
 Input: A list of numbers L.
 Output: The largest number in the list L.

 largest  null
 for each item in "L"', do
 if item > largest, then
 largest  item
 return largest

=== Euclids algorithm ===

The example-diagram of Euclid's algorithm from T.L. Heath 1908 with more detail added. Euclid does not go beyond a third measuring and gives no numerical examples. Nicomachus gives the example of 49 and 21: "I subtract the less from the greater; 28 is left; then again I subtract from this the same 21 (for this is possible); 7 is left; I subtract this from 21, 14 is left; from which I again subtract 7 (for this is possible); 7 is left, but 7 cannot be subtracted from 7." Heath comments that, "The last phrase is curious, but the meaning of it is obvious enough, as also the meaning of the phrase about ending 'at one and the same number'."(Heath 1908:300).

Euclids algorithm appears as Proposition II in Book VII ("Elementary Number Theory") of his Elements. Heath 1908:300; Hawkings Dover 2005 edition derives from Heath. Euclid poses the problem: "Given two numbers not prime to one another, to find their greatest common measure". He defines "A number be a multitude composed of units": a counting number, a positive integer not including 0. And to "measure" is to place a shorter measuring length s successively (q times) along longer length l until the remaining portion r is less than the shorter length s. " 'Let CD, measuring BF, leave FA less than itself.' This is a neat abbreviation for saying, measure along BA successive lengths equal to CD until a point F is reached such that the length FA remaining is less than CD; in other words, let BF be the largest exact multiple of CD contained in BA" (Heath 1908:297 In modern words, remainder r = l  q*s, q being the quotient, or remainder r is the "modulus", the integer-fractional part left over after the division. For modern treatments using division in the algorithm see Hardy and Wright 1979:180, Knuth 1973:2 (Volume 1), plus more discussion of Euclid's algorithm in Knuth 1969:293-297 (Volume 2). 

For Euclids method to succeed, the starting lengths must satisfy two requirements: (i) the lengths must not be 0, AND (ii) the subtraction must be proper, a test must guarantee that the smaller of the two numbers is subtracted from the larger (alternately, the two can be equal so their subtraction yields 0).

Euclid's original proof adds a third: the two lengths are not prime to one another. Euclid stipulated this so that he could construct a reductio ad absurdum proof that the two numbers' common measure is in fact the greatest. Euclid covers this question in his Proposition 1. While Nicomachus' algorithm is the same as Euclid's, when the numbers are prime to one another it yields the number "1" for their common measure. So to be precise the following is really Nicomachus' algorithm.

A graphical expression on Euclid's algorithm using example with 1599 and 650.

 1599 = 650*2 + 299
 650 = 299*2 + 52
 299 = 52*5 + 39
 52 = 39*1 + 13
 39 = 13*3 + 0

==== Computer language for Euclid's algorithm ====
Only a few instruction types are required to execute Euclid's algorithmsome logical tests (conditional GOTO), unconditional GOTO, assignment (replacement), and subtraction.
* A location is symbolized by upper case letter(s), e.g. S, A, etc.
* The varying quantity (number) in a location is written in lower case letter(s) and (usually) associated with the location's name. For example, location L at the start might contain the number l = 3009.

==== An inelegant program for Euclid's algorithm ====
"Inelegant" is a translation of Knuth's version of the algorithm with a subtraction-based remainder-loop replacing his use of division (or a "modulus" instruction). Derived from Knuth 1973:24. Depending on the two numbers "Inelegant" may compute the g.c.d. in fewer steps than "Elegant".

The following algorithm is framed as Knuth's 4-step version of Euclid's and Nichomachus', but rather than using division to find the remainder it uses successive subtractions of the shorter length s from the remaining length r until r is less than s. The high-level description, shown in boldface, is adapted from Knuth 1973:24:

INPUT:
 two locations L and S put the numbers l and s that represent the two lengths: 
 INPUT L, S
 R: make the remaining length r equal to the starting/initial/input length l:
 R  L

E0: r  s.
 the smaller of the two numbers is in S and the larger in R: 
 IF R > S THEN 
 the contents of L is the larger number so skip over the exchange-steps 4, 5 and 6: 
 GOTO step 6 
 ELSE 
 swap the contents of R and S.
 L  R (this first step is redundant, but is useful for later discussion).
 R  S
 S  L

E1: remainder: Until the remaining length r in R is less than the shorter length s in S, repeatedly subtract the measuring number s in S from the remaining length r in R.
 IF S > R THEN 
 done measuring so 
 GOTO 10 
 ELSE 
 measure again,
 R  R  S
 : 
 GOTO 7.

E2: the remainder 0?: EITHER (i) the last measure was exact and the remainder in R is 0 program can halt, OR (ii) the algorithm must continue: the last measure left a remainder in R less than measuring number in S.
 IF R = 0 THEN 
 done so 
 GOTO step 15 
 ELSE 
 CONTINUE TO step 11,

E3: s and r: The nut of Euclid's algorithm. Use remainder r to measure what was previously smaller number s:; L serves as a temporary location.
 L  R
 R  S
 S  L
 the measuring process: 
 GOTO 7

OUTPUT:

 S contains the greatest common divisor: 
 PRINT S

DONE:
 HALT, END, STOP.

==== An elegant program for Euclid's algorithm ====
The following version of Euclid's algorithm requires only 6 core instructions to do what 13 are required to do by "Inelegant"; worse, "Inelegant" requires more types of instructions. The flowchart of "Elegant" can be found at the top of this article. In the (unstructured) Basic language the steps are numbered, and the instruction LET [] = [] is the assignment instruction symbolized by .

 5 REM Euclid's algorithm for greatest common divisor
 6 PRINT "Type two integers greater than 0"
 10 INPUT A,B
 20 IF B=0 THEN GOTO 80
 30 IF A > B THEN GOTO 60
 40 LET B=B-A
 50 GOTO 20
 60 LET A=A-B
 70 GOTO 20
 80 PRINT A
 90 END

How "Elegant" works: In place of an outer "Euclid loop", "Elegant" shifts back and forth between two "co-loops", an A > B loop that computes A  A  B, and a B  A loop that computes B  B  A. This works because, when at last the minuend M is less than or equal to the subtrahend S ( Difference = Minuend  Subtrahend), the minuend can become s (the new measuring length) and the subtrahend can become the new r (the length to be measured); in other words the "sense" of the subtraction reverses.

=== Testing the Euclid algorithms ===
Does an algorithm do what its author wants it to do? A few test cases usually suffice to confirm core functionality. One source uses 3009 and 884. Knuth suggested 40902, 24140. Another interesting case is the two relatively prime numbers 14157 and 5950.

But exceptional cases must be identified and tested. Will "Inelegant" perform properly when R > S, S > R, R = S? Ditto for "Elegant": B > A, A > B, A = B? (Yes to all). What happens when one number is zero, both numbers are zero? ("Inelegant" computes forever in all cases; "Elegant" computes forever when A = 0.) What happens if negative numbers are entered? Fractional numbers? If the input numbers, i.e. the domain of the function computed by the algorithm/program, is to include only positive integers including zero, then the failures at zero indicate that the algorithm (and the program that instantiates it) is a partial function rather than a total function. A notable failure due to exceptions is the Ariane V rocket failure.

Proof of program correctness by use of mathematical induction: Knuth demonstrates the application of mathematical induction to an "extended" version of Euclid's algorithm, and he proposes "a general method applicable to proving the validity of any algorithm". Knuth 1973:1318. He credits "the formulation of algorithm-proving in terms of asertions and induction" to R. W. Floyd, Peter Naur, C. A. R. Hoare, H. H. Goldstine and J. von Neumann. Tausworth 1977 borrows Knuth's Euclid example and extends Knuth's method in section 9.1 Formal Proofs (pages 288298). Tausworthe proposes that a measure of the complexity of a program be the length of its correctness proof. Tausworthe 1997:294 

=== Measuring and improving the Euclid algorithms ===
Elegance (compactness) versus goodness (speed): With only 6 core instructions, "Elegant" is the clear winner compared to "Inelegant" at 13 instructions. However, "Inelegant" is faster (it arrives at HALT in fewer steps). Algorithm analysis cf Knuth 1973:7 (Vol. I), and his more-detailed analyses on pp. 1969:294-313 (Vol II). indicates why this is the case: "Elegant" does two conditional tests in every subtraction loop, whereas "Inelegant" only does one. As the algorithm (usually) requires many loop-throughs, on average much time is wasted doing a "B = 0?" test that is needed only after the remainder is computed.

Can the algorithms be improved?: Once the programmer judges a program "fit" and "effective"that is, it computes the function intended by its authorthen the question becomes, can it be improved?

The compactness of "Inelegant" can be improved by the elimination of 5 steps. But Chaitin proved that compacting an algorithm cannot be automated by a generalized algorithm; Breakdown occurs when an algorithm tries to compact itself. Success would solve the Halting problem. rather, it can only be done heuristically, i.e. by exhaustive search (examples to be found at Busy beaver), trial and error, cleverness, insight, application of inductive reasoning, etc. Observe that steps 4, 5 and 6 are repeated in steps 11, 12 and 13. Comparison with "Elegant" provides a hint that these steps together with steps 2 and 3 can be eliminated. This reduces the number of core instructions from 13 to 8, which makes it "more elegant" than "Elegant" at 9 steps.

The speed of "Elegant" can be improved by moving the B=0? test outside of the two subtraction loops. This change calls for the addition of 3 instructions (B=0?, A=0?, GOTO). Now "Elegant" computes the example-numbers faster; whether for any given A, B and R, S this is always the case would require a detailed analysis.

== Algorithmic analysis ==

It is frequently important to know how much of a particular resource (such as time or storage) is theoretically required for a given algorithm. Methods have been developed for the analysis of algorithms to obtain such quantitative answers (estimates); for example, the sorting algorithm above has a time requirement of O(n), using the big O notation with n as the length of the list. At all times the algorithm only needs to remember two values: the largest number found so far, and its current position in the input list. Therefore it is said to have a space requirement of O(1), if the space required to store the input numbers is not counted, or O(n) if it is counted.

Different algorithms may complete the same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time, space, or 'effort' than others. For example, a binary search algorithm usually outperforms a brute force sequential search when used for table lookups on sorted lists.

=== Formal versus empirical ===

The analysis and study of algorithms is a discipline of computer science, and is often practiced abstractly without the use of a specific programming language or implementation. In this sense, algorithm analysis resembles other mathematical disciplines in that it focuses on the underlying properties of the algorithm and not on the specifics of any particular implementation. Usually pseudocode is used for analysis as it is the simplest and most general representation. However, ultimately, most algorithms are usually implemented on particular hardware / software platforms and their algorithmic efficiency is eventually put to the test using real code. For the solution of a "one off" problem, the efficiency of a particular algorithm may not have significant consequences (unless n is extremely large) but for algorithms designed for fast interactive, commercial or long life scientific usage it may be critical. Scaling from small n to large n frequently exposes inefficient algorithms that are otherwise benign.

Empirical testing is useful because it may uncover unexpected interactions that affect performance. Benchmarks may be used to compare before/after potential improvements to an algorithm after program optimization.

=== Execution efficiency ===

To illustrate the potential improvements possible even in well established algorithms, a recent significant innovation, relating to FFT algorithms (used heavily in the field of image processing), can decrease processing time up to 1,000 times for applications like medical imaging. In general, speed improvements depend on special properties of the problem, which are very common in practical applications. Haitham Hassanieh, Piotr Indyk, Dina Katabi, and Eric Price, "ACM-SIAM Symposium On Discrete Algorithms (SODA), Kyoto, January 2012. See also the sFFT Web Page. Speedups of this magnitude enable computing devices that make extensive use of image processing (like digital cameras and medical equipment) to consume less power.

== Classification ==
There are various ways to classify algorithms, each with its own merits.

=== By implementation ===
One way to classify algorithms is by implementation means.

; Recursion or iteration
: A recursive algorithm is one that invokes (makes reference to) itself repeatedly until a certain condition matches, which is a method common to functional programming. Iterative algorithms use repetitive constructs like loops and sometimes additional data structures like stacks to solve the given problems. Some problems are naturally suited for one implementation or the other. For example, towers of Hanoi is well understood using recursive implementation. Every recursive version has an equivalent (but possibly more or less complex) iterative version, and vice versa.
; Logical
: An algorithm may be viewed as controlled logical deduction. This notion may be expressed as: Algorithm = logic + control. Kowalski 1979 The logic component expresses the axioms that may be used in the computation and the control component determines the way in which deduction is applied to the axioms. This is the basis for the logic programming paradigm. In pure logic programming languages the control component is fixed and algorithms are specified by supplying only the logic component. The appeal of this approach is the elegant semantics: a change in the axioms has a well-defined change in the algorithm.
; Serial, parallel or distributed
: Algorithms are usually discussed with the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time. Those computers are sometimes called serial computers. An algorithm designed for such an environment is called a serial algorithm, as opposed to parallel algorithms or distributed algorithms. Parallel algorithms take advantage of computer architectures where several processors can work on a problem at the same time, whereas distributed algorithms utilize multiple machines connected with a network. Parallel or distributed algorithms divide the problem into more symmetrical or asymmetrical subproblems and collect the results back together. The resource consumption in such algorithms is not only processor cycles on each processor but also the communication overhead between the processors. Some sorting algorithms can be parallelized efficiently, but their communication overhead is expensive. Iterative algorithms are generally parallelizable. Some problems have no parallel algorithms, and are called inherently serial problems.
; Deterministic or non-deterministic
: Deterministic algorithms solve the problem with exact decision at every step of the algorithm whereas non-deterministic algorithms solve problems via guessing although typical guesses are made more accurate through the use of heuristics.
; Exact or approximate
: While many algorithms reach an exact solution, approximation algorithms seek an approximation that is close to the true solution. Approximation may use either a deterministic or a random strategy. Such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems.
; Quantum algorithm
: They run on a realistic model of quantum computation. The term is usually used for those algorithms which seem inherently quantum, or use some essential feature of quantum computation such as quantum superposition or quantum entanglement.

=== By design paradigm ===
Another way of classifying algorithms is by their design methodology or paradigm. There is a certain number of paradigms, each different from the other. Furthermore, each of these categories include many different types of algorithms. Some common paradigms are:

; Brute-force or exhaustive search
: This is the naive method of trying every possible solution to see which is best. 
; Divide and conquer
: A divide and conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces an instance of a problem to one or more smaller instances of the same problem (usually recursively) until the instances are small enough to solve easily. One such example of divide and conquer is merge sorting. Sorting can be done on each segment of data after dividing data into segments and sorting of entire data can be obtained in the conquer phase by merging the segments. A simpler variant of divide and conquer is called a decrease and conquer algorithm, that solves an identical subproblem and uses the solution of this subproblem to solve the bigger problem. Divide and conquer divides the problem into multiple subproblems and so the conquer stage is more complex than decrease and conquer algorithms. An example of decrease and conquer algorithm is the binary search algorithm.
; Search and enumeration
: Many problems (such as playing chess) can be modeled as problems on graphs. A graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph and is useful for such problems. This category also includes search algorithms, branch and bound enumeration and backtracking.
;Randomized algorithm
: Such algorithms make some choices randomly (or pseudo-randomly). They can be very useful in finding approximate solutions for problems where finding exact solutions can be impractical (see heuristic method below). For some of these problems, it is known that the fastest approximations must involve some randomness. For instance, the volume of a convex polytope (described using a membership oracle) can be approximated to high accuracy by a randomized polynomial time algorithm, but not by a deterministic one: see . Whether randomized algorithms with polynomial time complexity can be the fastest algorithms for some problems is an open question known as the P versus NP problem. There are two large classes of such algorithms:
# Monte Carlo algorithms return a correct answer with high-probability. E.g. RP is the subclass of these that run in polynomial time)
# Las Vegas algorithms always return the correct answer, but their running time is only probabilistically bound, e.g. ZPP.
; Reduction of complexity
: This technique involves solving a difficult problem by transforming it into a better known problem for which we have (hopefully) asymptotically optimal algorithms. The goal is to find a reducing algorithm whose complexity is not dominated by the resulting reduced algorithm's. For example, one selection algorithm for finding the median in an unsorted list involves first sorting the list (the expensive portion) and then pulling out the middle element in the sorted list (the cheap portion). This technique is also known as transform and conquer.

=== Optimization problems ===

For optimization problems there is a more specific classification of algorithms; an algorithm for such problems may fall into one or more of the general categories described above as well as into one of the following:

; Linear programming
: When searching for optimal solutions to a linear function bound to linear equality and inequality constrains, the constrains of the problem can be used directly in producing the optimal solutions. There are algorithms that can solve any problem in this category, such as the popular simplex algorithm. 
George B. Dantzig and Mukund N. Thapa. 2003. Linear Programming 2: Theory and Extensions. Springer-Verlag. Problems that can be solved with linear programming include the maximum flow problem for directed graphs. If a problem additionally requires that one or more of the unknowns must be an integer then it is classified in integer programming. A linear programming algorithm can solve such a problem if it can be proved that all restrictions for integer values are superficial, i.e. the solutions satisfy these restrictions anyway. In the general case, a specialized algorithm or an algorithm that finds approximate solutions is used, depending on the difficulty of the problem.
; Dynamic programming
: When a problem shows optimal substructures  meaning the optimal solution to a problem can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems  and overlapping subproblems, meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many different problem instances, a quicker approach called dynamic programming avoids recomputing solutions that have already been computed. For example, FloydWarshall algorithm, the shortest path to a goal from a vertex in a weighted graph can be found by using the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices. Dynamic programming and memoization go together. The main difference between dynamic programming and divide and conquer is that subproblems are more or less independent in divide and conquer, whereas subproblems overlap in dynamic programming. The difference between dynamic programming and straightforward recursion is in caching or memoization of recursive calls. When subproblems are independent and there is no repetition, memoization does not help; hence dynamic programming is not a solution for all complex problems. By using memoization or maintaining a table of subproblems already solved, dynamic programming reduces the exponential nature of many problems to polynomial complexity.
; The greedy method
: A greedy algorithm is similar to a dynamic programming algorithm in that it works by examining substructures, in this case not of the problem but of a given solution. Such algorithms start with some solution, which may be given or have been constructed in some way, and improve it by making small modifications. For some problems they can find the optimal solution while for others they stop at local optima, that is at solutions that cannot be improved by the algorithm but are not optimum. The most popular use of greedy algorithms is for finding the minimal spanning tree where finding the optimal solution is possible with this method. Huffman Tree, Kruskal, Prim, Sollin are greedy algorithms that can solve this optimization problem.
;The heuristic method
:In optimization problems, heuristic algorithms can be used to find a solution close to the optimal solution in cases where finding the optimal solution is impractical. These algorithms work by getting closer and closer to the optimal solution as they progress. In principle, if run for an infinite amount of time, they will find the optimal solution. Their merit is that they can find a solution very close to the optimal solution in a relatively short time. Such algorithms include local search, tabu search, simulated annealing, and genetic algorithms. Some of them, like simulated annealing, are non-deterministic algorithms while others, like tabu search, are deterministic. When a bound on the error of the non-optimal solution is known, the algorithm is further categorized as an approximation algorithm.

=== By field of study ===

Every field of science has its own problems and needs efficient algorithms. Related problems in one field are often studied together. Some example classes are search algorithms, sorting algorithms, merge algorithms, numerical algorithms, graph algorithms, string algorithms, computational geometric algorithms, combinatorial algorithms, medical algorithms, machine learning, cryptography, data compression algorithms and parsing techniques.

Fields tend to overlap with each other, and algorithm advances in one field may improve those of other, sometimes completely unrelated, fields. For example, dynamic programming was invented for optimization of resource consumption in industry, but is now used in solving a broad range of problems in many fields.

=== By complexity ===

Algorithms can be classified by the amount of time they need to complete compared to their input size. There is a wide variety: some algorithms complete in linear time relative to input size, some do so in an exponential amount of time or even worse, and some never halt. Additionally, some problems may have multiple algorithms of differing complexity, while other problems might have no algorithms or no known efficient algorithms. There are also mappings from some problems to other problems. Owing to this, it was found to be more suitable to classify the problems themselves instead of the algorithms into equivalence classes based on the complexity of the best possible algorithms for them.

Burgin (2005, p. 24) uses a generalized definition of algorithms that relaxes the common requirement that the output of the algorithm that computes a function must be determined after a finite number of steps. He defines a super-recursive class of algorithms as "a class of algorithms in which it is possible to compute functions not computable by any Turing machine" (Burgin 2005, p. 107). This is closely related to the study of methods of hypercomputation.

=== By evaluative type ===

To maintain balance while integrating machines into society, one may classify algorithms by the types of evaluation they perform. A number of philosophers have hypothesized that societies benefit from evaluative diversity much as they benefit from diversity of gender and blood type (e.g. Dean 2012, Sober & Wilson 1998, Hertzke & McConkey 1998, and Bellah 1985). Technology could threaten those moral ecosystems like an invasive species if it skews the diversity mix. Wallach & Allen (2008) classified decision-making algorithms into three evaluative types: Bottom-up algorithms make judgments unpredictable to their programmers (e.g. evolving software). All others (top-down) were divided into deontological (which can be relied upon to implement programmed rules) vs. consequentialist (which can be relied upon to maximize a programmed measure). As examples, a standard calculator would be deontological, while machine learning for trading stocks would be consequentialist.

Santos-Lang renamed the deontological and consequentialist classes "institutional" and "negotiator" respectively to avoid the implication that all deontological and consequentialist theories of ethics can be implemented as algorithms, and split the bottom-up class into "gadfly" (algorithms which are unpredictable because of their use of randomness generators) vs. "relational" (algorithms which are unpredictable because of network effects). A mutator in evolutionary computation would be an example of a gadfly, while a class 3 or 4 cellular automaton would be an example of a relational machine. Santos-Lang noted that algorithms often have subcomponents of other types. For example, a stock trading negotiator may implement a genetic algorithm, and thus contain gadfly mutators, and mutators may in turn have institutional and relational subcomponents, all computation being relational at the level of underlying chemistry (Santos-Lang 2014).

== Continuous algorithms ==
The adjective "continuous" when applied to the word "algorithm" can mean:
* An algorithm operating on data that represents continuous quantities, even though this data is represented by discrete approximationssuch algorithms are studied in numerical analysis; or
* An algorithm in the form of a differential equation that operates continuously on the data, running on an analog computer. 

== Legal issues ==
:See also: Software patents for a general overview of the patentability of software, including computer-implemented algorithms.

Algorithms, by themselves, are not usually patentable. In the United States, a claim consisting solely of simple manipulations of abstract concepts, numbers, or signals does not constitute "processes" (USPTO 2006), and hence algorithms are not patentable (as in Gottschalk v. Benson). However, practical applications of algorithms are sometimes patentable. For example, in Diamond v. Diehr, the application of a simple feedback algorithm to aid in the curing of synthetic rubber was deemed patentable. The patenting of software is highly controversial, and there are highly criticized patents involving algorithms, especially data compression algorithms, such as Unisys' LZW patent.

Additionally, some cryptographic algorithms have export restrictions (see export of cryptography).

== Etymology ==
The word "Algorithm", or "Algorism" in some other writing versions, comes from the name al-Khwrizm, pronounced in classical Arabic as Al-Khwarithmi. Al-Khwrizm (, c. 780-850) was a Persian mathematician, astronomer, geographer and a scholar in the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, whose name means "the native of Khwarezm", a city that was part of the Greater Iran during his era and now is in modern day Uzbekistan. About 825, he wrote a treatise in the Arabic language, which was translated into Latin in the 12th century under the title Algoritmi de numero Indorum. This title means "Algoritmi on the numbers of the Indians", where "Algoritmi" was the translator's Latinization of Al-Khwarizmi's name. Al-Khwarizmi was the most widely read mathematician in Europe in the late Middle Ages, primarily through his other book, the Algebra. Foremost mathematical texts in history, according to Carl B. Boyer. In late medieval Latin, algorismus, the corruption of his name, simply meant the "decimal number system" that is still the meaning of modern English algorism. In 17th-century French the word's form, but not its meaning, changed to algorithme. English adopted the French very soon afterwards, but it wasn't until the late 19th century that "Algorithm" took on the meaning that it has in modern English. Etymology of algorithm at Dictionary.Reference.com 

Alternative etymology claims origin from the terms algebra in its late medieval sense of "Arabic arithmetics" and arithmos the Greek term for number (thus literally meaning "Arabic numbers" or "Arabic calculation"). Algorithms of Al-Kharizmi's works are not meant in their modern sense but as a type of repetitive calculus (here is to mention that his fundamental work known as algebra was originally titled "The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing" describing types of repetitive calculation and quadratic equations). In that sense, algorithms were known in Europe long before Al-Kharizmi. The oldest algorithm known today is the Euclidean algorithm (see also Extended Euclidean algorithm). Before the coining of the term algorithm the Greeks were calling them anthyphairesis literally meaning anti-subtraction or reciprocal subtraction (further reading here and here). Algorithms were known to the Greeks centuries before Becker O (1933). "Eudoxus-Studien I. Eine voreuklidische Proportionslehre und ihre Spuren bei Aristoteles und Euklid". Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik B 2: 311333. Euclid. Instead of the word algebra the Greeks were using the term arithmetica (, i.e. in Diophantus' works the so-called "father of Algebra" - see also Wikipedia's articles Diophantine equation and Eudoxos).

== History: Development of the notion of "algorithm" ==

=== Origin ===
The word algorithm comes from the name of the 9th century Persian mathematician Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Musa Al-Khwarizmi, whose work built upon that of the 7th-century Indian mathematician Brahmagupta. The word algorism originally referred only to the rules of performing arithmetic using HinduArabic numerals but evolved via European Latin translation of Al-Khwarizmi's name into algorithm by the 18th century. The use of the word evolved to include all definite procedures for solving problems or performing tasks. 

=== Discrete and distinguishable symbols ===
Tally-marks: To keep track of their flocks, their sacks of grain and their money the ancients used tallying: accumulating stones or marks scratched on sticks, or making discrete symbols in clay. Through the Babylonian and Egyptian use of marks and symbols, eventually Roman numerals and the abacus evolved (Dilson, p. 1641). Tally marks appear prominently in unary numeral system arithmetic used in Turing machine and PostTuring machine computations.

=== Manipulation of symbols as "place holders" for numbers: algebra ===
The work of the ancient Greek geometers (Euclidean algorithm), the Indian mathematician Brahmagupta, and the Persian mathematician Al-Khwarizmi (from whose name the terms "algorism" and "algorithm" are derived), and Western European mathematicians culminated in Leibniz's notion of the calculus ratiocinator (ca 1680):

=== Mechanical contrivances with discrete states ===
The clock: Bolter credits the invention of the weight-driven clock as "The key invention Europe in the Middle Ages", in particular the verge escapement Bolter 1984:24 that provides us with the tick and tock of a mechanical clock. "The accurate automatic machine" Bolter 1984:26 led immediately to "mechanical automata" beginning in the 13th century and finally to "computational machines"the difference engine and analytical engines of Charles Babbage and Countess Ada Lovelace, mid-19th century. Bolter 1984:3334, 204206. Lovelace is credited with the first creation of an algorithm intended for processing on a computer - Babbage's analytical engine, the first device considered a real Turing-complete computer instead of just a calculator - and is sometimes called "history's first programmer" as a result, though a full implementation of Babbage's second device would not be realized until decades after her lifetime.

Logical machines 1870Stanley Jevons' "logical abacus" and "logical machine": The technical problem was to reduce Boolean equations when presented in a form similar to what are now known as Karnaugh maps. Jevons (1880) describes first a simple "abacus" of "slips of wood furnished with pins, contrived so that any part or class of the combinations can be picked out mechanically . . . More recently however I have reduced the system to a completely mechanical form, and have thus embodied the whole of the indirect process of inference in what may be called a Logical Machine" His machine came equipped with "certain moveable wooden rods" and "at the foot are 21 keys like those of a piano . . .". With this machine he could analyze a "syllogism or any other simple logical argument". All quotes from W. Stanley Jevons 1880 Elementary Lessons in Logic: Deductive and Inductive, Macmillan and Co., London and New York. Republished as a googlebook; cf Jevons 1880:199201. Louis Couturat 1914 the Algebra of Logic, The Open Court Publishing Company, Chicago and London. Republished as a googlebook; cf Couturat 1914:7576 gives a few more details; interestingly he compares this to a typewriter as well as a piano. Jevons states that the account is to be found at Jan . 20, 1870 The Proceedings of the Royal Society. 

This machine he displayed in 1870 before the Fellows of the Royal Society. Jevons 1880:199200 Another logician John Venn, however, in his 1881 Symbolic Logic, turned a jaundiced eye to this effort: "I have no high estimate myself of the interest or importance of what are sometimes called logical machines ... it does not seem to me that any contrivances at present known or likely to be discovered really deserve the name of logical machines"; see more at Algorithm characterizations. But not to be outdone he too presented "a plan somewhat analogous, I apprehend, to Prof. Jevon's abacus ... gain, corresponding to Prof. Jevons's logical machine, the following contrivance may be described. I prefer to call it merely a logical-diagram machine ... but I suppose that it could do very completely all that can be rationally expected of any logical machine". All quotes from John Venn 1881 Symbolic Logic, Macmillan and Co., London. Republished as a googlebook. cf Venn 1881:120125. The interested reader can find a deeper explanation in those pages. 

Jacquard loom, Hollerith punch cards, telegraphy and telephonythe electromechanical relay: Bell and Newell (1971) indicate that the Jacquard loom (1801), precursor to Hollerith cards (punch cards, 1887), and "telephone switching technologies" were the roots of a tree leading to the development of the first computers. Bell and Newell diagram 1971:39, cf. Davis 2000 By the mid-19th century the telegraph, the precursor of the telephone, was in use throughout the world, its discrete and distinguishable encoding of letters as "dots and dashes" a common sound. By the late 19th century the ticker tape (ca 1870s) was in use, as was the use of Hollerith cards in the 1890 U.S. census. Then came the teleprinter (ca. 1910) with its punched-paper use of Baudot code on tape.

Telephone-switching networks of electromechanical relays (invented 1835) was behind the work of George Stibitz (1937), the inventor of the digital adding device. As he worked in Bell Laboratories, he observed the "burdensome' use of mechanical calculators with gears. "He went home one evening in 1937 intending to test his idea... When the tinkering was over, Stibitz had constructed a binary adding device". * Melina Hill, Valley News Correspondent, A Tinkerer Gets a Place in History, Valley News West Lebanon NH, Thursday March 31, 1983, page 13. 

Davis (2000) observes the particular importance of the electromechanical relay (with its two "binary states" open and closed):
: It was only with the development, beginning in the 1930s, of electromechanical calculators using electrical relays, that machines were built having the scope Babbage had envisioned." Davis 2000:14 

=== Mathematics during the 19th century up to the mid-20th century ===
Symbols and rules: In rapid succession the mathematics of George Boole (1847, 1854), Gottlob Frege (1879), and Giuseppe Peano (18881889) reduced arithmetic to a sequence of symbols manipulated by rules. Peano's The principles of arithmetic, presented by a new method (1888) was "the first attempt at an axiomatization of mathematics in a symbolic language". van Heijenoort 1967:81ff 

But Heijenoort gives Frege (1879) this kudos: Frege's is "perhaps the most important single work ever written in logic. ... in which we see a " 'formula language', that is a lingua characterica, a language written with special symbols, "for pure thought", that is, free from rhetorical embellishments ... constructed from specific symbols that are manipulated according to definite rules". van Heijenoort's commentary on Frege's Begriffsschrift, a formula language, modeled upon that of arithmetic, for pure thought in van Heijenoort 1967:1 The work of Frege was further simplified and amplified by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell in their Principia Mathematica (19101913).

The paradoxes: At the same time a number of disturbing paradoxes appeared in the literature, in particular the Burali-Forti paradox (1897), the Russell paradox (190203), and the Richard Paradox. Dixon 1906, cf. Kleene 1952:3640 The resultant considerations led to Kurt Gdel's paper (1931)he specifically cites the paradox of the liarthat completely reduces rules of recursion to numbers.

Effective calculability: In an effort to solve the Entscheidungsproblem defined precisely by Hilbert in 1928, mathematicians first set about to define what was meant by an "effective method" or "effective calculation" or "effective calculability" (i.e., a calculation that would succeed). In rapid succession the following appeared: Alonzo Church, Stephen Kleene and J.B. Rosser's -calculus cf. footnote in Alonzo Church 1936a in Davis 1965:90 and 1936b in Davis 1965:110 a finely honed definition of "general recursion" from the work of Gdel acting on suggestions of Jacques Herbrand (cf. Gdel's Princeton lectures of 1934) and subsequent simplifications by Kleene. Kleene 19356 in Davis 1965:237ff, Kleene 1943 in Davis 1965:255ff Church's proof Church 1936 in Davis 1965:88ff that the Entscheidungsproblem was unsolvable, Emil Post's definition of effective calculability as a worker mindlessly following a list of instructions to move left or right through a sequence of rooms and while there either mark or erase a paper or observe the paper and make a yes-no decision about the next instruction. cf. "Formulation I", Post 1936 in Davis 1965:289290 Alan Turing's proof of that the Entscheidungsproblem was unsolvable by use of his "a- machine" Turing 19367 in Davis 1965:116ff in effect almost identical to Post's "formulation", J. Barkley Rosser's definition of "effective method" in terms of "a machine". Rosser 1939 in Davis 1965:226 S. C. Kleene's proposal of a precursor to "Church thesis" that he called "Thesis I", Kleene 1943 in Davis 1965:273274 and a few years later Kleene's renaming his Thesis "Church's Thesis" Kleene 1952:300, 317 and proposing "Turing's Thesis". Kleene 1952:376 

=== Emil Post (1936) and Alan Turing (193637, 1939) ===
Here is a remarkable coincidence of two men not knowing each other but describing a process of men-as-computers working on computationsand they yield virtually identical definitions.

Emil Post (1936) described the actions of a "computer" (human being) as follows:
:"...two concepts are involved: that of a symbol space in which the work leading from problem to answer is to be carried out, and a fixed unalterable set of directions.

His symbol space would be
:"a two way infinite sequence of spaces or boxes... The problem solver or worker is to move and work in this symbol space, being capable of being in, and operating in but one box at a time.... a box is to admit of but two possible conditions, i.e., being empty or unmarked, and having a single mark in it, say a vertical stroke.

:"One box is to be singled out and called the starting point. ...a specific problem is to be given in symbolic form by a finite number of boxes INPUT being marked with a stroke. Likewise the answer OUTPUT is to be given in symbolic form by such a configuration of marked boxes....

:"A set of directions applicable to a general problem sets up a deterministic process when applied to each specific problem. This process terminates only when it comes to the direction of type (C ) STOP". Turing 19367 in Davis 1965:289290 See more at PostTuring machine
Alan Turing's statue at Bletchley Park.
Alan Turing's work Turing 1936 in Davis 1965, Turing 1939 in Davis 1965:160 preceded that of Stibitz (1937); it is unknown whether Stibitz knew of the work of Turing. Turing's biographer believed that Turing's use of a typewriter-like model derived from a youthful interest: "Alan had dreamt of inventing typewriters as a boy; Mrs. Turing had a typewriter; and he could well have begun by asking himself what was meant by calling a typewriter 'mechanical'". Hodges, p. 96 Given the prevalence of Morse code and telegraphy, ticker tape machines, and teletypewriters we might conjecture that all were influences.

Turinghis model of computation is now called a Turing machinebegins, as did Post, with an analysis of a human computer that he whittles down to a simple set of basic motions and "states of mind". But he continues a step further and creates a machine as a model of computation of numbers. Turing 19367:116 

:"Computing is normally done by writing certain symbols on paper. We may suppose this paper is divided into squares like a child's arithmetic book....I assume then that the computation is carried out on one-dimensional paper, i.e., on a tape divided into squares. I shall also suppose that the number of symbols which may be printed is finite....

:"The behaviour of the computer at any moment is determined by the symbols which he is observing, and his "state of mind" at that moment. We may suppose that there is a bound B to the number of symbols or squares which the computer can observe at one moment. If he wishes to observe more, he must use successive observations. We will also suppose that the number of states of mind which need be taken into account is finite...

:"Let us imagine that the operations performed by the computer to be split up into 'simple operations' which are so elementary that it is not easy to imagine them further divided." Turing 19367 in Davis 1965:136 

Turing's reduction yields the following:
:"The simple operations must therefore include:
::"(a) Changes of the symbol on one of the observed squares
::"(b) Changes of one of the squares observed to another square within L squares of one of the previously observed squares.
"It may be that some of these change necessarily invoke a change of state of mind. The most general single operation must therefore be taken to be one of the following:
::"(A) A possible change (a) of symbol together with a possible change of state of mind.
::"(B) A possible change (b) of observed squares, together with a possible change of state of mind"

:"We may now construct a machine to do the work of this computer." 

A few years later, Turing expanded his analysis (thesis, definition) with this forceful expression of it:
:"A function is said to be "effectively calculable" if its values can be found by some purely mechanical process. Though it is fairly easy to get an intuitive grasp of this idea, it is nevertheless desirable to have some more definite, mathematical expressible definition . . . discusses the history of the definition pretty much as presented above with respect to Gdel, Herbrand, Kleene, Church, Turing and Post . . . We may take this statement literally, understanding by a purely mechanical process one which could be carried out by a machine. It is possible to give a mathematical description, in a certain normal form, of the structures of these machines. The development of these ideas leads to the author's definition of a computable function, and to an identification of computability  with effective calculability . . . .
::" We shall use the expression "computable function" to mean a function calculable by a machine, and we let "effectively calculable" refer to the intuitive idea without particular identification with any one of these definitions". Turing 1939 in Davis 1965:160 

=== J. B. Rosser (1939) and S. C. Kleene (1943) ===
J. Barkley Rosser defined an 'effective method' in the following manner (italicization added):
:"'Effective method' is used here in the rather special sense of a method each step of which is precisely determined and which is certain to produce the answer in a finite number of steps. With this special meaning, three different precise definitions have been given to date. footnote #5; see discussion immediately below. The simplest of these to state (due to Post and Turing) says essentially that an effective method of solving certain sets of problems exists if one can build a machine which will then solve any problem of the set with no human intervention beyond inserting the question and (later) reading the answer. All three definitions are equivalent, so it doesn't matter which one is used. Moreover, the fact that all three are equivalent is a very strong argument for the correctness of any one." (Rosser 1939:2256)

Rosser's footnote #5 references the work of (1) Church and Kleene and their definition of -definability, in particular Church's use of it in his An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory (1936); (2) Herbrand and Gdel and their use of recursion in particular Gdel's use in his famous paper On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I (1931); and (3) Post (1936) and Turing (19367) in their mechanism-models of computation.

Stephen C. Kleene defined as his now-famous "Thesis I" known as the ChurchTuring thesis. But he did this in the following context (boldface in original):
:"12. Algorithmic theories... In setting up a complete algorithmic theory, what we do is to describe a procedure, performable for each set of values of the independent variables, which procedure necessarily terminates and in such manner that from the outcome we can read a definite answer, "yes" or "no," to the question, "is the predicate value true?"" (Kleene 1943:273)

=== History after 1950 ===
A number of efforts have been directed toward further refinement of the definition of "algorithm", and activity is on-going because of issues surrounding, in particular, foundations of mathematics (especially the ChurchTuring thesis) and philosophy of mind (especially arguments around artificial intelligence). For more, see Algorithm characterizations.

== See also ==

* Abstract machine
* Algorithm engineering
* Algorithmic composition
* Algorithmic synthesis
* Algorithmic trading
* Garbage in, garbage out
* Introduction to Algorithms
* List of algorithm general topics
* List of important publications in theoretical computer science - Algorithms
* Numerical Mathematics Consortium
* Theory of computation
** Computability theory
** Computational complexity theory

== Notes ==

== References ==

* Axt, P. (1959) On a Subrecursive Hierarchy and Primitive Recursive Degrees, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 92, pp. 85105
* Bell, C. Gordon and Newell, Allen (1971), Computer Structures: Readings and Examples, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York. ISBN 0-07-004357-4.
* 
* Includes an excellent bibliography of 56 references.
* : cf. Chapter 3 Turing machines where they discuss "certain enumerable sets not effectively (mechanically) enumerable".
* 
* Campagnolo, M.L., Moore, C., and Costa, J.F. (2000) An analog characterization of the subrecursive functions. In Proc. of the 4th Conference on Real Numbers and Computers, Odense University, pp. 91109
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 89ff. The first expression of "Church's Thesis". See in particular page 100 (The Undecidable) where he defines the notion of "effective calculability" in terms of "an algorithm", and he uses the word "terminates", etc.
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 110ff. Church shows that the Entscheidungsproblem is unsolvable in about 3 pages of text and 3 pages of footnotes.
* 
* Davis gives commentary before each article. Papers of Gdel, Alonzo Church, Turing, Rosser, Kleene, and Emil Post are included; those cited in the article are listed here by author's name.
* Davis offers concise biographies of Leibniz, Boole, Frege, Cantor, Hilbert, Gdel and Turing with von Neumann as the show-stealing villain. Very brief bios of Joseph-Marie Jacquard, Babbage, Ada Lovelace, Claude Shannon, Howard Aiken, etc.
* 
* 
* 
* Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
* 
* Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
* Excellentaccessible, readablereference source for mathematical "foundations".
* 
* 
* Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 1981
* 
* A. A. Markov (1954) Theory of algorithms. by Jacques J. Schorr-Kon and PST staff Imprint Moscow, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 1954 Jerusalem, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 1961; available from the Office of Technical Services, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Washington Description 444 p. 28 cm. Added t.p. in Russian Translation of Works of the Mathematical Institute, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, v. 42. Original title: Teoriya algerifmov. Dartmouth College library. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Office of Technical Services, number OTS 60-51085.
* Minsky expands his "...idea of an algorithman effective procedure..." in chapter 5.1 Computability, Effective Procedures and Algorithms. Infinite machines.
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 289ff. Post defines a simple algorithmic-like process of a man writing marks or erasing marks and going from box to box and eventually halting, as he follows a list of simple instructions. This is cited by Kleene as one source of his "Thesis I", the so-called ChurchTuring thesis.
* 
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 223ff. Herein is Rosser's famous definition of "effective method": "...a method each step of which is precisely predetermined and which is certain to produce the answer in a finite number of steps... a machine which will then solve any problem of the set with no human intervention beyond inserting the question and (later) reading the answer" (p. 225226, The Undecidable)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Cf. in particular the first chapter titled: Algorithms, Turing Machines, and Programs. His succinct informal definition: "...any sequence of instructions that can be obeyed by a robot, is called an algorithm" (p. 4).
* 
* . Corrections, ibid, vol. 43(1937) pp. 544546. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 116ff. Turing's famous paper completed as a Master's dissertation while at King's College Cambridge UK.
* Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 155ff. Turing's paper that defined "the oracle" was his PhD thesis while at Princeton USA.
* 
* United States Patent and Trademark Office (2006), 2106.02 **>Mathematical Algorithms: 2100 Patentability, Manual of Patent Examining Procedure (MPEP). Latest revision August 2006

=== Secondary references ===
* , ISBN 0-8078-4108-0 pbk.
* , ISBN 0-312-10409-X (pbk.)
* , 3rd edition 1976, ISBN 0-674-32449-8 (pbk.)
* , ISBN 0-671-49207-1. Cf. Chapter "The Spirit of Truth" for a history leading to, and a discussion of, his proof.

== Further reading ==

* 
* 
* Knuth, Donald E. (2000). Selected Papers on Analysis of Algorithms. Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
* Knuth, Donald E. (2010). Selected Papers on Design of Algorithms. Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 
* 
* 
* Dictionary of Algorithms and Data StructuresNational Institute of Standards and Technology
* Algorithms and Data Structures by Dr Nikolai Bezroukov
; Algorithm repositories
* The Stony Brook Algorithm RepositoryState University of New York at Stony Brook
* Netlib RepositoryUniversity of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Collected Algorithms of the ACMAssociation for Computing Machinery
* The Stanford GraphBaseStanford University
* CombinatoricaUniversity of Iowa and State University of New York at Stony Brook
* Library of Efficient Datastructures and Algorithms (LEDA)previously from Max-Planck-Institut fr Informatik
* Archive of Interesting Code
* A semantic wiki to collect, categorize and relate all algorithms and data structures
; Lecture notes
* Algorithms Course Materials. Jeff Erickson. University of Illinois.
; Community
* Algorithms on Google+

 



[[Annual plant]]

Peas are an annual plant.
An annual plant is a plant that completes its life cycle, from germination to the production of seed, within one year, and then dies. Summer annuals germinate during spring or early summer and mature by autumn of the same year. Winter annuals germinate during the autumn and mature during the spring or summer of the following calendar year. http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/files/line_drawings.htm 

One seed-to-seed life cycle for an annual can occur in as little as a month in some species, though most last several months. Oilseed rapa can go from seed-to-seed in about five weeks under a bank of fluorescent lamps. This style of growing is often used in classrooms for education. Many desert annuals are theropytes, because their seed-to-seed life cycle is only weeks and they spend most of the year as seeds to survive dry conditions.
__TOC__

==Cultivation==
In cultivation, many food plants are, or are grown as, annuals, including virtually all domesticated grains. Some perennials and biennials are grown in gardens as annuals for convenience, particularly if they are not considered cold hardy for the local climate. Carrot, celery and parsley are true biennials that are usually grown as annual crops for their edible roots, petioles and leaves, respectively. Tomato, sweet potato and bell pepper are tender perennials usually grown as annuals. Ornamental perennials commonly grown as annuals are impatiens, wax begonia, snapdragon, Pelargonium, coleus and petunia. Examples of true annuals include corn, wheat, rice, lettuce, peas, watermelon, beans, zinnia and marigold.

==Summer==
Summer annuals sprout, flower, produce seed, and die, during the warmer months of the year.

The lawn weed crabgrass is a summer annual.

==Winter==
Winter annuals germinate in autumn or winter, live through the winter, then bloom in winter or spring.

The plants grow and bloom during the cool season when most other plants are dormant or other annuals are in seed form waiting for warmer weather to germinate. Winter annuals die after flowering and setting seed. The seeds germinate in the autumn or winter when the soil temperature is cool.

Winter annuals typically grow low to the ground, where they are usually sheltered from the coldest nights by snow cover, and make use of warm periods in winter for growth when the snow melts. Some common winter annuals include henbit, deadnettle, chickweed, and winter cress.

Winter annuals are important ecologically, as they provide vegetative cover that prevents soil erosion during winter and early spring when no other cover exists and they provide fresh vegetation for animals and birds that feed on them. Although they are often considered to be weeds in gardens, this viewpoint is not always necessary, as most of them die when the soil temperature warms up again in early to late spring when other plants are still dormant and have not yet leafed out.

Even though they do not compete directly with cultivated plants, sometimes winter annuals are considered a pest in commercial agriculture, because they can be hosts for insect pests or fungal diseases (ovary smut  Microbotryum sp) which attack crops being cultivated. Ironically, the property that they prevent the soil from drying out can also be problematic for commercial agriculture.

==Molecular genetics==
In 2008, it was discovered that the inactivation of only two genes in one species of annual plant leads to the conversion into a perennial plant. Researchers deactivated the SOC1 and FUL genes in Arabidopsis thaliana, which control flowering time. This switch established phenotypes common in perennial plants, such as wood formation.

==See also==
*Biennial plant
*Perennial plant

==References==

==External links==

 

[[Anthophyta]]

The anthophytes were thought to be a clade comprising plants bearing flower-like structures. The group contained the angiosperms - the extant flowering plants - as well as the Gnetales and the extinct Bennettitales. It also includes such plants as roses, tulips, and common plants found to have flower structures.

Detailed morphological and molecular studies have shown that the group is not actually monophyletic, with proposed floral homologies of the gnetophytes and the angiosperms having evolved in parallel. This makes it easier to reconcile molecular clock data that suggests that the angiosperms diverged from the gymnosperms around . 

Some more recent studies have used the word anthophyte to describe a group which includes the angiosperms and a variety of fossils (glossopterids, Pentoxylon, Bennettitales, and Caytonia), but not the Gnetales. 

==References==



[[Atlas (disambiguation)]]

An atlas is a collection of maps.

Atlas may also refer to:

==Mythology==
* Atlas (mythology), a deity who held up the celestial sphere
* Atlas of Mauretania, a king skilled in astronomy
* Atlas, a son of Poseidon

==Businesses==
* Atlas Bank
* Atlas Consortium, a group of technology companies
* Atlas Copco, Swedish company founded in 1873
* Atlas Corporation, an investment company
* Atlas Economic Research Foundation
* Atlas Elektronik, a German naval/marine electronics and systems business
* Atlas Group, a Pakistani business group
* Atlas Press (tool company)
* Atlas Solutions, a subsidiary of Facebook for digital online advertising, formerly owned by Microsoft
* Atlas Telecom, a worldwide communications company
* Atlas Van Lines, a moving company
* Atlas-Imperial, an American diesel engine manufacturer
* Dresser Atlas, a provider of oilfield and factory automation services
* STN Atlas, a German defence company
* Tele Atlas, a Dutch mapping company
* Western Atlas, an oilfield services company

==Computing==
* Atlas (computer), an early supercomputer, built in the 1960s
* Atlas (robot), a humanoid robot developed by Boston Dynamics and DARPA
* ATLAS Transformation Language
* Atlas.ti, a qualitative analysis program
* Texture atlas
* Abbreviated Test Language for All Systems, a MILSPEC language for avionics equipment testing
* Automatically Tuned Linear Algebra Software
* UNIVAC 1101, an early American computer, built in the 1950s
* ASP.NET AJAX (formerly "Atlas"), a set of ASP.NET extensions
* Atlas, a computer used at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in 2006

==Entertainment==

===Music===
* Atlas (band), a New Zealand rock band
* Atlas (Real Estate album)
* Atlas (Kinky album)
* Atlas (Parkway Drive album)
* Atlas (RFS album)
* "Atlas" (Battles song), 2007 song by Battles on the album Mirrored
* "Atlas" (Coldplay song), 2013 song by Coldplay from The Hunger Games: Catching Fire soundtrack
* Atlas (opera), 1991 opera by Meredith Monk
**, 1993 recording of Monk's opera

===Video games===
* The Atlas (video game)
* Atlas Games, a game publisher
* Atlas Terrain Engine, part of a game engine
* Task Force Atlas, a Polish GROM task force in the video game 
===Literature and publishing===
* Atlas (DC Comics)
* Atlas (Drawn and Quarterly), a comic book series by Dylan Horrocks
* Atlas (magazine)
* The Atlas (novel), by William T. Vollmann
* Atlas Comics (1950s), a publisher
* Atlas/Seaboard Comics, a 1970s line of comics
* Atlas Press, a UK publisher
* Agents of Atlas, a Marvel Comics mini-series
* Atlas, a photography book by Gerhard Richter
* Atlas folio, a book size
* Atlas Shrugged, a novel by Ayn Rand

===Fictional characters===
* Erik Josten, aka Atlas, a Marvel Comics supervillain
* Atlas, an Astro Boy character
* Atlas, a BioShock character
* Atlas, a Portal 2 character
* Atlas, a PS238 character
* Atlas (Teen Titans), Teen Titans character
* Atlas, an antagonist in Mega Man ZX Advent

===Sport===
* Club Atlas, a Mexican professional football club
* Club Atltico Atlas, an Argentine amateur football club
*Tony Atlas, wrestler
*Charles Atlas, wrestler

===Other entertainment===
* Atlas (film)
* Atlas Media Corp., a non-fiction entertainment company
* RTV Atlas, a broadcaster in Montenegro
* Advanced Technology Leisure Application Simulator, a hydraulic motion simulator used in theme parks
* Atlas, a BattleMech in the BattleTech universe

==Geography==
* Atlas, California
* Atlas, Illinois
*Atlas, West Virginia
* Atlas, Wisconsin
* Atlas District, an area in Washington, D.C.
* Atlas Mountains, a set of mountain ranges in Africa
* Atlas Township, Michigan
* Atlas Peak AVA, a California wine region

==Outer space==
* Atlas (crater)
* Atlas (moon), a moon of Saturn
* Atlas (rocket family)
* Atlas (star)
* Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope
* Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System

==Physics==
* ATLAS experiment, a particle detector for the Large Hadron Collider at CERN
* Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System, a linear accelerator at the Argonne National Laboratory
* Atomic-terrace low-angle shadowing, a nanofabrication technique

==Plants and animals==
* A book about flora and/or fauna of a region, such as atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland
* Atlas bear
* Atlas beetle
* Atlas Cedar
* Atlas Pied Flycatcher, a bird
* Atlas moth
* Atlas Turtle

==Transport==

===Aviation===
* Atlas Air, an American cargo airline
* Atlas Aircraft, a 1940s aircraft manufacturer
* Atlas Aircraft Corporation, a South African military aircraft manufacturer
* Atlas Aviation, an aircraft maintenance firm
* Atlas Blue, a Moroccan low-cost airline
* Airbus A400M Atlas, a military aircraft produced 2007present
* Armstrong Whitworth Atlas, a British military aeroplane produced 19271933
* Birdman Atlas, an ultralight aircraft
* La Mouette Atlas, a French hang glider design
* Atlasjet, a Turkish airline
* HMLAT-303, U.S. Marine Corps helicopter training squadron
* AeroVelo Atlas, a human-powered helicopter

===Trains===
* Atlas Car and Manufacturing Company, a locomotive manufacturer
* Atlas Model Railroad
* Atlas, an 18631885 South Devon Railway Dido class locomotive
* Atlas, a 19271962 LMS Royal Scot Class locomotive

===Ships and boats===
* , the name of several U.S. Navy ships
* , the name of several Royal Navy ships
* ST Atlas, a Swedish tugboat
* Atlas Werke, a German shipbuilder

===Automotive===
* Atlas (1951 automobile), a French mini-car
* Atlas (light trucks), a Greek motor vehicle manufacturer
* Atlas (Pittsburgh automobile), produced 19061907
* Atlas (Springfield automobile), produced 19071913
* Atlas Motor Buggy, an American highwheeler produced in 1909
* GM Atlas engine
* Nissan Atlas, a Japanese light truck
* Honda Atlas Cars Pakistan, a Pakistani car manufacturer
* Atlas, a British van by the Standard Motor Company produced 19581962
* Atlas Drop Forge Company, a parts subsidiary of REO Motor Car Company

==People==
* Atlas DaBone, American wrestler and football player
* Charles Atlas (18921972), Italian-American bodybuilder
* David Atlas (born 1924), American meteorologist who pioneered weather radar
* James Atlas (born 1949), American writer, editor and publisher
* Meir Atlas (18481926), Lithuanian rabbi
* Natacha Atlas (born 1964), Belgian singer
* Teddy Atlas (born 1956), American boxing trainer and commentator
* Tony Atlas (born 1954), American wrestler and bodybuilder

==Other uses==
* Atlas (anatomy), part of the spine
* Atlas (architecture)
* ATLAS (simulation) (Army Tactical Level Advanced Simulation), a Thai military system
* Atlas (topology), a set of charts
* ATLAS of Finite Groups, a group theory book
* Atlas languages
* Atlas Network, a network of European special police units
* Atlas Uranium Mill
* Atlas (storm), which hit the Midwestern United States in October 2013, named by The Weather Channel
* Agrupacin de Trabajadores Latinoamericanos Sindicalistas

==See also==
* 



[[Mouthwash]]

Mouthwash, mouth rinse, oral rinse or mouth bath, is a liquid which is held in the mouth passively or swilled around the mouth by contraction of the perioral muscles and/or movement of the head, and may be gargled, where the head is tilted back and the liquid bubbled at the back of the mouth.

Usually mouthwashes are an antiseptic solution intended to reduce the microbial load in the oral cavity, although other mouthwashes might be given for other reasons such as for their analgesic, anti-inflammatory or anti-fungal action.

The most common use of mouthwash is commercial antiseptics which are used at home as part of an oral hygiene routine. Some manufacturers of mouthwash claim that antiseptic and anti-plaque mouth rinse kill the bacterial plaque which causes cavities, gingivitis, and bad breath. Anti-cavity mouth rinse uses fluoride to protect against tooth decay. It is, however, generally agreed that the use of mouthwash does not eliminate the need for both brushing and flossing. The American Dental Association asserts that regular brushing and proper flossing are enough in most cases, although they approve many mouthwashes that do not contain alcohol (in addition to regular dental check-ups). Simple Routine for Basic Oral Care Another common use of mouthwash is prior to and after oral surgery procedures such as tooth extraction.

==Use==
Common use involves rinsing the mouth with about 20ml (2/3 fl oz) of mouthwash. The wash is typically swished or gargled for about half a minute and then spit out. Most companies suggest not drinking water immediately after using mouthwash. In some brands, the expectorate is stained, so that one can see the bacteria and debris. Mouthwash should not be used immediately after brushing the teeth so as not to wash away the beneficial fluoride residue left from the toothpaste. Similarly, the mouth should not be rinsed out with water after brushing. Patients were told to "spit don't rinse" after toothbrushing as part of an National Health Service campaign in the UK. 

Gargling is where the head is tilted back, allowing the mouthwash to sit in the back of the mouth while exhaling, causing the liquid to bubble. Gargling is practiced in Japan for perceived prevention of viral infection. One commonly used way is with infusions or tea. In some cultures, gargling is usually done in private, typically in a bathroom at a sink so the liquid can be rinsed away.

==Typical formulation of commercial mouthwashes==
Each commercial brand of mouthwash has different ingredients. The active ingredients are usually alcohol, chlorhexidine gluconate, cetylpyridinium chloride hexetidine, benzoic acid (acts as a buffer), methyl salicylate, triclosan, http://drbenkim.com/articles/triclosan-products.htm benzalkonium chloride, methylparaben, hydrogen peroxide, domiphen bromide and sometimes fluoride, enzymes, and calcium. They can also include essential oil constituents that have some antibacterial properties, like phenol, thymol, eugenol, eucalyptol or menthol. Ingredients also include water, sweeteners such as sorbitol, sucralose, sodium saccharin, and xylitol (which doubles as a bacterial inhibitor). 

Commercial mouthwashes usually contain a preservative such as sodium benzoate to preserve freshness once the container has been opened. Many newer brands are alcohol-free and contain odor-elimination agents such as oxidizers, as well as odor-preventing agents such as zinc ion to keep future bad breath from developing.

Alternative mouthwash ingredients might include persica or alum.

Minor and transient side effects of commercial mouthwashes are very common, such as taste disturbance, tooth staining, sensation of a dry mouth, etc. Alcohol-containing mouthwashes may make dry mouth and halitosis worse since it dries out the mouth. Soreness, ulceration and redness may sometimes occur (e.g. aphthous stomatitis, allergic contact stomatitis) if the person is allergic or sensitive to mouthwash ingredients such as preservatives, coloring, flavors and fragrances. Such effects might be reduced or eliminated by diluting the mouthwash with water, using a different mouthwash (e.g. salt water), or foregoing mouthwash entirely.

==Custom formulations ("magic mouthwash")==
A "magic mouthwash" (or "magic swizzle"), refers to a non-standardized mixture of ingredients prescribed for a specific purpose, e.g. oral surgery, or to treat the pain associated with mucositis caused by radiation therapy or chemotherapy. It is also prescribed for aphthous ulcers, other oral ulcers, and other mouth pain. Variations are common, and some are done with over-the-counter products. Magic mouthwashes are intended to combine ingredients to treat a variety of oral conditions. Magic mouthwashes are typically compounded in a pharmacy from a doctor's prescription. 

Common ingredients include: Diphenhydramine (antihistamine), Glucocorticoids (anti-inflammatory), Lidocaine/Xylocaine (local anesthetic), Maalox (antacid), Nystatin (antifungal for oral candidiasis), Sucralfate (coating agent), Tetracycline or Erythromycin (antibiotics). 

Despite a lack of evidence that magic mouthwashes are effective in decreasing the pain of oral lesions, many patients and prescribers continue to use them. There has been only one controlled study to evaluate the efficacy of magic mouthwash; it shows no difference in efficacy among the most common formulation and other agents such as chlorhexidine and a saline/baking soda solution. Current guidelines suggest that saline solution is just as effective as magic mouthwash in pain relief or shortening of healing time of oral mucositis from cancer therapies. 

Because magic mouthwash has no standard formulation, its use involves concerns about patient safety. It is important that the prescriber and pharmacist are in specific agreement about exactly what is being prescribed, so as to minimize the potential for drug interaction and the possibility of drug allergy.

==Specific mouthwash ingredients==

===Alcohol===
An example of a commercial mouthwash brand which is alcohol-free
Sometimes a significant amount of alcohol (up to 27% vol) is added, as a carrier for the flavor, to provide "bite". Because of the alcohol content, it is possible to fail a breathalyzer test after rinsing although breath alcohol levels return to normal after 10 minutes . In addition, alcohol is a drying agent, which encourages bacterial activity in the mouth, releasing more malodorous volatile sulfur compounds. Therefore, alcohol-containing mouthwash may temporarily worsen halitosis in those who already have it, or indeed be the sole cause of halitosis in other individuals.

It is theorized that alcohol mouthwashes acts as a carcinogen (cancer-inducing). Generally, there is no scientific consensus about this. One review stated:

The same researchers also state that the risk of acquiring oral cancer rises almost five times for users of alcohol-containing mouthwash who neither smoke nor drink (with a higher rate of increase for those who do). Farah, C; McIntosh, L; McCullough, M (2009). "Mouthwashes". Australian Prescriber, 32:162-4. Available at australianprescriber.com In addition, the authors highlight side effects from several mainstream mouthwashes that included dental erosion and accidental poisoning of children. The review garnered media attention and conflicting opinions from other researchers. Yinka Ebo of Cancer Research UK disputed the findings, concluding that "there is still not enough evidence to suggest that using mouthwash that contains alcohol will increase the risk of mouth cancer". Studies conducted in 1985, 1995, 2003, and 2012 did not support an association between alcohol-containing mouth rinses and oral cancer. Andrew Penman, chief executive of The Cancer Council New South Wales, called for further research on the matter. In a March 2009 brief, the American Dental Association said "the available evidence does not support a connection between oral cancer and alcohol-containing mouthrinse". Many newer brands of mouthwash are alcohol free, not just in response to consumer concerns about oral cancer, but also to cater for religious groups who abstain from alcohol consumption.

===Benzydamine (Difflam)===
In painful oral conditions such as aphthous stomatitis, analgesic mouthrinses (e.g. benzydamine mouthwash, or "Difflam") are sometimes used to ease pain, commonly used before meals to reduce discomfort while eating.

===Betamethasone===
Betamethasone is sometimes used as an anti-inflammatory, corticosteroid mouthwash. It may be used for severe inflammatory conditions of the oral mucosa such as the severe forms of aphthous stomatitis. 

===Cetylpyridinium chloride===
Cetylpyridinium chloride containing mouthwash (e.g. 0.05%) is used in some specialized mouthwashes for halitosis. Fedorowicz Z, Aljufairi H, Nasser M, Outhouse TL, Pedrazzi V. Mouthrinses for the treatment of halitosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD006701. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006701.pub2 Cetylpyridinium chloride mouthwash has less anti-plaque effect than chlorhexidine and may cause staining of teeth, or sometimes an oral burning sensation or ulceration. 

===Chlorhexidine digluconate===
Chlorhexidine digluconate is a chemical antispetic and is used in a 0.12-0.2% solution as a mouthwash. It has significant anti-plaque action, but also some anti-fungal action. It is especially effective against Gram-negative rods. It is sometimes used as an adjunct to prevent dental caries and to treat periodontal disease, although it does not penetrate into periodontal pockets well. Chlorhexidine mouthwash alone is unable to prevent plaque, so it is not a substitute for regular toothbrushing and flossing. In the short term, if toothbrushing is impossible due to pain, as may occur in primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, chlorhexidine is used as temporary substitute for other oral hygiene measures. It is not suited for use in acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis however. Rinsing with chlorhexidine mouthwash before a tooth extraction reduces the risk of dry socket, a painful condition where the blood clot is lost from an extraction socket and bone is exposed to the oral cavity. Other uses of chlorhexidine mouthwash include prevention of oral candidiasis in immunocompromised persons, treatment of denture-related stomatitis, and many other uses. 

Chlorhexidine has good substantivity (the ability of a mouthwash to bind to hard and soft tissues in the mouth). However, chlorhexidine binds to tannins, meaning that prolonged use in persons who consume coffee, tea or red wine is associated with extrinsic staining (i.e. removable staining) of teeth. Chlorhexidine is rarely associated with other issues like overgrowth of enterobacteria in persons with leukemia, desquamation and irritation of oral mucosa, salivary gland pain and swelling, and hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis. 

===Essential oils===
Essential oils are oils which have been extracted from plants. Mouthwashes based on essential oils could be more effective than traditional mouthwashes. 

In traditional Ayurvedic medicine, the use of oil mouthwashes is called "oil pulling", "oil swishing", "Kavala" or "Gandusha", and this practice has more recently been re-marketed by the complimentary and alternative medicine industry. Its promoters claim it works by "pulling out" "toxins", which are known as ama in Ayurvedic medicine, and thereby reducing inflammation. Ayurvedic literature suggests oil pulling is capable of improving oral and systemic health, including a benefit in conditions such as headaches, migraines, diabetes mellitus, asthma, and acne, as well as whitening teeth. 

Oil pulling has received little study and there is little evidence to support claims made by the technique's advocates. When compared with chlorhexidine in one small study, it was found to be less effective at reducing oral bacterial load, Asokan S, Emmadi P, Chamundeswari R. "Effect of oil pulling on plaque induced gingivitis: A randomized, controlled, triple-blind study." Indian J Dent Res 2009;20:47-51 otherwise the health claims of oil pulling have failed scientific verification or have not been investigated. There is a report of lipid pneumonia caused by accidental inhalation of the oil during oil pulling. Kim JY, Jung JW, Choi JC, Shin JW, Park IW, Choi BW. "Recurrent lipoid pneumonia associated with oil pulling." Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2014 Feb;18(2):251-2. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.13.0852. 

The mouth is rinsed with approximately one tablespoon of oil for 1020 minutes then spat out. Sesame oil, coconut oil and ghee are traditionally used, but newer oils such as sunflower oil are also used. 

===Fluoride===
Fluoride mouthwashes are sometimes used in individuals who are at high risk of dental decay. They usually contain about 1450 parts per million fluoride. The fluoride strengthens teeth against decay.

===Hydrogen peroxide===
Hydrogen peroxide can be used as an oxidizing mouthwash (e.g. Peroxyl, 1.5%). It kills anearobic bacteria, and also has a mechanical cleansing action when it froths as it comes into contact with debris in mouth. It is often used in the short term to treat acute necrotising ulcerative gingivitis. Side effects with prolonged use might occur, including hypertrophy lingual papillae. 

===Phenol===
Phenolic mouthwashes (e.g. Listerine) have some anti-plaque action but less substantivity than chlorhexidine. They do not stain teeth. 

===Providone/iodine===
A 2005 study found that gargling three times a day with simple water or with a providone/iodine solution (although with less effectiveness) was effective in preventing upper respiratory infection and decreasing the severity of symptoms if contracted. A later study found that the same procedure did not prevent influenza-like illnesses. http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/internalmedicine/46/18/1623/_pdf Other sources attribute the benefit to a simple placebo effect. To gargle or not to gargle? Japan Times, 15 December 2009 

===Sanguinarine===
Sanguinarine-containing mouthwashes are marketed as anti-plaque and anti-malodor. It is a toxic alkaloid herbal extract, obtained from plants such as Sanguinaria canadensis (Bloodroot), Argemone mexicana (Mexican Prickly Poppy) and others. However, its use is strongly associated with development of leukoplakia (a white patch in the mouth), usually in the buccal sulcus. Leukoplakia, (pdf format) hosted by the American Academy of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. Page accessed on 19 December 2006. This type of leukoplakia has been termed "sanguinaria-associated keratosis" and more than 80% of people with leukoplakia in the vestibule of the mouth have used this substance. Upon stopping contact with the causative substance, the lesions may persist for years. Although this type of leukoplakia may show dysplasia, the potential for malignant transformation is unknown. Ironically, elements within the complimentary and alternative medicine industry promote the use of sanguinaria as a therapy for cancer.

===Sodium bicarbonate (Baking soda)===
Sodium bicarbonate is sometimes combined with salt to make a simple homemade mouthwash, indicated for any of the reasons that a salt water mouthwash might be used. Pre-mixed mouthwashes of 1% sodium bicarbonate and 1.5% sodium chloride in aqueous solution are marketed, although pharmacists will easily be able to produce such a formulation from the base ingredients when required. Sodium bicarbonate mouthwash is sometimes used to remove viscous saliva and to aid visualization of the oral tissues during examination of the mouth. 

===Sodium chloride (Salt)===

Hot salt water mouth baths (or hot salt water mouth washes, sometimes abbreviated to "HSWMW") are also routinely used after oral surgery, to keep food debris out of healing wounds and to prevent infection. Some oral surgeons consider salt water mouthwashes the mainstay of wound cleanliness after surgery. In dental extractions, hot salt water mouthbaths should start about 24 hours after a dental extraction. The term mouth bath implies that the liquid is passively held in the mouth rather than vigorously swilled around, which could dislodge a blood clot. Once the blood clot has stabilized, the mouth wash can be used more vigorously. These mouthwashes tend to be advised about 6 times per day, especially after meals to remove food from the socket. 

Salt water mouth wash is made by dissolving 0.5-1 teaspoon of table salt into a cup of water, which is as hot as possible without causing discomfort in the mouth. Saline has a mechanical cleansing action and an antiseptic action as it is a hypertonic solution in relation to bacteria, which undergo lysis. The heat of the solution produces a therapeutic increase in blood flow (hyperemia) to the surgical site, promoting healing. Hot salt water mouthwashes also encourage the draining of pus from dental abscesses. Conversely, if heat is applied on the side of the face (e.g. hot water bottle) rather than inside the mouth, it may cause a dental abscess to drain extra-orally, which is later associated with an area of fibrosis on the face. Gargling with salt water is said to reduce the symptoms of a sore throat. 

===Sodium lauryl sulfate===
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) is notorious for causing aphthous stomatitis (mouth ulcers) in susceptible individuals. It is present in a great many oral hygiene products including many mouthwashes. Some may suggest that it is probably advisable to use mouthwash at least an hour after brushing with toothpaste when the toothpaste contains SLS, since the anionic compounds in the SLS toothpaste can deactivate cationic agents present in the mouthrinse. However, many of the popular mouthwashes also contain sodium lauryl sulfate as an ingredient (e.g., Listerine Total Care).

===Tetracycline===
Tetracycline is an antibiotic which may sometimes be used as a mouthwash in adults (it causes red staining of teeth in children). It is sometimes use for herpetiforme ulceration (an uncommon type of aphthous stomatitis), but prolonged use may lead to oral candidiasis as the fungal population of the mouth overgrows in the absence of enough competing bacteria. 

===Tranexamic acid===
4.8% tranexamic acid solution is sometimes used as an antifibrinolytic mouthwash to prevent bleeding during and after oral surgery in persons with coagulopathies (clotting disorders) or who are taking anticoagulants (blood thinners such as warfarin). 

===Triclosan===
Triclosan is a non-ionic chlorinate bisphenol antiseptic. When used in mouthwash (e.g. 0.03%), there is moderate substantivity, broad spectrum anti-bacterial action, some anti-fungal action and significant anti-plaque effect, especially when combined with copolymer or zinc citrate. Triclosan does not cause staining of the teeth. The safety of tricolsan has been questioned. http://newyorkorthodontists.net/triclosan-dangers-side-effects-in-toothpastes-and-mouthwash/ 

==Example brands of common commercial mouthwashes==
thumb
* Cpacol
* Colgate
* Corsodyl
* Dentyl pH
* Listerine
* Oral-B
* Sarakan
* Scope (mouthwash)
* Tantum verde

==History==
Listerine advertisement, 1932.
The first known references to mouth rinsing is in Ayurveda and Chinese medicine, about 2700 BC, for treatment of gingivitis. Later, in the Greek and Roman periods, mouth rinsing following mechanical cleansing became common among the upper classes, and Hippocrates recommended a mixture of salt, alum, and vinegar. The Jewish Talmud, dating back about 1800 years, suggests a cure for gum ailments containing "dough water" and olive oil. 

Before Europeans came to the Americas, Native North American and Mesoamerican cultures used mouthwashes, often made from plants such as Coptis trifolia. Indeed Aztec dentistry was more advanced than European dentistry of the age. Peoples of the Americas used salt water mouthwashes for sore throats, and other mouthwashes for problems such as teething and mouth ulcers. 

Anton van Leeuwenhoek, the famous 17th century microscopist, discovered living organisms (living, because they were motile) in deposits on the teeth (what we now call dental plaque). He also found organisms in water from the canal next to his home in Delft. He experimented with samples by adding vinegar or brandy and found that this resulted in the immediate immobilization or killing of the organisms suspended in water. Next he tried rinsing the mouth of himself and somebody else with a mouthwash containing vinegar or brandy and found that living organisms remained in the dental plaque. He concluded&mdash;correctly&mdash;that the mouthwash either did not reach, or was not present long enough, to kill the plaque organisms. 

That remained the state of affairs until the late 1960s when Harald Loe (at the time a professor at the Royal Dental College in Aarhus, Denmark) demonstrated that a chlorhexidine compound could prevent the build-up of dental plaque. The reason for chlorhexidine effectiveness is that it strongly adheres to surfaces in the mouth and thus remains present in effective concentrations for many hours. 

Since then commercial interest in mouthwashes has been intense and several newer products claim effectiveness in reducing the build-up in dental plaque and the associated severity of gingivitis, in addition to fighting bad breath. Many of these solutions aim to control the Volatile Sulfur Compound (VSC)-creating anaerobic bacteria that live in the mouth and excrete substances that lead to bad breath and unpleasant mouth taste. 

==Research==
Research in the field of microbiomes shows that only a limited set of microbes cause tooth decay, with most of the bacteria in the human mouth being harmless. Focused attention on cavity-causing bacteria such as Streptococcus mutans has led research into new mouthwash treatments that prevent these bacteria from initially growing. While current mouthwash treatments must be used with a degree of frequency to prevent this bacteria from regrowing, future treatments could provide a viable long term solution. 

==References==

==External links==
* Article on Bad-Breath Prevention Products  from MSNBC
*Common formulations of Magic Mouthwash
*Mayo Clinic Q&A on Magic Mouthwash for chemotherapy sores
*Magic Mouthwash
*Gargle at the Centre for Cancer Education, University of Newcastle upon Tyne. Accessed July 2007



[[Alexander the Great]]

Alexander III of Macedon (20/21 July 356  10/11 June 323 BC), commonly known as Alexander the Great (, Alxandros ho Mgas from the ), was a king of the Greek kingdom of Macedon. Born in Pella in 356 BC, Alexander succeeded his father, Philip II, to the throne at the age of twenty. He spent most of his ruling years on an unprecedented military campaign through Asia and northeast Africa, until by the age of thirty he had created one of the largest empires of the ancient world, stretching from Greece to Egypt and into present-day Pakistan. He was undefeated in battle and is considered one of history's most successful commanders.

During his youth, Alexander was tutored by the philosopher Aristotle until the age of 16. When he succeeded his father to the throne in 336 BC, after Philip was assassinated, Alexander inherited a strong kingdom and an experienced army. He had been awarded the generalship of Greece and used this authority to launch his father's military expansion plans. In 334 BC, he invaded the Achaemenid empire, ruled Asia Minor, and began a series of campaigns that lasted ten years. Alexander broke the power of Persia in a series of decisive battles, most notably the battles of Issus and Gaugamela. He subsequently overthrew the Persian King Darius III and conquered the entirety of the Persian Empire. At that point, his empire stretched from the Adriatic Sea to the Indus River.

Seeking to reach the "ends of the world and the Great Outer Sea", he invaded India in 326 BC, but was eventually forced to turn back at the demand of his troops. Alexander died in Babylon in 323 BC, the city he planned to establish as his capital, Alexander the Great without executing a series of planned campaigns that would have begun with an invasion of Arabia. In the years following his death, a series of civil wars tore his empire apart, resulting in several states ruled by the Diadochi, Alexander's surviving generals and heirs.

Alexander's legacy includes the cultural diffusion his conquests engendered. He founded some twenty cities that bore his name, most notably Alexandria in Egypt. Alexander's settlement of Greek colonists and the resulting spread of Greek culture in the east resulted in a new Hellenistic civilization, aspects of which were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century. Alexander became legendary as a classical hero in the mold of Achilles, and he features prominently in the history and myth of Greek and non-Greek cultures. He became the measure against which military leaders compared themselves, and military academies throughout the world still teach his tactics.

==Early life==

===Lineage and childhood===
Bust of a young Alexander the Great from the Hellenistic era, British Museum
Aristotle tutoring Alexander, by Jean Leon Gerome Ferris

Alexander was born on the sixth day of the ancient Greek month of Hekatombaion, which probably corresponds to 20 July 356BC, although the exact date is not known, in Pella, the capital of the Ancient Greek Kingdom of Macedon. He was the son of the king of Macedon, Philip II, and his fourth wife, Olympias, the daughter of Neoptolemus I, king of Epirus. Although Philip had seven or eight wives, Olympias was his principal wife for some time, likely a result of giving birth to Alexander.

Several legends surround Alexander's birth and childhood. According to the ancient Greek biographer Plutarch, Olympias, on the eve of the consummation of her marriage to Philip, dreamed that her womb was struck by a thunder bolt, causing a flame that spread "far and wide" before dying away. Some time after the wedding, Philip is said to have seen himself, in a dream, securing his wife's womb with a seal engraved with a lion's image. Plutarch offered a variety of interpretations of these dreams: that Olympias was pregnant before her marriage, indicated by the sealing of her womb; or that Alexander's father was Zeus. Ancient commentators were divided about whether the ambitious Olympias promulgated the story of Alexander's divine parentage, variously claiming that she had told Alexander, or that she dismissed the suggestion as impious. 

On the day that Alexander was born, Philip was preparing a siege on the city of Potidea on the peninsula of Chalcidice. That same day, Philip received news that his general Parmenion had defeated the combined Illyrian and Paeonian armies, and that his horses had won at the Olympic Games. It was also said that on this day, the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, burnt down. This led Hegesias of Magnesia to say that it had burnt down because Artemis was away, attending the birth of Alexander. Such legends may have emerged when Alexander was king, and possibly at his own instigation, to show that he was superhuman and destined for greatness from conception. 

A statue showing Alexander taming Bucephalus in Edinburgh
In his early years, Alexander was raised by a nurse, Lanike, sister of Alexander's future general Cleitus the Black. Later in his childhood, Alexander was tutored by the strict Leonidas, a relative of his mother, and by Philip's general Lysimachus. Alexander was raised in the manner of noble Macedonian youths, learning to read, play the lyre, ride, fight, and hunt. 

When Alexander was ten years old, a trader from Thessaly brought Philip a horse, which he offered to sell for thirteen talents. The horse refused to be mounted and Philip ordered it away. Alexander however, detecting the horse's fear of its own shadow, asked to tame the horse, which he eventually managed. Plutarch stated that Philip, overjoyed at this display of courage and ambition, kissed his son tearfully, declaring: "My boy, you must find a kingdom big enough for your ambitions. Macedon is too small for you", and bought the horse for him. Alexander named it Bucephalas, meaning "ox-head". Bucephalas carried Alexander as far as Pakistan. When the animal died (due to old age, according to Plutarch, at age thirty), Alexander named a city after him, Bucephala. 

===Adolescence and education===
When Alexander was 13, Philip began to search for a tutor, and considered such academics as Isocrates and Speusippus, the latter offering to resign to take up the post. In the end, Philip chose Aristotle and provided the Temple of the Nymphs at Mieza as a classroom. In return for teaching Alexander, Philip agreed to rebuild Aristotle's hometown of Stageira, which Philip had razed, and to repopulate it by buying and freeing the ex-citizens who were slaves, or pardoning those who were in exile. 

Mieza was like a boarding school for Alexander and the children of Macedonian nobles, such as Ptolemy, Hephaistion, and Cassander. Many of these students would become his friends and future generals, and are often known as the 'Companions'. Aristotle taught Alexander and his companions about medicine, philosophy, morals, religion, logic, and art. Under Aristotle's tutelage, Alexander developed a passion for the works of Homer, and in particular the Iliad; Aristotle gave him an annotated copy, which Alexander later carried on his campaigns. 

==Philip's heir==

===Regency and ascent of Macedon===

Philip II of Macedon, Alexander's father.

At age 16, Alexander's education under Aristotle ended. Philip waged war against Byzantion, leaving Alexander in charge as regent and heir apparent. During Philip's absence, the Thracian Maedi revolted against Macedonia. Alexander responded quickly, driving them from their territory. He colonized it with Greeks, and founded a city named Alexandropolis. 

Upon Philip's return, he dispatched Alexander with a small force to subdue revolts in southern Thrace. Campaigning against the Greek city of Perinthus, Alexander is reported to have saved his father's life. Meanwhile, the city of Amphissa began to work lands that were sacred to Apollo near Delphi, a sacrilege that gave Philip the opportunity to further intervene in Greek affairs. Still occupied in Thrace, he ordered Alexander to muster an army for a campaign in Greece. Concerned that other Greek states might intervene, Alexander made it look as though he was preparing to attack Illyria instead. During this turmoil, the Illyrians invaded Macedonia, only to be repelled by Alexander. 

Philip and his army joined his son in 338 BC, and they marched south through Thermopylae, taking it after stubborn resistance from its Theban garrison. They went on to occupy the city of Elatea, only a few days' march from both Athens and Thebes. The Athenians, led by Demosthenes, voted to seek alliance with Thebes against Macedonia. Both Athens and Philip sent embassies to win Thebes' favor, but Athens won the contest. Philip marched on Amphissa (ostensibly acting on the request of the Amphictyonic League), capturing the mercenaries sent there by Demosthenes and accepting the city's surrender. Philip then returned to Elatea, sending a final offer of peace to Athens and Thebes, who both rejected it. 

Statue of Alexander in Istanbul Archaeology Museum.
As Philip marched south, his opponents blocked him near Chaeronea, Boeotia. During the ensuing Battle of Chaeronea, Philip commanded the right wing and Alexander the left, accompanied by a group of Philip's trusted generals. According to the ancient sources, the two sides fought bitterly for some time. Philip deliberately commanded his troops to retreat, counting on the untested Athenian hoplites to follow, thus breaking their line. Alexander was the first to break the Theban lines, followed by Philip's generals. Having damaged the enemy's cohesion, Philip ordered his troops to press forward and quickly routed them. With the Athenians lost, the Thebans were surrounded. Left to fight alone, they were defeated. 

After the victory at Chaeronea, Philip and Alexander marched unopposed into the Peloponnese, welcomed by all cities; however, when they reached Sparta, they were refused, but did not resort to war. At Corinth, Philip established a "Hellenic Alliance" (modeled on the old anti-Persian alliance of the Greco-Persian Wars), which included most Greek city-states except Sparta. Philip was then named Hegemon (often translated as "Supreme Commander") of this league (known by modern scholars as the League of Corinth), and announced his plans to attack the Persian Empire. 

===Exile and return===
When Philip returned to Pella, he fell in love with and married Cleopatra Eurydice, the niece of his general Attalus. The marriage made Alexander's position as heir less secure, since any son of Cleopatra Eurydice would be a fully Macedonian heir, while Alexander was only half-Macedonian. During the wedding banquet, a drunken Attalus publicly prayed to the gods that the union would produce a legitimate heir. 

Alexander fled Macedon with his mother, dropping her off with her brother, King Alexander I of Epirus in Dodona, capital of the Molossians. He continued to Illyria, where he sought refuge with the Illyrian King and was treated as a guest, despite having defeated them in battle a few years before. However, it appears Philip never intended to disown his politically and militarily trained son. Accordingly, Alexander returned to Macedon after six months due to the efforts of a family friend, Demaratus, who mediated between the two parties. 

In the following year, the Persian satrap (governor) of Caria, Pixodarus, offered his eldest daughter to Alexander's half-brother, Philip Arrhidaeus. Olympias and several of Alexander's friends suggested this showed Philip intended to make Arrhidaeus his heir. Alexander reacted by sending an actor, Thessalus of Corinth, to tell Pixodarus that he should not offer his daughter's hand to an illegitimate son, but instead to Alexander. When Philip heard of this, he stopped the negotiations and scolded Alexander for wishing to marry the daughter of a Carian, explaining that he wanted a better bride for him. Philip exiled four of Alexander's friends, Harpalus, Nearchus, Ptolemy and Erigyius, and had the Corinthians bring Thessalus to him in chains. 

==King of Macedon==

===Accession===
The Kingdom of Macedon in 336 BC.
In 336 BC, while at Aegae attending the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra to Olympias's brother, Alexander I of Epirus, Philip was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguards, Pausanias. As Pausanias tried to escape, he tripped over a vine and was killed by his pursuers, including two of Alexander's companions, Perdiccas and Leonnatus. Alexander was proclaimed king by the nobles and army at the age of 20. 

===Consolidation of power===
Alexander began his reign by eliminating potential rivals to the throne. He had his cousin, the former Amyntas IV, executed. He also had two Macedonian princes from the region of Lyncestis killed, but spared a third, Alexander Lyncestes. Olympias had Cleopatra Eurydice and Europa, her daughter by Philip, burned alive. When Alexander learned about this, he was furious. Alexander also ordered the murder of Attalus, who was in command of the advance guard of the army in Asia Minor and Cleopatra's uncle. 

Attalus was at that time corresponding with Demosthenes, regarding the possibility of defecting to Athens. Attalus also had severely insulted Alexander, and following Cleopatra's murder, Alexander may have considered him too dangerous to leave alive. Alexander spared Arrhidaeus, who was by all accounts mentally disabled, possibly as a result of poisoning by Olympias. 

News of Philip's death roused many states into revolt, including Thebes, Athens, Thessaly, and the Thracian tribes north of Macedon. When news of the revolts reached Alexander, he responded quickly. Though advised to use diplomacy, Alexander mustered the 3,000 Macedonian cavalry and rode south towards Thessaly. He found the Thessalian army occupying the pass between Mount Olympus and Mount Ossa, and ordered his men to ride over Mount Ossa. When the Thessalians awoke the next day, they found Alexander in their rear and promptly surrendered, adding their cavalry to Alexander's force. He then continued south towards the Peloponnese. 

Alexander stopped at Thermopylae, where he was recognized as the leader of the Amphictyonic League before heading south to Corinth. Athens sued for peace and Alexander pardoned the rebels. The famous encounter between Alexander and Diogenes the Cynic occurred during Alexander's stay in Corinth. When Alexander asked Diogenes what he could do for him, the philosopher disdainfully asked Alexander to stand a little to the side, as he was blocking the sunlight. This reply apparently delighted Alexander, who is reported to have said "But verily, if I were not Alexander, I would like to be Diogenes." At Corinth, Alexander took the title of Hegemon ("leader") and, like Philip, was appointed commander for the coming war against Persia. He also received news of a Thracian uprising. 

===Balkan campaign===

Before crossing to Asia, Alexander wanted to safeguard his northern borders. In the spring of 335 BC, he advanced to suppress several revolts. Starting from Amphipolis, he traveled east into the country of the "Independent Thracians"; and at Mount Haemus, the Macedonian army attacked and defeated the Thracian forces manning the heights. The Macedonians marched into the country of the Triballi, and defeated their army near the Lyginus river (a tributary of the Danube). Alexander then marched for three days to the Danube, encountering the Getae tribe on the opposite shore. Crossing the river at night, he surprised them and forced their army to retreat after the first cavalry skirmish. 

News then reached Alexander that Cleitus, King of Illyria, and King Glaukias of the Taulanti were in open revolt against his authority. Marching west into Illyria, Alexander defeated each in turn, forcing the two rulers to flee with their troops. With these victories, he secured his northern frontier. 

While Alexander campaigned north, the Thebans and Athenians rebelled once again. Alexander immediately headed south. While the other cities again hesitated, Thebes decided to fight. The Theban resistance was ineffective, and Alexander razed the city and divided its territory between the other Boeotian cities. The end of Thebes cowed Athens, leaving all of Greece temporarily at peace. Alexander then set out on his Asian campaign, leaving Antipater as regent. 

==Conquest of the Persian Empire==

===Asia Minor===

Map of Alexander's empire and his route.

Alexander's army crossed the Hellespont in 334 BC with approximately 48,100 soldiers, 6,100 cavalry and a fleet of 120 ships with crews numbering 38,000, drawn from Macedon and various Greek city-states, mercenaries, and feudally raised soldiers from Thrace, Paionia, and Illyria. (However, Arrian, who used Ptolemy as a source, said that Alexander crossed with more than 5,000 horse and 30,000 foot; Diodorus quoted the same totals, but listed 5,100 horse and 32,000 foot. Diodorus also referred to an advance force already present in Asia, which Polyaenus, in his Stratagems of War (5.44.4), said numbered 10,000 men.) He showed his intent to conquer the entirety of the Persian Empire by throwing a spear into Asian soil and saying he accepted Asia as a gift from the gods. This also showed Alexander's eagerness to fight, in contrast to his father's preference for diplomacy. 

After an initial victory against Persian forces at the Battle of the Granicus, Alexander accepted the surrender of the Persian provincial capital and treasury of Sardis; he then proceeded along the Ionian coast. Though Alexander believed in his divine right to expend the lives of men in battle, he did experience sorrow, as those who died were rewarded generously: To the relatives of his fallen, Alexander granted immunity from taxation and public service. Whether it was his own warriors or the Persian forces opposing him, Alexander chose to respect those who died. He even went so far to set up statues to honor and respect these people. Though this did not directly influence the culture of the Persians they did not feel the need to begin a rebellion as their men and rulers were treated with proper respect. At Halicarnassus, in Caria, Alexander successfully waged the first of many sieges, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea. Alexander left the government of Caria to Ada, who adopted Alexander. 

From Halicarnassus, Alexander proceeded into mountainous Lycia and the Pamphylian plain, asserting control over all coastal cities to deny the Persians naval bases. From Pamphylia onwards the coast held no major ports and Alexander moved inland. At Termessos, Alexander humbled but did not storm the Pisidian city. At the ancient Phrygian capital of Gordium, Alexander "undid" the hitherto unsolvable Gordian Knot, a feat said to await the future "king of Asia". According to the story, Alexander proclaimed that it did not matter how the knot was undone and hacked it apart with his sword. 

===The Levant and Syria===

Detail of Alexander Mosaic, showing Battle of Issus, from the House of the Faun, Pompeii.

Alexander journeyed south but was met by Darius significantly larger army which he easily defeated, causing Darius to panic. Although he was chased by some troops Alexander treated them (his family) with the respect out of consideration which demonstrated his continued generosity and kindness towards those he conquered. Darius fled the battle, causing his army to collapse, and left behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and a fabulous treasure. He offered a peace treaty that included the lands he had already lost, and a ransom of 10,000 talents for his family. Alexander replied that since he was now king of Asia, it was he alone who decided territorial divisions.

Alexander the Great, although a generous man in victory, eventually recognized the power that he was capable of when he would defeat an enemy in war. Following the siege of Tyre in 332, the enemy he defeated, Darius, attempted to present terms of unconditional surrender but Alexander became ruthless. He realized that he had control and could receive much more. Darius was thus forced to come back, This time the offer was impressive. Darius offered all territory as a far the Euphrates a colossal ransom of 30,000 talents for his familyinvited to marry his eldest daughter. This new change in diplomatic relations induced panic among the leaders of the surrounding nations, as they feared a similar defeat. This led to some barbarian cultures choosing to merely abdicate power to Alexander, to avoid certain death. 

Alexander proceeded to take possession of Syria, and most of the coast of the Levant. In the following year, 332 BC, he was forced to attack Tyre, which he captured after a long and difficult siege. Alexander massacred the men of military age and sold the women and children into slavery. 

===Egypt===

Name of Alexander the Great in Egyptian hieroglyphs (written from right to left), c. 330 BC, Egypt. Louvre Museum.

When Alexander destroyed Tyre, most of the towns on the route to Egypt quickly capitulated, with the exception of Gaza. The stronghold at Gaza was heavily fortified and built on a hill, requiring a siege. Alexander came upon the city only to be met with a surprising resistance and fortification. When his engineers pointed out to him that because of the height of the mound it would be impossible this encouraged Alexander all the more to make the attempt. The divine right that Alexander believed he had gave him confidence of a miracle occurring. After three unsuccessful assaults, the stronghold fell, but not before Alexander had received a serious shoulder wound. As in Tyre, men of military age were put to the sword and the women and children were sold into slavery. 

Jerusalem opened its gates in surrender, and according to Josephus, Alexander was shown the Book of Daniel's prophecy, presumably chapter 8, which described a mighty Greek king who would conquer the Persian Empire. He spared Jerusalem and pushed south into Egypt. Josephus, Jewish Antiquities, XI, 337 5 

Alexander advanced on Egypt in later 332 BC, where he was regarded as a liberator. He was pronounced the new "master of the Universe" and son of the deity of Amun at the Oracle of Siwa Oasis in the Libyan desert. Henceforth, Alexander often referred to Zeus-Ammon as his true father, and subsequent currency depicted him adorned with rams horn as a symbol of his divinity. During his stay in Egypt, he founded Alexandria-by-Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic Kingdom after his death. 

===Assyria and Babylonia===

Leaving Egypt in 331 BC, Alexander marched eastward into Mesopotamia (now northern Iraq) and again defeated Darius, at the Battle of Gaugamela. Darius once more fled the field, and Alexander chased him as far as Arbela. Gaugamela would be the final and decisive encounter between the two. Darius fled over the mountains to Ecbatana (modern Hamedan), while Alexander captured Babylon. 

===Persia===

Site of the Persian Gate; the road was built in the 1990s.

From Babylon, Alexander went to Susa, one of the Achaemenid capitals, and captured its legendary treasury. He sent the bulk of his army to the Persian ceremonial capital of Persepolis via the Royal Road. Alexander himself took selected troops on the direct route to the city. He had to storm the pass of the Persian Gates (in the modern Zagros Mountains) which had been blocked by a Persian army under Ariobarzanes and then hurried to Persepolis before its garrison could loot the treasury. 

On entering Persepolis, Alexander allowed his troops to loot the city for several days. Alexander stayed in Persepolis for five months. During his stay a fire broke out in the eastern palace of Xerxes and spread to the rest of the city. Possible causes include a drunken accident or deliberate revenge for the burning of the Acropolis of Athens during the Second Persian War. 

===Fall of the Empire and the East===
Silver coin of Alexander wearing the lion scalp of Herakles, British Museum.

Alexander then chased Darius, first into Media, and then Parthia. The Persian king no longer controlled his own destiny, and was taken prisoner by Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman. As Alexander approached, Bessus had his men fatally stab the Great King and then declared himself Darius' successor as Artaxerxes V, before retreating into Central Asia to launch a guerrilla campaign against Alexander. Alexander buried Darius' remains next to his Achaemenid predecessors in a regal funeral. He claimed that, while dying, Darius had named him as his successor to the Achaemenid throne. The Achaemenid Empire is normally considered to have fallen with Darius. 

Alexander viewed Bessus as a usurper and set out to defeat him. This campaign, initially against Bessus, turned into a grand tour of central Asia. Alexander founded a series of new cities, all called Alexandria, including modern Kandahar in Afghanistan, and Alexandria Eschate ("The Furthest") in modern Tajikistan. The campaign took Alexander through Media, Parthia, Aria (West Afghanistan), Drangiana, Arachosia (South and Central Afghanistan), Bactria (North and Central Afghanistan), and Scythia.

Spitamenes, who held an undefined position in the satrapy of Sogdiana, in 329BC betrayed Bessus to Ptolemy, one of Alexander's trusted companions, and Bessus was executed. However, when, at some point later, Alexander was on the Jaxartes dealing with an incursion by a horse nomad army, Spitamenes raised Sogdiana in revolt. Alexander personally defeated the Scythians at the Battle of Jaxartes and immediately launched a campaign against Spitamenes, defeating him in the Battle of Gabai. After the defeat, Spitamenes was killed by his own men, who then sued for peace.

===Problems and plots===
The killing of Cleitus, Andr Castaigne 18981899

During this time, Alexander took the Persian title "King of Kings" (Shahanshah) and adopted some elements of Persian dress and customs at his court, notably the custom of proskynesis, either a symbolic kissing of the hand, or prostration on the ground, that Persians showed to their social superiors. The Greeks regarded the gesture as the province of deities and believed that Alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it. This cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen, and he eventually abandoned it. 

A plot against his life was revealed, and one of his officers, Philotas, was executed for failing to alert Alexander. The death of the son necessitated the death of the father, and thus Parmenion, who had been charged with guarding the treasury at Ecbatana, was assassinated at Alexander's command, to prevent attempts at vengeance. Most infamously, Alexander personally killed the man who had saved his life at Granicus, Cleitus the Black, during a violent drunken altercation at Maracanda (modern day Samarkand in Uzbekistan), in which Cleitus accused Alexander of several judgemental mistakes and most especially, of having forgotten the Macedonian ways in favour of a corrupt oriental lifestyle. 

Later, in the Central Asian campaign, a second plot against his life was revealed, this one instigated by his own royal pages. His official historian, Callisthenes of Olynthus, was implicated in the plot; however, historians have yet to reach a consensus regarding this involvement. Callisthenes had fallen out of favor by leading the opposition to the attempt to introduce proskynesis. 

===Macedon in Alexander's absence===
When Alexander set out for Asia, he left his general Antipater, an experienced military and political leader and part of Philip II's "Old Guard", in charge of Macedon. Alexander's sacking of Thebes ensured that Greece remained quiet during his absence. The one exception was a call to arms by Spartan king Agis III in 331 BC, whom Antipater defeated and killed in battle at Megalopolis the following year. Antipater referred the Spartans' punishment to the League of Corinth, which then deferred to Alexander, who chose to pardon them. There was also considerable friction between Antipater and Olympias, and each complained to Alexander about the other. 

In general, Greece enjoyed a period of peace and prosperity during Alexander's campaign in Asia. Alexander sent back vast sums from his conquest, which stimulated the economy and increased trade across his empire. However, Alexander's constant demands for troops and the migration of Macedonians throughout his empire depleted Macedon's manpower, greatly weakening it in the years after Alexander, and ultimately led to its subjugation by Rome. 

==Indian campaign==

===Invasion of the Indian subcontinent===
The phalanx attacking the centre in the Battle of the Hydaspes by Andr Castaigne (18981899)

After the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana (Roshanak in Bactrian) to cement relations with his new satrapies, Alexander turned to the Indian subcontinent. He invited the chieftains of the former satrapy of Gandhara, in the north of what is now Pakistan, to come to him and submit to his authority. Omphis, ruler of Taxila, whose kingdom extended from the Indus to the Hydaspes (Jhelum), complied, but the chieftains of some hill clans, including the Aspasioi and Assakenoi sections of the Kambojas (known in Indian texts also as Ashvayanas and Ashvakayanas), refused to submit. 

In the winter of 327/326 BC, Alexander personally led a campaign against these clans; the Aspasioi of Kunar valleys, the Guraeans of the Guraeus valley, and the Assakenoi of the Swat and Buner valleys. A fierce contest ensued with the Aspasioi in which Alexander was wounded in the shoulder by a dart, but eventually the Aspasioi lost. Alexander then faced the Assakenoi, who fought in the strongholds of Massaga, Ora and Aornos. 

The fort of Massaga was reduced only after days of bloody fighting, in which Alexander was wounded seriously in the ankle. According to Curtius, "Not only did Alexander slaughter the entire population of Massaga, but also did he reduce its buildings to rubble". A similar slaughter followed at Ora. In the aftermath of Massaga and Ora, numerous Assakenians fled to the fortress of Aornos. Alexander followed close behind and captured the strategic hill-fort after four bloody days. 

After Aornos, Alexander crossed the Indus and fought and won an epic battle against King Porus, who ruled a region in the Punjab, in the Battle of the Hydaspes in 326 BC. Alexander was impressed by Porus's bravery, and made him an ally. He appointed Porus as satrap, and added to Porus' territory land that he did not previously own. Choosing a local helped him control these lands so distant from Greece. Alexander founded two cities on opposite sides of the Hydaspes river, naming one Bucephala, in honor of his horse, who died around this time. The other was Nicaea (Victory), thought to be located at the site of modern day Mong, Punjab. 

===Revolt of the army===
Alexander's invasion of the Indian subcontinent

East of Porus' kingdom, near the Ganges River, were the Nanda Empire of Magadha and further east the Gangaridai Empire (of modern day Bangladesh). Fearing the prospect of facing other large armies and exhausted by years of campaigning, Alexander's army mutinied at the Hyphasis River (Beas), refusing to march farther east. This river thus marks the easternmost extent of Alexander's conquests. 

Alexander tried to persuade his soldiers to march farther, but his general Coenus pleaded with him to change his opinion and return; the men, he said, "longed to again see their parents, their wives and children, their homeland". Alexander eventually agreed and turned south, marching along the Indus. Along the way his army conquered the Malhi (in modern day Multan) and other Indian tribes and sustained an injury during the siege. 

Alexander sent much of his army to Carmania (modern southern Iran) with general Craterus, and commissioned a fleet to explore the Persian Gulf shore under his admiral Nearchus, while he led the rest back to Persia through the more difficult southern route along the Gedrosian Desert and Makran (now part of southern Iran and Pakistan). Alexander reached Susa in 324 BC, but not before losing many men to the harsh desert. 

==Last years in Persia==
Alexander, left, and Hephaestion, right

Discovering that many of his satraps and military governors had misbehaved in his absence, Alexander executed several of them as examples on his way to Susa. As a gesture of thanks, he paid off the debts of his soldiers, and announced that he would send over-aged and disabled veterans back to Macedon, led by Craterus. His troops misunderstood his intention and mutinied at the town of Opis. They refused to be sent away and criticized his adoption of Persian customs and dress and the introduction of Persian officers and soldiers into Macedonian units. 

After three days, unable to persuade his men to back down, Alexander gave Persians command posts in the army and conferred Macedonian military titles upon Persian units. The Macedonians quickly begged forgiveness, which Alexander accepted, and held a great banquet for several thousand of his men at which he and they ate together. In an attempt to craft a lasting harmony between his Macedonian and Persian subjects, Alexander held a mass marriage of his senior officers to Persian and other noblewomen at Susa, but few of those marriages seem to have lasted much beyond a year. Meanwhile, upon his return, Alexander learned that guards of the tomb of Cyrus the Great had desecrated it, and swiftly executed them. 

After Alexander traveled to Ecbatana to retrieve the bulk of the Persian treasure, his closest friend and possible lover, Hephaestion, died of illness or poisoning. Hephaestion's death devastated Alexander, and he ordered the preparation of an expensive funeral pyre in Babylon, as well as a decree for public mourning. Back in Babylon, Alexander planned a series of new campaigns, beginning with an invasion of Arabia, but he would not have a chance to realize them, as he died shortly thereafter. 

==Death and succession==

A Babylonian astronomical diary (c. 323322 BC) recording the death of Alexander (British Museum, London)
19th century depiction of Alexander's funeral procession based on the description of Diodorus
On either 10 or 11 June 323 BC, Alexander died in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar II, in Babylon, at age 32. There are two different versions of Alexanders death and details of the death differ slightly in each. Plutarch's account is that roughly 14days before his death, Alexander entertained admiral Nearchus, and spent the night and next day drinking with Medius of Larissa. He developed a fever, which worsened until he was unable to speak. The common soldiers, anxious about his health, were granted the right to file past him as he silently waved at them. In the second account, Diodorus recounts that Alexander was struck with pain after downing a large bowl of unmixed wine in honour of Heracles, followed by 11 days of weakness; he did not develop a fever and died after some agony. Arrian also mentioned this as an alternative, but Plutarch specifically denied this claim. 

Given the propensity of the Macedonian aristocracy to assassination, foul play featured in multiple accounts of his death. Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian and Justin all mentioned the theory that Alexander was poisoned. Justin stated that Alexander was the victim of a poisoning conspiracy, Plutarch dismissed it as a fabrication, while both Diodorus and Arrian noted that they mentioned it only for the sake of completeness. The accounts were nevertheless fairly consistent in designating Antipater, recently removed as Macedonian viceroy, and at odds with Olympias, as the head of the alleged plot. Perhaps taking his summons to Babylon as a death sentence, and having seen the fate of Parmenion and Philotas, Antipater purportedly arranged for Alexander to be poisoned by his son Iollas, who was Alexander's wine-pourer. There was even a suggestion that Aristotle may have participated. 

It is claimed that the strongest argument against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days passed between the start of his illness and his death; such long-acting poisons were probably not available. However, in 2003 Dr Leo Schep From The New Zealand National Poisons Centre proposed in a BBC documentary investigating his death that the plant white hellebore (Veratrum album) may have been used to poison Alexander. In 2014 Dr Leo Schep published this theory in the peer-reviewed medical journal Clinical Toxicology; in this journal article it was suggested Alexander's wine was spiked with Veratrum album, a plant known to the Ancient Greeks, which produces poisoning symptoms that match the course of events as described in the Alexander Romance. Veratrum album poisoning can have a prolonged course and it was suggested that if Alexander was poisoned, Veratrum album offers the most plausible cause. Another poisoning explanation was put forward in 2010, it was proposed that the circumstances of his death were compatible with poisoning by water of the river Styx (Mavroneri) that contained calicheamicin, a dangerous compound produced by bacteria. 

Several natural causes (diseases) have been suggested, including malaria and typhoid fever. A 1998 article in the New England Journal of Medicine attributed his death to typhoid fever complicated by bowel perforation and ascending paralysis. Another recent analysis suggested pyogenic spondylitis or meningitis. Other illnesses fit the symptoms, including acute pancreatitis and West Nile virus. Natural-cause theories also tend to emphasise that Alexander's health may have been in general decline after years of heavy drinking and severe wounds. The anguish that Alexander felt after Hephaestion's death may also have contributed to his declining health. 

===After death===

Detail of Alexander on the Alexander Sarcophagus.

Alexander's body was laid in a gold anthropoid sarcophagus that was filled with honey, which was in turn placed in a gold casket. According to Aelian, a seer called Aristander foretold that the land where Alexander was laid to rest "would be happy and unvanquishable forever". Perhaps more likely, the successors may have seen possession of the body as a symbol of legitimacy, since burying the prior king was a royal prerogative.

While Alexander's funeral cortege was on its way to Macedon, Ptolemy stole it and took it to Memphis. His successor, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, transferred the sarcophagus to Alexandria, where it remained until at least late Antiquity. Ptolemy IX Lathyros, one of Ptolemy's final successors, replaced Alexander's sarcophagus with a glass one so he could convert the original to coinage. 

Pompey, Julius Caesar and Augustus all visited the tomb in Alexandria. The latter allegedly accidentally knocked the nose off the body. Caligula was said to have taken Alexander's breastplate from the tomb for his own use. Around AD 200, Emperor Septimius Severus closed Alexander's tomb to the public. His son and successor, Caracalla, a great admirer, visited the tomb during his own reign. After this, details on the fate of the tomb are hazy. 

The so-called "Alexander Sarcophagus", discovered near Sidon and now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum, is so named not because it was thought to have contained Alexander's remains, but because its bas-reliefs depict Alexander and his companions fighting the Persians and hunting. It was originally thought to have been the sarcophagus of Abdalonymus (died 311 BC), the king of Sidon appointed by Alexander immediately following the battle of Issus in 331. However, more recently, it has been suggested that it may date from earlier than Abdalonymus' death.

===Division of the empire===

Kingdoms of the Diadochi in 281 BC: the Ptolemaic Kingdom (dark blue), the Seleucid Empire (yellow), Kingdom of Pergamon (orange), and Macedonia (green). Also shown are the Roman Republic (light blue), the Carthaginian Republic (purple), and the Kingdom of Eprius (red).

Alexander's death was so sudden that when reports of his death reached Greece, they were not immediately believed. Alexander had no obvious or legitimate heir, his son Alexander IV by Roxane being born after Alexander's death. According to Diodorus, Alexander's companions asked him on his deathbed to whom he bequeathed his kingdom; his laconic reply was "ti kratisti""to the strongest". 

Arrian and Plutarch claimed that Alexander was speechless by this point, implying that this was an apocryphal story. Diodorus, Curtius and Justin offered the more plausible story that Alexander passed his signet ring to Perdiccas, a bodyguard and leader of the companion cavalry, in front of witnesses, thereby nominating him. 

Perdiccas initially did not claim power, instead suggesting that Roxane's baby would be king, if male; with himself, Craterus, Leonnatus, and Antipater as guardians. However, the infantry, under the command of Meleager, rejected this arrangement since they had been excluded from the discussion. Instead, they supported Alexander's half-brother Philip Arrhidaeus. Eventually, the two sides reconciled, and after the birth of Alexander IV, he and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only. 

Dissension and rivalry soon afflicted the Macedonians, however. The satrapies handed out by Perdiccas at the Partition of Babylon became power bases each general used to bid for power. After the assassination of Perdiccas in 321 BC, Macedonian unity collapsed, and 40 years of war between "The Successors" (Diadochi) ensued before the Hellenistic world settled into four stable power blocks: the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt, the Seleucid Empire in the east, the Kingdom of Pergamon in Asia Minor, and Macedon. In the process, both Alexander IV and Philip III were murdered. 

===Testament===
Diodorus stated that Alexander had given detailed written instructions to Craterus some time before his death. Craterus started to carry out Alexander's commands, but the successors chose not to further implement them, on the grounds they were impractical and extravagant. Nevertheless, Perdiccas read Alexander's will to his troops. 

The testament called for military expansion into the southern and western Mediterranean, monumental constructions, and the intermixing of Eastern and Western populations. It included:
*Construction of a monumental tomb for his father Philip, "to match the greatest of the pyramids of Egypt" 
*Erection of great temples in Delos, Delphi, Dodona, Dium, Amphipolis, and a monumental temple to Athena at Troy 
*Conquest of Arabia and the entire Mediterranean Basin 
*Circumnavigation of Africa 
*Development of cities and the "transplant of populations from Asia to Europe and in the opposite direction from Europe to Asia, in order to bring the largest continent to common unity and to friendship by means of intermarriage and family ties." 

==Character==

===Generalship===
The Battle of the Granicus, 334BC
The Battle of Issus, 333BC
Alexander earned the epithet "the Great" due to his unparalleled success as a military commander. He never lost a battle, despite typically being outnumbered. This was due to use of terrain, phalanx and cavalry tactics, bold strategy, and the fierce loyalty of his troops. The Macedonian phalanx, armed with the sarissa, a spear long, had been developed and perfected by Philip II through rigorous training, and Alexander used its speed and maneuverability to great effect against larger but more disparate Persian forces. Alexander also recognized the potential for disunity among his diverse army, which employed various languages and weapons. He overcame this by being personally involved in battle, in the manner of a Macedonian king. 

In his first battle in Asia, at Granicus, Alexander used only a small part of his forces, perhaps 13,000 infantry with 5,000 cavalry, against a much larger Persian force of 40,000. Alexander placed the phalanx at the center and cavalry and archers on the wings, so that his line matched the length of the Persian cavalry line, about 3 km. By contrast, the Persian infantry was stationed behind its cavalry. This ensured that Alexander would not be outflanked, while his phalanx, armed with long pikes, had a considerable advantage over the Persian's scimitars and javelins. Macedonian losses were negligible compared to those of the Persians. 

At Issus in 333 BC, his first confrontation with Darius, he used the same deployment, and again the central phalanx pushed through. Alexander personally led the charge in the center, routing the opposing army. At the decisive encounter with Darius at Gaugamela, Darius equipped his chariots with scythes on the wheels to break up the phalanx and equipped his cavalry with pikes. Alexander arranged a double phalanx, with the center advancing at an angle, parting when the chariots bore down and then reforming. The advance was successful and broke Darius' center, causing the latter to flee once again. 

When faced with opponents who used unfamiliar fighting techniques, such as in Central Asia and India, Alexander adapted his forces to his opponents' style. Thus, in Bactria and Sogdiana, Alexander successfully used his javelin throwers and archers to prevent outflanking movements, while massing his cavalry at the center. In India, confronted by Porus' elephant corps, the Macedonians opened their ranks to envelop the elephants and used their sarissas to strike upwards and dislodge the elephants' handlers. 

===Physical appearance===
Roman copy of a herma by Lysippos, Louvre Museum. Plutarch reports that sculptures by Lysippos were the most faithful.
Greek biographer Plutarch (c. 45120 AD) describes Alexander's appearance as:

Greek historian Arrian (Lucius Flavius Arrianus 'Xenophon' c. 86160) described Alexander as:

The semi-legendary Alexander Romance also suggests that Alexander suffered from heterochromia iridum: that one eye was dark and the other light.

British historian Peter Green provided a description of Alexander's appearance, based on his review of statues and some ancient documents:

Ancient authors recorded that Alexander was so pleased with portraits of himself created by Lysippos that he forbade other sculptors from crafting his image. Lysippos had often used the Contrapposto sculptural scheme to portray Alexander and other characters such as Apoxyomenos, Hermes and Eros. Lysippos' sculpture, famous for its naturalism, as opposed to a stiffer, more static pose, is thought to be the most faithful depiction.

===Personality===
Alexander (left) fighting an Asiatic lion with his friend Craterus (detail). 3rd century BC mosaic, Pella Museum.
Some of Alexander's strongest personality traits formed in response to his parents. His mother had huge ambitions, and encouraged him to believe it was his destiny to conquer the Persian Empire. Olympias' influence instilled a sense of destiny in him, and Plutarch tells us that his ambition "kept his spirit serious and lofty in advance of his years." However, his father Philip was Alexander's most immediate and influential role model, as the young Alexander watched him campaign practically every year, winning victory after victory while ignoring severe wounds. Alexander's relationship with his father forged the competitive side of his personality; he had a need to out-do his father, illustrated by his reckless behavior in battle. While Alexander worried that his father would leave him "no great or brilliant achievement to be displayed to the world", he also downplayed his father's achievements to his companions. 

According to Plutarch, among Alexander's traits were a violent temper and rash, impulsive nature, which undoubtedly contributed to some of his decisions. Although Alexander was stubborn and did not respond well to orders from his father, he was open to reasoned debate. He had a calmer sideperceptive, logical, and calculating. He had a great desire for knowledge, a love for philosophy, and was an avid reader. This was no doubt in part due to Aristotle's tutelage; Alexander was intelligent and quick to learn. His intelligent and rational side was amply demonstrated by his ability and success as a general. He had great self-restraint in "pleasures of the body," in contrast with his lack of self control with alcohol. 

Alexander was erudite and patronized both arts and sciences. However, he had little interest in sports or the Olympic games (unlike his father), seeking only the Homeric ideals of honor (tim) and glory (kudos). He had great charisma and force of personality, characteristics which made him a great leader. His unique abilities were further demonstrated by the inability of any of his generals to unite Macedonia and retain the Empire after his death  only Alexander had the ability to do so. 

During his final years, and especially after the death of Hephaestion, Alexander began to exhibit signs of megalomania and paranoia. His extraordinary achievements, coupled with his own ineffable sense of destiny and the flattery of his companions, may have combined to produce this effect. His delusions of grandeur are readily visible in his testament and in his desire to conquer the world. 

He appears to have believed himself a deity, or at least sought to deify himself. Olympias always insisted to him that he was the son of Zeus, a theory apparently confirmed to him by the oracle of Amun at Siwa. He began to identify himself as the son of Zeus-Ammon. Alexander adopted elements of Persian dress and customs at court, notably proskynesis, a practice of which Macedonians disapproved, and were loath to perform. This behavior cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen. However, Alexander also was a pragmatic ruler who understood the difficulties of ruling culturally disparate peoples, many of whom lived in kingdoms where the king was divine. Thus, rather than megalomania, his behavior may simply have been a practical attempt at strengthening his rule and keeping his empire together. 

===Personal relationships===

A mural in Pompeii, depicting the marriage of Alexander to Barsine (Stateira) in 324 BC. The couple are apparently dressed as Ares and Aphrodite.
Alexander married twice: Roxana, daughter of the Bactrian nobleman Oxyartes, out of love; and Stateira II, a Persian princess and daughter of Darius III of Persia, for political reasons. He apparently had two sons, Alexander IV of Macedon of Roxana and, possibly, Heracles of Macedon from his mistress Barsine. He lost another child when Roxana miscarried at Babylon. 

Alexander also had a close relationship with his friend, general, and bodyguard Hephaestion, the son of a Macedonian noble. Hephaestion's death devastated Alexander. This event may have contributed to Alexander's failing health and detached mental state during his final months. 

Alexander's sexuality has been the subject of speculation and controversy. No ancient sources stated that Alexander had homosexual relationships, or that Alexander's relationship with Hephaestion was sexual. Aelian, however, writes of Alexander's visit to Troy where "Alexander garlanded the tomb of Achilles and Hephaestion that of Patroclus, the latter riddling that he was a beloved of Alexander, in just the same way as Patroclus was of Achilles". Noting that the word eromenos (ancient Greek for beloved) does not necessarily bear sexual meaning, Alexander may have been bisexual, which in his time was not controversial.

Green argues that there is little evidence in ancient sources that Alexander had much carnal interest in women; he did not produce an heir until the very end of his life. However, he was relatively young when he died, and Ogden suggests that Alexander's matrimonial record is more impressive than his father's at the same age. Apart from wives, Alexander had many more female companions. Alexander accumulated a harem in the style of Persian kings, but he used it rather sparingly; showing great self-control in "pleasures of the body". Nevertheless, Plutarch described how Alexander was infatuated by Roxana while complimenting him on not forcing himself on her. Green suggested that, in the context of the period, Alexander formed quite strong friendships with women, including Ada of Caria, who adopted him, and even Darius's mother Sisygambis, who supposedly died from grief upon hearing of Alexander's death. 

==Legacy==
The Hellenistic world view after Alexander: ancient world map of Eratosthenes (276194 BC), incorporating information from the campaigns of Alexander and his successors. 

Alexander's legacy extended beyond his military conquests. His campaigns greatly increased contacts and trade between East and West, and vast areas to the east were significantly exposed to Greek civilization and influence. Some of the cities he founded became major cultural centers, many surviving into the 21st century. His chroniclers recorded valuable information about the areas through which he marched, while the Greeks themselves got a sense of belonging to a world beyond the Mediterranean. 

===Hellenistic kingdoms===

Alexander's most immediate legacy was the introduction of Macedonian rule to huge new swathes of Asia. At the time of his death, Alexander's empire covered some 5200000 km2, Peter Turchin, Thomas D. Hall and Jonathan M. Adams, "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires", Journal of World-Systems Research Vol. 12 (no. 2), pp. 219229 (2006). and was the largest state of its time. Many of these areas remained in Macedonian hands or under Greek influence for the next 200300 years. The successor states that emerged were, at least initially, dominant forces, and these 300 years are often referred to as the Hellenistic period. 

Plan of Alexandria c. 30 BC
The eastern borders of Alexander's empire began to collapse even during his lifetime. However, the power vacuum he left in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent directly gave rise to one of the most powerful Indian dynasties in history. Taking advantage of this, Chandragupta Maurya (referred to in Greek sources as "Sandrokottos"), of relatively humble origin, took control of the Punjab, and with that power base proceeded to conquer the Nanda Empire. 

===Founding of cities===
Over the course of his conquests, Alexander founded some twenty cities that bore his name, most of them east of the Tigris. The first, and greatest, was Alexandria in Egypt, which would become one of the leading Mediterranean cities. The cities locations' reflected trade routes as well as defensive positions. At first, the cities must have been inhospitable, little more than defensive garrisons. Following Alexander's death, many Greeks who had settled there tried to return to Greece. However, a century or so after Alexander's death, many of the Alexandrias were thriving, with elaborate public buildings and substantial populations that included both Greek and local peoples. 

===Hellenization===

Alexander's empire was the largest state of its time, covering approximately 5.2 million square km.

Hellenization was coined by the German historian Johann Gustav Droysen to denote the spread of Greek language, culture, and population into the former Persian empire after Alexander's conquest. That this export took place is undoubted, and can be seen in the great Hellenistic cities of, for instance, Alexandria, Antioch and Seleucia (south of modern Baghdad). Alexander sought to insert Greek elements into Persian culture and attempted to hybridize Greek and Persian culture. This culminated in his aspiration to homogenize the populations of Asia and Europe. However, his successors explicitly rejected such policies. Nevertheless, Hellenization occurred throughout the region, accompanied by a distinct and opposite 'Orientalization' of the Successor states. 

The core of Hellenistic culture was essentially Athenian. The close association of men from across Greece in Alexander's army directly led to the emergence of the largely Attic-based "koine", or "common" Greek dialect. Koine spread throughout the Hellenistic world, becoming the lingua franca of Hellenistic lands and eventually the ancestor of modern Greek. Furthermore, town planning, education, local government, and art current in the Hellenistic period were all based on Classical Greek ideals, evolving into distinct new forms commonly grouped as Hellenistic. Aspects of Hellenistic culture were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century. 

The Buddha, in Greco-Buddhist style, 1st2nd century AD, Gandhara (Modern Pakistan). Tokyo National Museum.
Some of the most unusual effects of Hellenization can be seen in India, in the region of the relatively late-arising Indo-Greek kingdoms. There, isolated from Europe, Greek culture apparently hybridized with Indian, and especially Buddhist, influences. The first realistic portrayals of the Buddha appeared at this time; they were modeled on Greek statues of Apollo. Several Buddhist traditions may have been influenced by the ancient Greek religion: the concept of Boddhisatvas is reminiscent of Greek divine heroes, and some Mahayana ceremonial practices (burning incense, gifts of flowers, and food placed on altars) are similar to those practiced by the ancient Greeks. One Greek king, Menander I, probably became Buddhist, and was immortalized in Buddhist literature as 'Milinda'. The process of Hellenization extended to the sciences, where ideas from Greek astronomy filtered eastward and had profoundly influenced Indian astronomy by the early centuries AD. For example, Greek astronomical instruments dating to the 3rd century BC were found in the Greco-Bactrian city of Ai Khanoum in modern-day Afghanistan while the Greek concept of a spherical earth surrounded by the spheres of planets was adopted in India and eventually supplanted the long-standing Indian cosmological belief of a flat and circular earth. The Yavanajataka and Paulisa Siddhanta texts in particular show Greek influence.

===Influence on Rome===
This medallion was produced in Imperial Rome, demonstrating the influence of Alexander's memory. Walters Art Museum, Baltimore.
Alexander and his exploits were admired by many Romans, especially generals, who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements. Polybius began his Histories by reminding Romans of Alexander's achievements, and thereafter Roman leaders saw him as a role model. Pompey the Great adopted the epithet "Magnus" and even Alexander's anastole-type haircut, and searched the conquered lands of the east for Alexander's 260-year-old cloak, which he then wore as a sign of greatness. Julius Caesar dedicated a Lysippean equestrian bronze statue but replaced Alexander's head with his own, while Octavian visited Alexander's tomb in Alexandria and temporarily changed his seal from a sphinx to Alexander's profile. The emperor Trajan also admired Alexander, as did Nero and Caracalla. The Macriani, a Roman family that in the person of Macrinus briefly ascended to the imperial throne, kept images of Alexander on their persons, either on jewelry, or embroidered into their clothes. 
The Greco-Bactrian king Demetrius (reigned c. 200180 BC), wearing an elephant scalp, took over Alexander's legacy in the east by again invading India, and establishing the Indo-Greek kingdom (180 BC10 AD).
On the other hand, some Roman writers, particularly Republican figures, used Alexander as a cautionary tale of how autocratic tendencies can be kept in check by republican values. Alexander was used by these writers as an example of ruler values such as amicita (friendship) and clementia (clemency), but also iracundia (anger) and cupiditas gloriae (over-desire for glory). 

===Legend===

Legendary accounts surround the life of Alexander the Great, many deriving from his own lifetime, probably encouraged by Alexander himself. His court historian Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis. Writing shortly after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, invented a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons. When Onesicritus read this passage to his patron, Alexander's general and later King Lysimachus reportedly quipped, "I wonder where I was at the time." 

In the first centuries after Alexander's death, probably in Alexandria, a quantity of the legendary material coalesced into a text known as the Alexander Romance, later falsely ascribed to Callisthenes and therefore known as Pseudo-Callisthenes. This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages, containing many dubious stories, and was translated into numerous languages. 

===In ancient and modern culture===

Alexander the Great depicted in a 14th-century Byzantine manuscript

Alexander the Great's accomplishments and legacy have been depicted in many cultures. Alexander has figured in both high and popular culture beginning in his own era to the present day. The Alexander Romance, in particular, has had a significant impact on portrayals of Alexander in later cultures, from Persian to medieval European to modern Greek. 

Alexander features prominently in modern Greek folklore, more so than any other ancient figure. The colloquial form of his name in modern Greek ("O Megalexandros") is a household name, and he is the only ancient hero to appear in the Karagiozis shadow play. One well-known fable among Greek seamen involves a solitary mermaid who would grasp a ship's prow during a storm and ask the captain "Is King Alexander alive?". The correct answer is "He is alive and well and rules the world!", causing the mermaid to vanish and the sea to calm. Any other answer would cause the mermaid to turn into a raging Gorgon who would drag the ship to the bottom of the sea, all hands aboard. 

Post-Islamic Persian miniature depicting Khidr and Alexander watching the Water of Life revive a salted fish

St. Augustine in his book City of God restated Ciceros parable showing that Alexander the Great was little more than a leader of a robber band:

And so if justice is left out, what are kingdoms except great robber bands? For what are robber bands except little kingdoms? The band also is a group of men governed by the orders of a leader, bound by a social compact, and its booty is divided according to a law agreed upon. If by repeatedly adding desperate men this plague grows to the point where it holds territory and establishes a fixed seat, seizes cities and subdues people, then it more conspicuously assumes the name of kingdom, and this name is now openly granted to it, not for any subtraction of cupidity, but by addition of impunity. For it was an elegant and true reply that was made to Alexander the Great by a certain pirate whom he had captured. When the king asked him what he was thinking of, that he should molest the sea, he said with defiant independence: 'The same as you when you molest the world! Since I do this with a little ship I am called a pirate. You do it with a great fleet and are called emperor'. 

In pre-Islamic Middle Persian (Zoroastrian) literature, Alexander is referred to by the epithet gujastak, meaning "accursed", and is accused of destroying temples and burning the sacred texts of Zoroastrianism. In Islamic Iran, under the influence of the Alexander Romance (in Iskandarnamah), a more positive portrayal of Alexander emerges. Firdausi's Shahnameh ("The Book of Kings") includes Alexander in a line of legitimate Iranian shahs, a mythical figure who explored the far reaches of the world in search of the Fountain of Youth. Later Persian writers associate him with philosophy, portraying him at a symposium with figures such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, in search of immortality. 

The Syriac version of the Alexander Romance portrays him as an ideal Christian world conqueror who prayed to "the one true God". In Egypt, Alexander was portrayed as the son of Nectanebo II, the last pharaoh before the Persian conquest. His defeat of Darius was depicted as Egypt's salvation, "proving" Egypt was still ruled by an Egyptian. 

The figure of Dhul-Qarnayn (literally "the Two-Horned One") mentioned in the Quran is believed by some scholars to represent Alexander, due to parallels with the Alexander Romance. In this tradition, he was a heroic figure who built a wall to defend against the nations of Gog and Magog. He then traveled the known world in search for the Water of Life and Immortality, eventually becoming a prophet. 

In India and Pakistan, more specifically the Punjab, the name "Sikandar", derived from Persian, denotes a rising young talent. In medieval Europe he was made a member of the Nine Worthies, a group of heroes who encapsulated all the ideal qualities of chivalry.

==Historiography==

Apart from a few inscriptions and fragments, texts written by people who actually knew Alexander or who gathered information from men who served with Alexander were all lost. Contemporaries who wrote accounts of his life included Alexander's campaign historian Callisthenes; Alexander's generals Ptolemy and Nearchus; Aristobulus, a junior officer on the campaigns; and Onesicritus, Alexander's chief helmsman. Their works are lost, but later works based on these original sources have survived. The earliest of these is Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), followed by Quintus Curtius Rufus (mid-to-late 1st century AD), Arrian (1st to 2nd century AD), the biographer Plutarch (1st to 2nd century AD), and finally Justin, whose work dated as late as the 4th century. Of these, Arrian is generally considered the most reliable, given that he used Ptolemy and Aristobulus as his sources, closely followed by Diodorus. 

==Ancestry==

==In film==
Alexander the Great was subject of the films Alexander the Great (1956), starring Richard Burton, and Alexander (2004), starring Colin Farrell.

==See also==
*Alexander the Great in the Qur'an
*Bucephalus
*Chronology of European exploration of Asia
*Diogenes and Alexander
*List of people known as The Great

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==

===Primary sources===
*
*
*
*

===Secondary sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*.
*
*
*

== External links ==

* .
* ; Part 2, Part 3, Part 4, Part 5, Part 6.
* 
* .
* .
* .
* Google Map of the Wars of Alexander the Great

 



[[Alfred Korzybski]]

Alfred Habdank Skarbek Korzybski (; July 3, 1879 &ndash; March 1, 1950) was a Polish-American philosopher and scientist. He is remembered for developing the theory of general semantics. Korzybski's work argued that human knowledge of the world is limited both by the human nervous system and by the structure of language.

Korzybski thought that people do not have access to direct knowledge of reality; rather they have access to perceptions and to a set of beliefs which human society has confused with direct knowledge of reality. Korzybski is remembered as the author of the dictum: "The map is not the territory".

==Early life and career==
Alfred Korzybski's family coat-of-arms (see Abdank coat of arms).
Korzybski was born in Warsaw, Poland which at that time was part of the Russian Empire. He was part of an aristocratic Polish family whose members had worked as mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for generations. He learned the Polish language at home and the Russian language in schools; and having a French governess and a German governess, he became fluent in these four languages as a child.

Korzybski was educated at the Warsaw University of Technology in engineering. During the First World War Korzybski served as an intelligence officer in the Russian Army. After being wounded in a leg and suffering other injuries, he moved to North America in 1916 (first to Canada, then the United States) to coordinate the shipment of artillery to Russia. He also lectured to Polish-American audiences about the conflict, promoting the sale of war bonds. After the War, he decided to remain in the United States, becoming a naturalized citizen in 1940. He met Mira Edgerly, http://american-miniatures20c.blogspot.com/2007/06/edgerly-mira-portrait-of-three-sisters.html a painter of portraits on ivory, shortly after the Armistice, and married her in January 1919. Their marriage lasted until his death.

His first book, Manhood of Humanity, was published in 1921. In the book, he proposed and explained in detail a new theory of humankind: mankind as a "time-binding" class of life (humans perform time binding by the transmission of knowledge and abstractions through time which are accreted in cultures).

==General semantics==
Korzybski's work culminated in the initiation of a discipline that he named general semantics (GS). As Korzybski said, GS should not be confused with semantics, a different subject. The basic principles of general semantics, which include time-binding, are described in the publication Science and Sanity, published in 1933. After the publication of Science and Sanity he traveled about teaching briefly in many schools and universities. In 1938 Korzybski founded the Institute of General Semantics in Chicago. http://www.generalsemantics.org/about-us/history/ The post-World War II housing shortage in Chicago cost him the Institute's building lease, so in 1946, he moved the Institute to Lakeville, Connecticut, U.S., where he directed it until his death in 1950.

Korzybski's work maintained that human beings are limited in what they know by (1) the structure of their nervous systems, and (2) the structure of their languages. Human beings cannot experience the world directly, but only through their "abstractions" (nonverbal impressions or "gleanings" derived from the nervous system, and verbal indicators expressed and derived from language). Sometimes our perceptions and our languages actually mislead us as to the "facts" with which we must deal. Our understanding of what is happening sometimes lacks similarity of structure with what is actually happening.

He stressed training in awareness of abstracting, using techniques that he had derived from his study of mathematics and science. He called this awareness, this goal of his system, "consciousness of abstracting".

His system included modifying the way we consider the world, e.g., with an attitude of "I don't know; let's see," to better discover or reflect its realities as revealed by modern science. One of these techniques involved becoming inwardly and outwardly quiet, an experience that he termed, "silence on the objective levels".

=="To be"==
Many devotees and critics of Korzybski reduced his rather complex system to a simple matter of what he said about the verb form "is" of the more general verb "to be." Alfred Korzybski, Selections from Science and Sanity, 2010. His system, however, is based primarily on such terminology as the different "orders of abstraction," and formulations such as "consciousness of abstracting." It is often said that Korzybski opposed the use of the verb "to be," which is a profound exaggeration (see "Criticisms" below).

He thought that certain uses of the verb "to be", called the "is of identity" and the "is of predication", were faulty in structure, e.g., a statement such as, "Elizabeth is a fool" (said of a person named "Elizabeth" who has done something that we regard as foolish). In Korzybski's system, one's assessment of Elizabeth belongs to a higher order of abstraction than Elizabeth herself. Korzybski's remedy was to deny identity; in this example, to be aware continually that "Elizabeth" is not what we call her. We find Elizabeth not in the verbal domain, the world of words, but the nonverbal domain (the two, he said, amount to different orders of abstraction). This was expressed by Korzybski's most famous premise, "the map is not the territory". Note that this premise uses the phrase "is not", a form of "to be"; this and many other examples show that he did not intend to abandon "to be" as such. In fact, he said explicitly that there were no structural problems with the verb "to be" when used as an auxiliary verb or when used to state existence or location.

It was even acceptable at times to use the faulty forms of the verb "to be," as long as one was aware of their structural limitations. This was developed into the language "E-Prime" by D. David Bourland, Jr. 15 years after his death (E-Prime a form of the English language in which the verb "to be" does not appear in any of its forms; for example, the sentence "the movie was good" could translate into E-Prime as "I liked the movie", thereby distinguishing opinion from fact). Bourland "translated" several Rational Emotive Therapy books by psychotherapist Albert Ellis into E-Prime, including Ellis and Harper's A New Guide to Rational Living. 

==Anecdotes==
One day, Korzybski was giving a lecture to a group of students, and he interrupted the lesson suddenly in order to retrieve a packet of biscuits, wrapped in white paper, from his briefcase. He muttered that he just had to eat something, and he asked the students on the seats in the front row if they would also like a biscuit. A few students took a biscuit. "Nice biscuit, don't you think," said Korzybski, while he took a second one. The students were chewing vigorously. Then he tore the white paper from the biscuits, in order to reveal the original packaging. On it was a big picture of a dog's head and the words "Dog Cookies." The students looked at the package, and were shocked. Two of them wanted to vomit, put their hands in front of their mouths, and ran out of the lecture hall to the toilet. "You see," Korzybski remarked, "I have just demonstrated that people don't just eat food, but also words, and that the taste of the former is often outdone by the taste of the latter." R. Diekstra, Haarlemmer Dagblad, 1993, cited by L. Derks & J. Hollander, Essenties van NLP (Utrecht: Servire, 1996), p. 58. 

William Burroughs went to a Korzybski workshop in the Autumn of 1939. He was 25 years old, and paid $40. His fellow studentsthere were 38 in allincluded young Samuel I. Hayakawa (later to become a Republican member of the U.S. Senate), Ralph Moriarty deBit (later to become the spiritual teacher Vitvan) and Wendell Johnson (founder of the Monster Study). http://nakedlunch.org/naked-lunch/space-time-travel/naked-lunch-and-chicago/seminal-semantics-antics/ 

== Reception ==

Korzybski was well received in numerous disciplinary realms, as evidenced by the positive reactions from leading persons in the sciences and humanities in the 1940s and 1950s. 

Some of the persons listed are, like Korzybski, polymaths and several categories apply to them. For example, Heinlein was the "dean of science fiction writers" because he was "the scientist" of science fiction.

As reported in the Third Edition of Science and Sanity, The U.S. Army in World War II used Korzybski's system to treat battle fatigue in Europe with the supervision of Dr. Douglas M. Kelley, who went on to become the psychiatrist in charge of the Nazi prisoners at Nuremberg.

Some of the General Semantics tradition was continued by Samuel I. Hayakawa, who had a dispute with Korzybski. When asked because of what, Hayakawa is said to have replied: "Words." 

===Writers and artists===
The general semantics concept "non-Aristotelian logic", influenced the science fiction of the most prolific, best selling, influential authors of the genre during its flowering and height. General semantics has helped guide the thinking of artists contemplating what to say to society, or how to study society, influencing a notable lyricist, a filmmaker, and other writers.

* Isaac Asimov, Science and Science Fiction author, professor of biochemistry
* Robert A. Heinlein, Korzybski is mentioned in the 1940 short story "Blowups Happen" and the 1949 novella Gulf. set the standard for scientific and engineering plausibility
*: "You may not like personally, but he's at least as great a man as Einstein - at least - because his field is broader. The same kind of work that Einstein did, the same kind of work, using the same methods; but in a much broader field, much more close to human relationships." The Institute of General Semantics Retrieved on 20100817 Stockdale Steve: Heinlein and Ellis: converging competencies, ETC.: A Review of General Semantics, Oct, 2007 Retrieved on 20100817. 
* William S. Burroughs, novelist, short story writer, essayist and spoken word performer
* Frank Herbert, critically acclaimed, science fiction author of the best-selling science fiction novel of all time: Dune
* L. Ron Hubbard, author; founder of both the Church of Scientology and of Dianetics

* Robert Anton Wilson, polymath, author, philosopher, editor, playwright, poet, futurist, civil libertarian, (edu. in engineering, math, psychology), (See also Prometheus Rising.)
*: "and Sanity got a lot of enthusiastic reviews from a lot of distinguished people. And it had a tremendous impact on all the social sciences for a while." Robert Anton Wilson, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qsjdEClYke0&feature=related, minute 7 
* Ken Keyes, Jr., sold or distributed millions of self-help books he wrote, organized lectures for his many students, spoke to dignitaries at political gatherings, and knew and moved among the self-help elite
* A. E. van Vogt, regarded as one of the most popular and complex science fiction writers during its "Golden Age"
* John W. Campbell, an influential science fiction writer who "shaped the Golden Age of Science Fiction"
* Steve Allen, television personality, musician, composer, actor, comedian, and writer
* Neil Postman, (1931  2003) author, media theorist and cultural critic
* Tommy Hall, lyricist for the 13th Floor Elevators
* Jan Bucquoy, See the seventh part of the comics series Jaunes: Labyrinthe, with its explicit references to Korzybski's "the map is not the territory". surrealist, anarchist, author, filmmaker, cartoon script-writer

===Gurus, futurists and philosophers===
These are the psychological, sociological, and knowledge-worker types.
* Kenneth Burke, literary theorist, linguist
*: But Burke also points out that the concepts of "incipient" and "delayed action" exist in the works of I. A. Richards and George Herbert Mead as well, and that although Korzybski analyzes knowing, he doesn't fully analyze doing. Burke wrote the book on Language As Symbolic Action.
* Albert Ellis the psychologist who developed Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy http://time-binding.org/misc/akml/akmls/58-ellis.pdf 
* Jacque Fresco, futurist, founder and director with his colleague Roxanne Meadows The Venus Project 
* Stephen Gaskin Self-proclaimed professional Hippy, author, political activist and musician.
* John Grinder, (with Richard Bandler) Neuro-linguistic programming, Bandler, Richard & John Grinder (1975). The Structure of Magic I: A Book About Language and Therapy. Palo Alto, CA: Science & Behavior Books. esp. the Meta model and "human modeling for performance"
* Alejandro Jodorowsky, Unofficial biography of Alejandro Jodorowsky. filmmaker, playwright, actor, author, comics writer and spiritual guru
* Alvin Toffler, futurist
* Alan Watts, Author, theologist, zen philosopher, interpreter of Eastern Philosophy and speaker.
* Benjamin Lee Whorf, linguist and fire prevention engineer
*: The article on Whorf states "Drawing on Nietzsche's ideas of perspectivism Alfred Korzybski developed the theory of general semantics which has been compared to Whorf's notions of linguistic relativity. (Pula 1992)".

===Mathematicians, scientists and physicists===
* Gregory Bateson, polymath, anthropologist, social scientist, linguist, visual anthropologist, semiotician and cyberneticist
* Buckminster Fuller, systems theorist, architect, engineer, author, designer, inventor, and futurist
* Mosh Feldenkrais, physicist. The Feldenkrais Method improve functioning by increasing self-awareness through movement
* Douglas Engelbart, as an internet pioneer, the inventor of the computer mouse, in humancomputer interaction, committed, vocal proponent of the development and use of computers and networks to help cope with the worlds increasingly urgent and complex problems
* Stuart Chase, economist, MIT trained engineer, writer. Coined the phrase "A New Deal"". Hybrid background of engineering and economics places him in the same philosophical camp as R. Buckminster Fuller
* Jacques Loeb, biologist
* Percy Williams Bridgman, physicist
* William Alanson White, neurologist and psychiatrist
* W. Horsley Gantt, researcher

==Quotation==
* "There are two ways to slide easily through life: to believe everything or to doubt everything; both ways save us from thinking." Wisdomquotes 

==See also==
* General Semantics
* The map is not the territory
* Structural differential
* E-Prime
* Institute of General Semantics
* Robert Pula
* Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture
* Concept and object

==References==

==Further reading==
* Kodish, Bruce. 2011. Korzybski: A Biography. Pasadena, CA: Extensional Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9700664-0-4 softcover, 978-09700664-28 hardcover.
* Kodish, Bruce and Susan Presby Kodish. 2011. Drive Yourself Sane: Using the Uncommon Sense of General Semantics, Third Edition. Pasadena, CA: Extensional Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9700664-1-1
* Alfred Korzybski, Manhood of Humanity, foreword by Edward Kasner, notes by M. Kendig, Institute of General Semantics, 1950, hardcover, 2nd edition, 391 pages, ISBN 0-937298-00-X. (Copy of the first edition.)
* Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics, Alfred Korzybski, Preface by Robert P. Pula, Institute of General Semantics, 1994, hardcover, 5th edition, ISBN 0-937298-01-8. (Full text online.)
* Alfred Korzybski, Collected Writings 1920-1950, Institute of General Semantics, 1990, hardcover, ISBN 0-685-40616-4
* Montagu, M. F. A. (1953). Time-binding and the concept of culture. The Scientific Monthly, Vol. 77, No. 3 (Sep., 1953), pp. 148155.
* Murray, E. (1950). In memoriam: Alfred H. Korzybski. Sociometry, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Feb., 1950), pp. 7677.

==External links==

* 
* Alfred Korzybski and Gestalt Therapy Website
* Australian General Semantics Society
* Institute of General Semantics



[[Asteroids (video game)]]

Asteroids is an arcade space shooter released in November 1979 by Atari, Inc. and designed by Lyle Rains and Ed Logg. The player controls a spaceship in an asteroid field which is periodically traversed by flying saucers. The object of the game is to shoot and destroy asteroids and saucers while not colliding with either, or being hit by the saucers' counter-fire. The game becomes harder as the number of asteroids increases.

Asteroids was conceived during a meeting between Logg and Rains and used hardware developed by Howard Delman previously used for Lunar Lander. Based on an unfinished game titled Cosmos and inspired by Spacewar! and Computer Space, both early shoot 'em up video games, Asteroids physics model and control scheme were derived by Logg from these earlier games and refined through trial and error. The game is rendered on a vector display in a two-dimensional view that wraps around in both screen axes.

Acclaimed by players and video game critics for its vector graphics, controls, and addictive gameplay, Asteroids was one of the first major hits of the golden age of arcade games. The game sold over 70,000 arcade cabinets and proved both popular with players and influential with developers. It has since been ported to multiple platforms. Asteroids was widely imitated and directly influenced two popular and often cloned arcade games, Defender and Gravitar, as well as many other video games.

==Gameplay==
A ship is surrounded by asteroids and a saucer.
The objective of Asteroids is to destroy asteroids and saucers. The player controls a triangular ship that can rotate left and right, fire shots straight forward, and thrust forward. Once the ship begins moving in a direction, it will continue in that direction for a time without player intervention unless the player applies thrust in a different direction. The ship eventually comes to a stop when not thrusting. The player can also send the ship into hyperspace, causing it to disappear and reappear in a random location on the screen, at the risk of self-destructing or appearing on top of an asteroid. 

Each level starts with a few large asteroids drifting in various directions on the screen. Objects wrap around screen edges  for instance, an asteroid that drifts off the top edge of the screen reappears at the bottom and continues moving in the same direction. As the player shoots asteroids, they break into smaller asteroids that move faster and are more difficult to hit. Smaller asteroids are also worth more points. Two flying saucers appear periodically on the screen; the "big saucer" shoots randomly and poorly, while the "small saucer" fires frequently at the ship. After reaching a score of 40,000, only the small saucer appears. As the player's score increases, the angle range of the shots from the small saucer diminishes until the saucer fires extremely accurately. Once the screen has been cleared of all asteroids and flying saucers, a new set of large asteroids appears, thus starting the next level. The game gets harder as the number of asteroids increases until after the score reaches a range between 40,000 and 60,000. The player starts with 3 lives after a coin is inserted and gains an extra life every 10,000 points. When the player loses all his lives, the game ends.

Like many games of its time, Asteroids contains several bugs. The game slows down as the player gains 50-100 lives, due to a programming error in that there is no limit for the permitted number of lives. The player can "lose" the game after more than 250 lives are collected. 

==Development and design==
Asteroids was conceived by Lyle Rains and programmed by Ed Logg with collaborations from other Atari staff. Logg was impressed with the Atari 2600 (then known as "Atari Video Computer System") and joined Atari's coin-op division and worked on Dirt Bike, which was never released due to an unsuccessful field test. He developed Super Breakout after hearing that Nolan Bushnell, founder of Atari, wanted Breakout updated. Paul Mancuso joined the development team as Asteroids technician and engineer Howard Delman contributed to the hardware. During a meeting in April 1979, Rains discussed Planet Grab, a multiplayer arcade game later renamed to Cosmos. Logg did not know the name of the game, thinking Computer Space as "the inspiration for the two-dimensional approach." The unfinished game featured a giant, indestructible asteroid, so Rains asked Logg: "Well, why dont we have a game where you shoot the rocks and blow them up?" In response, Logg described a similar concept where the player selectively shoots at rocks that break into smaller pieces. Both agreed on the concept. 

Asteroids was implemented on hardware developed by Delman and is a vector game, in which the graphics are composed of lines drawn on a vector monitor. Rains initially wanted the game done in raster graphics, but Logg, experienced in vector graphics, suggested an XY monitor because the high 1024x760 resolution would permit precise aiming. The hardware is chiefly a MOS 6502 executing the game program, and QuadraScan, a high-resolution vector graphics processor developed by Atari and referred to as an "XY display system" and the "Digital Vector Generator (DVG)". Asteroids Flyer, 1979, Atari, Inc. 

The original design concepts for QuadraScan came out of Cyan Engineering, Atari's off-campus research lab in Grass Valley, California, in 1978. Cyan gave it to Delman, who finished the design and first used it for Lunar Lander. Logg received Delman's modified board with five buttons, 13 sound effects, and additional RAM, and used it to develop Asteroids. The size of the board was 4 by 4 inches, and it was "linked up" to a monitor. 

Logg modeled the player's ship, the five-button control scheme, and the game physics after Spacewar!, which he had played as a student at the University of California, Berkeley, but made several changes to improve playability. The ship was programmed into the hardware and rendered by the monitor, and was configured to move with thrust and inertia. The hyperspace button was not placed near Logg's right thumb, which he was dissatisfied, as he had a problem "tak his hand off the thrust button." Drawings of asteroids in various shapes were incorporated into the game. Logg copied the idea of a high score table with initials from Exidy's Star Fire. 

The two saucers were formulated to be different from each other. A steadily decreasing timer that shortens intervals between saucer attacks was employed to keep the player from not shooting asteroids and saucers. The minimalist soundtrack features a "heartbeat" sound effect, which quickens as the game progresses. The game did not have a sound chip, so Delman created a hardware circuit for 13 sound effects by hand which was wired onto the board. 

A prototype of Asteroids was well received by several Atari staff and engineers, who would "wander between labs, passing comment and 
stopping to play as they went." Logg was often asked when he would be leaving by employees eager to play the prototype, so he created a second prototype specifically for staff to play. Atari went to Sacramento, California for testing, setting up prototypes of the game in local arcades to measure its potential success. The company also observed veteran players and younger players during focus group sessions at Atari itself. A group of old players familiar with Spacewar! struggled to maintain grip on the thrust button and requested a joystick, whereas younger players accustomed to Space Invaders noted they get no break in the game. Logg and other Atari engineers observed proceedings and documented comments in four pages. 

==Reception and legacy==
Asteroids was immediately successful upon release. It displaced Space Invaders by popularity in the United States and became Atari's best selling arcade game of all time, with over 70,000 units sold. Atari earned an estimated $150 million in sales from the game, and arcade operators earned further $500 million from coin drops. Atari had been in the process of manufacturing another vector game, Lunar Lander, but demand for Asteroids was so high "that several hundred Asteroids games were shipped in Lunar Lander cabinets." 
 Asteroids was so popular that some video arcade operators had to install large boxes to hold the number of coins spent by players. 

The saucer in the original game design was supposed to take a shot as soon as it appeared. This action was altered so there would be a delay before the saucer shoots, leading to "lurking" from players. Lurking is a strategy in which the player uses thrust to keep the ship in motion, leaves 1 or 2 asteroids undamaged, and hunts for saucers, allowing the player to pick off as many 1,000-point UFOs as possible and play indefinitely on a single credit. Since the saucer could only shoot directly at the player's position on the screen, the player could "hide" at the opposite end of the screen and shoot across the screen boundary, while remaining relatively safe. Complaints from operators losing revenue due to lurking led to the creation of an EPROM restricting such chances. Usage of the names of Saturday Night Live characters "Mr. Bill" and "Sluggo" to refer to the saucers in an Esquire article about the game led to Logg receiving a cease and desist letter from a lawyer with the "Mr. Bill Trademark." 

Asteroids received positive reviews from video game critics and has been regarded as Logg's magnum opus. Brett Alan Weiss, writing for Allgame, likened the monochrome vector graphics to minimalism and viewed its sound effects as memorable. Weiss found its overall design to be near-perfect and cites the intensity and controls as elements that make the game addicting. He admitted the game is easily understandable and "holds up extremely well over time." William Cassidy, writing for GameSpy's "Classic Gaming", noticed its innovations, including being one of the first video games to track initials and allow players to enter their initials for appearing in the top 10 high scores, and commented, "the vector graphics fit the futuristic outer space theme very well." Asteroids was ranked fourth on Retro Gamers list of "Top 25 Arcade Games"; the Retro Gamer staff cited its simplicity and the lack of a proper ending as allowances of revisiting the game. It was added to the Museum of Modern Art's collection of video games. 

Released in 1981, Asteroids Deluxe is the first sequel to Asteroids. Dave Shepperd edited the code and made enhancements to the game without Logg's involvement. The onscreen objects were tinted blue, and hyperspace was replaced by a shield that depleted if used. The asteroids rotate, and the added killer satellite enemy breaks apart into three smaller ships when hit that home the player's position. The arcade machine's monitor displays vector graphics overlaying a holographic backdrop. It was followed by Owen Rubin's Space Duel in 1982, featuring colorful geometric shapes and co-op multiplayer gameplay, and Blasteroids in 1987, in which Ed Rotberg added "power-ups, ship morphing, branching levels, bosses and the ability to dock your ships in multiplayer for added firepower." Asteroids: Gunner, released to iOS platforms in 2011, has a large amount of content as a free-to-play game, with 150 waves, power-ups, and an achievement system. 

The gameplay in Asteroids was imitated by many games that followed, mostly "Asteroid clones". The Mattel Intellivision title Astrosmash was conceived as Avalanche! after Meteor! did not take up the cartridge's entire ROM space. Meteor!, an Asteroids clone, was cancelled to avoid a lawsuit and Avalanche! was released as Astrosmash. The resultant game borrows elements from Asteroids and Space Invaders, as with Defender and Gravitar, two popular and often cloned arcade games. 
 

Quality Software's Asteroids in Space (1980), another Asteroids clone, was one of the best selling games for the Apple II and was voted one of the most popular software titles of 1978-80 by Softalk magazine. Others include Acornsoft's Meteors and Ambrosia Software's Maelstrom, as well as those with expanded gameplay and background, such as Moons of Jupiter for the Commodore VIC-20 and MineStorm for the Vectrex. 

In 2009, Universal Studios won the rights to adapt Asteroids into a film, with Matthew Lopez as the scriptwriter and Lorenzo di Bonaventura as the producer. The game has no plot, so Universal would create the story from scratch, as done with Battleship, a film based on the Hasbro board game of the same name. 

==Ports==
A ship fires at one of the glowing asteroids. The Xbox Live Arcade port of Asteroids includes revamped HD graphics.
Asteroids has been ported to multiple platforms, including much of Atari's hardware (Atari 2600 in 1981, Atari 7800 in 1986, Atari Lynx in 1994) and many other platforms. Released in 1981, the 2600 port was the first game to use bank switching, a technique developed by Carl Nielsen's group of engineers that increased available ROM space from 4 KB to 8 KB. Brad Stewart, the programmer tasked to work on the port, used bank switching to complete the game. A port was in development for the Atari 5200 but was never officially released. The Atari 7800 version is a launch title and features co-operative play. The asteroids receive colorful textures, and the "heartbeat" sound effect remains intact. The game was included as part of the Atari Lynx title Super Asteroids & Missile Command, and featured in the original Microsoft Arcade compilation in 1993, the latter with four other Atari video games: Missile Command, Tempest, Centipede, and Battlezone. 

Activision made an enhanced version of Asteroids for PlayStation, Nintendo 64, Microsoft Windows, and the Game Boy Color in 1998. Doug Perry, writing for entertainment and video game journalism website IGN, praised the high-end graphics  with realistic space object models, backgrounds, and special effects  for making Asteroids "a pleasure to look at" while being a homage to the original arcade version. The Atari Flashback series of dedicated video game consoles have included both the 2600 the arcade versions of Asteroids. 

Published by Crave Entertainment on December 14, 1999, Asteroids Hyper 64 is the Nintendo 64 port of Asteroids. The game's graphics were upgraded to 3D, with both the ship and asteroids receiving polygon models along static backgrounds, and it was supplemented with weapons and a multiplayer mode. IGN writer Matt Casamassina was pleased that the gameplay was faithful to the original but felt the minor additions and constant "repetition" was not enough to make the port "warrant a $50 purchase." He was disappointed about the lack of music and found the sound effects to be of poor quality. 

In 2001, Infogrames released Atari Anniversary Edition for the Sega Dreamcast, PlayStation, and PC compatibles. Developed by Digital Eclipse, it included emulated versions of Asteroids and other old Atari games. Jeff Gerstmann of Gamespot criticized the Dreamcast version for its limitations, such as the presentation of vector graphics on a low resolution television set, which obscures the copyright text in Asteroids. The arcade and Atari 2600 versions of Asteroids, along with Asteroids Deluxe, were included in Atari Anthology for both Xbox and PlayStation 2. 

Released on November 28, 2007, the Xbox Live Arcade port of Asteroids has revamped HD graphics along with an added intense "throttle monkey" mode. Both Asteroids in its arcade and 2600 versions and Asteroids Deluxe were ported to Microsofts Game Room download service in 2010. Glu Mobile released a mobile phone port of the game with supplementary features as well as the original arcade version. 

Asteroids was included on Atari Greatest Hits Volume 1 for the Nintendo DS. Craig Harris, writing for IGN, noticed that the Nintendo DS's small screen can not properly display details of games with vector graphics. 

==Highest score==
On November 13, 1982, 15 year old Scott Safran of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, set a world record of 41,336,440 points on the arcade game Asteroids, beating the 40,101,910 point score set by Leo Daniels of Carolina Beach on February 6, 1982. In 1998, to congratulate Safran on his accomplishment, the Twin Galaxies Intergalactic Scoreboard searched for him for four years until 2002, when it was discovered that he had died in an accident in 1989. In a ceremony in Philadelphia on April 27, 2002, Walter Day of Twin Galaxies presented an award to the surviving members of Safran's family, commemorating the Asteroid Champion's achievement. On April 6, 2010, John McAllister broke Safran's record with a high score of 41,338,740 in a 58-hour Internet livestream. 

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* Official online version of Asteroids at Atari
* 
* 
* All About Asteroids at Atari Times
* Article at The Dot Eaters, featuring a history of Asteroids
*Edge Magazine The Making Of: Asteroids



[[Asparagales]]

Asparagales (older names include Irides) is the name of an order of plants, used in modern classification systems such as the APG III system (which is used throughout this article). The order takes its name from the family Asparagaceae and is placed in the monocots. The order has only recently been recognized in classification systems. It was first put forward by Huber in 1977 and later taken up in the Dahlgren system of 1985. Before this, many of its families were assigned to the old order Liliales: a very large order containing almost all monocots with colourful tepals and without starch in their endosperm. DNA sequence analysis indicated that Liliales should be divided into at least Liliales, Asparagales and Dioscoreales. The boundaries of the Asparagales and of its families have undergone a series of changes in recent years; future research may lead to further changes and ultimately greater stability.

The order is clearly circumscribed on the basis of DNA sequence analysis, but is difficult to define morphologically, since its members are structurally diverse. Thus although most species in the order are herbaceous, some no more than 15 cm high, there are a number of climbers (e.g., some species of Asparagus), as well as several genera forming trees (e.g. Agave, Cordyline, Yucca, Dracaena), some of which can exceed 10 m in height. Succulent genera occur in several families (e.g. Aloe).

One of the defining characteristics of the order is the presence of phytomelan, 'Phytomelan' appears as 'phytomelanin' in some sources. a black pigment present in the seed coat, creating a dark crust. Phytomelan is found in most families of the Asparagales (although not in Orchidaceae, thought to be a sister to the rest of the group).

Almost all species have a tight cluster of leaves (a rosette), either at the base of the plant or at the end of a more-or-less woody stem; the leaves are less often produced along the stem. The flowers are in the main not particularly distinctive, being of a general 'lily type', with six tepals, either free or fused from the base.

The order is thought to have first diverged from other related monocots some 120130 million years ago (early in the Cretaceous period), although given the difficulty in classifying the families involved, estimates are likely to be uncertain.

From an economic point of view, the order Asparagales is second in importance within the monocots to the order Poales (which includes grasses and cereals). Species are used as food and flavourings (e.g. onion, garlic, leek, asparagus, vanilla), as cut flowers (e.g. freesia, gladiolus, iris, orchids), and as garden ornamentals (e.g. day lilies, lily of the valley, Agapanthus).

==Characteristics==
 Seeds of Hippeastrum with dark phytomelan-containing coat
 Tree-like habit created by secondary thickening in Nolina recurvata

Most species of Asparagales are herbaceous perennials, although some are climbers (e.g. species of Asparagus, family Asparagaceae) and some are tree-like. The order also contains many geophytes (bulbs, corms and various kinds of tuber). Almost all species have a tight cluster of leaves (a rosette) at the base of the plant or, in the tree-forming species, at the end of a woody stem. Only in a few cases are leaves produced along the length of the stem. The flowers are often at the tip of the stem and are mainly of a rather generalized 'lily type', with six tepals and up to six stamens.

The orders which have been separated from the old Liliales are difficult to characterize. No single morphological character appears to be diagnostic of the order Asparagales.

* The flowers of Asparagales are of a general type among the lilioid monocots. Compared to Liliales, they usually have plain tepals without markings in the form of dots. If nectaries are present, they are in the septa of the ovaries rather than at the base of the tepals or stamens. "Floral Morphology of Asparagales", Botany 2001, p. 16, Sabasrabudhe and Stace, 1974. 

* Those species which have relatively large dry seeds have a dark, crust-like (crustose) outer layer containing the pigment phytomelan. However, some species with hairy seeds (e.g. Eriospermum, family Asparagaceae s.l.), berries (e.g. Maianthemum, family Asparagaceae s.l.), or highly reduced seeds (e.g. orchids) lack this dark pigment in their seed coats. Phytomelan is not unique to Asparagales (i.e. it is not a synapomorphy) but it is common within the order and rare outside it. The inner portion of the seed coat is usually completely collapsed. In contrast, the morphologically similar seeds of Liliales have no phytomelan, and usually retain a cellular structure in the inner portion of the seed coat.

* Most monocots are unable to thicken their stems once they have formed, since they lack the cylindrical meristem present in other angiosperm groups. Asparagales have a method of secondary thickening which is otherwise only found inDioscorea (in the order Disoscoreales). In a process called 'anomalous secondary growth', they are able to create new vascular bundles around which thickening growth occurs. Agave, Yucca, Aloe, Dracaena, Nolina and Cordyline can become massive trees, albeit not of the height of the tallest dicots, and with less branching. Other genera in the order, such as Lomandra and Aphyllanthes, have the same type of secondary growth but confined to their underground stems.

* Microsporogenesis (part of pollen formation) distinguishes some members of Asparagales from Liliales. Microsporogenesis involves a cell dividing twice (meiotically) to form four daughter cells. There are two kinds of microsporogenesis: successive and simultaneous (although intermediates exist). In successive microsporogenesis, walls are laid down separating the daughter cells after each division. In simultaneous microsporogenesis, there is no wall formation until all four cell nuclei are present. Liliales all have successive microsporogenesis, which is thought to be the primitive condition in monocots. It seems that when the Asparagales first diverged they developed simultaneous microsporogenesis, which the 'lower' Asparagale families retain. However, the 'core' Asparagales (see #Phylogeny section) have reverted to successive microsporogenesis.

* The Asparagales appear to be unified by a mutation affecting their telomeres (a region of repetitive DNA at the end of a chromosome). The typical Arabidopsis-type' sequence of bases has been fully or partially replaced by other sequences, with the 'human-type' predominating.

* Other apomorphic characters of the order according to Stevens are: the presence of chelidonic acid, anthers longer than wide, tapetal cells bi- to tetra-nuclear, tegmen not persistent, endosperm helobial, and loss of mitochondrial gene sdh3. 

==Diversity==
The taxonomic diversity of the monocotyledons is described in detail by Kubitzki. Up-to-date information on the Asparagales can be found on the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. 

The families of the Asparagales, as set out in the APG III system, are briefly surveyed below. For more information follow the links to the main articles.

Flowers of xBrassolaeliocattleya 'Turanbeat', a hybrid between the genera Brassavola, Laelia and Cattleya.

===Orchidaceae===

The orchid family is one of the two largest families of angiosperms (the other is Asteraceae). The shape of the flowers is very distinctive, making orchids easy to recognize. The flower is bilaterally symmetrical. The three sepals are generally colourful and bright (which is why they are sometimes called outer tepals), with one on each side ("lateral sepals") and one usually at the top of the flower ("dorsal sepal"), sometimes forming a hood. The three petals (or inner tepals), also showy, are located alternately between the sepals, two at the side and one usually at the bottom of the flower. The lower petal is referred to as the "labellum" or "lip", and is usually distinctively different from the side petals. Thelymitra is an example of a genus where the lower petal is similar in appearance to the other petals. The pollination systems of orchids are among the most complex and interesting of all the angiosperms.

Orchids include many species of great ornamental value. Vanilla is obtained from the fruit of the orchid Vanilla planifolia.

===Boryaceae===

The genus Borya contains tree-like species which behave as "resurrection plants". Growing on rocky slopes, the plants dry out during the dry season and become a rusty orange color, but quickly turn green and become active again once it starts to rain. Along with the other genus in the Boryaceae family, Alania, these xerophytic plants are native to Australia.

Flowers of Blandfordia grandiflora.

=== Blandfordiaceae ===

Blandfordia is the only genus in the family Blandfordiaceae, with four species distributed in eastern Australia. They are commonly called "Christmas Bells", because of the shape of their flowers and their flowering time, which coincides with Christmas in Australia. They are upright perennial herbs (to about 1.50 m), with distinctive leaves. The inflorescence is a raceme. Individual flowers have jointed pedicels and tepals forming a tubular shape. The seeds have conspicuous hairs.

=== Lanariaceae ===

Lanaria lanata is the only species in the family Lanariaceae and is found in southern South Africa. A more or less typical monocotyledon, the species can be recognized by its shortly branched inflorescence covered with branched hairs (giving rise to the common name of Lamb's-tail). The flowers are radially symmetrical.

 Habit of Collospermum hastatum, an epiphyte in the forests of New Zealand. The immature fruits are yellow, the ripe ones red.

=== Asteliaceae ===

The Asteliaceae is a family of two to four genera of plants found in the Southern Hemisphere. They are more or less rhizomatous, with spiral leaves and an inflorescence that may form a raceme or a spike. There are large bracts at the base of the inflorescence. The individual flowers are small, with tepals joined at the base.

 Habit of Hypoxis hemerocallidea

===Hypoxidaceae===

The family includes some 150 species with a worldwide distribution, excluding Europe and northern Asia. Species can be recognized by their rosettes of more or less folded leaves with persistent bases and quite prominent nonglandular hairs. The tepals in the outer whorl tend to be green on the outside. The ovary is inferior with often a thin tubular portion at its apex formed by joined tepals or the tip of the ovary.

 Habit of Ixiolirion.

=== Ixioliriaceae ===

The family includes a single genus, Ixiolirion, with four species distributed from Egypt to central Asia. They are herbs with corms and an inflorescence forming a cluster. The individual flowers are blue, shortly tubular, with an inferior ovary.

 Flowers of Tecophilaea violiflora.

===Tecophilaeaceae===

The nine genera are found in Chile, the United States and Africa. They are herbs with corms and leaves which are sometimes stalked (petiolate) with wide blades. The flowers have tepals that open outwards. The stamens are strongly dimorphic. The anthers open by pores.

The genus Cyanastrum is sometimes placed in its own family Cyanastraceae.

 Habit of Doryanthes palmeri

===Doryanthaceae===

The two species of Doryanthes, the only genus of the family, are huge rosette-forming herbs that are a conspicuous element of the flora in the vicinity of Sydney, being hard not to notice when in flower. The leaves have entire margins but disintegrate into fibres at the apex. The sub-umbellate inflorescences are borne at the end of long stems, having numerous bright red flowers, which are radially symmetric with inferior ovaries.

 Flower of Iris sibirica.

===Iridaceae===

The iris family contains about 70 genera and over 1,600 species with a worldwide distribution.

Members of the family are usually perennial herbs with sword-shaped unifacial leaves; the inflorescence is a spike or panicle of solitary flowers, or forms a monochasial cyme or rhipidium (meaning that the successive stems of the flowers follow a zig-zag path in the same plane); and the flower has only three stamens, each opposite to an outer tepal.

Saffron is obtained from the dried styles of Crocus sativus L., a member of the iris family. The corms of some species of Iridaceae are used as food by some indigenous peoples.

Many species in the iris family have a great economic importance in ornamental horticulture and the cut flower industry, especially Gladiolus, Freesia, Sparaxis, Iris, Tigridia (tiger lily), Ixia (corn lily), Romulea, Neomarica, Moraea (butterfly lily), Nemastylis, Belamcanda, Sisyrinchium (blue-eyed grass), Crocosmia and Trimezia. Many other genera, both perennials and bulbs, are grown in gardens in tropical and temperate regions (e.g. Watsonia, Crocus, Dietes, Tritonia, Hesperantha and Neomarica).

Moraea and Homeria are two genera of poisonous plants which are a problem in sheep and cattle producing regions, notably in South Africa.

 Flowers of a Xeronema species

===Xeronemataceae===

The family consists of a single genus Xeronema with two species, one found only on the Poor Knights islands in New Zealand and the other in New Caledonia. The inflorescence is crowded with quite large, radial symmetrical flowers, which face upwards. The stamens are strongly exserted (i.e. extend out of the flower). The family is still poorly known.

===Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato===

The Xanthorrhoeaceae, or grasstree, family has been recognized by most taxonomists, but the limits of the family have varied greatly. In the narrowest definition, the Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu stricto consists only of the genus Xanthorrhoea. Based on phylogenetic research, the latest (2009) revision of the APG classification groups together the former families Hemerocallidaceae, Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu stricto and Asphodelaceae as the Xanthorrhoeaceae. A paper published at the same time proposed that the original three families should be retained as subfamilies within Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato. This division has been used here.

 Flowers of Hemerocallis fulva.

====Hemerocallidoideae====

The Hemerocallidoideae, or day lily, subfamily of the Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Hemerocallidaceae.

It includes perennial herbaceous plants which are glabrous and have short rhizomes with fibrous roots or are rhizomatous with root tubers. The leaves form a rosette at the base of the plant, and are alternate, distichous, flat, sessile, simple, linear or lanceolate, and parallel veined, with entire margins. The flower is typically somewhat zygomorphic (i.e. not radially symmetrical) and has nectaries. The flowers are arranged in various types of inflorescence. The group includes eight genera and about 85 species distributed in the temperate zones of Europe and Asia, Malaysia, India, Madagascar, Africa and the Pacific, from Australia and New Zealand to South America.

Two of the genera, Hemerocallis (day lily) and Phormium (New Zealand flax), are grown as ornamentals worldwide.

Xanthorrhoea preissii

====Xanthorrhoeoideae====

The Xanthorrhoeoideae, or grasstree, subfamily of the Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu stricto.

It contains only one genus, Xanthorrhoea, endemic to Australia. Many species have an erect woody stem which is covered with persistent dried leaves unless there have been fires, topped by a crown of long thin leaves. The spike-like inflorescence is erect and densely crowded with small flowers. The fruit is a capsule. Plants are adapted to bush fires, which can stimulate flowering.

 Aloe striatula
 Flowers of Asphodeline lutea

====Asphodeloideae====

The Asphodeloideae, or asphodel, subfamily of the Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Asphodelaceae.

Members of the family are natives of temperate to tropical regions of the Old World, with 15 genera and 780 species. The greatest diversity occurs in South Africa, usually in arid habitats. They differ from other related families by often being pachycauline (i.e. with a thickened trunk, usually wider at the base, which has a water storage function), by usually having succulent leaves, and by possessing a trimerous flower with a superior ovary and seeds with an aryl.

The most conspicuous genus in the family is Aloe. Many species of Aloe are used medicinally and in cosmetics. For example, "aloin" is derived from Aloe vera and Aloe ferox and has important medical uses (e.g. as a laxative and in the treatment of burns) as well as cosmetic uses (e.g. in skin and hair products). Other genera are used as ornamental plants, both succulents such as Aloe, Haworthia and Gasteria and perennials such as Kniphofia, Asphodelus and Bulbine.

===Amaryllidaceae sensu lato===

The amaryllis family has been recognized in many taxonomic systems, but the limits of the family have varied. In the narrowest definition, the Amaryllidaceae sensu stricto is characterized by an umbellate inflorescence with an inferior ovary. Two other groups have similar inflorescences but a superior ovary, and have at times been put into separate families: the Agapanthaceae and the Alliaceae. Based on phylogenetic research, the latest (2009) revision of the APG classification groups together these three families under the conserved name of Amaryllidaceae. (Earlier the APG had used the name Alliaceae for this group.). A paper published at the same time as the 2009 classification proposed that the original three families should be retained as subfamilies within Amaryllidaceae sensu lato. This division has been used here.

 Flowers of Agapanthus

====Agapanthoideae====

The agapanthus subfamily of the Amaryllidaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Agapanthaceae.

Agapanthus, native to South Africa, is the sole genus of the subfamily. They are relatively robust herbaceous perennials with short rhizomes and leaves forming a rosette, individually linear-oblong, flat, rather fleshy. The flowers are quite large, blue or white, forming an umbel at the end of a stem (scape) which is longer than the leaves. The inflorescences are protected by bracts joined together along one side. The ovary is superior. Plants do not have the characteristic garlic odor of the allium subfamily (Allioideae). They are set apart from the amaryllis subfamily (Amaryllidoideae) by their superior ovary, the presence of saponins and the absence of the alkaloids typical of amaryllids.

Agapanthus is widely grown as an ornamental in temperate gardens.

 Flowers of Allium ursinum

====Allioideae====

The allium subfamily of the Amaryllidaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Alliaceae.

Members of the subfamily are found worldwide, in temperate, subtropical and tropical regions. They are herbaceous perennials, usually with bulbs, although in some cases they have short rhizomes. The subfamily can be easily recognized by its characteristic smell (the smell of garlic and onions, singular enough to be called "garlic odour"), by the very soft, fleshy leaves and the umbel-like inflorescence at the end of a stem (scape), which has small to medium flowers with a superior ovary.

The subfamily is of considerable economic importance, being grown as vegetables and seasoning, medicinal plants and ornamentals. The genus Allium includes some of the most widely used edible plants, such as onion and shallot (varieties of Allium cepa), garlic (A. sativum and A. scordoprasum), leek (Allium ampeloprasum var. porrum), and various flavourings such as chives (Allium schoenoprasum).

The organosulphur compounds responsible for the characteristic odour are believed to have antioxidant, antibiotic and anticarcinogenic properties, to stimulate the immune system and to be protective of liver functioning.

The family also has important ornamentals, mainly from the dominant genus Allium, but also including genera such as Ipheion.

Amaryllis belladonna

====Amaryllidoideae====

The amaryllis subfamily of the Amaryllidaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Amaryllidaceae sensu stricto.

The subfamily includes 59 genera and approximately 800 species from temperate and tropical regions worldwide. They are herbaceous perennials with bulbs, and can be identified by their rather fleshy leaves, usually large and attractive flowers, with six stamens and an inferior ovary. The flowers are solitary or, more frequently, arranged in umbellate inflorescences at the end of a stem (scape).

Many species of Amaryllidoideae are popular as ornamentals in parks and gardens. A special mention should be made of Narcissus (daffodils and narcissi), cultivated in various parts of the world as an ornamental in gardens and as a cut flower.

===Asparagaceae sensu lato===
The members of this group have a complex taxonomic history, having been assigned to widely differing families in different classification systems. Proposed subgroups are difficult to recognise, having similar 'lily-like' flowers, with the result that some members of the group have been included in different subgroups at different times. Based on phylogenetic research, the latest (2009) revision of the APG classification supports the use of a single broadly defined family, Asparagaceae sensu lato. A paper published at the same time as the 2009 classification proposed seven subfamilies for the families recognized in the very first APG classification of 1998. This division has been used here, although it is not clear whether the approach will be upheld by future research as some of the clades are weakly supported.

The broadly defined family is large, with some 153 genera and 2480 species, and occurs worldwide.

Flowers of Aphyllanthes monspeliensis

====Aphyllanthoideae====

The Aphyllanthoideae subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Aphyllanthaceae.

It comprises a single species, Aphyllanthes monspeliensis, found in arid areas of the western Mediterranean. The inflorescence is made up of small clusters of blue flowers at the end of a long stem (scape). An unusual feature of the species is that the stem (scape) is actually the main photosynthetic organ, since the paper-like leaves at the base lack chlorophyll.

 Flowers of Dichelostemma capitatum

====Brodiaeoideae====

The Brodiaeoideae subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, under the name Themidaceae.

It comprises about a dozen genera which are native to western North America. Plants are superficially similar to those of the allium subfamily, being perennial herbs with an umbellate inflorescence made up of quite small flowers. The tepals are more or less joined at the base, sometimes with a corona (a structure like the trumpet of a daffodil). The ovary is superior. Plants lack the "garlic odor" typical of the allium subfamily, and have a fibrous corm rather than a bulb. The inflorescence bracts also differ from those of alliums.

A number of genera, including Brodiaea and Triteleia, are grown as ornamental plants.

 Flowers of Hyacinthus orientalis.

====Scilloideae====

The Scilloideae, or scilla, subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, under the name Hyacinthaceae.

The group includes from 770 to 1,000 species, distributed predominantly in Mediterranean climates, especially South Africa, the Mediterranean to Central Asia and Burma, and South America. Characteristics of the subfamily include: flowers with six tepals and six stamens, typically arranged in a raceme; a superior ovary; growing from bulbs; rather fleshy mucilaginous leaves in a basal rosette. Plants contain poisonous compounds, so that they are not edible.

Many spring- and summer-flowering bulbs grown in gardens in temperate climates belong to this subfamily, including genera such as Scilla (squill), Muscari (grape hyacinth), Hyacinthus (hyacinths),Chionodoxa (glory of the snow) and Galtonia (summer hyacinth). Some are used as cut flowers.

 Habit of Yucca (Joshua Tree)
Hosta 'Bressingham Blue' in bloom.

====Agavoideae====

The Agavoideae, or agave, subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, under a variety of names, including Agavaceae. It includes species formerly placed in several other families (e.g. Anthericaceae and Hesperocallidaceae). Many species currently assigned to this group have been placed in other groups at different times. Stevens notes "The broad concept of Agavoideae adopted here may not seem very satisfactory, but I fear that none of the alternative solutions is much better ...". 

Given this broad definition, there are about 23 genera in over 600 species, distributed more or less around the world outside cold areas. South west North America, including Mexico, is an area of particular diversity. Some members of the subfamily form trees (such as the Joshua Tree, a species of Yucca). They often have large, succulent leaves in rosettes, either at the base or at the end of the branches. Others are herbaceous (e.g. Hosta, Anthericum). The flowers have six tepals and six stamens with either a superior or inferior ovary.

Agave has important economic uses (for example, it is used to make tequila and mezcal). Some genera are used as ornamental garden plants in temperate regions (e.g. Hosta) and as house plants (e.g. Chlorophytum).

 Habit of Cordyline

====Lomandroideae====

The Lomandroideae subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, Laxmanniaceae.

The group consists of some 15 genera and about 180 species from Australasia, south east Asia, and South America. The best known genus is Cordyline. The tepals of the flower persist in the fruit.

Species of Cordyline are grown as house plants and as garden plants in temperate to tropical regions.

 Flower of Asparagus officinalis
 Habit of Asparagus plumosus

====Asparagoideae====

The asparagus subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, the Asparagaceae sensu stricto.

The subfamily contains only two genera, one, Asparagus, with around 150300 species distributed throughout the Old World and a small area of Australia, the other, Hemiphylacus, with only five species, found in Mexico. The photosynthetic organs of Asparagus have been the subject of some controversy; however, most authors consider them to be flattened stems rather than leaves (phylloclades). The leaves are reduced to non-photosynthetic scales, with the phylloclades in their axils. The flowers are small, bell-shaped, greenish-white to yellowish, with six tepals partially joined together at the base, either single or in small clusters, springing from the junctions of the phylloclades. Asparagus species are usually dioecious, with male and female flowers on separate plants. The fruit is a small red berry, which is poisonous to humans.

Asparagus officinalis is used as a vegetable, the young shoots being cut before they become woody. Other species are used as house plants and as greenery in the cut flower trade.

 Habit of Dracaena draco, the dragon tree
 Habit of Ruscus aculeatus, butcher's broom

====Nolinoideae====

The Nolinoideae subfamily of the Asparagaceae sensu lato is treated in some systems as a separate family, under a variety of names, including Ruscaceae sensu lato. As with the subfamily Agavoideae, the Nolinoideae contains genera previously classified in a number of different families (including Ruscaceae sensu stricto, Nolinaceae sensu stricto, Convallariaceae sensu stricto and Eriospermaceae sensu stricto).

When broadly defined, the group contains some 26 genera and almost 500 species, distributed mainly in the temperate to tropical regions of the Northern Hemisphere. There are few morphological features separating the subfamily from other groups within the Asparagaceae sensu lato. The small flowers are radially symmetrical, with six tepals, usually joined at the base, six stamens and a superior ovary. The fruit is usually a berry with few seeds. Species vary from herbaceous perennials to tree-like forms (e.g. Dracaena).

There are several examples of convergent evolution between species in this subfamily and those in other subfamilies of the Asparagaceae sensu lato. Ruscus (butcher's broom) has photosynthetic branches (phylloclades), similar to those of Asparagus (Asparagoideae); Dracaena draco has a tree-like habit resembling Yucca (Agavoideae) and Cordyline (Lomandroideae).

Some genera are used in horticulture: Sanseviera and Aspidistra are used as house plants in temperate areas and as garden plants in warmer regions; Polygonatum and Ophiopogon are used as garden plants in temperate areas.

==Taxonomy==
The order Asparagales has only recently been recognized in classification systems, with the advent of phylogenetics. Older systems based on morphology placed many of the species now included in Asparagales into the lily family (Liliaceae); where other families were recognized, these were generally placed into the old order Liliales: a very large order which was used for almost all monocotyledons with colourful tepals and without starch in their endosperm (the lilioid monocots). The Liliales was difficult to divide into families because morphological characters were not present in patterns that clearly demarcated groups. Thus the Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, did not recognise the Asparagales, and placed many of the plants involved in an order called 'Liliiflorae'. The widely used Cronquist system of 19681988 also did not recognise Asparagales, using instead the very broadly defined order Liliales.

===APG system===
The 2009 revision of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system, APG III, places the order in the clade monocots with the circumscription given below. The APG III system is very recent, , so it is not yet employed in many text books; however it is likely to become more influential since its family circumscriptions are being used as the basis of the Kew-hosted World Checklist of Selected Plant Families. With this circumscription, the order consists of 14 families with approximately 1120 genera and 26000 species. 

Order Asparagales Link
* Family Amaryllidaceae J.St.-Hil. (including Agapanthaceae F.Voigt, Alliaceae Borkh.) The name 'Alliaceae' has also been used for the expanded family comprising the Alliaceae sensu stricto, Amaryllidaceae and Agapanthaceae (e.g. in the APG II system). 'Amaryllidaceae' is used as a conserved name in APG III. 
* Family Asparagaceae Juss. (including Agavaceae Dumort. [which includes Anemarrhenaceae, Anthericaceae, Behniaceae and Herreriaceae], Aphyllanthaceae Burnett, Hesperocallidaceae Traub, Hyacinthaceae Batsch ex Borkh., Laxmanniaceae Bubani, Ruscaceae M.Roem. [which includes Convallariaceae] and Themidaceae Salisb.)
* Family Asteliaceae Dumort.
* Family Blandfordiaceae R. Dahlgren & Clifford
* Family Boryaceae M.W. Chase, Rudall & Conran
* Family Doryanthaceae R. Dahlgren & Clifford
* Family Hypoxidaceae R.Br.
* Family Iridaceae Juss.
* Family Ixioliriaceae Nakai
* Family Lanariaceae R. Dahlgren & A.E.van Wyk
* Family Orchidaceae Juss.
* Family Tecophilaeaceae Leyb.
* Family Xanthorrhoeaceae Dumort. (including Asphodelaceae Juss. and Hemerocallidaceae R.Br.)
* Family Xeronemataceae M.W. Chase, Rudall & M.F.Fay

The earlier 2003 version, APG II, allowed 'bracketed' families, i.e. families which could either be segregated from more comprehensive families or could be included in them. These are the families given under "including" in the list above. APG III does not allow bracketed families, requiring the use of the more comprehensive family; otherwise the circumscription of the Asparagales is unchanged. A separate paper accompanying the publication of the 2009 APG III system provided subfamilies to accommodate the families which were discontinued.

The first APG system of 1998 contained some extra families, included in square brackets in the list above.

===Other systems===
Two other systems which use the order Asparagales are the Dahlgren system and the Kubitzki system. The families included in the circumscriptions of the order in these two systems are shown in the first and second columns of the table below. The equivalent family in the APG III system is shown in the third column. Note that although these systems may use the same name for a family, the genera which it includes may be different, so the equivalence between systems is only approximate in some cases.

 Families included in Asparagales in three systems which use this order Dahlgren system Kubitzki system APG III system 
  Agapanthaceae Amaryllidaceae: Agapanthoideae 
 Agavaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Alliaceae Amaryllidaceae: Allioideae 
 Amaryllidaceae Amaryllidaceae: Amaryllidoideae 
  Anemarrhenaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Anthericaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Aphyllanthaceae Asparagaceae: Aphyllanthoideae 
 Asparagaceae Asparagaceae: Asparagoideae 
 Asphodelaceae Xanthorrhoeaceae: Asphodeloideae 
 Asteliaceae Asteliaceae 
  Behniaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Blandfordiaceae Blandfordiaceae 
  Boryaceae Boryaceae 
 Calectasiaceae  Not in Asparagales (family Dasypogonaceae, unplaced as to order, clade commelinids) 
 Convallariaceae Asparagaceae: Nolinoideae 
 Cyanastraceae  Tecophilaeaceae 
 Dasypogonaceae  Not in Asparagales (family Dasypogonaceae, unplaced as to order, clade commelinids) 
 Doryanthaceae Doryanthaceae 
 Dracaenaceae Asparagaceae: Nolinoideae 
 Eriospermaceae Asparagaceae: Nolinoideae 
 Hemerocallidaceae Xanthorrhoeaceae: Hemerocallidoideae 
 Herreriaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Hostaceae Asparagaceae: Agavoideae 
 Hyacinthaceae Asparagaceae: Scilloideae 
 Hypoxidaceae Hypoxidaceae 
  Iridaceae Iridaceae 
 Ixioliriaceae Ixioliriaceae 
  Johnsoniaceae Xanthorrhoeaceae: Hemerocallidoideae 
 Lanariaceae Lanariaceae 
 Luzuriagaceae  Not in Asparagales (family Alstroemeriaceae, order Liliales) 
  Lomandraceae Asparagaceae: Lomandroideae 
 Nolinaceae Asparagaceae: Nolinoideae 
  Orchidaceae Orchidaceae 
 Philesiaceae  Not in Asparagales (family Philesiaceae, order Liliales) 
 Phormiaceae  Xanthorrhoeaceae: Hemerocallidoideae 
 Ruscaceae Asparagaceae: Nolinoideae 
 Tecophilaeaceae Tecophilaeaceae 
  Themidaceae Asparagaceae: Brodiaeoideae 
 Xanthorrhoeaceae Xanthorrhoeaceae: Xanthorrhoeoideae 

==Phylogeny==
From the Dahlgren system of 1985 onwards, studies based mainly on morphology had identified the Asparagales as a distinct group, but had also included groups now located in Liliales, Pandanales and Zingiberales. Research in the 21st century has supported the monophyly of Asparagales, based on morphology, 18S rDNA, and other DNA sequences, although some phylogenetic reconstructions based on molecular data have suggested that Asparagales may be paraphyletic, with Orchidaceae separated from the rest. Within the monocots, Asparagales is the sister of the commelinid clade.

A possible phylogenetic tree for the Asparagales, including those families recently reduced to subfamilies, is shown below. 

The tree shown above can be divided into a basal paraphyletic group, the 'lower Asparagales', from Orchidaceae to Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato, and a well-supported monophyletic group of 'core Asparagales', comprising Amaryllidaceae sensu lato and Asparagaceae sensu lato. 

Two differences between these two groups (although with exceptions) are: the mode of microsporogenesis and the position of the ovary. The 'lower Asparagales' typically have simultaneous microsporogenesis (i.e. cell walls develop only after both meiotic divisions), which appears to be an apomorphy within the monocots, whereas the 'core Asparagales' have reverted to successive microsporogenesis (i.e. cell walls develop after each division). The 'lower Asparagales' typically have an inferior ovary, whereas the 'core Asparagales' have reverted to a superior ovary. A 2002 morphological study by Rudall treated possessing an inferior ovary as a synapomorphy of the Asparagales, stating that reversions to a superior ovary in the 'core Asparagales' could be associated with the presence of nectaries below the ovaries. However, Stevens notes that superior ovaries are distributed among the 'lower Asparagales' in such a way that it is not clear where to place the evolution of different ovary morphologies. The position of the ovary seems a much more flexible character (here and in other angiosperms) than previously thought. 

===Orchid clade===
Orchidaceae is the largest family of all angiosperms and hence by far the largest in the order. The Dahlgren system recognized three families of orchids, but DNA sequence analysis later showed that these families are polyphyletic and so should be combined. Several studies suggest (with high bootstrap support) that Orchidaceae is the sister of the rest of the Asparagales. Other studies have placed the orchids differently in the phylogenetic tree, generally among the Boryaceae-Hypoxidaceae clade. The position of Orchidaceae shown above seems the best current hypothesis, but cannot be taken as confirmed.

Orchids have simultaneous microsporogenesis and inferior ovaries, two characters that are typical of the 'lower Asparagales'. However, their nectaries are rarely in the septa of the ovaries, and most orchids have dust-like seeds, atypical of the rest of the order. (Some members of Vanilloideae and Cypripedioideae have crustose seeds, probably associated with dispersal by birds and mammals that are attracted by fermenting fleshy fruit releasing fragrant compounds, e.g. vanilla.)

In terms of the number of species, Orchidaceae diversification is remarkable. However, although the other Asparagales may be less rich in species, they are more variable morphologically, including tree-like forms.

===Boryaceae to Hypoxidaceae===
The four families excluding Boryaceae form a well-supported clade in studies based on DNA sequence analysis. All four contain relatively few species, and it has been suggested that they be combined into one family under the name Hypoxidaceae sensu lato. The relationship between Boryaceae (which includes only two genera, Borya and Alania), and other Asparagales has remained unclear for a long time. The Boryaceae are mycorrhizal, but not in the same way as orchids. Morphological studies have suggested a close relationship between Boryaceae and Blandfordiaceae. There is relatively low support for the position of Boryaceae in the tree shown above.

===Ixioliriaceae to Xeronemataceae===
The relationship shown between Ixioliriaceae and Tecophilaeaceae is still unclear. Some studies have supported a clade of these two families, others have not. The position of Doryanthaceae has also varied, with support for the position shown above, but also support for other positions.

The clade from Iridaceae upwards appears to have stronger support. All have some genetic characteristics in common, having lost Arabidopsis-type telomeres. Iridaceae is distinctive among the Asparagales in the unique structure of the inflorescence (a ripidium), the combination of an inferior ovary and three stamens, and the common occurrence of unifacial leaves whereas bifacial leaves are the norm in other Asparagales.

Members of the clade from Iridaceae upwards have infra-locular septal nectaries, which Rudall interpreted as a driver towards secondarily superior ovaries.

===Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato + 'core Asparagales'===
The next node in the tree (Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato + the 'core Asparagales') has strong support. 'Anomalous' secondary thickening occurs among this clade, e.g. in Xanthorrhoea (family Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato) and Dracaena (family Asparagaceae sensu lato), with species reaching tree-like proportions.

The 'core Asparagales', comprising Amaryllidaceae sensu lato and Asparagaceae sensu lato, are a strongly supported clade, as are clades for each of the families. Relationships within these broadly defined families appear less clear, particularly within the Asparagaceae sensu lato. Stevens notes that most of its subfamilies are difficult to recognize, and that significantly different divisions have been used in the past, so that the use of a broadly defined family to refer to the entire clade is justified. Thus the relationships among subfamilies shown above, based on APWeb , is somewhat uncertain.

==Evolution==
Several studies have attempted to date the evolution of the Asparagales, based on phylogenetic evidence. Earlier studies generally give younger dates than more recent studies, which have been preferred in the table below.

+ Approx. date inMillions of Years Ago Event 
 133-120 Origin of Asparagales, i.e. first divergence from other monocots 
 93 Split between Xanthorrhoeaceae sensu lato and the 'core group' Asparagales 
 9189 Origin of Alliodeae and Asparagoideae 
 47 Divergence of Agavoideae and Nolinoideae 

A 2009 study suggests that the Asparagales have the highest diversification rate in the monocots, about the same as the order Poales, although in both orders the rate is little over half that of the eudicot order Lamiales, the clade with the highest rate.

==Notes and references==

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* : Families included in the checklist
* 

==External links==

*Asparagales in Angiosperm Phylogeny Website
* NCBI Taxonomy Browser

 



[[Alismatales]]

Snake lily (Dracunculus vulgaris) of Araceae family in Crete, Greece.
Ottelia alismoides from family Hydrocharitaceae in Hyderabad, India.
Alismatales is an order of flowering plants including about 4500 species. Plants assigned to this order are mostly tropical or aquatic.

==Description==
Alismatales comprise herbaceous flowering plants of aquatic and marshy habitats, and the only monocots known to have green embryos other than the Amaryllidaceae. They also include the only marine angiosperms. -Angiosperm Phylogeny Website The flowers are usually arranged in inflorescences, and the mature seeds lack endosperm.

Both marine and freshwater forms include those with staminate flowers that detach from the parent plant and float to the surface where they become pollinated. In others, pollination occurs underwater where pollen may form elongated strands, increasing chance of success. Most aquatic species have a totally submerged juvenile phase, and flowers are either floating or emergent. Vegetation may be totally submersed, have floating leaves, or protrude from the water. Collectively they are commonly known as "water plantain". -Alismatales (Water Plantains) 

==Classification==
As understood, the order contains about 165 genera in 13 families, with a cosmopolitan distribution.

===APG===
The Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system (APG) of 1998 and APG II (2003) assigned the Alismatales to the monocots, which may be thought of as an unranked clade containing the families listed below. The biggest departure from earlier systems (see below) is the inclusion of family Araceae. By its inclusion the order has grown enormously in number of species. The family Araceae alone accounts for about a hundred genera, totaling over two thousand species. The rest of the families together contain only about five hundred species.
* order Alismatales APG-III
*: family Alismataceae (including Limnocharitaceae)
*: family Aponogetonaceae
*: family Araceae
*: family Butomaceae 
*: family Cymodoceaceae
*: family Hydrocharitaceae
*: family Juncaginaceae
*: family Posidoniaceae
*: family Potamogetonaceae
*: family Ruppiaceae
*: family Scheuchzeriaceae
*: family Tofieldiaceae
*: family Zosteraceae

The APG III system (2009) differs only in that the Limnocharitaceae are combined with the Alismataceae; it was also suggested that the genus Maundia (of the Juncaginaceae) could be separated into a monogeneric family, Maundiaceae, but the authors noted that more study was necessary before Maundiaceae could be recognized. 

===Earlier systems===
The Cronquist system (1981) places the Alismatales in subclass Alismatidae, class Liliopsida monocotyledons and includes only three families as shown:
* Alismataceae
* Butomaceae
* Limnocharitaceae
Cronquist's subclass Alismatidae conformed fairly closely to the order Alismatales as defined by APG, minus the Araceae.

The Dahlgren system places the Alismatales in the superorder Alismatanae in the subclass Liliidae monocotyledons in the class Magnoliopsida angiosperms with the following families included:
* Alismataceae
* Aponogetonaceae
* Butomaceae
* Hydrocharitaceae
* Limnocharitaceae

In Tahktajan's classification (1997), the Order Alismatales contains only the Alismataceae and Limnocharitaceae making it equivalent to the Alismataceae as revised in APG-III. Other families included in the Alismatates as currently defined are here distributed among ten additional orders, all of which are assigned, with the following exception, to the Subclass Alismatidae. Araceae in Tahktajan 1997 is assigned to the Arales and placed in the Subclass Aridae; Tofieldiaceae to the Melanthiales and placed in the Liliidae. -Flowering Plant Gateway 

== References ==

* B. C. J. du Mortier 1829. Analyse des Familles de Plantes : avec l'indication des principaux genres qui s'y rattachent. Imprimerie de J. Casterman, Tournay
* W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue, 2002. Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts ISBN 0-87893-403-0.

==External links==

* NCBI Taxonomy Browser

 



[[Apiales]]

The Apiales are an order of flowering plants. The families, given at right, are those recognized in the APG III system. This is typical of the newer classifications, though there is some slight variation, and in particular the Torriceliaceae may be divided. Gregory M. Plunkett, Gregory T. Chandler, Porter P. Lowry, Steven M. Pinney, and Taylor S. Sprenkle (2004). "Recent advances in understanding Apiales and a revised classification". South African Journal of Botany 70(3):371-381. 

Under this definition, well-known members include carrots, celery, parsley, and ivy.

The order Apiales is placed within the asterid group of eudicots as circumscribed by the APG III system. Within the asterids, Apiales belongs to an unranked group called the campanulids, Richard C. Winkworth, Johannes Lundberg, and Michael J. Donoghue (2008). "Toward a resolution of Campanulid phylogeny, with special reference to the placement of Dipsacales". Taxon 57(1):53-65. and within the campanulids, it belongs to a clade known in phylogenetic nomenclature as Apiidae. In 2010, a subclade of Apiidae named Dipsapiidae was defined to consist of the three orders: Apiales, Paracryphiales, and Dipsacales. 

The circumscriptions of some of the families have changed. In 2009, one of the subfamilies of Araliaceae was shown to be polyphyletic. 

==History==
The present understanding of the Apiales is fairly recent and is based upon comparison of DNA sequences by phylogenetic methods. 

Under the Cronquist system, only the Apiaceae and Araliaceae were included here, and the restricted order was placed among the rosids rather than the asterids. The Pittosporaceae were placed within the Rosales, and many of the other forms within the family Cornaceae. Pennantia was in the family Icacinaceae.

==References==



[[Asterales]]

Asterales (AST-er-ALE'-eez) Botanical Latin, William T Stearn, Timber Press 2004, ISBN 0-88192-627-2 is an order of dicotyledonous flowering plants that includes the large family Asteraceae (or Compositae) known for composite flowers made of florets, and ten families related to the Asteraceae. The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants, Edited by K. Kubitzki, Volume VIII, Flowering Plants Eudicots Asterales; Springer 2006 

The order is a cosmopolite (plants found throughout most of the world including desert and frigid zones), and includes mostly herbaceous species, although a small number of trees (such as the giant Lobelia and the giant Senecio) and shrubs are also present.

Asterales are organisms that seem to have evolved from one common ancestor. Asterales share characteristics on morphological and biochemical levels. Synapomorphies (a character that is shared by two or more groups through evolutionary development) include the presence in the plants of oligosaccharide inulin, a nutrient storage molecule used instead of starch; and unique stamen morphology. The stamens are usually found around the style, either aggregated densely or fused into a tube, probably an adaptation in association with the plunger (brush; or secondary) pollination that is common among the families of the order, wherein pollen is collected and stored on the length of the pistil.

== Families ==
The order Asterales currently includes 11 families, the largest of which are the Asteraceae, with about 25,000 species, and the Campanulaceae ("bellflowers"), with about 2,000 species. The remaining families count together for less than 500 species. The two large families are cosmopolitan, with many of their species found in the Northern Hemisphere, and the smaller families are usually confined to Australia and the adjacent areas, or sometimes South America.

Only the Asteraceae have composite flower heads; the other families do not, but share other characteristics such as storage of inulin that define the 11 families as more closely related to each other than to other plant families or orders such as the rosids.

The name and order Asterales is botanically venerable, dating back to at least 1926 in the Hutchinson system of plant taxonomy when it contained only five families, of which only two are retained in the APG III classification. Under the Cronquist system of taxonomic classification of flowering plants, Asteraceae was the only family in the group, but newer systems (such as APG II and APG III) have expanded it to 11. 

==Biogeography==
The core Asterales are Stylidiaceae genera), APA clade (Alseuosmiaceae, Phellinaceae and Argophyllaceae (7 genera) and MGCA clade (Menyanthaceae, Goodeniaceae, Calyceraceae - total 20 genera), and Asteraceae (1600 genera). Other Asterales are Rousseaceae (four genera), Campanulaceae (84 genera) and Pentaphragmataceae (one genus).

All Asterales families are represented in the Southern Hemisphere; however, Asteraceae and Campanulaceae are cosmopolitan and Menyanthaceae nearly so. J.Lundberg 2009 Asteraceae and relationships within Asterales, Chapter 10 of Systematics, Evolution, and Biogeography of Compositae. IAPT, Austria, p.159 

==Evolution==
Although most extant species of Asteraceae are herbaceous, the examination of the basal members in the family suggests that the common ancestor of the family was an arborescent plant, a tree or shrub, perhaps adapted to dry conditions, radiating from South America. Less can be said about the Asterales themselves with certainty, although since several families in Asterales contain trees, the ancestral member is most likely to have been a tree or shrub.

Because all clades are represented in the southern hemisphere but many not in the northern hemisphere, it is natural to conjecture that there is a common southern origin to them. Asterales are angiosperms, flowering plants that appeared about 140 million years ago. The Asterales order probably originated in the Cretaceous (145  66 Mya) on the supercontinent Gondwana which broke up from 184  80 Mya, forming the area that is now Australia, South America, Africa, India and Antarctica.

Asterales contain about 14% of eudicot diversity. From an analysis of relationships and diversities within the Asterales and with their superorders, estimates of the age of the beginning of the Asterales have been made, which range from 116 Mya to 82Mya. p. 7 However few fossils have been found, of the Menyanthaceae-Asteraceae clade in the Oligocene, about 29 Mya.

Fossil evidence of the Asterales is rare and belongs to rather recent epochs, so the precise estimation of the order's age is quite difficult. An Oligocene (34  23 Mya) pollen is known for Asteraceae and Goodeniaceae, and seeds from Oligocene and Miocene (23  5.3 Mya) are known for Menyanthaceae and Campanulaceae respectively. (Bremer and Gustafsson, 1997)

==Economic importance==
The Asterales, by dint of being a super-set of the family Asteraceae, include some species grown for food, including the sunflower (Helianthus annuus), lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and chicory (Cichorium). Compositdb: A Brief Overview of the Compositae
http://compositdb.ucdavis.edu/compositae_overview.php Many spices and medicinal herbs are also present.

Asterales are common plants and have many known uses. For example, Pyrethrum (refers to several Old World plants of the genus Chrysanthemum) is a natural insecticide with minimal environmental impact. Wormwood, a genus that includes the sagebrush, is used as a source of flavoring for absinthe, a bitter classical liquor of European origin.
Of horticultural importance are many of the Asteraceae (e. g. chrysanthemum) and Campanulaceae.

Despite the large number of species in order Asterales, they do not compare in economic benefit for mankind to the Poales or to the Fabaceae. Furthermore, www.invasive.org notes 838 invasive plant species in the Asterales, all members of the Asteraceae.

==References==

* K. Bremer, M. H. G. Gustafsson (1997). East Gondwana ancestry of the sunflower alliance of families. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 94, 9188-9190. (Available online: Abstract | Full text (HTML) | Full text (PDF))
* W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue (2002). Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition. pp. 476486 (Asterales). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. ISBN 0-87893-403-0.
* J. Lindley (1833). Nixus Plantarum, 20. Londini.
* Smissen, R. D. (December 2002). Asterales (Sunflower). In: Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. Nature Publishing Group, London. (Available online: DOI | ELS site)
* "Asterales (plant Order) -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia." Encyclopedia - Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Web. 19 Jan. 2012. .

*"Asterales - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary." Dictionary and Thesaurus - Merriam-Webster Online. Web. 19 Jan. 2012. .
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolutionary_history_of_plants Background information on this field

* http://www.mobot.org/mobot/research/apweb/ has detailed maps of locations of each family in the Asterales, and botanical and biochemical information relating to the evolution and relationships of the families in the order

 


[[Asteroid]]

253 Mathilde, a C-type asteroid measuring about 50 km across, covered in craters half that size. Photograph taken in 1997 by the NEAR Shoemaker probe.

Asteroids are minor planets, especially those of the inner Solar System. The larger ones have also been called planetoids. These terms have historically been applied to any astronomical object orbiting the Sun that did not show the disk of a planet and was not observed to have the characteristics of an active comet, but as minor planets in the outer Solar System were discovered, their volatile-based surfaces were found to resemble comets more closely and so were often distinguished from traditional asteroids. Thus the term asteroid has come increasingly to refer specifically to the small bodies of the inner Solar System out to the orbit of Jupiter. They are grouped with the outer bodiescentaurs, Neptune trojans, and trans-Neptunian objectsas minor planets, which is the term preferred in astronomical circles. Asimov, Isaac, and Dole, Stephen H. Planets for Man (New York: Random House, 1964), p.43. In this article the term "asteroid" refers to the minor planets of the inner Solar System.

There are millions of asteroids, many thought to be the shattered remnants of planetesimals, bodies within the young Sun's solar nebula that never grew large enough to become planets. The large majority of known asteroids orbit in the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, or are co-orbital with Jupiter (the Jupiter Trojans). However, other orbital families exist with significant populations, including the near-Earth asteroids. Individual asteroids are classified by their characteristic spectra, with the majority falling into three main groups: C-type, S-type, and M-type. These were named after and are generally identified with carbon-rich, stony, and metallic compositions, respectively.

Only one asteroid, 4 Vesta, which has a relatively reflective surface, is normally visible to the naked eye, and this only in very dark skies when it is favorably positioned. Rarely, small asteroids passing close to Earth may be visible to the naked eye for a short time. Closest Flyby of Large Asteroid to be Naked-Eye Visible, Space.com, 4 February 2005 As of September 2013, the Minor Planet Center had data on more than one million objects in the inner and outer Solar System, of which 625,000 had enough information to be given numbered designations. Provisional Designations, Minor Planet Center, 20 September 2013 

On 22 January 2014, ESA scientists reported the detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt. The detection was made by using the far-infrared abilities of the Herschel Space Observatory. The finding is unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to "sprout jets and plumes". According to one of the scientists, "The lines are becoming more and more blurred between comets and asteroids." 

== Naming ==

2013 EC, shown here in radar images, has a provisional designation
A newly discovered asteroid is given a provisional designation (such as ) consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code indicating the half-month of discovery and the sequence within that half-month. Once an asteroid's orbit has been confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g. 433 Eros). The formal naming convention uses parentheses around the number (e.g. (433) Eros), but dropping the parentheses is quite common. Informally, it is common to drop the number altogether, or to drop it after the first mention when a name is repeated in running text.

=== Symbols ===

The first asteroids to be discovered were assigned iconic symbols like the ones traditionally used to designate the planets. By 1855 there were two dozen asteroid symbols, which often occurred in multiple variants. 

 Asteroid Symbol Year 
 1 Ceres Old planetary symbol of Ceres Variant symbol of Ceres Other sickle variant symbol of Ceres Ceres' scythe, reversed to double as the letter C 1801 
 2 Pallas Old symbol of Pallas Variant symbol of Pallas Athena's (Pallas') spear 1801 
 3 Juno Old symbol of Juno Other symbol of Juno x20px A star mounted on a scepter, for Juno, the Queen of Heaven 1804 
 4 Vesta Modern astrological symbol of Vesta Old symbol of Vesta Old planetary symbol of Vesta x20px The altar and sacred fire of Vesta 1807 
 5 Astraea x20px x20px A scale, or an inverted anchor, symbols of justice 1845 
 6 Hebe x20px Hebe's cup 1847 
 7 Iris x20px A rainbow (iris) and a star 1847 
 8 Flora x20px A flower (flora) (specifically the Rose of England) 1847 
 9 Metis x20px The eye of wisdom and a star 1848 
 10 Hygiea x20px x20px Hygiea's serpent and a star, or the Rod of Asclepius 1849 
 11 Parthenope x20px x20px A harp, or a fish and a star; symbols of the sirens 1850 
 12 Victoria x20px The laurels of victory and a star 1850 
 13 Egeria Astronomical symbol of 13 Egeria A shield, symbol of Egeria's protection, and a star 1850 
 14 Irene x30px A dove carrying an olive branch (symbol of irene 'peace') with a star on its head, or an olive branch, a flag of truce, and a star 1851 
 15 Eunomia x20px A heart, symbol of good order (eunomia), and a star 1851 
 16 Psyche x20px A butterfly's wing, symbol of the soul (psyche), and a star 1852 
 17 Thetis x20px A dolphin, symbol of Thetis, and a star 1852 
 18 Melpomene x20px The dagger of Melpomene, and a star 1852 
 19 Fortuna x20px The wheel of fortune and a star 1852 
 26 Proserpina x20px Proserpina's pomegranate 1853 
 28 Bellona x20px Bellona's whip and lance 1854 
 29 Amphitrite x20px The shell of Amphitrite and a star 1854 
 35 Leukothea x20px A lighthouse beacon, symbol of Leucothea 1855 
 37 Fides x20px The cross of faith (fides) 1855 

In 1851, after the fifteenth asteroid (Eunomia) had been discovered, Johann Franz Encke made a major change in the upcoming 1854 edition of the Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch (BAJ, Berlin Astronomical Yearbook). He introduced a disk (circle), a traditional symbol for a star, as the generic symbol for an asteroid. The circle was then numbered in order of discovery to indicate a specific asteroid (although he assigned  to the fifth, Astraea, while continuing to designate the first four only with their existing iconic symbols). The numbered-circle convention was quickly adopted by astronomers, and the next asteroid to be discovered (16 Psyche, in 1852) was the first to be designated in that way at the time of its discovery. However, Psyche was given an iconic symbol as well, as were a few other asteroids discovered over the next few years. (See chart above.) 20 Massalia was the first asteroid that was not assigned an iconic symbol, and no iconic symbols were created after the 1855 discovery of 37 Fides. Except for Pluto and, in the astrological community, for a few outer bodies such as 2060 Chiron That year Astraea's number was increased to , but the first four asteroids, Ceres to Vesta, were not listed by their numbers until the 1867 edition. The circle was soon abbreviated to a pair of parentheses, which were easier to typeset and sometimes omitted altogether over the next few decades, leading to the modern convention. 

== Discovery ==
243 Ida and its moon Dactyl. Dactyl is the first satellite of an asteroid to be discovered.
The first asteroid to be discovered, Ceres, was found in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi, and was originally considered to be a new planet. Ceres is the largest asteroid and is now classified as a dwarf planet. All other asteroids are now classified as small Solar System bodies along with comets, centaurs, and the smaller trans-Neptunian objects. This was followed by the discovery of other similar bodies, which, with the equipment of the time, appeared to be points of light, like stars, showing little or no planetary disc, though readily distinguishable from stars due to their apparent motions. This prompted the astronomer Sir William Herschel to propose the term "asteroid", coined in Greek as  asteroeids 'star-like, star-shaped', from Ancient Greek astr 'star, planet'. In the early second half of the nineteenth century, the terms "asteroid" and "planet" (not always qualified as "minor") were still used interchangeably; for example, the Annual of Scientific Discovery for 1871, page 316, reads "Professor J. Watson has been awarded by the Paris Academy of Sciences, the astronomical prize, Lalande foundation, for the discovery of eight new asteroids in one year. The planet Lydia (No. 110), discovered by M. Borelly at the Marseilles Observatory M. Borelly had previously discovered two planets bearing the numbers 91 and 99 in the system of asteroids revolving between Mars and Jupiter".

=== Historical methods ===
Asteroid discovery methods have dramatically improved over the past two centuries.

In the last years of the 18th century, Baron Franz Xaver von Zach organized a group of 24 astronomers to search the sky for the missing planet predicted at about 2.8 AU from the Sun by the Titius-Bode law, partly because of the discovery, by Sir William Herschel in 1781, of the planet Uranus at the distance predicted by the law. This task required that hand-drawn sky charts be prepared for all stars in the zodiacal band down to an agreed-upon limit of faintness. On subsequent nights, the sky would be charted again and any moving object would, hopefully, be spotted. The expected motion of the missing planet was about 30 seconds of arc per hour, readily discernible by observers.
First asteroid image (Ceres and Vesta) from Mars - viewed by Curiosity (20 April 2014).
The first object, Ceres, was not discovered by a member of the group, but rather by accident in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi, director of the observatory of Palermo in Sicily. He discovered a new star-like object in Taurus and followed the displacement of this object during several nights. His colleague, Carl Friedrich Gauss, used these observations to find the exact distance from this unknown object to the Earth. Gauss' calculations placed the object between the planets Mars and Jupiter. Piazzi named it after Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture.

Three other asteroids (2 Pallas, 3 Juno, and 4 Vesta) were discovered over the next few years, with Vesta found in 1807. After eight more years of fruitless searches, most astronomers assumed that there were no more and abandoned any further searches.

However, Karl Ludwig Hencke persisted, and began searching for more asteroids in 1830. Fifteen years later, he found 5 Astraea, the first new asteroid in 38 years. He also found 6 Hebe less than two years later. After this, other astronomers joined in the search and at least one new asteroid was discovered every year after that (except the wartime year 1945). Notable asteroid hunters of this early era were J. R. Hind, Annibale de Gasparis, Robert Luther, H. M. S. Goldschmidt, Jean Chacornac, James Ferguson, Norman Robert Pogson, E. W. Tempel, J. C. Watson, C. H. F. Peters, A. Borrelly, J. Palisa, the Henry brothers and Auguste Charlois.

In 1891, Max Wolf pioneered the use of astrophotography to detect asteroids, which appeared as short streaks on long-exposure photographic plates. This dramatically increased the rate of detection compared with earlier visual methods: Wolf alone discovered 248 asteroids, beginning with 323 Brucia, whereas only slightly more than 300 had been discovered up to that point. It was known that there were many more, but most astronomers did not bother with them, calling them "vermin of the skies", a phrase variously attributed to Eduard Suess and Edmund Weiss. Even a century later, only a few thousand asteroids were identified, numbered and named.

=== Manual methods of the 1900s and modern reporting ===
Until 1998, asteroids were discovered by a four-step process. First, a region of the sky was photographed by a wide-field telescope, or astrograph. Pairs of photographs were taken, typically one hour apart. Multiple pairs could be taken over a series of days. Second, the two films or plates of the same region were viewed under a stereoscope. Any body in orbit around the Sun would move slightly between the pair of films. Under the stereoscope, the image of the body would seem to float slightly above the background of stars. Third, once a moving body was identified, its location would be measured precisely using a digitizing microscope. The location would be measured relative to known star locations. 

These first three steps do not constitute asteroid discovery: the observer has only found an apparition, which gets a provisional designation, made up of the year of discovery, a letter representing the half-month of discovery, and finally a letter and a number indicating the discovery's sequential number (example: ).

The last step of discovery is to send the locations and time of observations to the Minor Planet Center, where computer programs determine whether an apparition ties together earlier apparitions into a single orbit. If so, the object receives a catalogue number and the observer of the first apparition with a calculated orbit is declared the discoverer, and granted the honor of naming the object subject to the approval of the International Astronomical Union.

=== Computerized methods ===

2004 FH is the center dot being followed by the sequence; the object that flashes by during the clip is an artificial satellite.
There is increasing interest in identifying asteroids whose orbits cross Earth's, and that could, given enough time, collide with Earth (see Earth-crosser asteroids). The three most important groups of near-Earth asteroids are the Apollos, Amors, and Atens. Various asteroid deflection strategies have been proposed, as early as the 1960s.

The near-Earth asteroid 433 Eros had been discovered as long ago as 1898, and the 1930s brought a flurry of similar objects. In order of discovery, these were: 1221 Amor, 1862 Apollo, 2101 Adonis, and finally 69230 Hermes, which approached within 0.005 AU of the Earth in 1937. Astronomers began to realize the possibilities of Earth impact.

Two events in later decades increased the alarm: the increasing acceptance of Walter Alvarez' hypothesis that an impact event resulted in the CretaceousPaleogene extinction, and the 1994 observation of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashing into Jupiter. The U.S. military also declassified the information that its military satellites, built to detect nuclear explosions, had detected hundreds of upper-atmosphere impacts by objects ranging from one to 10 metres across.

All these considerations helped spur the launch of highly efficient automated systems that consist of Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) cameras and computers directly connected to telescopes. As of spring 2011, it was estimated that 89% to 96% of near-Earth asteroids one kilometer or larger in diameter had been discovered. NEO Discovery Statistics from Mainzer et al. (2011) A list of teams using such automated systems includes: 
* The Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) team
* The Near-Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT) team
* Spacewatch
* The Lowell Observatory Near-Earth-Object Search (LONEOS) team
* The Catalina Sky Survey (CSS)
* The Campo Imperatore Near-Earth Object Survey (CINEOS) team
* The Japanese Spaceguard Association
* The Asiago-DLR Asteroid Survey (ADAS)

The LINEAR system alone has discovered 138,393 asteroids, as of 20 September 2013. Among all the automated systems, 4711 near-Earth asteroids have been discovered including over 600 more than 1 km in diameter.

== Terminology == 

Traditionally, small bodies orbiting the Sun were classified as asteroids, comets or meteoroids, with anything smaller than ten metres across being called a meteoroid. Czechowski L., Adv. Space Res., 38, 2006,2054-2059. DOI 10.1016/j.astr.2006.09.004 The term "asteroid" is ill-defined. It never had a formal definition, with the broader term minor planet being preferred by the International Astronomical Union from 1853 on. In 2006, the term "small Solar System body" was introduced to cover both most minor planets and comets. The definition of "small Solar System bodies" says that they "include most of the Solar System asteroids, most trans-Neptunian objects, comets, and other small bodies". The Final IAU Resolution on the definition of "planet" ready for voting (IAU) Other languages prefer "planetoid" (Greek for "planet-like"), and this term is occasionally used in English for larger minor planets such as the dwarf planets. The word "planetesimal" has a similar meaning, but refers specifically to the small building blocks of the planets that existed when the Solar System was forming. The term "planetule" was coined by the geologist William Daniel Conybeare to describe minor planets, but is not in common use. The three largest objects in the asteroid belt, Ceres, 2 Pallas, and 4 Vesta, grew to the stage of protoplanets. Ceres is a dwarf planet, the only one in the inner Solar System.

When found, asteroids were seen as a class of objects distinct from comets, and there was no unified term for the two until "small Solar System body" was coined in 2006. The main difference between an asteroid and a comet is that a comet shows a coma due to sublimation of near surface ices by solar radiation. A few objects have ended up being dual-listed because they were first classified as minor planets but later showed evidence of cometary activity. Conversely, some (perhaps all) comets are eventually depleted of their surface volatile ices and become asteroids. A further distinction is that comets typically have more eccentric orbits than most asteroids; most "asteroids" with notably eccentric orbits are probably dormant or extinct comets. Weissman, Paul R., William F. Bottke, Jr., and Harold F. Levinson. "Evolution of Comets into Asteroids." Southwest Research Institute, Planetary Science Directorate. 2002. Web Retrieved 3 August 2010 

For almost two centuries, from the discovery of Ceres in 1801 until the discovery of the first centaur, 2060 Chiron, in 1977, all known asteroids spent most of their time at or within the orbit of Jupiter, though a few such as 944 Hidalgo ventured far beyond Jupiter for part of their orbit. When astronomers started finding more small bodies that permanently resided further out than Jupiter, now called centaurs, they numbered them among the traditional asteroids, though there was debate over whether they should be considered as asteroids or as a new type of object. Then, when the first trans-Neptunian object, 1992 QB1, was discovered in 1992, and especially when large numbers of similar objects started turning up, new terms were invented to sidestep the issue: Kuiper-belt object, trans-Neptunian object, scattered-disc object, and so on. These inhabit the cold outer reaches of the Solar System where ices remain solid and comet-like bodies are not expected to exhibit much cometary activity; if centaurs or trans-Neptunian objects were to venture close to the Sun, their volatile ices would sublimate, and traditional approaches would classify them as comets and not asteroids.

The innermost of these are the Kuiper-belt objects, called "objects" partly to avoid the need to classify them as asteroids or comets. "Are Kuiper Belt Objects asteroids?", "Ask an astronomer", Cornell University They are believed to be predominantly comet-like in composition, though some may be more akin to asteroids. "Asteroids and Comets", NASA website Furthermore, most do not have the highly eccentric orbits associated with comets, and the ones so far discovered are larger than traditional comet nuclei. (The much more distant Oort cloud is hypothesized to be the main reservoir of dormant comets.) Other recent observations, such as the analysis of the cometary dust collected by the Stardust probe, are increasingly blurring the distinction between comets and asteroids, "Comet Dust Seems More Asteroidy" Scientific American, 25 January 2008 suggesting "a continuum between asteroids and comets" rather than a sharp dividing line. "Comet samples are surprisingly asteroid-like", New Scientist, 24 January 2008 

The minor planets beyond Jupiter's orbit are sometimes also called "asteroids", especially in popular presentations. For instance, a joint NASAJPL public-outreach website states:
 
However, it is becoming increasingly common for the term "asteroid" to be restricted to minor planets of the inner Solar System. Therefore, this article will restrict itself for the most part to the classical asteroids: objects of the asteroid belt, Jupiter trojans, and near-Earth objects.

When the IAU introduced the class small Solar System bodies in 2006 to include most objects previously classified as minor planets and comets, they created the class of dwarf planets for the largest minor planetsthose that have enough mass to have become ellipsoidal under their own gravity. According to the IAU, "the term 'minor planet' may still be used, but generally the term 'Small Solar System Body' will be preferred." Questions and Answers on Planets, IAU Currently only the largest object in the asteroid belt, Ceres, at about 950 km across, has been placed in the dwarf planet category, although there are several large asteroids (Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea) that may be classified as dwarf planets when their shapes are better known. "Three new planets may join solar system", New Scientist, 16 August 2006 

== Formation ==
It is believed that planetesimals in the asteroid belt evolved much like the rest of the solar nebula until Jupiter neared its current mass, at which point excitation from orbital resonances with Jupiter ejected over 99% of planetesimals in the belt. Simulations and a discontinuity in spin rate and spectral properties suggest that asteroids larger than approximately 120 km in diameter accreted during that early era, whereas smaller bodies are fragments from collisions between asteroids during or after the Jovian disruption. Ceres and Vesta grew large enough to melt and differentiate, with heavy metallic elements sinking to the core, leaving rocky minerals in the crust. 

In the Nice model, many Kuiper-belt objects are captured in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU. Most were later ejected by Jupiter, but those that remained may be the D-type asteroids, and possibly include Ceres. William B. McKinnon, 2008, "On The Possibility Of Large KBOs Being Injected Into The Outer Asteroid Belt". American Astronomical Society, DPS meeting #40, #38.03 

== Distribution within the Solar System ==

The asteroid belt (white) and the Trojan asteroids (green)

Various dynamical groups of asteroids have been discovered orbiting in the inner Solar System. Their orbits are perturbed by the gravity of other bodies in the Solar System and by the Yarkovsky effect. Significant populations include:

=== Asteroid belt ===

The majority of known asteroids orbit within the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, generally in relatively low-eccentricity (i.e. not very elongated) orbits. This belt is now estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than 1 km in diameter, 

 and millions of smaller ones. These asteroids may be remnants of the protoplanetary disk, and in this region the accretion of planetesimals into planets during the formative period of the Solar System was prevented by large gravitational perturbations by Jupiter.

=== Trojans ===

Trojan asteroids are a population that share an orbit with a larger planet or moon, but do not collide with it because they orbit in one of the two Lagrangian points of stability, L4 and L5, which lie 60 ahead of and behind the larger body.

The most significant population of Trojan asteroids are the Jupiter Trojans. Although fewer Jupiter Trojans have been discovered as of 2010, it is thought that they are as numerous as the asteroids in the asteroid belt.

A couple of trojans have also been found orbiting with Mars. Neptune also has a few known trojans, and these are thought to actually be much more numerous than the Jovian trojans. However, they are often included in the trans-Neptunian population rather than counted with the asteroids. 

=== Near-Earth asteroids ===

Near-Earth asteroids, or NEAs, are asteroids that have orbits that pass close to that of Earth. Asteroids that actually cross the Earth's orbital path are known as Earth-crossers. As of May 2010, 7,075 near-Earth asteroids are known and the number over one kilometre in diameter is estimated to be 5001,000.

== Characteristics ==
=== Size distribution ===

Asteroids vary greatly in size, from almost for the largest down to rocks just tens of metres across. Below , these rocks are by convention considered to be meteoroids. The three largest are very much like miniature planets: they are roughly spherical, have at least partly differentiated interiors, and are thought to be surviving protoplanets. The vast majority, however, are much smaller and are irregularly shaped; they are thought to be either surviving planetesimals or fragments of larger bodies.

The dwarf planet Ceres is by far the largest asteroid, with a diameter of 975 km. The next largest are 2 Pallas and 4 Vesta, both with diameters of just over 500 km. Vesta is the only main-belt asteroid that can, on occasion, be visible to the naked eye. On some rare occasions, a near-Earth asteroid may briefly become visible without technical aid; see 99942 Apophis.

The mass of all the objects of the asteroid belt, lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, is estimated to be about 2.83.2 kg, or about 4% of the mass of the Moon. Of this, Ceres comprises , a third of the total. Adding in the next three most massive objects, Vesta (9%), Pallas (7%), and Hygiea (3%), brings this figure up to 51%; whereas the three after that, 511 Davida (1.2%), 704 Interamnia (1.0%), and 52 Europa (0.9%), only add another 3% to the total mass. The number of asteroids then increases rapidly as their individual masses decrease.

The number of asteroids decreases markedly with size. Although this generally follows a power law, there are 'bumps' at and , where more asteroids than expected from a logarithmic distribution are found. Davis 2002, "Asteroids III", cited by eljko Ivezi 

+Approximate number of asteroids N larger than diameter D 
 D 100 m 300 m 500 m 1 km 3 km 5 km 10 km 30 km 50 km 100 km 200 km 300 km 500 km 900 km 
 N ~25,000,000 4,000,000 2,000,000 750,000 200,000 90,000 10,000 1,100 600 200 30 5 3 1 

====Largest asteroids====

of asteroids vs main belt.png|thumb|300px|right|The relative masses of the twelve largest asteroids known, [http://home.earthlink.net/~jimbaer1/astmass.txt "Recent Asteroid Mass Determinations". Maintained by Jim Baer. Last updated 2010-12-12. Retrieved 2 September 2011. The values of Juno and Herculina may be off by as much as 16%, and Euphrosyne by a third. The order of the lower eight may change as better data is acquired, but the values do not overlap with any known asteroid outside these twelve. compared to the remaining mass of the asteroid belt. 
 

 

]]
Although their location in the asteroid belt excludes them from planet status, the four largest objects, Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea, are remnant protoplanets that share many characteristics common to planets, and are atypical compared to the majority of "potato"-shaped asteroids.

Ceres is the only asteroid with a fully ellipsoidal shape and hence dwarf planet. Vesta hasaside from the large crater at its southern pole, Rheasilviaan ellipsoidal shape. Ceres has a much higher absolute magnitude than the other asteroids, of around 3.32, and may possess a surface layer of ice. Like the planets, Ceres is differentiated: it has a crust, a mantle and a core. Vesta, too, has a differentiated interior, though it formed inside the Solar System's frost line, and so is devoid of water; 
 its composition is mainly of basaltic rock such as olivine. Pallas is unusual in that, like Uranus, it rotates on its side, with its axis of rotation tilted at high angles to its orbital plane. Its composition is similar to that of Ceres: high in carbon and silicon, and perhaps partially differentiated. Hygiea is a carbonaceous asteroid and, unlike the other largest asteroids, lies relatively close to the plane of the ecliptic. 
 

 Attributes of protoplanetary asteroids 
 Name Orbitalradius (AU) Orbital period(years) Inclination to ecliptic Orbitaleccentricity Diameter(km) Diameter(% of Moon) Mass( kg) Mass(% of Ceres) Density g/cm3 Rotationperiod(hr) Axial tilt Surfacetemperature 
 Vesta 2.36 3.63 7.1 0.089 573557446(mean 525) 15% 260 28% 3.44  0.12 5.34 29 85270 K 
 Ceres 2.77 4.60 10.6 0.079 975975909(mean 952) 28% 940 100% 2.12  0.04 9.07  3 167 K 
 Pallas 2.77 4.62 34.8 0.231 580555500(mean 545) 16% 210 22% 2.71  0.11 7.81  80 164 K 
 Hygiea 3.14 5.56 3.8 0.117 530407370(mean 430) 12% 87 9% 2.76  1.2 27.6  60 164 K 

===Rotation===
Measurements of the rotation rates of large asteroids in the asteroid belt show that there is an upper limit. No asteroid with a diameter larger than 100 meters has a rotation period smaller than 2.2 hours. For asteroids rotating faster than approximately this rate, the inertia at the surface is greater than the gravitational force, so any loose surface material would be flung out. However, a solid object should be able to rotate much more rapidly. This suggests that most asteroids with a diameter over 100 meters are rubble piles formed through accumulation of debris after collisions between asteroids. 

=== Composition ===
Cratered terrain on 4 Vesta
The physical composition of asteroids is varied and in most cases poorly understood. Ceres appears to be composed of a rocky core covered by an icy mantle, where Vesta is thought to have a nickel-iron core, olivine mantle, and basaltic crust. HubbleSite  NewsCenter  Asteroid or Mini-Planet? Hubble Maps the Ancient Surface of Vesta (04/19/1995)  Release Images 10 Hygiea, however, which appears to have a uniformly primitive composition of carbonaceous chondrite, is thought to be the largest undifferentiated asteroid. Most of the smaller asteroids are thought to be piles of rubble held together loosely by gravity, though the largest are probably solid. Some asteroids have moons or are co-orbiting binaries: Rubble piles, moons, binaries, and scattered asteroid families are believed to be the results of collisions that disrupted a parent asteroid.

Asteroids contain traces of amino acids and other organic compounds, and some speculate that asteroid impacts may have seeded the early Earth with the chemicals necessary to initiate life, or may have even brought life itself to Earth. (See also panspermia.) Life is Sweet: Sugar-Packing Asteroids May Have Seeded Life on Earth , Space.com, 19 December 2001 In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may have been formed on asteroids and comets in outer space. 

Artist's view of a watery asteroid in the white-dwarf system GD 61. 
Composition is calculated from three primary sources: albedo, surface spectrum, and density. The last can only be determined accurately by observing the orbits of moons the asteroid might have. So far, every asteroid with moons has turned out to be a rubble pile, a loose conglomeration of rock and metal that may be half empty space by volume. The investigated asteroids are as large as 280 km in diameter, and include 121 Hermione (268186183 km), and 87 Sylvia (384262232 km). Only half a dozen asteroids are larger than 87 Sylvia, though none of them have moons; however, some smaller asteroids are thought to be more massive, suggesting they may not have been disrupted, and indeed 511 Davida, the same size as Sylvia to within measurement error, is estimated to be two and a half times as massive, though this is highly uncertain. The fact that such large asteroids as Sylvia can be rubble piles, presumably due to disruptive impacts, has important consequences for the formation of the Solar system: Computer simulations of collisions involving solid bodies show them destroying each other as often as merging, but colliding rubble piles are more likely to merge. This means that the cores of the planets could have formed relatively quickly. Marchis, Descamps, et al. Icarus, February 2011 

On 7 October 2009, the presence of water ice was confirmed on the surface of 24 Themis using NASAs Infrared Telescope Facility. The surface of the asteroid appears completely covered in ice. As this ice layer is sublimated, it may be getting replenished by a reservoir of ice under the surface. Organic compounds were also detected on the surface. Scientists hypothesize that some of the first water brought to Earth was delivered by asteroid impacts after the collision that produced the Moon. The presence of ice on 24 Themis supports this theory. 

In October 2013, water was detected on an extrasolar body for the first time, on an asteroid orbiting the white dwarf star GD 61. 

===Surface features===
Most asteroids outside the big four (Ceres, Pallas, Vesta, and Hygiea) are likely to be broadly similar in appearance, if irregular in shape. 50-km (31-mi) 253 Mathilde is a rubble pile saturated with craters with diameters the size of the asteroid's radius, and Earth-based observations of 300-km (186-mi) 511 Davida, one of the largest asteroids after the big four, reveal a similarly angular profile, suggesting it is also saturated with radius-size craters. A.R. Conrad et al. 2007. "Direct measurement of the size, shape, and pole of 511 Davida with Keck AO in a single night", Icarus, Medium-sized asteroids such as Mathilde and 243 Ida that have been observed up close also reveal a deep regolith covering the surface. Of the big four, Pallas and Hygiea are practically unknown. Vesta has compression fractures encircling a radius-size crater at its south pole but is otherwise a spheroid. Ceres seems quite different in the glimpses Hubble has provided, with surface features that are unlikely to be due to simple craters and impact basins, but details will not be known until Dawn arrives in 2015.

===Color===
Asteroids become darker and redder with age due to space weathering. However evidence suggests most of the color change occurs rapidly, in the first hundred thousands years, limiting the usefulness of spectral measurement for determining the age of asteroids. 

== Classification ==
Asteroids are commonly classified according to two criteria: the characteristics of their orbits, and features of their reflectance spectrum.

=== Orbital classification ===

Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics. Apart from the broadest divisions, it is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered. Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are tighter and result from the catastrophic break-up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past. Families have only been recognized within the asteroid belt. They were first recognized by Kiyotsugu Hirayama in 1918 and are often called Hirayama families in his honor.

About 3035% of the bodies in the asteroid belt belong to dynamical families each thought to have a common origin in a past collision between asteroids. A family has also been associated with the plutoid dwarf planet .

==== Quasi-satellites and horseshoe objects ====
Some asteroids have unusual horseshoe orbits that are co-orbital with the Earth or some other planet. Examples are 3753 Cruithne and . The first instance of this type of orbital arrangement was discovered between Saturn's moons Epimetheus and Janus.

Sometimes these horseshoe objects temporarily become quasi-satellites for a few decades or a few hundred years, before returning to their earlier status. Both Earth and Venus are known to have quasi-satellites.

Such objects, if associated with Earth or Venus or even hypothetically Mercury, are a special class of Aten asteroids. However, such objects could be associated with outer planets as well.

=== Spectral classification ===
This picture of 433 Eros shows the view looking from one end of the asteroid across the gouge on its underside and toward the opposite end. Features as small as 35 m across can be seen.

In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on color, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by Clark R. Chapman, David Morrison, and Ben Zellner. These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroid's surface material. The original classification system had three categories: C-types for dark carbonaceous objects (75% of known asteroids), S-types for stony (silicaceous) objects (17% of known asteroids) and U for those that did not fit into either C or S. This classification has since been expanded to include many other asteroid types. The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied.

The two most widely used taxonomies now used are the Tholen classification and SMASS classification. The former was proposed in 1984 by David J. Tholen, and was based on data collected from an eight-color asteroid survey performed in the 1980s. This resulted in 14 asteroid categories. In 2002, the Small Main-Belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey resulted in a modified version of the Tholen taxonomy with 24 different types. Both systems have three broad categories of C, S, and X asteroids, where X consists of mostly metallic asteroids, such as the M-type. There are also several smaller classes. 

The proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type; some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.

==== Problems ====
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroid's composition. However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and a variety of classifications are in use. This has led to significant confusion. Although asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of similar materials.

== Exploration ==

951 Gaspra is the first asteroid to be imaged in close-up (enhanced color).
Vesta, imaged by the Dawn spacecraft
Several views of 433 Eros in natural colour
Until the age of space travel, objects in the asteroid belt were merely pinpricks of light in even the largest telescopes and their shapes and terrain remained a mystery. The best modern ground-based telescopes and the Earth-orbiting Hubble Space Telescope can resolve a small amount of detail on the surfaces of the largest asteroids, but even these mostly remain little more than fuzzy blobs. Limited information about the shapes and compositions of asteroids can be inferred from their light curves (their variation in brightness as they rotate) and their spectral properties, and asteroid sizes can be estimated by timing the lengths of star occulations (when an asteroid passes directly in front of a star). Radar imaging can yield good information about asteroid shapes and orbital and rotational parameters, especially for near-Earth asteroids. In terms of delta-v and propellant requirements, NEOs are more easily accessible than the Moon. A Piloted Orion Flight to a Near-Earth Object: A Feasibility Study 

The first close-up photographs of asteroid-like objects were taken in 1971 when the Mariner 9 probe imaged Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, which are probably captured asteroids. These images revealed the irregular, potato-like shapes of most asteroids, as did later images from the Voyager probes of the small moons of the gas giants.

The first true asteroid to be photographed in close-up was 951 Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by 243 Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the Galileo probe en route to Jupiter.

The first dedicated asteroid probe was NEAR Shoemaker, which photographed 253 Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around 433 Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001.

Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft en route to other destinations include 9969 Braille (by Deep Space 1 in 1999), and 5535 Annefrank (by Stardust in 2002).

In September 2005, the Japanese Hayabusa probe started studying 25143 Itokawa in detail and was plagued with difficulties, but returned samples of its surface to earth on 13 June 2010.

The European Rosetta probe (launched in 2004) flew by 2867 teins in 2008 and 21 Lutetia, the second-largest asteroid visited to date, in 2010.

In September 2007, NASA launched the Dawn Mission, which orbited the protoplanet 4 Vesta from July 2011 to September 2012, and is planned to orbit 1 Ceres in 2015. 4 Vesta is the largest asteroid visited to date.

On 13 December 2012, China's lunar orbiter Chang'e 2 flew within 2 mi of the asteroid 4179 Toutatis on an extended mission.

The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) plans to launch around 2015 the improved Hayabusa 2 space probe and to return asteroid samples by 2020. Current target for the mission is the C-type asteroid .

In May 2011, NASA announced the OSIRIS-REx sample return mission to asteroid 1999 RQ36, and is expected to launch in 2016.

On 15 February 2013, an asteroid measuring approximately 18 m with a mass of about 9,100 tonnes (10,000 short tons) exploded over Chelyabinsk, Russia causing 1,500 injuries and damaging 7,000 buildings. Small samples of the rocky Chelyabinsk meteorite were quickly recovered and analyzed with a larger fragment found several months later.

In early 2013, NASA announced the planning stages of a mission to capture a near-Earth asteroid and move it into lunar orbit where it could possibly be visited by astronauts and later impacted into the Moon. NASA May Slam Captured Asteroid Into Moon (Eventually), space.com, Mike Wall, 30 September 2013 

It has been suggested that asteroids might be used as a source of materials that may be rare or exhausted on earth (asteroid mining), or materials for constructing space habitats (see Colonization of the asteroids). Materials that are heavy and expensive to launch from earth may someday be mined from asteroids and used for space manufacturing and construction.

== Fiction ==

Asteroids and the asteroid belt are a staple of science fiction stories. Asteroids play several potential roles in science fiction: as places human beings might colonize, resources for extracting minerals, hazards encountered by spaceships traveling between two other points, and as a threat to life on Earth by potential impact.

== See also ==

* Asteroid deflection strategies
* Atira asteroids, (Interior-Earth objects, asteroids with orbits fully within that of Earth).
* BOOTES (Burst Observer and OpticalTransient Exploring System)
* Category:Asteroids
* Category:Asteroid groups and families
* Category:Binary asteroids
* Centaur (minor planet)
* Dwarf planet
* Impact event
* List of asteroid close approaches to Earth
* List of asteroids named after people
* List of asteroids named after places
* List of minor planets
* List of notable asteroids
* Lost asteroid
* Marco Polo (spacecraft)
* Meanings of asteroid names
* Mesoplanet
* Minor planet
* Near-Earth object
* Near Earth Object Surveillance Satellite NEOsStat Canada's New Satellite
* Orion asteroid mission
* Pioneer 10 space probe
* Pronunciation of asteroid names
* Rosetta probe

== Notes ==
 

== References ==

== External links ==

* Asteroids@home (BOINC distributed computing project)

* Rocks from the Main Belt asteroids
* Alphabetical list of minor planet names (ASCII) (Minor Planet Center)
* Near Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT)
* Asteroids Page at NASA's Solar System Exploration
* Asteroid Simulator with Moon and Earth
* Alphabetical and numerical lists of minor planet names (Unicode) (Institute of Applied Astronomy)
* Future Asteroid Interception Research
* Near Earth Objects Dynamic Site
* Asteroids Dynamic Site Up-to-date osculating orbital elements and proper orbital elements University of Pisa, Italy.

* JPL small bodies database Current down-loadable ASCII table of orbit data and absolute magnitudes H for over 200000 asteroids, sorted by number. Caltech/JPL.
* Asteroid naming statistics
* Spaceguard UK
* Committee on Small Body Nomenclature
* List of minor planet orbital groupings and families from ProjectPluto
* Cunningham, Clifford, "Introduction to Asteroids: The Next Frontier", ISBN 0-943396-16-6
* James L. Hilton: When Did the Asteroids Become Minor Planets?
* Kirkwood, Daniel; Relations between the Motions of some of the Minor Planets (1874).
* Schmadel, L.D. (2003). Dictionary of Minor Planet Names. 5th ed. IAU/Springer-Verlag: Heidelberg.
* Asteroid articles in Planetary Science Research Discoveries
* Catalogue of the Solar System Small Bodies Orbital Evolution
* TECA Table of next close approaches to the Earth
* SAEL Small Asteroids Encounter List
* MBPL Minor Body Priority List
* PCEL Planetary Close Encounter List
* NEO MAP (Armagh Observatory)
* Information about near-Earth asteroids and their close approaches

 



[[Allocution]]

In the criminal procedure of some common law jurisdictions, an allocution or allocutus is a formal statement made to the court by the defendant who has been found guilty, prior to being sentenced.

An allows the defendant to explain why the sentence should be lenient.

In plea bargains, an allocution may be required of the defendant; the defendant explicitly admits specifically and in detail to what he or she did and for what reason, in exchange for a reduced sentence. In principle, it removes any doubt as to the exact nature of the defendant's guilt in the matter.

The term "allocution" is generally only in use in jurisdictions in the United States, though there are vaguely similar processes in other common law countries. In many other jurisdictions it is for the defense lawyer to mitigate on his client's behalf, and the defendant himself will rarely have the opportunity to speak. The right of victims to speak at sentencing is also sometimes referred to as allocution. 

==Specific jurisdictions==

===United States===
In most United States jurisdictions a defendant is allowed the opportunity to allocute&mdash;that is, explain himself&mdash;before sentence is passed. Some jurisdictions hold this as an absolute right, and in its absence, a sentence may potentially be overturned, with the result that a new sentencing hearing must be held. In the federal system, Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 32(i)(4) provides that the court must "address the defendant personally in order to permit the defendant to speak or present any information to mitigate the sentence." http://www.law.cornell.edu/rules/frcrmp/Rule32.htm The Federal Public Defender recommends that defendants speak in terms of how a lenient sentence will be sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the statutory directives set forth in . http://www.fd.org/pdf_lib/allocution%20pleading.pdf 

===Australia===
In Australia the term "allocutus" will be used. It will be used by the Clerk of Arraigns or another formal associate of the Court. It will generally be phrased as "Prisoner at the Bar, you have been found Guilty by a jury of your peers of the offense of XYZ. Do you have anything to say as to why the sentence of this Court should not now be passed upon you?". The defense counsel will then make a "plea in mitigation" (also called "submissions on penalty") wherein he or she will attempt to mitigate the relative seriousness of the offense and heavily refer to and rely upon the defendant's previous good character and good works (if any). In Australia, the right to make a plea in mitigation is absolute. If a judge or magistrate were to refuse to hear such a plea, or obviously fail to properly consider it, then the sentence would, without doubt, be overturned on appeal.

== See also ==
* Confession (legal)

==References==

==External links==



[[Affidavit]]

Vasil Levski's affidavit, 16 June 1872, Bucharest, Romania

An affidavit ( ) is a written sworn statement of fact voluntarily made by an affiant or deponent under an oath or affirmation administered by a person authorized to do so by law. Such statement is witnessed as to the authenticity of the affiant's signature by a taker of oaths, such as a notary public or commissioner of oaths. The name is Medieval Latin for he/she has declared upon oath. An affidavit is a type of verified statement or showing, or in other words, it contains a verification, meaning it is under oath or penalty of perjury, and this serves as evidence to its veracity and is required for court proceedings.
*To obtain a declaration on a legal document, such as an application for voter registration, that the information provided by the applicant is truthful to the best of the applicant's knowledge. If, after signing such a declaration, the information is found to be deliberately untrue with the intent to deceive, the applicant may face perjury charges.

Affidavits may be written in the first or third person, depending on who drafted the document. If in the first person, the document's component parts are:
* a commencement which identifies the "affiant of truth", Legal Dictionary retrieved on 11 October 2012 generally stating that everything is true, under penalty of perjury, fine, or imprisonment;
* an attestation clause, usually a jurat, at the end certifying the affiant made oath and the date; and
* signatures of the author and witness.

If an affidavit is notarized or authenticated, it will also include a caption with a venue and title in reference to judicial proceedings. In some cases, an introductory clause, called a preamble, is added attesting that the affiant personally appeared before the authenticating authority.

==India==
In Indian Law although an affidavit may be taken as proof of the facts stated therein, the Courts have no jurisdiction to admit evidence by way of affidavit. Affidavit is treated as Evidence within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act. However, it was held by the Supreme Court that an affidavit can be used as an evidence only if the Court so orders for sufficient reasons. Therefore an affidavit cannot ordinarily be used as evidence in absence of specific order of the Court.

==Ireland==
Affidavits are made in a similar way as to England and Wales, although "make oath" is sometimes omitted. A declaration may be substituted for an affidavit in most cases for those opposed to swearing oaths. The person making the affidavit is known as the deponent but does not sign the affidavit. The affidavit concludes in the standard format "sworn (declared) before me, of commissioner for oaths/solicitor, a commissioner for oaths (solicitor), on the at in the county/city of , and I know the deponent (declarant)", and it is signed and stamped by the commissioner for oaths...

==United States==
In American jurisprudence, under the rules for hearsay, admission of an unsupported affidavit as evidence is unusual (especially if the affiant is not available for cross-examination) with regard to material facts which may be dispositive of the matter at bar. Affidavits from persons who are dead or otherwise incapacitated, or who cannot be located or made to appear may be accepted by the court, but usually only in the presence of corroborating evidence. An affidavit which reflected a better grasp of the facts close in time to the actual events may be used to refresh a witness's recollection. Materials used to refresh recollection are admissible as evidence. If the affiant is a party in the case, the affiant's opponent may be successful in having the affidavit admitted as evidence, as statements by a party-opponent are admissible through an exception to the hearsay rule.

Affidavits are typically included in the response to interrogatories. Rule 33. Interrogatories to Parties. Cornell Legal Information Institute. Interrogatories. Requests for admissions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 36, however, are not required to be sworn. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 36.Cornell Legal Information Institute. 

Some types of motions will not be accepted by the court unless accompanied by an independent sworn statement or other evidence, in support of the need for the motion. In such a case, a court will accept an affidavit from the filing attorney in support of the motion, as certain assumptions are made, to wit: The affidavit in place of sworn testimony promotes judicial economy. The lawyer is an officer of the court and knows that a false swearing by him, if found out, could be grounds for severe penalty up to and including disbarment. The lawyer if called upon would be able to present independent and more detailed evidence to prove the facts set forth in his affidavit.

The acceptance of an affidavit by one society does not confirm its acceptance as a legal document in other jurisdictions. Equally, the acceptance that a lawyer is an officer of the court (for swearing the affidavit) is not a given. This matter is addressed by the use of the Apostille, a means of certifying the legalization of a document for international use under the terms of the 1961 Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Documents. Documents which have been notarized by a notary public, and certain other documents, and then certified with a conformant apostille are accepted for legal use in all the nations that have signed the Hague Convention. Thus most Affidavits now require to be Apostilled if used for cross border issues.

==See also==
*Deposition (law)
*Declaration (law)
*Statutory declaration

==Notes==

== External links ==

* McCarthyism and Academic Freedom on the University of Chicago Campus



[[Aries (constellation)]]

Aries is one of the constellations of the zodiac. It is located in the northern celestial hemisphere between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east. The name Aries is Latin for ram, and its symbol is 20px (), representing a ram's horns. It is one of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It is a mid-sized constellation, ranking 39th overall size, with an area of 441 square degrees (1.1% of the celestial sphere). 

Although Aries came to represent specifically the ram whose fleece became the Golden Fleece of Ancient Greek mythology, it has represented a ram since late Babylonian times. Before that, the stars of Aries formed a farmhand. Different cultures have incorporated the stars of Aries into different constellations including twin inspectors in China and a porpoise in the Marshall Islands. Aries is a relatively dim constellation, possessing only four bright stars: Hamal (Alpha Arietis, second magnitude), Sheratan (Beta Arietis, third magnitude), Mesarthim (Gamma Arietis, fourth magnitude), and 41 Arietis (also fourth magnitude). The few deep-sky objects within the constellation are quite faint and include several pairs of interacting galaxies. Several meteor showers appear to radiate from Aries, including the Daytime Arietids and the Epsilon Arietids.

== History and mythology ==

Aries is now recognized as an official constellation, albeit as a specific region of the sky, by the International Astronomical Union. It was originally defined in ancient texts as a specific pattern of stars, and has remained a constellation since ancient times; it now includes the ancient pattern as well as the surrounding stars. In the description of the Babylonian zodiac given in the clay tablets known as the MUL.APIN, the constellation now known as Aries was the final station along the ecliptic. The MUL.APIN was a comprehensive table of the risings and settings of stars, which likely served as an agricultural calendar. Modern-day Aries was known as , "The Agrarian Worker" or "The Hired Man". Although likely compiled in the 12th or 11th century BCE, the MUL.APIN reflects a tradition which marks the Pleiades as the vernal equinox, which was the case with some precision at the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age. The earliest identifiable reference to Aries as a distinct constellation comes from the boundary stones that date from 1350 to 1000 BCE. On several boundary stones, a zodiacal ram figure is distinct from the other characters present. The shift in identification from the constellation as the Agrarian Worker to the Ram likely occurred in later Babylonian tradition because of its growing association with Dumuzi the Shepherd. By the time the MUL.APIN was createdby 1000 BCEmodern Aries was identified with both Dumuzi's ram and a hired laborer. The exact timing of this shift is difficult to determine due to the lack of images of Aries or other ram figures.

In ancient Egyptian astronomy, Aries was associated with the god Amon-Ra, who was depicted as a man with a ram's head and represented fertility and creativity. Because it was the location of the vernal equinox, it was called the "Indicator of the Reborn Sun". During the times of the year when Aries was prominent, priests would process statues of Amon-Ra to temples, a practice that was modified by Persian astronomers centuries later. Aries acquired the title of "Lord of the Head" in Egypt, referring to its symbolic and mythological importance.

Aries and Musca Borealis as depicted in Urania's Mirror, a set of constellation cards published in London c.1825

Aries was not fully accepted as a constellation until classical times. In Hellenistic astrology, the constellation of Aries is associated with the golden ram of Greek mythology that rescued Phrixos and Helle on orders from Hermes, taking him to the land of Colchis. Phrixos and Helle were the son and daughter of King Athamas and his first wife Nephele. The king's second wife, Ino, was jealous and wished to kill his children. To accomplish this, she induced a famine in Boeotia, then falsified a message from the Oracle of Delphi that said Phrixos must be sacrificed to end the famine. Athamas was about to sacrifice his son atop Mount Laphystium when Aries, sent by Nephele, arrived. Helle fell off of Aries's back in flight and drowned in the Dardanelles, also called the Hellespont in her honor. After arriving, Phrixos sacrificed the ram to Zeus and gave the Fleece to Aetes of Colchis, who rewarded him with an engagement to his daughter Chalciope. Aetes hung its skin in a sacred place where it became known as the Golden Fleece and was guarded by a dragon. In a later myth, this Golden Fleece was stolen by Jason and the Argonauts.

Historically, Aries has been depicted as a crouched, wingless ram with its head turned towards Taurus. Ptolemy asserted in his Almagest that Hipparchus depicted Alpha Arietis as the ram's muzzle, though Ptolemy did not include it in his constellation figure. Instead, it was listed as an "unformed star", and denoted as "the star over the head". John Flamsteed, in his Atlas Coelestis, followed Ptolemy's description by mapping it above the figure's head. Flamsteed followed the general convention of maps by depicting Aries lying down. Astrologically, Aries has been associated with the head and its humors. It was strongly associated with Mars, both the planet and the god. It was considered to govern Western Europe and Syria, and to indicate a strong temper in a person.

The First Point of Aries, the location of the vernal equinox, is named for the constellation. This is because the Sun crossed the celestial equator from south to north in Aries more than two millennia ago. Hipparchus defined it in 130 BCE. as a point south of Gamma Arietis. Because of the precession of the equinoxes, the First Point of Aries has since moved into Pisces and will move into Aquarius by around 2600 CE. The Sun now appears in Aries from late April through mid May, though the constellation is still associated with the beginning of spring.

Medieval Muslim astronomers depicted Aries in various ways. Astronomers like al-Sufi saw the constellation as a ram, modeled on the precedent of Ptolemy. However, some Islamic celestial globes depicted Aries as a nondescript four-legged animal with what may be antlers instead of horns. Some early Bedouin observers saw a ram elsewhere in the sky; this constellation featured the Pleiades as the ram's tail. The generally accepted Arabic formation of Aries consisted of thirteen stars in a figure along with five "unformed" stars, four of which were over the animal's hindquarters and one of which was the disputed star over Aries's head. Al-Sufi's depiction differed from both other Arab astronomers' and Flamsteed's, in that his Aries was running and looking behind itself.

The obsolete constellations introduced in Aries (Musca Borealis, Lilium, Vespa, and Apes) have all been composed of the northern stars. Musca Borealis was created from the stars 33 Arietis, 35 Arietis, 39 Arietis, and 41 Arietis. In 1612, Petrus Plancius introduced Apes, a constellation representing a bee. In 1624, the same stars were used by Jakob Bartsch to create a constellation called Vespa, representing a wasp. In 1679 Augustin Royer used these stars for his constellation Lilium, representing the fleur-de-lis. None of these constellation became widely accepted. Johann Hevelius renamed the constellation "Musca" in 1690 in his Firmamentum Sobiescianum. To differentiate it from Musca, the southern fly, it was later renamed Musca Borealis but it did not gain acceptance and its stars were ultimately officially reabsorbed into Aries.

In 1922, the International Astronomical Union defined its recommended three-letter abbreviation, "Ari". The official boundaries of Aries were defined in 1930 by Eugne Delporte as a polygon of 12 segments. Its right ascension is between 1h 46.4m and 3h 29.4m and its declination is between 10.36 and 31.22 in the equatorial coordinate system.

=== In non-Western astronomy ===

In traditional Chinese astronomy, stars from Aries were used in several constellations. The brightest starsAlpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietisformed a constellation called Lou, variously translated as "bond", "lasso", and "sickle", which was associated with the ritual sacrifice of cattle. This name was shared by the 16th lunar mansion, the location of the full moon closest to the autumnal equinox. The lunar mansion represented the area where animals were gathered before sacrifice around that time. This constellation has also been associated with harvest-time as it could represent a woman carrying a basket of food on her head. 35, 39, and 41 Arietis were part of a constellation called Wei, which represented a fat abdomen and was the namesake of the 17th lunar mansion, which represented granaries. Delta and Zeta Arietis were a part of the constellation Tianyin, thought to represent the Emperor's hunting partner. Zuogeng (Tso-kang), a constellation depicting a marsh and pond inspector, was composed of Mu, Nu, Omicron, Pi, and Sigma Arietis. He was accompanied by Yeou-kang, a constellation depicting an official in charge of pasture distribution.

In a similar system to the Chinese, the first lunar mansion in Hindu astronomy was called "Aswini", after the traditional names for Beta and Gamma Arietis, the Aswins. Because the Hindu new year began with the vernal equinox, the Rig Veda contains over 50 new-year's related hymns to the twins, making them some of the most prominent characters in the work. Aries itself was known as "Aja" and "Mesha". In Hebrew astronomy Aries was named "Teli"; it signified either Simeon or Gad, and generally symbolizes the "Lamb of the World". The neighboring Syrians named the constellation "Amru", and the bordering Turks named it "Kuzi". Half a world away, in the Marshall Islands, several stars from Aries were incorporated into a constellation depicting a porpoise, along with stars from Cassiopeia, Andromeda, and Triangulum. Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis formed the head of the porpoise, while stars from Andromeda formed the body and the bright stars of Cassiopeia formed the tail. Other Polynesian peoples recognized Aries as a constellation. The Marquesas islanders called it Na-pai-ka; the Maori constellation Pipiri may correspond to modern Aries as well. In indigenous Peruvian astronomy, a constellation with most of the same stars as Aries existed. It was called the "Market Moon" and the "Kneeling Terrace", as a reminder for when to hold the annual harvest festival, Ayri Huay.

== Notable features ==

The constellation Aries as it can be seen with the naked eye

=== Stars ===

Aries has three prominent stars forming an asterism, designated Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis by Johann Bayer. All three are commonly used for navigation. There is also one other star above the fourth magnitude, 41 Arietis.  Arietis, called Hamal, is the brightest star in Aries. Its traditional name is derived from the Arabic word for "lamb" or "head of the ram" (ras al-hamal), which references Aries's mythological background. With a spectral class of K2 and a luminosity class of III, it is an orange giant with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.00, which lies 66 light-years from Earth. Hamal has a luminosity of 96 L and its absolute magnitude is 0.1.

 Arietis, also known as Sheratan, is a blue-white star with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.64. Its traditional name is derived from "sharatayn", the Arabic word for "the two signs", referring to both Beta and Gamma Arietis in their position as heralds of the vernal equinox. The two stars were known to the Bedouin as "qarna al-hamal", "horns of the ram". It is 59 light-years from Earth. It has a luminosity of 11 L and its absolute magnitude is 2.1. It is a spectroscopic binary star, one in which the companion star is only known through analysis of the spectra. The spectral class of the primary is A5. Hermann Carl Vogel determined that Sheratan was a spectroscopic binary in 1903; its orbit was determined by Hans Ludendorff in 1907. It has since been studied for its eccentric orbit.

 Arietis, with a common name of Mesarthim, is a binary star with two white-hued components, located in a rich field of magnitude 812 stars. Its traditional name has conflicting derivations. It may be derived from a corruption of "al-sharatan", the Arabic word meaning "pair" or a word for "fat ram". However, it may also come from the Sanskrit for "first star of Aries" or the Hebrew for "ministerial servants", both of which are unusual languages of origin for star names. Along with Beta Arietis, it was known to the Bedouin as "qarna al-hamal". The primary is of magnitude 4.59 and the secondary is of magnitude 4.68. The system is 164 light-years from Earth. The two components are separated by 7.8 arcseconds, and the system as a whole has an apparent magnitude of 3.9. The primary has a luminosity of 60 L and the secondary has a luminosity of 56 L; the primary is an A-type star with an absolute magnitude of 0.2 and the secondary is a B9-type star with an absolute magnitude of 0.4. The angle between the two components is 1. Mesarthim was discovered to be a double star by Robert Hooke in 1664, one of the earliest such telescopic discoveries. The primary, 1 Arietis, is an Alpha Canum Venaticorum variable star that has a range of 0.02 magnitudes and a period of 2.607 days. It is unusual because of its strong silicon emission lines.

The constellation is home to several double stars, including Epsilon, Lambda, and Pi Arietis.  Arietis is a binary star with two white components. The primary is of magnitude 5.2 and the secondary is of magnitude 5.5. The system is 290 light-years from Earth. Its overall magnitude is 4.63, and the primary has an absolute magnitude of 1.4. Its spectral class is A2. The two components are separated by 1.5 arcseconds.  Arietis is a wide double star with a white-hued primary and a yellow-hued secondary. The primary is of magnitude 4.8 and the secondary is of magnitude 7.3. The primary is 129 light-years from Earth. It has an absolute magnitude of 1.7 and a spectral class of F0. The two components are separated by 36 arcseconds at an angle of 50; the two stars are located 0.5 east of 7 Arietis.  Arietis is a close binary star with a blue-white primary and a white secondary. The primary is of magnitude 5.3 and the secondary is of magnitude 8.5. The primary is 776 light-years from Earth. The primary itself is a wide double star with a separation of 25.2 arcseconds; the tertiary has a magnitude of 10.8. The primary and secondary are separated by 3.2 arcseconds.

Most of the other stars in Aries visible to the naked eye have magnitudes between 3 and 5.  Ari, called Boten, is a star of magnitude 4.35, 170 light-years away. It has an absolute magnitude of 0.1 and a spectral class of K2.  Arietis is a star of magnitude 4.89, 263 light-years away. Its spectral class is A0 and its absolute magnitude is 0.0. 14 Arietis is a star of magnitude 4.98, 288 light-years away. Its spectral class is F2 and its absolute magnitude is 0.6. 39 Arietis is a similar star of magnitude 4.51, 172 light-years away. Its spectral class is K1 and its absolute magnitude is 0.0. 35 Arietis is a dim star of magnitude 4.55, 343 light-years away. Its spectral class is B3 and its absolute magnitude is 1.7. 41 Arietis, known both as c Arietis and Nair al Butain, is a brighter star of magnitude 3.63, 165 light-years away. Its spectral class is B8 and it has a luminosity of 105 L. Its absolute magnitude is 0.2. 53 Arietis is a runaway star of magnitude 6.09, 815 light-years away. Its spectral class is B2. It was likely ejected from the Orion Nebula approximately five million years ago, possibly due to supernovae. Finally, Teegarden's Star is the closest star to Earth in Aries. It is a brown dwarf of magnitude 15.14 and spectral class M6.5V. With a proper motion of 5.1 arcseconds per year, it is the 24th closest star to Earth overall.

Aries has its share of variable stars, including R and U Arietis, Mira-type variable stars, and T Arietis, a semi-regular variable star. R Arietis is a Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13.7 to a maximum of 7.4 with a period of 186.8 days. It is 4,080 light-years away. U Arietis is another Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 15.2 to a maximum of 7.2 with a period of 371.1 days. T Arietis is a semiregular variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 11.3 to a maximum of 7.5 with a period of 317 days. It is 1,630 light-years away. One particularly interesting variable in Aries is SX Arietis, a rotating variable star considered to be the prototype of its class, helium variable stars. SX Arietis stars have very prominent emission lines of Helium I and Silicon III. They are normally main-sequence B0pB9p stars, and their variations are not usually visible to the naked eye. Therefore, they are observed photometrically, usually having periods that fit in the course of one night. Similar to Alpha Canum Venaticorum variables, SX Arietis stars have periodic changes in their light and magnetic field, which correspond to the periodic rotation; they differ from the Alpha Canum Venaticorum variables in their higher temperature. There are between 39 and 49 SX Arietis variable stars currently known; ten are noted as being "uncertain" in the General Catalog of Variable Stars.

=== Deep-sky objects ===

The few deep-sky objects in Aries are very dim. Nevertheless, several scientifically interesting galaxies lie within its borders; it has spiral, elliptical, and interacting galaxies.

NGC 772, with a notated supernova.

NGC 772 is a spiral galaxy with an integrated magnitude of 10.3, located southeast of  Arietis and 15 arcminutes west of 15 Arietis. It is a relatively bright galaxy and shows obvious nebulosity and ellipticity in an amateur telescope. It is 7.2 by 4.2 arcminutes, meaning that its surface brightness, magnitude 13.6, is significantly lower than its integrated magnitude. NGC 772 is a class SA(s)b galaxy, which means that it is an unbarred spiral galaxy without a ring that possesses a somewhat prominent bulge and spiral arms that are wound somewhat tightly. The main arm, on the northwest side of the galaxy, is home to many star forming regions; this is due to previous gravitational interactions with other galaxies. NGC 772 has a small companion galaxy, NGC 770, that is about 113,000 light-years away from the larger galaxy. The two galaxies together are also classified as Arp 78 in the Arp peculiar galaxy catalog. NGC 772 has a diameter of 240,000 light-years and the system is 114 million light-years from Earth. Another spiral galaxy in Aries is NGC 673, a face-on class SAB(s)c galaxy. It is a weakly barred spiral galaxy with loosely wound arms. It has no ring and a faint bulge and is 2.5 by 1.9 arcminutes. It has two primary arms with fragments located farther from the core. 171,000 light-years in diameter, NGC 673 is 235 million light-years from Earth.

NGC 678 and NGC 680 are a pair of galaxies in Aries that are only about 200,000 light-years apart. Part of the NGC 691 group of galaxies, both are at a distance of approximately 130 million light-years. NGC 678 is an edge-on spiral galaxy that is 4.5 by 0.8 arcminutes. NGC 680, an elliptical galaxy with an asymmetrical boundary, is the brighter of the two at magnitude 12.9; NGC 678 has a magnitude of 13.35. Both galaxies have bright cores, but NGC 678 is the larger galaxy at a diameter of 171,000 light-years; NGC 680 has a diameter of 72,000 light-years. NGC 678 is further distinguished by its prominent dust lane. NGC 691 itself is a spiral galaxy slightly inclined to our line of sight. It has multiple spiral arms and a bright core. Because it is so diffuse, it has a low surface brightness. It has a diameter of 126,000 light-years and is 124 million light-years away. NGC 877 is the brightest member of an 8-galaxy group that also includes NGC 870, NGC 871, and NGC 876, with a magnitude of 12.53. It is 2.4 by 1.8 arcminutes and is 178 million light-years away with a diameter of 124,000 light-years. Its companion is NGC 876, which is about 103,000 light-years from the core of NGC 877. They are interacting gravitationally, as they are connected by a faint stream of gas and dust. Arp 276 is a different pair of interacting galaxies in Aries, consisting of NGC 935 and IC 1801.

NGC 821 is an E6 elliptical galaxy. It is unusual because it has hints of an early spiral structure, which is normally only found in lenticular and spiral galaxies. NGC 821 is 2.6 by 2.0 arcminutes and has a visual magnitude of 11.3. Its diameter is 61,000 light-years and it is 80 million light-years away. Another unusual galaxy in Aries is Segue 2. Segue 2 is a dwarf galaxy that is a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way, recently discovered to be a potential relic of the epoch of reionization.

=== Meteor showers ===

Aries is home to several meteor showers. The Daytime Arietid meteor shower is one of the strongest meteor showers that occurs during the day, lasting from 22 May to 2 June. It is an annual shower associated with the Marsden group of comets that peaks on 7 June with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of 54 meteors. Its parent body may be the asteroid Icarus. The meteors are sometimes visible before dawn, because the radiant is 32 degrees away from the Sun. They usually appear at a rate of 12 per hour as "earthgrazers", meteors that last several seconds and often begin at the horizon. Because most of the Daytime Arietids are not visible to the naked eye, they are observed in the radio spectrum. This is possible because of the ionized gas they leave in their wake. Other meteor showers radiate from Aries during the day; these include the Daytime Epsilon Arietids and the Northern and Southern Daytime May Arietids. The Jodrell Bank Observatory discovered the Daytime Arietids in 1947 when James Hey and G.S. Stewart adapted the World War II-era radar systems for meteor observations.

The Delta Arietids are another meteor shower radiating from Aries. Peaking on 9 December with a low peak rate, the shower lasts from 8 December to 14 January, with the highest rates visible from 8 to 14 December. The average Delta Aquarid meteor is very slow, with an average velocity of 13.2 km per second. However, this shower sometimes produces bright fireballs. This meteor shower has northern and southern components, both of which are likely associated with 1990 HA, a near-Earth asteroid.

The Autumn Arietids also radiate from Aries. The shower lasts from 7 September to 27 October and peaks on 9 October. Its peak rate is low. The Epsilon Arietids appear from 12 to 23 October. Other meteor showers radiating from Aries include the October Delta Arietids, Daytime Epsilon Arietids, Daytime May Arietids, Sigma Arietids, Nu Arietids, and Beta Arietids. The Sigma Arietids, a class IV meteor shower, are visible from 12 to 19 October, with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of less than two meteors per hour on 19 October.

=== Planetary systems ===

Aries contains several stars with extrasolar planets. HIP 14810, a G5 type star, is orbited by three giant planets (those more than ten times the mass of Earth). HD 12661, like HIP 14810, is a G-type main sequence star, slightly larger than the Sun, with two orbiting planets. One planet is 2.3 times the mass of Jupiter, and the other is 1.57 times the mass of Jupiter. HD 20367 is a G0 type star, approximately the size of the Sun, with one orbiting planet. The planet, discovered in 2002, has a mass 1.07 times that of Jupiter and orbits every 500 days.

==Astrology==

, the Sun resides in the constellation Aries from April 18 to May 13 as it moves through the ecliptic. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Aries from March 21 to April 20, and in sidereal astrology, from April 15 to May 15.

== References ==

Explanatory notes

Citations

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Online sources

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

SIMBAD

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Aries
* Star Tales  Aries
* Aries Constellation at Constellation Guide

 



[[Aquarius (constellation)]]

Aquarius is a constellation of the zodiac, situated between Capricornus and Pisces. Its name is Latin for "water-carrier" or "cup-carrier", and its symbol is 20px (), a representation of water.

Aquarius is one of the oldest of the recognized constellations along the zodiac (the sun's apparent path). It was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century AD astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It is found in a region often called the Sea due to its profusion of constellations with watery associations such as Cetus the whale, Pisces the fish, and Eridanus the river.

==History and mythology==
Aquarius is identified as "The Great One" in the Babylonian star catalogues and represents the god Ea himself, who is commonly depicted holding an overflowing vase. The Babylonian star-figure appears on entitlement stones and cylinder seals from the second millennium. It contained the winter solstice in the Early Bronze Age. In Old Babylonian astronomy, Ea was the ruler of the southernmost quarter of the Sun's path, the "Way of Ea", corresponding to the period of 45 days on either side of winter solstice. Aquarius was also associated with the destructive floods that the Babylonians regularly experienced, and thus was negatively connoted. In Ancient Egypt, Aquarius was associated with the annual flood of the Nile; the banks were said to flood when Aquarius put his jar into the river, beginning spring.

In the Greek tradition, the constellation became represented as simply a single vase from which a stream poured down to Piscis Austrinus. The name in the Hindu zodiac is likewise kumbha "water-pitcher", showing that the zodiac reached India via Greek intermediaries.

In Greek mythology, Aquarius is sometimes associated with Deucalion, the son of Prometheus who built a ship with his wife Pyrrha to survive an imminent flood. They sailed for nine days before washing ashore on Mount Parnassus. Aquarius is also sometimes identified with beautiful Ganymede, a youth in Greek mythology and the son of Trojan king Tros, who was taken to Mount Olympus by Zeus to act as cup-carrier to the gods. Neighboring Aquila represents the eagle, under Zeus' command, that snatched the young boy; some versions of the myth indicate that the eagle was in fact Zeus transformed. An alternative version of the tale recounts Ganymede's kidnapping by the goddess of the dawn, Eos, motivated by her affection for young men; Zeus then stole him from Eos and employed him as cup-bearer. Yet another figure associated with the water bearer is Cecrops I, a king of Athens who sacrificed water instead of wine to the gods.

===In non-Western astronomy===
In Chinese astronomy, the stream of water flowing from the Water Jar was depicted as the "Army of Yu-Lin" (Yu-lin-kiun or Yulinjun). The name "Yu-lin" means "feathers and forests", referring to the numerous light-footed soldiers from the northern reaches of the empire represented by these faint stars. The constellation's stars were the most numerous of any Chinese constellation, numbering 45, the majority of which were located in modern Aquarius. The celestial army was protected by the wall Leibizhen, which counted Iota, Lambda, Phi, and Sigma Aquarii among its 12 stars. 88, 89, and 98 Aquarii represent Fou-youe, the axes used as weapons and for hostage executions. Also in Aquarius is Loui-pi-tchin, the ramparts that stretch from 29 and 27 Piscium and 33 and 30 Aquarii through Phi, Lambda, Sigma, and Iota Aquarii to Delta, Gamma, Kappa, and Epsilon Capricorni.

Near the border with Cetus, the axe Fuyue was represented by three stars; its position is disputed and may have instead been located in Sculptor. Tienliecheng also has a disputed position; the 13-star castle replete with ramparts may have possessed Nu and Xi Aquarii but may instead have been located south in Piscis Austrinus. The Water Jar asterism was seen to the ancient Chinese as the tomb, Fenmu. Nearby, the emperors' mausoleum Xiuliang stood, demarcated by Kappa Aquarii and three other collinear stars. Ku ("crying") and Qi ("weeping"), each composed of two stars, were located in the same region.

Three of the Chinese lunar mansions shared their name with constellations. Nu, also the name for the 10th lunar mansion, was a handmaiden represented by Epsilon, Mu, 3, and 4 Aquarii. The 11th lunar mansion shared its name with the constellation Xu ("emptiness"), formed by Beta Aquarii and Alpha Equulei; it represented a bleak place associated with death and funerals. Wei, the rooftop and 12th lunar mansion, was a V-shaped constellation formed by Alpha Aquarii, Theta Pegasi, and Epsilon Pegasi; it shared its name with two other Chinese constellations, in modern-day Scorpius and Aries.

===Depictions===
A representation of Aquarius printed in 1825 as part of Urania's Mirror, (including a now-obsolete constellation, Ballon Aerostatique south of it).
In the first century CE, Ptolemy's Almagest established the common Western depiction of Aquarius. His water jar, an asterism itself, consists of Gamma, Pi, Eta, and Zeta Aquarii; it pours water in a stream of more than 20 stars terminating with Fomalhaut, now assigned solely to Piscis Austrinus. The water bearer's head is represented by 5th magnitude 25 Aquarii while his left shoulder is Beta Aquarii; his right shoulder and forearm are represented by Alpha and Gamma Aquarii respectively.

==Notable features==
The constellation Aquarius as it can be seen by the naked eye.

===Stars===
Despite both its prominent position on the zodiac and its large size, Aquarius has no particularly bright stars, with its 4 brightest stars less than magnitude 2. However, recent research has shown that there are several stars lying within its borders that possess planetary systems.

 Aquarii, also known as Sadalmelik, is a G2 spectral class star (yellow supergiant) named in Arabic for the phrase "the lucky stars of the king". It is the second brightest star in Aquarius with a magnitude of 2.96 (though it has an absolute magnitude of -4.5) and is 523 light-years from Earth. It has a luminosity of 5250 L.

 Aquarii, sometimes called Sadalsuud, is a G0 spectral class star (yellow supergiant) named for the Arabic phrase meaning "luckiest of the lucky stars". It is the brightest star in Aquarius with an apparent magnitude of 2.91 and an absolute magnitude of -4.5. Sadalsuud is 537 light-years from Earth and has a luminosity of 5250 L, the same as  Aquarii.

 Aquarii, also called Sadachbia, is a blue-white A0 spectral class star of magnitude 3.84 and a luminosity of 50 L that is 163 light years away. It has a luminosity of 50 L. The name Sadachbia comes from the Arabic for "lucky stars of the tents", sa'd al-akhbiya.

 Aquarii, also known as Scheat or Skat, is a blue-white A2 spectral class star of magnitude 3.27 and luminosity of 105 L.

 Aquarii, also known as Albali, is a blue-white A1 spectral class star with an apparent magnitude of 3.77, an absolute magnitude of 1.2, and a luminosity of 28 L.

 Aquarii is an F2 spectral class double star; both stars are white. Overall, it appears to be of magnitude 3.6 and luminosity of 50 L. The primary has a magnitude of 4.53 and the secondary a magnitude of 4.31, but both have an absolute magnitude of 0.6. Its orbital period is 760 years; the two components are currently moving farther apart.

 Aquarii, sometimes called Ancha, is a G8 spectral class star with an apparent magnitude of 4.16 and an absolute magnitude of 1.4.

 Aquarii, also called Hudoor or Ekchusis, is an M2 spectral class star of magnitude 3.74 and luminosity of 120 L.

 Aquarii, also called Bunda, is an A7 spectral class star with an apparent magnitude of 4.69 and an absolute magnitude of 2.4.

 Aquarii, also called Seat, is a B0 spectral class star with an apparent magnitude of 4.66 and an absolute magnitude of -4.1.

===Planetary systems===
Twelve exoplanet systems have been found in Aquarius as of 2013. Gliese 876, one of the nearest stars to Earth at a distance of 15 light-years, was the first red dwarf star to be found to possess a planetary system. It is orbited by four planets, including one terrestrial planet 6.6 times the mass of Earth. The planets vary in orbital period from 2 days to 124 days. 91 Aquarii is an orange giant star orbited by one planet, 91 Aquarii b. The planet's mass is 2.9 times the mass of Jupiter, and its orbital period is 182 days. Gliese 849 is a red dwarf star orbited by the first known long-period Jupiter-like planet, Gliese 849 b. The planet's mass is 0.99 times that of Jupiter and its orbital period is 1,852 days.

There are also less-prominent systems in Aquarius. WASP-6, a type G8 star of magnitude 12.4, is host to one exoplanet, WASP-6 b. The star is 307 parsecs from Earth and has a mass of 0.888 solar masses and a radius of 0.87 solar radii. WASP-6 b was discovered in 2008 by the transit method. It orbits its parent star every 3.36 days at a distance of 0.042 astronomical units (AU). It is 0.503 Jupiter masses but has a proportionally larger radius of 1.224 Jupiter radii. HD 206610, a K0 star located 194 parsecs from Earth, is host to one planet, HD 206610 b. The host star is larger than the Sun; more massive at 1.56 solar masses and larger at 6.1 solar radii. The planet was discovered by the radial velocity method n 2010 and has a mass of 2.2 Jupiter masses. It orbits every 610 days at a distance of 1.68 AU. Much closer to its sun is WASP-47 b, which orbits every 4.15 days only 0.052 AU from its sun, yellow dwarf (G9V) WASP-47. WASP-47 is close in size to the Sun, having a radius of 1.15 solar radii and a mass even closer at 1.08 solar masses. WASP-47 b was discovered in 2011 by the transit method, like WASP-6 b. It is slightly larger than Jupiter with a mass of 1.14 Jupiter masses and a radius of 1.15 Jupiter masses.

There are several more single-planet systems in Aquarius. HD 210277, a magnitude 6.63 yellow star located 21.29 parsecs from Earth, is host to one known planet: HD 210277 b. The 1.23 Jupiter mass planet orbits at nearly the same distance as Earth orbits the Sun - 1.1 AU, though its orbital period is significantly longer at around 442 days. HD 210277 b was discovered earlier than most of the other planets in Aquarius, detected by the radial velocity method in 1998. The star it orbits resembles the Sun beyond their similar spectral class; it has a radius of 1.1 solar radii and a mass of 1.09 solar masses. HD 212771 b, a larger planet at 2.3 Jupiter masses, orbits host star HD 212771 at a distance of 1.22 AU. The star itself, barely below the threshold of naked-eye visibility at magnitude 7.6, is a G8IV (yellow subgiant) star located 131 parsecs from Earth. Though it has a similar mass to the Sun - 1.15 solar masses - it is significantly less dense with its radius of 5 solar radii. Its lone planet was discovered in 2010 by the radial velocity method, like several other exoplanets in the constellation.

As of 2013, there are only two multiple-planet systems within the bounds of Aquarius: the Gliese 876 and HD 215152 systems. The former is quite prominent; the latter has only two planets and has a host star farther away at 21.5 parsecs. The HD 215152 system consists of the planets HD 215152 b and HD 215152 c orbiting their K0-type, magnitude 8.13 sun. Both discovered in 2011 by the radial velocity method, the two tiny planets orbit very close to their host star. HD 215152 c is the larger at 0.0097 Jupiter masses (still significantly larger than the Earth, which weighs in at 0.00315 Jupiter masses); its smaller sibling is barely smaller at 0.0087 Jupiter masses. The error in the mass measurements (0.0032 and 0.0049 MJ respectively) is large enough to make this discrepancy statistically insignificant. HD 215152 c also orbits further from the star than HD 215152 b, 0.0852 AU compared to 0.0652.

===Deep sky objects===
The green bean galaxy J2240 lies in the constellation of Aquarius.

Because of its position away from the galactic plane, the majority of deep-sky objects in Aquarius are galaxies, globular clusters, and planetary nebulae. Aquarius contains three deep sky objects that are in the Messier catalog: the globular clusters Messier 2, Messier 72, and the open cluster Messier 73. Two well-known planetary nebulae are also located in Aquarius: the Saturn Nebula (NGC 7009), to the eastwest of  Aquarii; and the famous Helix Nebula (NGC 7293), southwest of  Aquarii.

M2, also catalogued as NGC 7089, is an incredibly rich globular cluster located approximately 37,000 light-years from Earth. At magnitude 6.5, it is viewable in small-aperture instruments, but a 100 mm aperture telescope is needed to resolve any stars. M72, also catalogued as NGC 6981, is a small 9th magnitude globular cluster located approximately 56,000 light-years from Earth. M73, also catalogued as NGC 6994, is an open cluster with highly disputed status.

Aquarius is also home to several planetary nebulae. NGC 6781 is a planetary nebula with a magnitude of 11.0, 2500 light-years from Earth. It appears as a near-perfect ring in a rich star field; the field is so rich that several stars appear superimposed on the nebula. Like the Ring Nebula in Lyra, the ring is approximately 1 light-year in diameter. NGC 7009, also known as the Saturn Nebula, is an 8th magnitude planetary nebula located 3,000 light-years from Earth. It was given its moniker by the 19th century astronomer Lord Rosse for its resemblance to the planet Saturn in a telescope; it has faint protrusions on either side that resemble Saturn's rings. It appears blue-green in a telescope and has a central star of magnitude 11.3. Compared to the Helix Nebula, another planetary nebula in Aquarius, it is quite small. NGC 7293, also known as the Helix Nebula, is the closest planetary nebula to Earth at a distance of 650 light-years. It covers 0.25 square degrees, making it also the largest planetary nebula as seen from Earth. However, because it is so large, it is only viewable as a very faint object, though it has a fairly high integrated magnitude of 6.0.

One galaxy visible in Aquarius is NGC 7727, also of interest for amateur astronomers who wish to discover or observe supernovae. A spiral galaxy (type S), it has an integrated magnitude of 10.7 and is 3 by 3 arcseconds.

===Meteor showers===
There are three major meteor showers with radiants in Aquarius: the Eta Aquariids, the Delta Aquariids, and the Iota Aquariids.

The Eta Aquariids are the strongest meteor shower radiating from Aquarius. It peaks between 5 and 6 May with a rate of approximately 35 meteors per hour. Originally discovered by Chinese astronomers in 401 CE, Eta Aquariids can be seen coming from the Water Jar beginning on April 21 and as late as May 12. The parent body of the shower is Halley's Comet, a periodic comet. Fireballs are common shortly after the peak, approximately between May 9 and May 11. The normal meteors appear to have yellow trails.

The Delta Aquariids is a double radiant meteor shower that peaks first on 29 July and second on 6 August. The first radiant is located in the south of the constellation, while the second radiant is located in the northern circlet of Pisces asterism. The southern radiant's peak rate is about 20 meteors per hour, while the northern radiant's peak rate is about 10 meteors per hour.

The Iota Aquariids is a fairly weak meteor shower that peaks on 6 August, with a rate of approximately 8 meteors per hour.

==Astrology==

, the Sun appears in the constellation Aquarius from 16 February to 11 March. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Aquarius from 20 January to 19 February, and in sidereal astrology, from 15 February to 14 March.

Aquarius is also associated with the Age of Aquarius, a concept popular in 1960s counterculture. Despite this prominence, the Age of Aquarius will not dawn until the year 2597, as an astrological age does not begin until the Sun is in a particular constellation on the vernal equinox.

==Notes==

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* * 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Attribution
*

==External links==

* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Aquarius
* NightSkyInfo.com: Constellation Aquarius
* WIKISKY.ORG: Aquarius constellation
* Star Tales  Aquarius
* Aquarius Constellation at Constellation Guide

 



[[Anime]]

 are Japanese animated productions usually featuring hand-drawn or computer animation. The word is the abbreviated pronunciation of "animation" in Japanese, where this term references all animation. In other languages, the term is defined as animation from Japan or as a Japanese-disseminated animation style often characterized by colorful graphics, vibrant characters and fantastic themes. Arguably, the stylization approach to the meaning may open up the possibility of anime produced in countries other than Japan. For simplicity, many Westerners strictly view anime as an animation product from Japan. 

The earliest commercial Japanese animation dates to 1917, and production of anime works in Japan has since continued to increase steadily. The characteristic anime art style emerged in the 1960s with the works of Osamu Tezuka and spread internationally in the late twentieth century, developing a large domestic and international audience. Anime is distributed theatrically, by television broadcasts, directly to home media, and over the internet and is classified into numerous genres targeting diverse broad and niche audiences.

Anime is a diverse art form with distinctive production methods and techniques that have been adapted over time in response to emergent technologies. The production of anime focuses less on the animation of movement and more on the realism of settings as well as the use of camera effects, including panning, zooming and angle shots. Diverse art styles are used and character proportions and features can be quite varied, including characteristically large emotive or realistically sized eyes.

The anime industry consists of over 430 production studios including major names like Studio Ghibli, Gainax and Toei Animation. Despite having a fraction of the domestic film market, anime achieves a majority of DVD sales and has been an international success after the rise of televised English dubs. This rise in international popularly has resulted in non-Japanese productions using the anime art style, but these works have been defined as anime-influenced animation by both fans and the industry.

== Definition and usage ==
Anime is an art form, specifically animation, that includes all genres found in cinema, but it can be mistakenly classified as a genre. In Japan, the term anime refers to all forms of animation from around the world. English-language dictionaries define anime as "a Japanese style of motion-picture animation" or as "a style of animation developed in Japan". 

The etymology of the word anime is disputed. The English term "animation" is written in Japanese katakana as  (animshon, pronounced ), and is  (anime) in its shortened form. Some sources claim that anime derives from the French term for animation, dessin anim, but others believe this to be a myth derived from the French popularity of the medium in the late 1970s and 1980s. In English, anime, when used as a common noun, normally functions as a mass noun (for example: "Do you watch anime?", "How much anime have you collected?"). American Heritage Dictionary, 4th ed.; Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Prior to the widespread use of anime, the term Japanimation was prevalent throughout the 1970s and 1980s. In the mid-1980s, the term anime began to supplant Japanimation. In general, the term now only appears in period works where it is used to distinguish and identify Japanese animation. 

In 1987 Hayao Miyazaki stated that he despised the truncated word "Anime" because to him it represented the desolation of the Japanese animation industry. A desolation he equated with animators lacking motivation and mass-produced, overly expressive products which rely on fixed iconography for facial expressions and protracted and exaggerated action scenes but lack depth and sophistication because they do not attempt to convey emotion or thought. 

== Format ==
The first format of anime was theatrical viewing which originally began with commercial productions in 1917. Originally the animated flips were crude and required played musical components before adding sound and vocal components to the production. On July 14, 1958, Nippon Television aired Mole's Adventure, both the first televised and first color anime to debut. It wasn't until the 1960s when the first televised series were broadcast and it has remained a popular medium since. Works released in a direct to video format are called "original video animation" (OVA) or "original animation video" (OAV); and are typically not released theatrically or televised prior to home media release. The emergence of the internet has led some animators to distribute works online in a format called "original net anime" (ONA). 

The home distribution of anime releases were popularized in the 1980s with the VHS and Laser Disc formats. The VHS NTSC video format used in both Japan and the United States is credited as aiding the rising popularity of anime in the 1990s. The Laser Disc and VHS formats were transcended by the DVD format which offered the unique advantages; including multiple subtitling and dubbing tracks on the same disc. The DVD format also has its drawbacks in the its usage of region coding; adopted by the industry to solve licensing, piracy and export problems and restricted region indicated on the DVD player. The Video CD (VCD) format was popular in Hong Kong and Taiwan, but became only a minor format in the United States that was closely associated with bootleg copies. 

== History ==

A cel from the earliest surviving Japanese animated short, produced in 1917

Anime arose in the early 20th century, when Japanese filmmakers experimented with the animation techniques also pioneered in France, Germany, the United States and Russia. A claim for the earliest Japanese animation is Katsud Shashin, an undated and private work by an unknown creator. Clements, Jonathan, and Helen McCarthy. The Anime Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese Animation Since 1917. Berkeley, Calif: Stone Bridge Press, 2006. Page 169 In 1917, the first professional and publicly displayed works began to appear. Animators such as ten Shimokawa and Seitarou Kitayama produced numerous works, with the oldest surviving film being Kouchi's Namakura Gatana, a two-minute clip of a samurai trying to test a new sword on his target only to suffer defeat. The 1923 Great Kant earthquake resulted in widespread destruction to Japan's infrastructure and the destruction of Shimokawa's warehouse, destroying most of these early works.

By the 1930s animation was well established in Japan as an alternative format to the live-action industry. It suffered competition from foreign producers and many animators, such as Nobur fuji and Yasuji Murata, who still worked in cheaper cutout animation rather than cel animation. Other creators, such as Kenz Masaoka and Mitsuyo Seo, nonetheless made great strides in animation technique; they benefited from the patronage of the government, which employed animators to produce educational shorts and propaganda. The first talkie anime was Chikara to Onna no Yo no Naka, produced by Masaoka in 1933. By 1940, numerous anime artists' organizations had risen, including the Shin Mangaha Shudan and Shin Nippon Mangaka. The first feature length animated film was Momotaro's Divine Sea Warriors directed by Seo in 1944 with sponsorship by the Imperial Japanese Navy. Official booklet, The Roots of Japanese Anime, DVD, Zakka Films, 2009.
 

A frame from Momotaro's Divine Sea Warriors (1944), the first feature-length anime film

The success of The Walt Disney Company's 1937 feature film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs profoundly influenced many Japanese animators. In the 1960s, manga artist and animator Osamu Tezuka adapted and simplified many Disney animation techniques to reduce costs and to limit the number of frames in productions. He intended this as a temporary measure to allow him to produce material on a tight schedule with inexperienced animation staff. Three Tales, aired in 1960, was the first anime shown on television. The first anime television series was Otogi Manga Calendar, aired from 1961 to 1964.

The 1970s saw a surge of growth in the popularity of manga, Japanese comic books and graphic novels, many of which were later animated. The work of Osamu Tezuka drew particular attention: he has been called a "legend" and the "god of manga". His work  and that of other pioneers in the field  inspired characteristics and genres that remain fundamental elements of anime today. The giant robot genre (known as "mecha" outside Japan), for instance, took shape under Tezuka, developed into the Super Robot genre under Go Nagai and others, and was revolutionized at the end of the decade by Yoshiyuki Tomino who developed the Real Robot genre. Robot anime like the Gundam and The Super Dimension Fortress Macross series became instant classics in the 1980s, and the robot genre of anime is still one of the most common in Japan and worldwide today. In the 1980s, anime became more accepted in the mainstream in Japan (although less than manga), and experienced a boom in production. Following a few successful adaptations of anime in overseas markets in the 1980s, anime gained increased acceptance in those markets in the 1990s and even more at the turn of the 21st century. In 2002, Spirited Away, a Studio Ghibli production directed by Hayao Miyazaki won the Golden Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival and in 2003 at the 75th Academy Awards it won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. 

== Genres ==
Anime are often classified by target demographic, including kodomo (children's), shjo (girls'), shounen (boys') and a diverse range of genres targeting an adult audience. Shoujo and shounen anime sometimes contain elements popular with children of both sexes in an attempt to gain crossover appeal. Adult anime may feature a slower pace or greater plot complexity that younger audiences typically find unappealing, as well as adult themes and situations. A subset of adult anime works feature pornographic elements and are labeled "R18" in Japan, but internationally these works are grouped together under the term hentai (Japanese for "pervert"). By contrast, a variety of anime sub-genres across demographic groups incorporate ecchi, sexual themes or undertones without depictions of sexual intercourse, as typified in the comedic or harem genres; due to its popularity among adolescent and adult anime enthusiasts, incorporation of ecchi elements in anime is considered a form of fan service. Ask John: Why Do Americans Hate Harem Anime?. animenation.net. May 20. 2005. Note: fan service and ecchi are often considered the same in wording. Robin E. Brenner: Understanding manga and anime. Libraries Unlimited, 2007, ISBN 978-1-59158-332-5 

Anime's genre classification is different from other types of animation and does not lend itself to simple identity. Gilles Poitras compared the labeling Gundam 0080 and its complex depiction of war as a "giant robot" anime akin to simply labeling War and Peace a "war novel". Science fiction is a major anime genre and includes important historical works like Tezuka's Astro Boy and Yokoyama's Tetsujin 28-go. A major sub-genre of science fiction is mecha, with the Gundam metaseries being iconic. The diverse fantasy genre includes works based on Asian and Western traditions and folklore; examples include the Japanese feudal fairytale InuYasha, and the depiction of Scandinavian goddesses who move to Japan to maintain a computer called Yggdrasil in Oh My Goddess. Genre crossing in anime is also prevalent, such as the blend of fantasy and comedy in Dragon Half, and the incorporation of slapstick humor in the crime anime Castle of Cagliostro. Other subgenres found in anime include magical girl, harem, sports, martial arts, literary adaptations and war. 

Genres have emerged that explore homosexual romances. While originally pornographic in terminology, yaoi (male homosexuality) and yuri (female homosexuality) are broad terms used internationally to describe any focus on the themes or development of romantic homosexual relationships. Prior to 2000, homosexual characters were typically used for comedic effect, but some works portrayed these characters seriously or sympathetically. 

== Attributes ==
Anime artists employ many distinct visual styles

Anime is a diverse art form that is targeted and produced for the domestic Japanese audience and market. Anime differs greatly from other forms of animation by its diverse art styles, methods of animation, its production and its process. Visually, anime is a diverse art form that contains a wide variety of styles that share few similarities to one another.

=== Animation technique ===
Anime follows the typical production of animation, including storyboarding, voice acting, character design, and cel production. Since the 1990s, animators have increasingly used computer animation to improve the efficiency of the production process. Artists like Nobur fuji pioneered the earliest anime works, which were experimental and consisted of images drawn on blackboards, stop motion animation of paper cutouts, and silhouette animation. Cel animation grew in popularity until it came to dominate the medium. In the 21st century, the use of other animation techniques is mostly limited to independent short films, including the stop motion puppet animation work produced by Tadahito Mochinaga, Kihachir Kawamoto and Tomoyasu Murata. Computers were integrated into the animation process in the 1990s, with works such as Ghost in the Shell and Princess Mononoke mixing cel animation with computer-generated images. Fuji Film, a major cel production company, announced it would stop cel production, producing an industry panic to procure cel imports and hastening the switch to digital processes. 

Prior to the digital era, anime was produced with traditional animation methods using a pose to pose approach. The majority of mainstream anime uses fewer expressive key frames and more in-between animation. 

Japanese animation studios were pioneers of many limited animation techniques, and have given anime a distinct set of conventions. Unlike Disney animation, where the emphasis is on the movement, anime emphasizes the art quality and let limited animation techniques make up for the lack of time spent on movement. Such techniques are often used not only to meet deadlines but also as artistic devices. Anime scenes place emphasis on achieving three-dimensional views, and backgrounds are instrumental in creating the atmosphere of the work. The backgrounds are not always invented and are occasionally based on real locations, as exemplified in Howl's Moving Castle and The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya. Oppliger stated that anime is one of the rare mediums where putting together an all-star cast usually comes out looking "tremendously impressive." 

The cinematic effects of anime differentiates itself from the stage plays found in American animation. Anime is cinematically shot as if by camera, including panning, zooming, distance and angle shots to more complex dynamic shots that would be difficult to produce in reality. In anime, the animation is produced before the voice acting, contrary to American animation which does the voice acting first; this can cause lip sync errors in the Japanese version. 

=== Characters ===
Body proportions of human anime characters tend to accurately reflect the proportions of the human body in reality. The height of the head is considered by the artist as the base unit of proportion. Head heights can vary, but most anime characters are about seven to eight heads tall. Anime artists occasionally make deliberate modifications to body proportions to produce super deformed characters that feature a disproportionately small body compared to the head; many super deformed characters are two to four heads tall. Some anime works like Crayon Shin-chan completely disregard these proportions, such that they resemble Western cartoons.

A common anime character design convention is exaggerated eye size. The animation of characters with large eyes in anime can be traced back to Osamu Tezuka, who was deeply influenced by such early animation characters as Betty Boop, who was drawn with disproportionately large eyes. Tezuka is a central figure in anime and manga history, whose iconic art style and character designs allowed for the entire range of human emotions to be depicted solely through the eyes. The artist adds variable color shading to the eyes and particularly to the cornea to give them greater depth. Generally, a mixture of a light shade, the tone color, and a dark shade is used. Cultural anthropologist Matt Thorn argues that Japanese animators and audiences do not perceive such stylized eyes as inherently more or less foreign. However, not all anime have large eyes. For example, the works of Hayao Miyazaki are known for having realistically proportioned eyes, as well as realistic hair colors on their characters. 

Anime and manga artists often draw from a defined set of facial expressions to depict particular emotions

Hair in anime is often unnaturally lively and colorful or uniquely styled. The movement of hair in anime is exaggerated and "hair action" is used to emphasize the action and emotions of characters for added visual effect. Poitras traces hairstyle color to cover illustrations on manga, where eye-catching artwork and colorful tones are attractive for children's manga. Despite being produced for a domestic market, anime features characters whose race or nationality is not always defined, and this is often a deliberate decision, such as in the Pokmon animated series. 

Anime and manga artists often draw from a common canon of iconic facial expression illustrations to denote particular moods and thoughts. These techniques are often different in form than their counterparts in Western animation, and they include a fixed iconography that is used as shorthand for certain emotions and moods. These expression are often exaggerated and are typically comedic in nature. For example, a male character may develop a nosebleed when aroused, stemming from a Japanese old wives' tale. A variety of visual symbols are employed, including sweatdrops to depict nervousness, visible blushing for embarrassment, or glowing eyes for an intense glare. 

===Music===
The opening and credits sequences of most anime television episodes are accompanied by J-pop or J-rock songs, often by reputed bands. They may be written with the series in mind, but are also aimed at the general music market, and therefore often allude only vaguely or not at all to the themes or plot of the series. Pop and rock songs are also sometimes used as incidental music ("insert songs") in an episode, often to highlight particularly important scenes.

== Industry ==
The animation industry consists of more than 430 production companies with some of the major studios including Toei Animation, Gainax, Madhouse, Gonzo, Sunrise, Bones and Studio Ghibli. Many of the studios are organized into a trade association, The Association of Japanese Animations. There is also a labor union for workers in the industry, the Japanese Animation Creators Association. Studios will often work together to produce more complex and costly projects, as done with Studio Ghibli's Spirited Away. An anime episode can cost between US$100,000 and US$300,000 to produce. In 2001, animation accounted for 7% of the Japanese film market, above the 4.6% market share for live-action works. The popularity and success of anime is seen through the profitability of the DVD market, contributing nearly 70% of total sales. Spirited Away (2001) is the highest-grossing anime film, with US$274,925,095. 

The anime market for the United States was worth approximately $2.74 billion in 2009. Dubbed animation began airing in the United States in 2000 on networks like The WB and Cartoon Network's Adult Swim. In 2005, this resulted in five of the top ten anime titles having previously aired on Cartoon Network. As a part of localization, some editing of cultural references may occur to better follow the references of the non-Japanese culture. The cost of English localization averages US $10,000 per episode. 

The industry has been subject to both praise and condemnation for fansubs, the addition of unlicensed and unauthorized subtitled translations of anime series or films. Fansubs, which were originally distributed on VHS bootlegged cassettes in the 1980s, have been freely available and disseminated online since the 1990s. Fansubbers tend to adhere to an unwritten code to destroy or no longer distribute an anime once an official translated or subtitled version becomes licensed, although fansubs typically continue to circulate through file sharing networks. 

Legal international availability of anime on the internet has changed in recent years, with simulcasts of series available on websites like Crunchyroll.

=== Awards ===
The anime industry has several annual awards which honor the year's best works. Major annual awards in Japan include the fuji Nobur Award, the Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film, the Animation Kobe Awards, the Japan Media Arts Festival animation awards, the Tokyo Anime Award and the Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year. In the United States, anime films compete in the ICv2.com Anime Awards There were also the American Anime Awards, which were designed to recognize excellence in anime titles nominated by the industry, and were held only once in 2006. Anime productions are also nominated and win awards not exclusively for anime.

== Influence on world culture ==
Akihabara district of Tokyo is the center of otaku subculture in Japan.

Anime has become commercially profitable in Western countries, as demonstrated by early commercially successful Western adaptations of anime, such as Astro Boy. Since the 19th century, many Westerners have expressed a particular interest towards Japan and anime has dramatically exposed more Westerners to the culture of Japan.

=== Fan response ===
Anime clubs gave rise to anime conventions in the 1990s with the "anime boom," a period marked by increased popularity of anime. These conventions are dedicated to anime and manga and include elements like cosplay contests and industry talk panels. Cosplay, a portmanteau for "costume play", is not unique to anime and has become popular in contests and masquerades at anime conventions. Japanese culture and words have entered English usage through the popularity of the medium, including otaku, a derogatory Japanese term commonly used in English to denote a fan of anime and manga. Anime enthusiasts have produced fan fiction and fan art, including computer wallpaper and anime music videos. 

==="Anime style"===
As a popular movement and unique art style, anime styling has been the subject of both satire and serious creative productions. South Parks "Chinpokomon" and "Good Times with Weapons" episodes, Adult Swim's Perfect Hair Forever, and Nickelodeon's Kappa Mikey are examples of satirical depictions of Japanese culture and anime. Some works have sparked debate for blurring the lines between satire and serious "anime style" productions, such as the American anime style production . These anime styled works have become defined as anime-influenced animation, in an attempt to classify all anime styled works of non-Japanese origin. Some creators of these works cite anime as a source of inspiration and like the French production team for ban Star-Racers moved to Tokyo to collaborate with a Japanese production team. When anime is defined as a "style" rather than as a national product it leaves open the possibility of anime being produced in other countries. A series dubbed as the "Middle East's First Anime Show" is currently in production. The web-based series RWBY is produced using an anime art style and has been declared to be anime. Defining anime as style has been contentious amongst fans, with John Oppliger stating, "The insistence on referring to original American art as Japanese "anime" or "manga" robs the work of its cultural identity." 

== See also ==

* List of anime
* Mechademia
* Animation director
* Voice acting in Japan

== References ==

== External links ==

* 

 



[[Asterism]]

Asterism may refer to:

* Asterism (astronomy), a pattern of stars
* Asterism (gemmology), an optical phenomenon in gemstones
* Asterism (typography), a moderately rare typographical symbol denoting a break in passages

==See also==
* 
* 
* Aster (disambiguation)



[[Ankara]]

Ankara (; historically known with the names Ancyra and Angora) is the capital of Turkey and the country's second largest city, Istanbul being the largest. The city has a mean elevation of sp=us 938 and has a population of 4,338,620, with its metropolitan municipality having 4,965,542 as of 2012. Citypopulation.de  Turkey 2011 Trkiye statistik Kurumu (TK)  Bykehir belediyeleri ve bal belediyelerin nfuslar  2011 Ankara, Turkey: Latitude, Longitude and Altitude 2014 Municipal Elections brought controversy to Ankara given some statistical evidence for fraud. 

Centrally located in Anatolia, Ankara is an important commercial and industrial city. It is the center of the Turkish Government, and houses all foreign embassies. It is an important crossroads of trade, strategically located at the center of Turkey's highway and railway networks, and serves as the marketing center for the surrounding agricultural area. The city was famous for its long-haired Angora goat and its prized wool (mohair), a unique breed of cat (Angora cat), Angora rabbits and their prized Angora wool, pears, honey, and the region's muscat grapes.

The historical center of Ankara is situated upon a rocky hill, which rises 150 sp=us above the plain on the left bank of the Ankara ay, a tributary of the Sakarya (Sangarius) river. Although situated in one of the driest places of Turkey and surrounded mostly by steppe vegetation except for the forested areas on the southern periphery, Ankara can be considered a green city in terms of green areas per inhabitant, which is 72 m2 per head. 

Ankara is a very old city with various Hittite, Phrygian, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman archaeological sites. The hill which overlooks the city is crowned by the ruins of the old castle, which adds to the picturesqueness of the view, but only a few historic structures surrounding the old citadel have survived to the present day. There are, however, many well-preserved remains of Hellenistic, Roman and Byzantine architecture, the most remarkable being the Temple of Augustus and Rome (20 BC) which is also known as the Monumentum Ancyranum. 

==Etymology==
As with many ancient cities, Ankara has gone by several names over the ages. It has been identified with the Hittite cult center Ankuwa, although this remains a matter of debate. Gorny, Ronald L. "Zippalanda and Ankuwa: The Geography of Central Anatolia in the Second Millennium B.C." The Journal of the American Oriental Society. Vol. 117 (1997). In classical antiquity and during the medieval period, the city was known as (nkyra "anchor") in Greek and Ancyra in Latin; the Galatian Celtic name was probably a similar variant. Following its annexation by the Seljuk Turks in 1073, the city became known in many European languages as Angora, a usage which continued until its official international renaming to Ankara under the Turkish Postal Service Law of 28 March 1930. 

==History==

Hittite artifacts on display at the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations, Ankara.

The region's history can be traced back to the Bronze Age Hattic civilization, which was succeeded in the 2nd millennium BC by the Hittites, in the 10th century BC by the Phrygians, and later by the Lydians, Persians, Greeks, Galatians, Romans, Byzantines, and Turks (the Seljuk Sultanate of Rm, the Ottoman Empire and Turkey.)

===Ancient history===
The oldest settlements in and around the city center of Ankara belonged to the Hattic civilization which existed during the Bronze Age and was gradually absorbed ca. 20001700 BC by the Indo-European Hittites. The city grew significantly in size and importance under the Phrygians starting around 1000 BC, and experienced a large expansion following the mass migration from Gordion, (the capital of Phrygia), after an earthquake which severely damaged that city around that time. In Phrygian tradition, King Midas was venerated as the founder of Ancyra, but Pausanias mentions that the city was actually far older, which accords with present archaeological knowledge. Pausanias, Description of Greece, 1.4.1., "Ancyra was actually older even than that." 

Phrygian rule was succeeded first by Lydian and later by Persian rule, though the strongly Phrygian character of the peasantry remained, as evidenced by the gravestones of the much later Roman period. Persian sovereignty lasted until the Persians' defeat at the hands of Alexander the Great who conquered the city in 333 BC. Alexander came from Gordion to Ankara and stayed in the city for a short period. After his death at Babylon in 323 BC and the subsequent division of his empire among his generals, Ankara and its environs fell into the share of Antigonus.

Another important expansion took place under the Greeks of Pontos who came there around 300 BC and developed the city as a trading center for the commerce of goods between the Black Sea ports and Crimea to the north; Assyria, Cyprus, and Lebanon to the south; and Georgia, Armenia and Persia to the east. By that time the city also took its name  (nkyra, meaning Anchor in Greek) which in slightly modified form provides the modern name of Ankara.

===Celtic history===
The Dying Galatian was a famous statue commissioned some time between 230220 BC by King Attalos I of Pergamon to honor his victory over the Celtic Galatians in Anatolia. Roman marble copy of a Hellenistic work of the late 3rd century BC, at the Capitoline Museums, Rome.

In 278 BC, the city, along with the rest of central Anatolia, was occupied by a Celtic group, the Galatians, who were the first to make Ankara one of their main tribal centers, the headquarters of the Tectosages tribe. Other centers were Pessinos, today's Balhisar, for the Trocmi tribe, and Tavium, to the east of Ankara, for the Tolstibogii tribe. The city was then known as Ancyra. The Celtic element was probably relatively small in numbers; a warrior aristocracy which ruled over Phrygian-speaking peasants. However, the Celtic language continued to be spoken in Galatia for many centuries. At the end of the 4th century, St. Jerome, a native of Dalmatia, observed that the language spoken around Ankara was very similar to that being spoken in the northwest of the Roman world near Trier.

===Roman history===
Ancyra was the capital of the Celtic kingdom of Galatia, and later of the homonymous Roman province, after its conquest by Augustus in 25 BC.

The city was subsequently conquered by Augustus in 25 BC and passed under the control of the Roman Empire. Now the capital city of the Roman province of Galatia, Ancyra continued to be a center of great commercial importance. Ankara is also famous for the Monumentum Ancyranum (Temple of Augustus and Rome) which contains the official record of the Acts of Augustus, known as the Res Gestae Divi Augusti, an inscription cut in marble on the walls of this temple. The ruins of Ancyra still furnish today valuable bas-reliefs, inscriptions and other architectural fragments.

Augustus decided to make Ancyra one of three main administrative centers in central Anatolia. The town was then populated by Phrygians and Celtsthe Galatians who spoke a language somewhat closely related to Welsh and Gaelic. Ancyra was the center of a tribe known as the Tectosages, and Augustus upgraded it into a major provincial capital for his empire. Two other Galatian tribal centers, Tavium near Yozgat, and Pessinus (Balhisar) to the west, near Sivrihisar, continued to be reasonably important settlements in the Roman period, but it was Ancyra that grew into a grand metropolis.

The Res Gestae is the self-laudatory autobiography completed in 13 AD, just before his death, by the first Roman emperor Augustus. Most of the text is preserved in the Monumentum Ancyranum.
The Roman Baths of Ankara were constructed by the Roman emperor Caracalla (212217) in honor of Asclepios, the God of Medicine, and built around three principal rooms: the caldarium (hot bath), the tepidarium (warm bath) and the frigidarium (cold bath) in a typically laid-out 80m x 120m classical complex.

An estimated 200,000 people lived in Ancyra in good times during the Roman Empire, a far greater number than was to be the case from after the fall of the Roman Empire until the early 20th century. A small river, the Ankara ay, ran through the center of the Roman town. It has now been covered and diverted, but it formed the northern boundary of the old town during the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman periods. ankaya, the rim of the majestic hill to the south of the present city center, stood well outside the Roman city, but may have been a summer resort. In the 19th century, the remains of at least one Roman villa or large house were still standing not far from where the ankaya Presidential Residence stands today. To the west, the Roman city extended until the area of the Genlik Park and Railway Station, while on the southern side of the hill, it may have extended downwards as far as the site presently occupied by Hacettepe University. It was thus a sizeable city by any standards and much larger than the Roman towns of Gaul or Britannia.

Ancyra's importance rested on the fact that it was the junction point where the roads in northern Anatolia running north-south and east-west intersected. The great imperial road running east passed through Ankara and a succession of emperors and their armies came this way. They were not the only ones to use the Roman highway network, which was equally convenient for invaders. In the second half of the 3rd century, Ancyra was invaded in rapid succession by the Goths coming from the west (who rode far into the heart of Cappadocia, taking slaves and pillaging) and later by the Arabs. For about a decade, the town was one of the western outposts of one of the most brilliant queens of the ancient world, the Arab empress Zenobia from Palmyra in the Syrian Desert, who took advantage of a period of weakness and disorder in the Roman Empire to set up a short-lived state of her own.

The town was reincorporated into the Roman Empire under Emperor Aurelian in 272. The tetrarchy, a system of multiple (up to four) emperors introduced by Diocletian (284305), seems to have engaged in a substantial programme of rebuilding and of road construction from Ankara westwards to Germe and Dorylaeum (now Eskiehir).

In its heyday, Roman Ankara was a large market and trading center but it also functioned as a major administrative capital, where a high official ruled from the city's Praetorium, a large administrative palace or office. During the 3rd century, life in Ancyra, as in other Anatolian towns, seems to have become somewhat militarized in response to the invasions and instability of the town. In this period, like other cities of central Anatolia, Ankara was also undergoing Christianization.

Early martyrs, about whom little is known, included Proklos and Hilarios who were natives of the otherwise unknown village of Kallippi, near Ancyra, and suffered repression under the emperor Trajan (98117). In the 280s AD we hear of Philumenos, a Christian corn merchant from southern Anatolia, being captured and martyred in Ankara, and Eustathius.

St. Theodotus of Ancyra

As in other Roman towns, the reign of Diocletian marked the culmination of the persecution of the Christians. In 303, Ancyra was one of the towns where the co-Emperors Diocletian and his deputy Galerius launched their anti-Christian persecution. In Ancyra, their first target was the 38-year-old Bishop of the town, whose name was Clement. Clement's life describes how he was taken to Rome, then sent back, and forced to undergo many interrogations and hardship before he, and his brother, and various companions were put to death. The remains of the church of St. Clement can be found today in a building just off Iklar Caddesi in the Ulus district. Quite possibly this marks the site where Clement was originally buried. Four years later, a doctor of the town named Plato and his brother Antiochus also became celebrated martyrs under Galerius. Theodotus of Ancyra is also venerated as a saint.

However, the persecution proved unsuccessful and in 314 Ancyra was the center of an important council of the early church; which considered ecclesiastical policy for the reconstruction of the Christian Church after the persecutions, and in particular the treatment of 'lapsi'Christians who had given in and conformed to paganism during these persecutions.

The Column of Julian (362) was erected in honor of the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate's visit to Ancyra.

Three councils were held in the former capital of Galatia in Asia Minor, during the 4th century. The first, an orthodox plenary synod, was held in 314, and its 25 disciplinary canons constitute one of the most important documents in the early history of the administration of the Sacrament of Penance. Nine of them deal with conditions for the reconciliation of the lapsi; the others, with marriage, alienations of church property, etc.

Though paganism was probably tottering in Ancyra in Clement's day, it may still have been the majority religion. Twenty years later, Christianity and monotheism had taken its place. Ancyra quickly turned into a Christian city, with a life dominated by monks and priests and theological disputes. The town council or senate gave way to the bishop as the main local figurehead. During the middle of the 4th century, Ancyra was involved in the complex theological disputes over the nature of Christ, and a form of Arianism seems to have originated there.

The synod of 358 was a Semi-Arian conciliabulum, presided over by Basil of Ancyra. It condemned the grosser Arian blasphemies, but set forth an equally heretical doctrine in the proposition that the Son was in all things similar to the Father, but not identical in substance.

In 362363, the Emperor Julian the Apostate passed through Ancyra on his way to an ill-fated campaign against the Persians, and according to Christian sources, engaged in a persecution of various holy men. The stone base for a statue, with an inscription describing Julian as "Lord of the whole world from the British Ocean to the barbarian nations", can still be seen, built into the eastern side of the inner circuit of the walls of Ankara Castle. The Column of Julian which was erected in honor of the emperor's visit to the city in 362 still stands today. In 375, Arian bishops met at Ancyra and deposed several bishops, among them St. Gregory of Nyssa. The modern Ankara, also known in some Western texts as Angora, remains a Roman Catholic titular see in the former Roman province of Galatia in Asia Minor, suffragan of Laodicea. Its episcopal list is given in Gams, "Series episc. Eccl. cath."; also that of another Ancyra in Phrygia Pacatiana.

In the late 4th century AD, Ancyra became something of an imperial holiday resort. After Constantinople became the East Roman capital, emperors in the 4th and 5th centuries would retire from the humid summer weather on the Bosporus to the drier mountain atmosphere of Ancyra. Theodosius II (408450) kept his court in Ancyra in the summers. Laws issued in Ancyra testify to the time they spent there. The city's military as well as logistical significance lasted well into the long Byzantine rule. Although Ancyra temporarily fell into the hands of several Arab Muslim armies numerous times after the 7th century, it remained an important crossroads polis within the Byzantine Empire until the late 11th century. It was also the capital of the powerful Opsician Theme, and after ca. 750 of the Bucellarian Theme.

===Turkish history===
President Mustafa Kemal Atatrk (center) and Prime Minister smet nn (left) leaving the Grand National Assembly of Turkey during the 7th anniversary celebrations of the Turkish Republic in 1930.
In 1071, the Turkish Seljuk Sultan Alp Arslan conquered much of eastern and central Anatolia after his victory at the Battle of Manzikert. He then annexed Ankara, an important location for military transportation and natural resources, to his territory in 1073. After the Battle of Kse Da in 1243, in which the Mongols defeated the Seljuks, most of Anatolia became part of the dominion of the Mongols. Taking advantage of Seljuk decline, a semi-religious cast of craftsmen and trade people named Ahiler chose Ankara as their independent city-state in 1290. Orhan I, the second Bey of the Ottoman Empire, captured the city in 1356. Timur defeated the Ottomans at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 and took the city, but in 1403 Ankara was again under Ottoman control.

Following the Ottoman defeat at World War I, the Ottoman capital Constantinople (modern Istanbul) and much of Anatolia were occupied by the Allies, who planned to share these lands between Armenia, France, Greece, Italy and the United Kingdom, leaving for the Turks the core piece of land in central Anatolia. In response, the leader of the Turkish nationalist movement, Mustafa Kemal Pasha, established the headquarters of his resistance movement in Ankara in 1920. After the Turkish War of Independence was won and the Treaty of Svres was superseded by the Treaty of Lausanne, the Turkish nationalists replaced the Ottoman Empire with the Republic of Turkey on 29 October 1923. A few days earlier, Ankara had officially replaced Constantinople as the new Turkish capital city, on 13 October 1923.

After Ankara became the capital of the newly founded Republic of Turkey, new development divided the city into an old section, called Ulus, and a new section, called Yeniehir. Ancient buildings reflecting Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman history and narrow winding streets mark the old section. The new section, now centered on Kzlay Square, has the trappings of a more modern city: wide streets, hotels, theaters, shopping malls, and high-rises. Government offices and foreign embassies are also located in the new section. Ankara has experienced a phenomenal growth since it was made Turkey's capital. It was "a small town of no importance" Columbia Lippincott Gazeteer when it was made the capital of Turkey. In 1924, the year after the government had moved there, Ankara had about 35,000 residents. By 1927 there were 44,553 residents and by 1950 the population had grown to 286,781.

==Climate==
Due to its elevation and inland location, Ankara has a dry summer continental climate, with cold, snowy winters and hot, dry summers. Rainfall occurs mostly during the spring and autumn. Under Kppen climate classification, Ankara has a dry summer continental climate with a hot summer subtype (Dsa), near the borderline of a cold semi-arid climate (BSk), with some regions of the province having a warm summer subtype (Dsb) of continental climate, depending on elevation. Because of Ankara's high altitude and its dry summers, nightly temperatures in the summer months are cool. Ankara's annual average precipitation is fairly low at sp=us 408, nevertheless precipitation can be observed throughout the year. Monthly mean temperatures range from 0.3 C in January to 23.5 C in July, with an annual mean of 12.02 C.

Record rain= 88.9 kg/m2 (11.06.1997)

Record snow= 30.0 sp=us (05.01.2002)

==Demographics==
Ankara metropolitan area
Kzlay Square during the 2013 protests

Ankara had a population of 75,000 in 1927. In 2013, Ankara has a population of 5,045,083 of which 2,507,525 are men and 2,537,558 are women. Trkiye istatistik kurumu Address-based population survey 2007. Retrieved on 9 October 2008. 

When Ankara became the capital of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, it was designated as a planned city for 500,000 future inhabitants. During the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s, the city grew in a planned and orderly pace. However, from the 1950s onward, the city grew much faster than envisioned, because unemployment and poverty forced people to migrate from the countryside into the city in order to seek a better standard of living. As a result, many illegal houses called gecekondu were built around the city, causing the unplanned and uncontrolled urban landscape of Ankara, as not enough planned housing could be built fast enough. Although precariously built, the vast majority of them have electricity, running water and modern household amenities.

Nevertheless, many of these gecekondus have been replaced by huge public housing projects in the form of tower blocks such as Elvankent, Eryaman and Gzelkent; and also as mass housing compounds for military and civil service accommodation. Although many gecekondus still remain, they too are gradually being replaced by mass housing compounds, as empty land plots in the city of Ankara for new construction projects are becoming impossible to find.

==Economy==
Atatrk Avenue in central Ankara
Stz business district in Ankara, with the Armada Tower & Mall rising behind the Turkish flag.

Historically, the production of mohair from the Angora goat, and Angora wool from the Angora rabbit, have been an important part of the city's economy. These fabrics have been exported from Ankara to Europe and other parts of the globe for centuries.

The Central Anatolia Region is one of the primary locations of grape and wine production in Turkey, and Ankara is particularly famous for its Kalecik Karas and Muscat grapes; and its Kavakldere wine, which is produced in the Kavakldere neighbourhood within the ankaya district of the city. Ankara is also famous for its pears. Another renowned natural product of Ankara is its indigenous type of honey (Ankara Bal) which is known for its light color and is mostly produced by the Atatrk Forest Farm and Zoo in the Gazi district, and by other facilities in the Elmada, ubuk and Beypazar districts.

Ankara is the center of the state-owned and private Turkish defence and aerospace companies, where the industrial plants and headquarters of the Turkish Aerospace Industries, MKE, ASELSAN, Havelsan, Roketsan, FNSS, FNSS Nurol Makina, Nurol and numerous other firms are located. Exports to foreign countries from these defence and aerospace firms have steadily increased in the past decades. The IDEF in Ankara is one of the largest international expositions of the global arms industry. A number of the global automotive companies also have production facilities in Ankara, such as the German bus and truck manufacturer MAN SE. MAN Trkiye Ankara hosts the OSTIM Industrial Zone, Turkey's largest industrial park.

A large percentage of the complicated employment in Ankara is provided by the state institutions; such as the ministries, undersecretariats, and other administrative bodies of the Turkish government. There are also many foreign citizens working as diplomats or clerks in the embassies of their respective countries.

==Main sights==

===Museums===

====Antkabir====
Antkabir is located on an imposing hill, which forms the Anttepe quarter of the city, where the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatrk, founder of the Republic of Turkey, stands. Completed in 1953, it is an impressive fusion of ancient and modern architectural styles. An adjacent museum houses a wax statue of Atatrk, his writings, letters and personal items, as well as an exhibition of photographs recording important moments in his life and during the establishment of the Republic. Antkabir is open every day, while the adjacent museum is open every day except Mondays.

====Ankara Ethnography Museum====
Ethnography Museum of Ankara (1930)
Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (1921)

Ankara Ethnography Museum (Etnorafya Mzesi) is located opposite to the Ankara Opera House on Talat Paa Boulevard, in the Ulus district. There is a fine collection of folkloric items, as well as artifacts from the Seljuk and Ottoman periods. In front of the museum building, there is a marble and bronze equestrian statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatrk (who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal) which was crafted in 1927 by the renowned Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica.

====Museum of Anatolian Civilizations====
The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (Anadolu Medeniyetleri Mzesi) is situated at the entrance of the Ankara Castle. It is an old bedesten (covered bazaar) that has been beautifully restored and now houses a unique collection of Paleolithic, Neolithic, Hatti, Hittite, Phrygian, Urartian, and Roman works as well as a major section dedicated to Lydian treasures.

====State Art and Sculpture Museum====
The State Art and Sculpture Museum (Resim-Heykel Mzesi) is close to the Ethnography Museum and houses a rich collection of Turkish art from the late 19th century to the present day. There are also galleries which host guest exhibitions.

====Cer Modern====
Cer Modern is the modern-arts museum of Ankara, inaugurated on 1 April 2010. It is situated in the renovated building of the historic TCDD Cer Atlyeleri, formerly a workshop of the Turkish State Railways. The museum incorporates the largest exhibition hall in Turkey. The museum holds periodic exhibitions of modern and contemporary art as well as hosting other contemporary arts events.

====War of Independence Museum====
The War of Independence Museum (Kurtulu Sava Mzesi) is located on Ulus Square. It was originally the first Parliament building (TBMM) of the Republic of Turkey. The War of Independence was planned and directed here as recorded in various photographs and items presently on exhibition. In another display, wax figures of former presidents of the Republic of Turkey are on exhibit.

====Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library====
METU Science and Technology Museum (2003)

The Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library is a literary museum and archive opened in 2011 and dedicated to Mehmet Akif Ersoy (18731936), the poet of the Turkish National Anthem.

====TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum====

The TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum is an open-air museum which traces the history of steam locomotives.

====Ankara Aviation Museum====
Ankara Aviation Museum (Hava Kuvvetleri Mzesi Komutanl) is located near the Istanbul Road in Etimesgut. It is home to various missiles, avionics, aviation materials and aircraft that have served in the Turkish Air Force (e.g. combat aircraft such as the F-86 Sabre, F-100 Super Sabre, F-102 Delta Dagger, F-104 Starfighter, F-5 Freedom Fighter, F-4 Phantom; and cargo planes such as the Transall C-160.) Also a Hungarian MiG-21, a Pakistani MiG-19, and a Bulgarian MiG-17 are on display at the museum.

====METU Science and Technology Museum====
The METU Science and Technology Museum (ODT Bilim ve Teknoloji Mzesi) is located inside the Middle East Technical University campus.

===Parks===
Gksu Park 
Dikmen Valley Park

Ankara has many parks and open spaces mainly established in the early years of the Republic and well maintained and expanded thereafter. The most important of these parks are: Genlik Park (houses an amusement park with a large pond for rowing), the Botanical garden, Semenler Park, Anayasa Park, Kuulu Park (famous for the swans received as a gift from the Chinese government), Abdi peki Park, Gven Park (see above for the monument), Kurtulu Park (has an ice-skating rink), Altnpark (also a prominent exposition/fair area), Harikalar Diyar (claimed to be Biggest Park of Europe inside city borders) and Gksu Park.

Genlik Park was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 100 lira banknotes of 19521976. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Banknote Museum: 5. Emission Group  One Hundred Turkish Lira  I. Series, II. Series, III. Series, IV. Series, V. Series & VI. Series.  Retrieved on 20 April 2009. 

Atatrk Forest Farm and Zoo (Atatrk Orman iftlii) is an expansive recreational farming area which houses a zoo, several small agricultural farms, greenhouses, restaurants, a dairy farm and a brewery. It is a pleasant place to spend a day with family, be it for having picnics, hiking, biking or simply enjoying good food and nature. There is also an exact replica of the house where Atatrk was born in 1881, in Thessaloniki, Greece. Visitors to the "iftlik" (farm) as it is affectionately called by Ankarans, can sample such famous products of the farm such as old-fashioned beer and ice cream, fresh dairy products and meat rolls/kebaps made on charcoal, at a traditional restaurant (Merkez Lokantas, Central Restaurant), cafs and other establishments scattered around the farm.

===Shopping===
Atakule Tower (1989)
Sheraton Ankara rising behind Karum shopping mall in the Kavakldere quarter of the ankaya business and leisure district.

Foreign visitors to Ankara usually like to visit the old shops in krklar Yokuu (Weavers' Road) near Ulus, where myriad things ranging from traditional fabrics, hand-woven carpets and leather products can be found at bargain prices. Bakrclar ars (Bazaar of Coppersmiths) is particularly popular, and many interesting items, not just of copper, can be found here like jewelry, carpets, costumes, antiques and embroidery. Up the hill to the castle gate, there are many shops selling a huge and fresh collection of spices, dried fruits, nuts, and other produce.

Modern shopping areas are mostly found in Kzlay, or on Tunal Hilmi Avenue, including the modern mall of Karum (named after the ancient Assyrian merchant colonies called Krum that were established in central Anatolia at the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC) which is located towards the end of the Avenue; and in ankaya, the quarter with the highest elevation in the city. Atakule Tower next to Atrium Mall in ankaya commands a magnificent view over Ankara and also has a revolving restaurant at the top, where the city's panorama can be enjoyed in a leisurely fashion. The symbol of the Armada Shopping Mall is an anchor, and there's a large anchor monument at its entrance, as a reference to the ancient Greek name of the city,  (nkyra), which means anchor. Likewise, the anchor monument is also related with the Spanish name of the mall, Armada, which means naval fleet.

As Ankara started expanding westward in the 1970s, several modern, suburbia-style developments and mini-cities began to rise along the western highway, also known as the Eskiehir Road. The Armada and CEPA malls on the highway, the Galleria in mitky, and a huge mall, Real in Bilkent Center, offer North American and European style shopping opportunities (these places can be reached through the Eskiehir Highway.) There is also the newly expanded ANKAmall at the outskirts, on the Istanbul Highway, which houses most of the well-known international brands. This mall is the largest throughout the Ankara region.

===Archeological sites===

====Ankara Citadel====
Ankara citadel walls
In the Temple of Augustus and Rome (commonly known as the Monumentum Ancyranum) in Ulus, the primary intact copy of Res Gestae written by the first Roman emperor Augustus survives.

The foundations of the Ankara castle and citadel were laid by the Galatians on a prominent lava outcrop (), and the rest was completed by the Romans. The Byzantines and Seljuks further made restorations and additions. The area around and inside the citadel, being the oldest part of Ankara, contains many fine examples of traditional architecture. There are also recreational areas to relax. Many restored traditional Turkish houses inside the citadel area have found new life as restaurants, serving local cuisine.

The citadel was depicted in various Turkish banknotes during 19271952 and 19831989. The citadel was depicted in the following Turkish banknotes:
* On the obverse of the 1 lira banknote of 19271939 (1. Emission Group  One Turkish Lira  I. Series).
* On the obverse of the 5 lira banknote of 19271937 (1. Emission Group  Five Turkish Lira  I. Series).
* On the reverse of the 10 lira banknote of 19271938 (1. Emission Group  Ten Turkish Lira  I. Series).
* On the reverse of the 10 lira banknote of 19381952 (2. Emission Group  Ten Turkish Lira  I. Series).
* On the reverse of the 100 lira banknotes of 19831989 (7. Emission Group  One Hundred Turkish Lira  I. Series & II. Series).
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Banknote Museum.  Links retrieved on 20 April 2009. 

====Roman Theatre====
The remains, the stage, and the backstage of the Roman theatre can be seen outside the castle. Roman statues that were found here are exhibited in the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations. The seating area is still under excavation.

====Temple of Augustus and Rome====

The temple, also known as the Monumentum Ancyranum, was built between 25 BC  20 BC following the conquest of Central Anatolia by the Roman Empire and the formation of the Roman province of Galatia, with Ancyra (modern Ankara) as its administrative capital. After the death of Augustus in 14 AD, a copy of the text of Res Gestae Divi Augusti was inscribed on the interior of the pronaos in Latin, whereas a Greek translation is also present on an exterior wall of the cella. The temple, on the ancient Acropolis of Ancyra, was enlarged by the Romans in the 2nd century. In the 5th century it was converted into a church by the Byzantines. It is located in the Ulus quarter of the city.

====Roman Baths====
The Roman Baths of Ankara have all the typical features of a classical Roman bath complex: a frigidarium (cold room), a tepidarium (warm room) and a caldarium (hot room). The baths were built during the reign of the Roman emperor Caracalla in the early 3rd century AD to honor Asclepios, the God of Medicine. Today, only the basement and first floors remain. It is situated in the Ulus quarter.

====Roman Road====
The Roman Road of Ankara or Cardo Maximus was found in 1995 by Turkish archaeologist Cevdet Bayburtluolu. It is 216 meters long and 6.7 meters wide. Many ancient artifacts were discovered during the excavations along the road and most of them are currently displayed at the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations. 

====Column of Julian====
The Column of Julian or Julianus, now in the Ulus district, was erected in honor of the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate's visit to Ancyra in 362.

===Mosques===
Kocatepe Mosque (1989) is the largest mosque in Ankara.

====Alaeddin Mosque====
The Alaeddin Mosque is the oldest mosque in Ankara. It has a carved walnut mimber, the inscription on which records that the mosque was completed in early AH 574 (which corresponds to the summer of 1178 AD) and was built by the Seljuk prince Muhiddin Mesud ah (d. 1204), the Bey of Ankara, who was the son of the Anatolian Seljuk sultan Kl Arslan II (reigned 11561192.)

====Ahi Elvan Mosque====
It was founded in the Ulus quarter near the Ankara Citadel and was constructed by the Ahi fraternity during the late 14th and early 15th centuries. The finely carved walnut member (pulpic) is of particular interest.

====Hac Bayram Mosque====
This mosque, in the Ulus quarter next to the Temple of Augustus, was built in the early 15th century in Seljuk style by an unknown architect. It was subsequently restored by architect Mimar Sinan in the 16th century, with Ktahya tiles being added in the 18th century. The mosque was built in honor of Hac Bayram- Veli, whose tomb is next to the mosque, two years before his death (142728). The usable space inside this mosque is 437 m2 on the first floor and sp=us 263 on the second floor.

====Yeni (Cenab Ahmet) Mosque====
It is the largest Ottoman mosque in Ankara and was built by the famous architect Sinan in the 16th century. The mimber (pulpit) and mihrap (prayer niche) are of white marble, and the mosque itself is of Ankara stone, an example of very fine workmanship. Yeni Cami is on Ulucanlar Avenue.

====Kocatepe Mosque====
Kocatepe Mosque is the largest mosque in the city. Located in the Kocatepe quarter, it was constructed between 1967 and 1987 in classical Ottoman style with four minarets. Its size and prominent location have made it a landmark for the city.

===Caravanserais===

====Suluhan====
Suluhan Caravanserai (1511)

Suluhan is a historical caravanserai (han) in Ankara. It is also called the Hasanpaa Han. It is about sp=us 400 southeast of Ulus Square and situated in the Hacdoan neighbourhood. According to the vakfiye (inscription) of the building, the Ottoman era han was commissioned by Hasan Pasha, a regional beylerbey, and was constructed between 1508 and 1511, during the final years of the reign of Sultan Bayezid II. History of Ankara 

====engelhan Rahmi Ko Museum====
engelhan Rahmi Ko Museum is a museum of industrial technology situated in engel Han, an Ottoman era caravanserai (han) which was completed in 1523, during the early years of the reign of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. The exhibits include industrial/technological artifacts from the 1850s onwards.

===Modern monuments===

====Victory Monument====
Hatti Monument (1970) on Shhiye Square. It was the city's official logo.

The Victory Monument (Turkish: Zafer Ant) was crafted by Austrian sculptor Heinrich Krippel in 1925 and was erected in 1927 at Ulus Square. The monument is made of marble and bronze and features an equestrian statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatrk, who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal.

====Statue of Atatrk====
Located at Zafer Square (Turkish: Zafer Meydan), the marble and bronze statue was crafted by the renowned Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica in 1927 and depicts a standing Atatrk who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal.

====Monument to a Secure, Confident Future====
This monument, located in Gven Park near Kzlay Square, was erected in 1935 and bears Atatrk's advice to his people: "Turk! Be proud, work hard, and believe in yourself."

The monument was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 5 lira banknote of 19371952 Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Banknote Museum: 2. Emission Group  Five Turkish Lira  I. Series.  Retrieved on 20 April 2009. and of the 1000 lira banknotes of 19391946. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Banknote Museum: 2. Emission Group  One Thousand Turkish Lira  I. Series & II. Series.  Retrieved on 20 April 2009. 

====Hatti Monument====
Built in the 1970s on Shhiye Square, this impressive monument symbolizes the Hatti gods and commemorates Anatolia's earliest known civilization. The symbol derived from this monument has been used as the logo of the city for a long time.

==Transportation==

Kzlay station of the Ankara Metro
Ankara Central Station in 2012. The station was built in 1937. Bus tickets from all other cities to Ankara can be found in Otobusbileti.

Esenboa International Airport, located in the north-east of the city, is Ankara's main airport.
Ankara Intercity Bus Terminal () is an important part of the bus network which covers every neighbourhood in the city.

The Ankara Central Station is a major rail hub in Turkey. The Turkish State Railways operates passenger train service from Ankara to other major cities, such as: stanbul, Eskiehir, Balkesir, Ktahya, zmir, Kayseri, Adana, Kars, Elz, Malatya, Diyarbakr, Karabk, Zonguldak and Sivas. Commuter rail also runs between the stations of Sincan and Kaya. In 2009, the new Yksek Hzl Tren high-speed rail service began operation between Ankara and Eskiehir. On 23 August 2011, another Yksek Hzl Tren high-speed rail line commercially started its service between Ankara and Konya.

The Electricity, Gas, Bus General Directorate (EGO) operates the Ankara Metro and other forms of public transportation. Ankara is currently served by suburban rail and two subway lines with about 300,000 total daily commuters, and three additional subway lines are under construction.

A gondola lift with four stations and 3.2 km long connects the disctrict of entepe to Yenimahalle metro station. 

==Sports==
Ankara Arena (2010)
As with all other cities of Turkey, football is the most popular sport in Ankara. The city has one football club currently competing in the Turkish Super League: Genlerbirlii, founded in 1923, is known as the Ankara Gale or the Poppies because of their colors: red and black. They were the Turkish Cup winners in 1987 and 2001. Ankaragc, founded in 1910, is the oldest club in Ankara and is associated with Ankara's military arsenal manufacturing company MKE. Ankaragc used to play in the Turkish Super League until being relegated to the TFF First League at the end of the 20112012 season. They were the Turkish Cup winners in 1972 and 1981. Genlerbirlii's B team, Hacettepe SK (formerly known as Genlerbirlii OFTA) played in the Turkish Super League for a while until being relegated. All of the aforementioned teams have their home at the Ankara 19 Mays Stadium in Ulus, which has a capacity of 21,250 (all-seater). A fourth team, Bykehir Belediye Ankaraspor, played in the Turkish Super League until 2010, when they were expelled, and currently are not a member of the Turkish league system. Their home was the Yenikent Asa Stadium in the Sincan district of Yenikent, outside the city center.

Ankara has a large number of minor teams, playing at regional levels: Bugsaspor in Sincan; Etimesgut ekerspor in Etimesgut; Trk Telekomspor owned by the phone company in Yenimahalle; Ankara Demirspor in ankaya; Keirengc, Keirenspor, Pursaklarspor, Balumspor in Keiren; and Petrol Ofisi Spor owned by the oil company in Altnda. Most of them, including Hacettepespor, play their matches at Cebeci nn Stadium in the Cebeci district.

In the Turkish Basketball League, Ankara is represented by Trk Telekom, whose home is the Ankara Arena, and CASA TED Kolejliler, whose home is the TOBB Sports Hall.

Ankara Buz Pateni Saray is where the ice skating and ice hockey competitions take place in the city.

There are many popular spots for skateboarding which is active in the city since the 1980s. Skaters in Ankara usually meet in the park near the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.

The 2012-built THF Sport Hall hosts the Handball Super League and Women's Handball Super League matches scheduled in Ankara. 

==Culture and education==
The historic Evkaf Apartman (1929) is the headquarters of the Turkish State Theatres. The building also houses the Kk Tiyatro and Oda Tiyatrosu.
Ankara Opera House of the Turkish State Opera and Ballet (1933)
Bilkent Concert Hall

Turkish State Opera and Ballet, the national directorate of opera and ballet companies of Turkey, has its headquarters in Ankara, and serves the city with three venues:

*Ankara Opera House (Opera Sahnesi, also known as Byk Tiyatro) is the largest of the three venues for opera and ballet in Ankara.

The Turkish State Theatres also has its head office in Ankara and runs the following stages in the city:

*125. Yl ayyolu Sahnesi
*Byk Tiyatro, 
*Kk Tiyatro,
*inasi Sahnesi,
*Akn Sahnesi,
*Altnda Tiyatrosu,
*rfan ahinba Atlye Sahnesi,
*Oda Tiyatrosu,
*Mahir Canova Sahnesi,
*Muhsin Erturul Sahnesi.

In addition, the city is served by several private theatre companies, among which Ankara Sanat Tiyatrosu, who have their own stage in the city center, is a notable example.

Ankara is host to five classical music orchestras:
*Presidential Symphony Orchestra (Turkish Presidential Symphony Orchestra)
*Bilkent Symphony Orchestra (BSO) is a major symphony orchestra of Turkey.
*Hacettepe Symphony Orchestra was founded in 2003 and is currently conducted by Erol Erdin.
*Bakent Oda Orkestras (Chamber Orchestra of the Capital) 

There are four concert halls in the city:
*CSO Concert Hall
*Bilkent Concert Hall is a performing arts center in Ankara. It is located in the Bilkent University campus.
*MEB ura Salonu (also known as the Festival Hall), It is noted for its tango performances.
*ankaya ada Sanatlar Merkezi Concert Hall was founded in 1994.

The city has been host to several well-established, annual theatre, music, film festivals:

*Ankara International Music Festival, a music festival organized in the Turkish capital presenting classical music and ballet programmes.

===Universities===
Ankara is noted, within Turkey, for the multitude of universities it is home to. These include the following, several of them being among the most reputable in the country:

*Ankara University
*Bakent University
*Altn Koza University
*Atlm University
*Turkish Aeronautical Association University
*Bilkent University
*ankaya University
*Gazi University
*Hacettepe University
*Middle East Technical University
*TOBB University of Economics and Technology
*Turgut zal University
*Ufuk University
*Yldrm Beyazt University
*Glhane Military Medical Academy
*Turkish Military Academy
*Turkish National Police Academy

File:TOBB University of Economics & Technology.jpg|TOBB University of Economics and Technology
File:Dil ve Tarih Corafya Fakltesi Binas, Ankara.jpg|Ankara University Faculty of History and Geography (1940)
File:MiddleEastTechnicalUniversityCampus800x470.jpg|Part of the METU campus, as seen from its MM Building
File:Metuba1 big.jpg|An auditorium in METU
File:Merkez1.jpg|The Medical School on the main campus of Hacettepe University (1967)
File:ankaya University Turquoise campus.JPG|ankaya University (1997)

==Fauna==

===Angora cat===

Angora cat

Ankara is home to a world famous cat breed  the Turkish Angora, called Ankara kedisi (Ankara cat) in Turkish. It is a breed of domestic cat. Turkish Angoras are one of the ancient, naturally occurring cat breeds, having originated in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia.

They mostly have a white, silky, medium to long length coat, no undercoat and a fine bone structure. There seems to be a connection between the Angora Cats and Persians, and the Turkish Angora is also a distant cousin of the Turkish Van. Although they are known for their shimmery white coat, currently there are more than twenty varieties including black, blue and reddish fur. They come in tabby and tabby-white, along with smoke varieties, and are in every color other than pointed, lavender, and cinnamon (all of which would indicate breeding to an outcross.)

Eyes may be blue, green, or amber, or even one blue and one amber or green. The W gene which is responsible for the white coat and blue eye is closely related to the hearing ability, and the presence of a blue eye can indicate that the cat is deaf to the side the blue eye is located. However, a great many blue and odd-eyed white cats have normal hearing, and even deaf cats lead a very normal life if kept indoors.

Ears are pointed and large, eyes are almond shaped and the head is massive with a two plane profile. Another characteristic is the tail, which is often kept parallel to the back.

===Angora rabbit===

Angora rabbit

The Angora rabbit () is a variety of domestic rabbit bred for its long, soft hair. The Angora is one of the oldest types of domestic rabbit, originating in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia, along with the Angora cat and Angora goat. The rabbits were popular pets with French royalty in the mid-18th century, and spread to other parts of Europe by the end of the century. They first appeared in the United States in the early 20th century. They are bred largely for their long Angora wool, which may be removed by shearing, combing, or plucking (gently pulling loose wool.)

Angoras are bred mainly for their wool because it is silky and soft. They have a humorous appearance, as they oddly resemble a fur ball. Most are calm and docile but should be handled carefully. Grooming is necessary to prevent the fiber from matting and felting on the rabbit. A condition called "wool block" is common in Angora rabbits and should be treated quickly. Sometimes they are shorn in the summer as the long fur can cause the rabbits to overheat.

===Angora goat===

Angora goat

The Angora goat () is a breed of domestic goat that originated in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia.

This breed was first mentioned in the time of Moses, roughly in 1500 BC. The first Angora goats were brought to Europe by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, about 1554, but, like later imports, were not very successful. Angora goats were first introduced in the United States in 1849 by Dr. James P. Davis. Seven adult goats were a gift from Sultan Abdlmecid I in appreciation for his services and advice on the raising of cotton.

The fleece taken from an Angora goat is called mohair. A single goat produces between five and eight kilograms of hair per year. Angoras are shorn twice a year, unlike sheep, which are shorn only once. Angoras have high nutritional requirements due to their rapid hair growth. A poor quality diet will curtail mohair development. The United States, Turkey, and South Africa are the top producers of mohair.

For a long period of time, Angora goats were bred for their white coat. In 1998, the Colored Angora Goat Breeders Association was set up to promote breeding of colored Angoras. Today, Angora goats produce white, black (deep black to greys and silver), red (the color fades significantly as the goat gets older), and brownish fiber.

Angora goats were depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 50 lira banknotes of 19381952. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Banknote Museum:2. Emission Group  Fifty Turkish Lira  I. Series;3. Emission Group  Fifty Turkish Lira  I. Series & II. Series.  Retrieved on 20 April 2009. 

==Ankara image gallery==

File:Atakule.JPG|Atakule Tower (1989)
 File:Sheraton Ankara.jpg|Sheraton Hotel & Convention Center (1991)
File:A view of the BDDK building, Atatrk Avenue in Ankara.jpg|BDDK Building (1975), formerly the Trkiye  Bankas headquarters, on Atatrk Avenue
File:Kzlay Square in Ankara, Turkey.JPG|Emek Business Center (1965) at Kzlay Square
File:Airport lake style.JPG|Esenboa International Airport (2006)
File:Ankara Airport departures dougbelshaw 1.jpg|Esenboa International Airport (2006)
File:145 Ulus.05.2006 resize.JPG|The historic Ankara Palas Hotel (1927)
File:Ankara Palas 1.JPG|The historic Ankara Palas Hotel (1927)
File:Resim ve Heykel Mzesi Ankara.jpg|Entrance of the State Art and Sculpture Museum (1927)
File:Yunus Emre Institut Ulus Ankara.JPG|Yunus Emre Institute, originally the Tekel Building (1928)
File:TurkishStateTheatresHeadOfficeInAnkara.JPG|Evkaf Apartman (1929) is the headquarters of the Turkish State Theatres and houses the Kk Tiyatro and Oda Tiyatrosu
File:Ziraat Bankas 5.JPG|The historic Ziraat Bank Building (1929)
File:Leyla Gencer Ant.jpg|Statue of Leyla Gencer in front of the Ankara Opera House (1933)
File:Ankara.jpg|View of central Ankara from the Botanical Park
File:Atatrk Meydan'ndan TBMM.jpg|The third and current Grand National Assembly of Turkey building (1938)
File:Guvenpark.jpg|Gvenpark in Kzlay Square
File:Crowne Plaza Ankara.JPG|Crowne Plaza Hotel (2006)
File:Radisson Blu Hotel.JPG|Radisson Blu Hotel, originally Stad Oteli (1970), was designed in 1964 by Doan Tekeli, Sami Sisa and Metin Hepgler
File:Sogutozu Ankara Turkey.jpg|Stz business district in Ankara, with the Armada Tower & Mall (2002) rising behind the Turkish flag
File:ArmadaAVM.jpg|Armada Tower & Mall (2002)
File:AT junction - Balgat.jpg|Yenimahalle, Ankara
File:Ankara, Ati.jpg|Yenimahalle, Ankara
File:TOBB.jpg|TOBB Towers (2001)
File:Halkbank.jpg|Halkbank Tower (1993) designed by Doan Tekeli and Sami Sisa

==International relations==
*List of twin towns and sister cities in Turkey

==See also==

*Angora cat
*Angora goat
*Angora rabbit
*Ankara Agreement
*Ankara Arena
*Ankara Central Station
*Ankara Esenboa International Airport
*Ankara Metro
*Ankara Province
*Ankara University
*Basil of Ancyra
*Battle of Ancyra
*Battle of Ankara
*Clement of Ancyra
*Gemellus of Ancyra
*Marcellus of Ancyra
*Monumentum Ancyranum
*Nilus of Ancyra
*Roman Baths of Ankara
*Synod of Ancyra
*Theodotus of Ancyra (bishop)
*Theodotus of Ancyra (martyr)
*Treaty of Ankara

==References and notes==

==Bibliography==

==External links==

* Governorate of Ankara
* Municipality of Ankara
* Ankara Development Agency
* Esenboa International Airport

 



[[Arabic language]]

Arabic ( or ) is a name for what are traditionally considered the descendants of the Classical Arabic language of the 6th century. This includes both the literary language and varieties of Arabic spoken in a wide arc of territory, stretching across Western Asia (aka the Middle East), North Africa, and East Africa (aka the Horn of Africa). Arabic belongs to the Afro-Asiatic language family.

The literary language is called Modern Standard Arabic or Literary Arabic, which is a pluricentric, fusional language. It is currently the only official form of Arabic, used in most written documents as well as in formal spoken occasions, such as lectures and news broadcasts. However, this varies from one country to the other. Moroccan Arabic was official in Morocco for some time, before Morocco joined the Arab League.

Arabic languages are Central Semitic languages, most closely related to Aramaic, Hebrew, Ugaritic and Phoenician. The standardized written Arabic is distinct from and more conservative than all of the spoken varieties, and the two exist in a state known as diglossia, used side-by-side for different societal functions.

Some of the spoken varieties are mutually unintelligible, "Arabic language." Encyclopdia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Retrieved on 29 July 2009. both written and orally, and the varieties as a whole constitute a sociolinguistic language. This means that on purely linguistic grounds they would likely be considered to constitute more than one language, but are commonly grouped together as a single language for political and/or religious reasons (see below). If considered multiple languages, it is unclear how many languages there would be, as the spoken varieties form a dialect chain with no clear boundaries. If Arabic is considered a single language, it perhaps is spoken by as many as 420 million speakers (native and non-native) in the Arab world, making it one of the half dozen most populous languages in the world. If considered separate languages, the most-spoken variety would most likely be Egyptian Arabic, with 54 million native speakers &mdash;still greater than any other Semitic language. Arabic also is a liturgical language of 1.6 billion Muslim speakers. It is one of six official languages of the United Nations. 

The modern written language (Modern Standard Arabic) is derived from the language of the Quran (known as Classical Arabic or Quranic Arabic). It is widely taught in schools, universities and used to varying degrees in workplaces, government and the media. The two formal varieties are grouped together as Literary Arabic, which is the official language of 26 states and the liturgical language of Islam. Modern Standard Arabic largely follows the grammatical standards of Quranic Arabic and uses much of the same vocabulary. However, it has discarded some grammatical constructions and vocabulary that no longer have any counterpart in the spoken varieties and adopted certain new constructions and vocabulary from the spoken varieties. Much of the new vocabulary is used to denote concepts that have arisen in the post-Quranic era, especially in modern times.

Arabic is the only surviving member of the Ancient North Arabian dialect group attested in pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions dating back to the 4th century. Arabic is written with the Arabic alphabet, which is an abjad script and is written from right-to-left although the spoken varieties are sometimes written in ASCII Latin from left-to-right with no standardized forms.

Arabic has influenced many languages around the globe throughout its history; some of the most influenced languages are Urdu, Persian, Turkish, Somali, Swahili, Bosnian, Kazakh, Bengali, Hindi, Malay, Indonesian, Tigrinya, Pashto, Punjabi, Tagalog, Sindhi and Hausa. During the Middle Ages, Literary Arabic was a major vehicle of culture in Europe, especially in science, mathematics and philosophy. As a result, many European languages have also borrowed many words from it. Many words of Arabic origin are also found in ancient languages like Latin and Greek. Arabic influence, mainly in vocabulary, is seen in Romance languages, particularly Spanish, Portuguese, Catalan and Sicilian, owing to both the proximity of Christian European and Muslim Arab civilizations and 800 years of Arabic culture and language in the Iberian Peninsula referred to in Arabic as al-Andalus.

Arabic has also borrowed words from many languages, including Hebrew, Greek, Persian and Syriac in early centuries, Turkish in medieval times and contemporary European languages in modern times, mostly from English and French.

==History==
===PreIslamic Arabic and Arabic Language ===
The earliest Arabic inscriptions date back to AD 512-568. The Aramaic alphabet was introduced to the Arab people through traders from the Mediterranean Empire and the Arab people began using the script during the Christian period in the Middle East. From the Aramaic, the script continued to develop through two separate kingdoms in the region: The Nabatean and the Palmyran. The Arabic script that is widely used today developed from the Nabataean Kingdoms writing script. While the Nabatean alphabet and writing system met a great deal of the needs, it did not provide letters or symbols for /t/, /d/, /h/, /g/, /z/ and /d/, which were not represented by Aramaic script. The Aramaic writing system also only provided fifteen letter shapes for 28 consonants. In order to differentiate between consonants that had the same shape, a system of placing dots around the letters developed. It took over 100 years in order to codify these dots around letters (Bateson, 55). Evidence of the development of codified dots is recorded on numerous different codes and tombstones. In the 8th century, the dots were finally codified enough that all texts used dots with the exception of purely decorative writings that were not meant to be read. 
 In addition to the issue of codifying the dots above letters, there was also the issue of how to represent vowel sounds in Arabic script, a language made up of an all-consonants script. During the 7th century a dotting system also developed to mark voweling. Red dots were used to mark vowels while black lines were used to mark consonants. Eventually smaller versions of the letters representing short vowels were places above consonants in order to indicate that a vowel was present. 

===Pre-Islamic Poetry and Early Islamic Literature===
The oral poetic tradition had been alive and well for centuries in the Arabian Peninsula before it was eventually recorded. Arab poets blossomed in the 6th century AD but their work was not recorded or written down until the 8th or 9th century AD. There were linguistic oddities in regards to spelling found throughout the poems. The poems had been recorded, but there were different spelling and pronunciation techniques used by different authors when trying to record a poem that had previously only been recited. These differences reflected how different dialects had a large impact on written Arabic and how texts were recorded. To solve this problem, grammarians and scholars asked Bedouins to recite poems in order to hear how they pronounced the poem as their voices were believed to be pure. Consensus was then used to determine the correct pronunciation of a word so that the word could also be spelt correctly. Eventually, scholars and grammarian developed a system for Standardizing Classical Arabic so that texts and words would be written in a way that the majority of the population could understand. 
 The Quran was revealed to Muhammad in 632 CE, but it was nearly a century before it was written down, during the reign of the Caliph Uthman (Holes, 3). Beeston, A. F. L.. The Arabic language today. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2006. Print. The Quran was written down in a way that reflected the pronunciation of the western dialect of Mecca. Scholars from lower Iraq eventually attempted to reclaim the Quran and have it written to reflect their accent and dialect. The scholars in Lower Iraq did not physically alter the script, as the Western Arab scholars did, but instead wrote a pronunciation guide above the existing version of the Quran. 
 Both a formal and informal version of Arabic existed during the Pre-Islamic Period. The informal dialect was used on coin and tomb inscriptions while the formal variety of Arabic was used on letters and contracts. However, contracts were sometimes written in a mixture of Formal and Informal Arabic, reflecting the large influence dialects had on the written language in Pre-Islamic Arabia. 

===The Islamic Conquests and Arabic Language===
The Islamic Conquests introduced Arabic to new non-Arab regions, such as Spain and Persia. As a result, Osmanli, Turkish, Persian, Urdu, Malay, Berber, Swahili and Hausa all adopted some Arabic alphabet into their writing systems and Arabic adopted 12 letters from others (for example, Persian P CH Zh and Ga). These sounds entered Arabic through loanwords (Bateson, 58). Bateson, Mary Catherine. Arabic language handbook. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2003. Print In the 8th century Islamic scholars in Lower Iraq feared the influence that the recently conquered non-Arabs would have on the language and scholars became more conservative and a more standardized Classical Arabic writing system developed (Clive Holes, 4) However, non-Arabs had a huge influence on the religious writings at the time since many of intellectual elite were in fact non-Arab (Clive Holes, 4). 

===Modern era===
During the colonial era, the European powers occupying Arab nations actively encouraged the public spread and use of colloquial Arabic dialects and suppressed the use and teaching of classical Arabic. John Andrew Morrow, Islamic Images and Ideas: Essays on Sacred Symbolism, pg. 257. Jefferson: McFarland & Company, 2013. ISBN 9781476612881 After wiping out a third of the Algerian population between 1830 and 1872, for example, the French then closed all Qur'anic schools and banned public usage of Arabic; Arabic was actually declared a foreign language in 1938 and while about half the population was literate in Arabic at the beginning of French colonization, 90% of the native population was illiterate in both Arabic and French by its end in the 1960s. John andrew Morrow, Islamic Images and Ideas, pg. 258. 

== Classical, Modern Standard and spoken Arabic ==
Arabic usually designates one of three main variants: Classical Arabic, Modern Standard Arabic and colloquial or dialectal Arabic.

Classical Arabic is the language found in the Quran, used from the period of Pre-Islamic Arabia to that of the Abbasid Caliphate. Theoretically, Classical Arabic is considered normative, according to the syntactic and grammatical norms laid down by classical grammarians (such as Sibawayh) and the vocabulary defined in classical dictionaries (such as the ). In practice, however, modern authors almost never write in pure Classical Arabic, instead using a literary language with its own grammatical norms and vocabulary, commonly known as Modern Standard Arabic. This is the variety used in most current, printed Arabic publications, spoken by some of the Arabic media across North Africa, the Horn of Africa and the Middle East, and understood by most educated Arabic speakers. "Literary Arabic" and "Standard Arabic" ( ) are less strictly defined terms that may refer to Modern Standard Arabic or Classical Arabic.

Some of the differences between Classical Arabic (CA) and Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) are as follows:
* Certain grammatical constructions of CA that have no counterpart in any modern dialect (e.g., the energetic mood) are almost never used in Modern Standard Arabic.
* No modern spoken variety of Arabic has case distinctions. As a result, MSA is generally composed without case distinctions in mind, and the proper cases are added after the fact, when necessary. Because most case endings are noted using final short vowels, which are normally left unwritten in the Arabic script, it is unnecessary to determine the proper case of most words. The practical result of this is that MSA, like English and Standard Chinese, is written in a strongly determined word order and alternative orders that were used in CA for emphasis are rare. In addition, because of the lack of case marking in the spoken varieties, most speakers cannot consistently use the correct endings in extemporaneous speech. As a result, spoken MSA tends to drop or regularize the endings except when reading from a prepared text.
* The numeral system in CA is complex and heavily tied in with the case system. This system is never used in MSA, even in the most formal of circumstances; instead, a significantly simplified system is used, approximating the system of the conservative spoken varieties.

MSA uses much Classical vocabulary (e.g., 'to go') that is not present in the spoken varieties. In addition, MSA has borrowed or coined a large number of terms for concepts that did not exist in Quranic times, and MSA continues to evolve. Some words have been borrowed from other languagesnotice that transliteration mainly indicates spelling, and not real pronunciation (e.g., 'film' or 'democracy'). However, the current preference is to avoid direct borrowings, preferring to either use loan translations (e.g., 'branch', also used for the branch of a company or organization; 'wing', also used for the wing of an airplane, building, air force, etc.) or to coin new words using forms within existing roots ( 'apoptosis', using the root m/w/t 'death' put into the Xth form, or 'university', based on 'to gather, unite'; 'republic', based on 'multitude'). An earlier tendency was to repurpose older words that had fallen into disuse (e.g., 'telephone' < 'invisible caller (in Sufism)'; 'newspaper' < 'palm-leaf stalk').

Colloquial or dialectal Arabic refers to the many national or regional varieties which constitute the everyday spoken language. Colloquial Arabic has many regional variants; these sometimes differ enough to be mutually unintelligible, and some linguists consider them distinct languages. "Arabic Language." Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2009. Retrieved on 29 July 2009. The varieties are typically unwritten. They are often used in informal spoken media, such as soap operas and talk shows, as well as occasionally in certain forms of written media, such as poetry and printed advertising. The only variety of modern Arabic to have acquired official language status is Maltese, spoken in (predominately Roman Catholic) Malta and written with the Latin script. It is descended from Classical Arabic through Siculo-Arabic and is not mutually intelligible with other varieties of Arabic. Most linguists list it as a separate language rather than as a dialect of Arabic. Historically, Algerian Arabic was taught in French Algeria under the name darija.
Flag of the Arab league, used in some cases for the Arabic Language.
Flag used in some cases for the Arabic Language

Note that even during Muhammad's lifetime, there were dialects of spoken Arabic. Muhammad spoke in the dialect of Mecca, in the western Arabian peninsula, and it was in this dialect that the Quran was written down. However, the dialects of the eastern Arabian peninsula were considered the most prestigious at the time, so the language of the Quran was ultimately converted to follow the eastern phonology. It is this phonology that underlies the modern pronunciation of Classical Arabic. The phonological differences between these two dialects account for some of the complexities of Arabic writing, most notably the writing of the glottal stop or hamzah (which was preserved in the eastern dialects but lost in western speech) and the use of (representing a sound preserved in the western dialects but merged with in eastern speech).

==Language and dialect==
The sociolinguistic situation of Arabic in modern times provides a prime example of the linguistic phenomenon of diglossia, which is the normal use of two separate varieties of the same language, usually in different social situations. In the case of Arabic, educated Arabs of any nationality can be assumed to speak both their school-taught Standard Arabic as well as their native, mutually unintelligible "dialects"; Janet C. E. Watson, The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic, Introduction, pg. xix. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 9780191607752 Proceedings and Debates of the 107th United States Congress Congressional Record, pg. 10,462. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 2002. Shalom Staub, Yemenis in New York City: The Folklore of Ethnicity, pg. 124. Philadelphia: Balch Institute for Ethnic Studies, 1989. ISBN 9780944190050 Daniel Newman, Arabic-English Thematic Lexicon, pg. 1. London: Routledge, 2007. ISBN 9781134103928 Rebecca L. Torstrick and Elizabeth Faier, Culture and Customs of the Arab Gulf States, pg. 41. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2009. ISBN 9780313336591 these dialects linguistically constitute separate languages which may have dialects of their own. Walter J. Ong, Interfaces of the Word: Studies in the Evolution of Consciousness and Culture, pg. 32. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2012. ISBN 9780801466304 When educated Arabs of different dialects engage in conversation (for example, a Moroccan speaking with a Lebanese), many speakers code-switch back and forth between the dialectal and standard varieties of the language, sometimes even within the same sentence. Arabic speakers often improve their familiarity with other dialects via music or film.

The issue of whether Arabic is one language or many languages is politically charged, similar to the issue with Chinese, Hindi and Urdu, Serbian and Croatian, Scots and English, etc. Similar to how speakers of Hindi and Urdu will claim they cannot understand each other even when they can, speakers of the varieties of Arabic will claim they can all understand each other even when they can't. Clive Holes, Modern Arabic: Structures, Functions, and Varieties, pg. 3. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2004. ISBN 9781589010222 The issue of diglossia between spoken and written language is a significant complicating factor: A single written form, significantly different from any of the spoken varieties learned natively, unites a number of sometimes divergent spoken forms. For political reasons, Arabs mostly assert that they all speak a single language, despite significant issues of mutual incomprehensibility among differing spoken versions. Nizar Y. Habash,Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing, pgs. 1-2. San Rafael: Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2010. ISBN 9781598297959 

From a linguistic standpoint, it is often said that the various spoken varieties of Arabic differ among each other collectively about as much as the Romance languages. Bernard Bate, Tamil Oratory and the Dravidian Aesthetic: Democratic Practice in South India, pgs. 14-15. New York: Columbia University Press, 2013. ISBN 9780231519403 This is an apt comparison in a number of ways. The period of divergence from a single spoken form is similarperhaps 1500 years for Arabic, 2000 years for the Romance languages. Also, while it is comprehensible to people from the Maghreb, a linguistically innovative variety such as Moroccan Arabic is essentially incomprehensible to Arabs from the Mashriq, much as French is incomprehensible to Spanish or Italian speakers. This suggests that the spoken varieties may linguistically be considered separate languages.

== Influence of Arabic on other languages ==

The influence of Arabic has been most important in Islamic countries, because it is the language of the Islamic sacred book, Quran. Arabic is also an important source of vocabulary for languages such as Baluchi, Bengali, Berber, Bosnian, Catalan, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hausa, Hindustani, Italian, Indonesian, Kazakh, Kurdish, Kutchi, Malay, Malayalam, Pashto, Persian, Portuguese, Punjabi, Rohingya, Saraiki, Sindhi, Somali, Spanish, Swahili, Tagalog, Turkish, Urdu, Uzbek and Wolof, as well as other languages in countries where these languages are spoken.

In addition, English has many Arabic loanwords, some directly but most through the medium of other Mediterranean languages. Examples of such words include admiral, adobe, alchemy, alcohol, algebra, algorithm, alkaline, almanac, amber, arsenal, assassin, candy, carat, cipher, coffee, cotton, ghoul, hazard, jar, kismet, lemon, loofah, magazine, mattress, sherbet, sofa, sumac, tariff and many other words. Other languages such as Maltese and Kinubi derive ultimately from Arabic, rather than merely borrowing vocabulary or grammar rules.

Terms borrowed range from religious terminology (like Berber 'prayer' < salat) ( ), academic terms (like Uyghur mentiq 'logic'), economic items (like English coffee) to placeholders (like Spanish fulano 'so-and-so') and everyday conjunctions (like Hindustani lekin 'but', or Spanish taza meaning 'cup' and Portuguese at meaning 'until'), and expressions (like Catalan a betzef 'galore, in quantity'). Most Berber varieties (such as Kabyle), along with Swahili, borrow some numbers from Arabic. Most Islamic religious terms are direct borrowings from Arabic, such as salat 'prayer' and imam 'prayer leader.'

In languages not directly in contact with the Arab world, Arabic loanwords are often transferred indirectly via other languages rather than being transferred directly from Arabic. For example, most Arabic loanwords in Hindustani entered through Persian though Persian is an Indo-Iranian language. Older Arabic loanwords in Hausa were borrowed from Kanuri.

Some words in English and other European languages are derived from Arabic, often through other European languages, especially Spanish and Italian. Among them are commonly used words like "coffee" (qahwah), "cotton" () and "magazine" ([[makhzen|]]). English words more recognizably of Arabic origin include "algebra", "alcohol", "alchemy", "alkali", "zenith," and "nadir".

Arabic words also made their way into several West African languages as Islam spread across the Sahara. Variants of Arabic words such as kitb (book) have spread to the languages of African groups who had no direct contact with Arab traders. 

As, throughout the Islamic world, Arabic occupied a position similar to that of Latin in Europe, many of the Arabic concepts in the field of science, philosophy, commerce etc. were coined from Arabic roots by non-native Arabic speakers, notably by Aramaic and Persian translators, and then found their way into other languages. This process of using Arabic roots, especially in Turkish and Persian, to translate foreign concepts continued right until the 18th and 19th century, when swaths of Arab-inhabited lands were under Ottoman rule.

==Influence of other languages on Arabic==
Arabic was influenced by other languages as well. The most important sources of borrowings into (pre-Islamic) Arabic are from the related (Semitic) languages Aramaic, See the seminal study by Siegmund Fraenkel, Die aramischen Fremdwrter im Arabischen, Leiden 1886 (repr. 1962) which used to be the principal, international language of communication throughout the ancient Near and Middle East, Ethiopic, and to a lesser degree Hebrew (mainly religious concepts). In addition, many cultural, religious and political terms have entered Arabic from Iranian, notably Middle Persian or Parthian and (Classical) Persian, See for instance Wilhelm Eilers, "Iranisches Lehngut im Arabischen", Actas IV. Congresso des Estudos rabes et Islmicos, Coimbra, Lisboa, Leiden 1971, with earlier references. and Hellenistic Greek (kmiy has as origin the Greek chymia, meaning in that language the melting of metals; see Roger Dachez, Histoire de la Mdecine de l'Antiquit au XXe sicle, Tallandier, 2008, p. 251), alembic (distiller) from ambix (cup), qalam (pen, pencil, feather) from kalamos (reed, pen), almanac (climate) from almenichiakon (calendar). (For the origin of the last three borrowed words, see Alfred-Louis de Prmare, Foundations of Islam, Seuil, L'Univers Historique, 2002.) Some Arabic borrowings from Semitic or Persian languages are, as presented in De Prmare's above-cited book:

* ramn (, merciful), from Hebrew and Aramaic, where it had a similar meaning

* nab (, prophet), old non-Arabic term that came into Arabic from Aramaic and Hebrew before the emergence of Islam.

* madnah/medina (, city or city square), a word of Aramaic or Hebrew origin; Alfred-Louis de Prmare explains in The Foundations Of Islam (p. 101) that the Jews were long before Arabs a sedentary population of "Arabian desert."

* jizyah (), the tax imposed by the caliphate on individuals of religion other than Islam (dhimmis), a tax in addition to the levy on agricultural land (kharj). The term comes from the Syriac gzita, which is in turn borrowed from Persian gazit.

* kharj (), land tax originally imposed only on non-Muslims, which comes from the Persian term kharazh, a term which designates the act by which the wealthy citizens were taxed, sometimes imposed upon states; satrapies were supposed to collect them. This term probably originates from the Greek language. Bertold Spuler, The Muslim World a Historical Survey Part 1: The Age of the Caliphs, transl. F.R.C. Bagley, (E.J. Brill, 1960), 24 n1. 

* jazrah (), as in the well-known form "Al Jazeera," means 'island' and has its origin in Syriac gazra/gzrta.

* frq (, savior) is the naturalized form of the Aramaic word poruk, which in the Syriac Bible (Peshitta) means the Savior or Liberator. Once naturalized, the term produced mnemonic derivatives or shortcuts, so the root f-r-q (meaning cutting) became a folk etymological explanation for faruq: the Savior was one who cuts (separates) the truth from falsehood.

* munfiq (, hypocrite), a term borrowed from Ethiopian, where it had the sense of heretical sect.

* lzaward () is taken from Persian ljvard, the name of a blue stone, lapis lazuli. This word was borrowed in several European languages to mean (light) blue - azure in English, azur in French and azul in Spanish.

==Arabic Alphabet and Nationalism==

There have been many instances of national movements to convert Arabic script into Latin script or to Romanize the language.

===Lebanon===
A Beirut newspaper La Syrie pushed for the change from Arabic script to Latin Script in 1922. The major head of this movement was Louis Massignon, a French Orientalist, who brought his concern before the Arabic Language Academy in Damacus in 1928. Massignons attempt at Romanization failed as the Academy and population viewed the proposal as an attempt from the Western world to take over their country. Said Afghani, a member of the Academy, mentioned that the movement to Romanize the script was a Zionist plan to dominate Lebanon. Shrivtiel, p. 188 

===Egypt===
After the period of colonialism in Egypt, Egyptians were looking for a way to reclaim and reemphasize Egyptian culture. As a result, some Egyptians pushed for an Egyptianization of the Arabic language in which the formal Arabic and the colloquial Arabic would be combined into one language and the Latin alphabet would be used. There was also the idea of finding a way to use Hieroglyphics instead of the Latin Alphabet, but this was seen as too complicated to use. A scholar, Salama Musa agreed with the idea of applying a Latin alphabet to Arabic, as he believed that would allow Egypt to have a closer relationship with the West. He also believed that Latin script was key to the success of Egypt as it would allow for more advances in science and technology. This change in script, he believed, would solve the problems inherent with Arabic, such as a lack of written vowels and difficulties writing foreign words that made it difficult for non native speakers to learn. Ahmad Lutfi As Sayid and Muhammad Azmi, two Egyptian intellectuals, agreed with Musa and supported the push for Romanization. Shrivtiel, p. 189 The idea that Romanization was necessary for modernization and growth in Egypt continued with Abd Al Aziz Fahmi in 1944. He was the chairman for the Writing and Grammar Committee for the Arabic Language Academy of Cairo. However, this effort failed as the Egyptian people felt a strong cultural tie to the Arabic alphabet. In particular, the older Egpytian generations believed that the Arabic alphabet had strong connections to Arab values and history, which is easy to believe due to the long history of the Arabic alphabet (Shrivtiel, 189).

== Arabic and Islam ==
Classical Arabic is the language of the Qur'an. Arabic is closely associated with the religion of Islam because the Qur'an is written in the language, but it is nevertheless also spoken by Arab Christians, Mizrahi Jews and Iraqi Mandaeans. Most of the world's Muslims do not speak Arabic as their native language, but many can read the Quranic script and recite the Quran. Among non-Arab Muslims, translations of the Quran are most often accompanied by the original text.

Some Muslims present a monogenesis of languages and claim that the Arabic language was the language revealed by God for the benefit of mankind and the original language as a prototype symbolic system of communication, based upon its system of triconsonantal roots, spoken by man from which all other languages were derived, having first been corrupted. Judaism has a similar account with the Tower of Babel.

== External history ==

Arabic languages (brown) within Semitic languages.
Among the earliest surviving texts in Ancient North Arabian, a group of languages closely related to but not a direct predecessor of Arabic, are the Hasaean inscriptions of in eastern Saudi Arabia, from about the 4th century BC, written not in the modern Arabic alphabet, nor in its Nabataean ancestor, but in variants of the epigraphic South Arabian musnad. More numerous are the 6th-century BC Lihyanite texts from southeastern Saudi Arabia and the Thamudic texts found throughout Arabia and the Sinai, and not actually connected with Thamud. Later come the Safaitic inscriptions beginning in the 1st century AD and the many Arabic personal names attested in Nabataean inscriptions (which are, however, written in Aramaic).

Classical Arabic co-existed with the Old North Arabian languages. In the 5th century BC, Herodotus (Histories I,131; III,8) quotes the epithet of a goddess in its preclassical Arabic form as Alilat (, i. e.,al-ilat), which means "the goddess". Woodard, Roger D. Ancient Languages of Syria-Palestine and Arabia. p 208 Apart from this isolated theonym, Arabic is first attested in an inscription in Qaryat al-Fw (formerly Qaryat Dhat Kahil, near Sulayyil, Saudi Arabia) in the 1st century BC. Woodard, Roger D. (2008), Ancient Languages of Syria-Palestine and Arabia. p. 180 M. C. A. Macdonald, "Reflections on the Linguistic Map of Pre-Islamic Arabia", Arabian Archaeology and Epigraphy, 2000, Volume 11, p. 50 and 61 The oldest inscription in Classical Arabic known in 1985 goes back to 328 AD and is known as the inscription, written in the Nabataean alphabet and named after the place where it was found in southern Syria in April 1901. 
By the fourth century AD, the Arab kingdoms of the Lakhmids in southern Iraq and the Ghassanids in southern Syria appeared. The Kindite Kingdom emerged in Central Arabia. Their courts were responsible for some notable examples of pre-Islamic Arabic poetry and for some of the few surviving pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions in the Arabic script. 

== Internal history ==
The Semitic languages changed a great deal between Proto-Semitic and the establishment of the Central Semitic languages, particularly in terms of grammar. Innovations of the Central Semitic languages  all maintained in Classical Arabic  include
*The conversion of the suffix-conjugated stative formation into a past tense.
*The conversion of the prefix-conjugated preterite-tense formation into a present tense.
*The elimination of other prefix-conjugated mood/aspect forms (e.g., a present tense formed by doubling the middle root, a perfect formed by infixing a /t/ after the first root consonant, probably a jussive formed by a stress shift) in favor of new moods formed by endings attached to the prefix-conjugation forms (e.g. -u for indicative, -a for subjunctive, no ending for jussive, -an or -anna for energetic).
*The development of an internal passive.

===Phonological history===
Of the 29 Proto-Semitic consonants, only one has been lost: , which merged with . But the consonant is still found in many colloquial Arabic. Various other consonants have changed their sound too, but have remained distinct. An original lenited to , and became palatalized to or by the time of the Quran and , , or in MSA (see Arabic phonology#Local variations for more detail). An original voiceless alveolar lateral fricative became . Its emphatic counterpart was considered by Arabs to be the most unusual sound in Arabic (Hence the Classical Arabic's appellation or "language of the "); for most modern dialects, it has become an emphatic stop with loss of the laterality or with complete loss of any pharyngealization or velarization, . (The classical pronunciation of pharyngealization still occurs in the Mehri language and the similar sound without velarization exists in other Modern South Arabian languages.)

Other changes may also have happened. Classical Arabic pronunciation is not thoroughly recorded and different reconstructions of the sound system of Proto-Semitic propose different phonetic values. One example is the emphatic consonants, which are pharyngealized in modern pronunciations may have been velarized in the eighth century and glottalized in Proto-Semitic. 

Reduction of and between vowels occurs in a number of circumstances and is responsible for much of the complexity of third-weak ("defective") verbs. Early Akkadian transcriptions of Arabic names shows that this reduction had not yet occurred as of the early part of the 1st millennium BC.

The Classical Arabic language as recorded was a poetic koine that reflected a consciously archaizing dialect, chosen based on the Bedouin tribes in the eastern part of the Arabian Peninsula, who spoke the most conservative variants of Arabic. Even at the time of Mohammed and before, other dialects existed with many more changes, including the loss of most glottal stops, the loss of case endings, the reduction of the diphthongs and into monophthongs , etc. Most of these changes are present in most or all modern varieties of Arabic.

An interesting feature of the writing system of the Quran (and hence of Classical Arabic) is that it contains certain features of Muhammad's native dialect of Mecca, corrected through diacritics into the forms of standard Classical Arabic. Among these features visible under the corrections are the loss of the glottal stop and a differing development of the reduction of certain final sequences containing : Evidently, final became as in the Classical language, but final became a different sound, possibly (rather than again in the Classical language). This is the apparent source of the alif maqrah 'restricted alif' where a final is reconstructed: a letter that would normally indicate or some similar high-vowel sound, but is taken in this context to be a logical variant of alif and represent the sound .

== Dialects and descendants ==
Different dialects of Arabic.

Colloquial Arabic is a collective term for the spoken varieties of Arabic used throughout the Arab world, which differ radically from the literary language. The main dialectal division is between the varieties within and outside of the Arabian peninsula, followed by that between sedentary varieties and the much more conservative Bedouin varieties. All of the varieties outside of the Arabian peninsula (which include the large majority of speakers) have a large number of features in common with each other that are not found in Classical Arabic. This has led researchers to postulate the existence of a prestige koine dialect in the one or two centuries immediately following the Arab conquest, whose features eventually spread to all of the newly conquered areas. (These features are present to varying degrees inside the Arabian peninsula. Generally, the Arabian peninsula varieties have much more diversity than the non-peninsula varieties, but have been understudied.)

Within the non-peninsula varieties, the largest difference is between the non-Egyptian North African dialects (especially Moroccan Arabic) and the others. Moroccan Arabic in particular is hardly comprehensible to Arabic speakers east of Libya (although the converse is not true, in part due to the popularity of Egyptian films and other media).

One factor in the differentiation of the dialects is influence from the languages previously spoken in the areas, which have typically provided a significant number of new words and have sometimes also influenced pronunciation or word order; however, a much more significant factor for most dialects is, as among Romance languages, retention (or change of meaning) of different classical forms. Thus Iraqi aku, Levantine fh and North African kayn all mean 'there is', and all come from Classical Arabic forms (yakn, fhi, k'in respectively), but now sound very different.

===Examples===
Transcription is a broad IPA transcription, so minor differences were ignored for easier comparison.

 Variety I love reading a lot When I went to the library I didn't find this old book I wanted to read a book about the history of women in France. 
 Literary Arabic in Arabic script(dialects are written in other non-standardized spellings) 
 Classical Arabic(liturgical or poetic only) 
 Modern Standard Arabic 
 Yemeni Arabic (Sanaa) 
 Gulf Arabic (Kuwait) 
 Gilit Mesopotamian (Baghdad?) 
 Hijazi Arabic (Makka?) 
 Western Syrian Arabic (Damascus) 
 Lebanese Arabic (Beyrut?) 
 Urban Palestinian (Jerusalem). 
 Rural Palestinian (West Bank). 
 Egyptian (Cairo) 
 Libyan Arabic (Tripoli?) 
 Tunisian (Tunis?) 
 Algerian (Algiers?) 
 Moroccan (Rabat?) 

=== Koine ===
According to Charles A. Ferguson, the following are some of the characteristic features of the koine that underlies all of the modern dialects outside the Arabian peninsula. Although many other features are common to most or all of these varieties, Ferguson believes that these features in particular are unlikely to have evolved independently more than once or twice and together suggest the existence of the koine:
* Loss of the dual (grammatical number) except on nouns, with consistent plural agreement (cf. feminine singular agreement in plural inanimates).
* Change of a to i in many affixes (e.g., non-past-tense prefixes ti- yi- ni-; wi- 'and'; il- 'the'; feminine -it in the construct state).
* Loss of third-weak verbs ending in w (which merge with verbs ending in y).
* Reformation of geminate verbs, e.g., 'I untied'  .
* Conversion of separate words l 'to me', laka 'to you', etc. into indirect-object clitic suffixes.
* Certain changes in the cardinal number system, e.g., 'five days'  , where certain words have a special plural with prefixed t.
* Loss of the feminine elative (comparative).
* Adjective plurals of the form 'big'  .
* Change of nisba suffix > .
* Certain lexical items, e.g., 'bring' < 'come with'; 'see'; 'what' (or similar) < 'which thing'; (relative pronoun).
* Merger of and .

=== Dialect groups ===
* Egyptian Arabic, spoken by around 55 million in Egypt. It is one of the most understood varieties of Arabic, due in large part to the widespread distribution of Egyptian films and television shows throughout the Arabic-speaking world.
* Levantine Arabic includes North Levantine Arabic, South Levantine Arabic and Cypriot Arabic. It is spoken by about 21 million people in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Palestine, Cyprus and Turkey.
* Maghrebi Arabic, spoken by about 70 million people in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Malta. It is very hard to understand for Arabic speakers from the Mashriq or Mesopotamia, the easiest being Libyan Arabic and the hardest Moroccan Arabic and Maltese language.
* Maltese, spoken on the island of Malta, is the only dialect to have established itself as a fully separate language, with independent literary norms. Sicilian Arabic, spoken on the island of Sicily until the 14th century, developed into Maltese in Malta. In the course of its history the language has adopted numerous loanwords, phonetic and phonological features, and even some grammatical patterns, from Italian, Sicilian and English. It is also the only Semitic language written in the Latin script. 
* Mesopotamian Arabic, spoken by about 15 million people in Iraq, eastern Syria and southwestern Iran (Khuzestan).
* Sudanese Arabic is spoken by 17 million people in Sudan and some parts of southern Egypt. Sudanese Arabic is quite distinct from the dialect of its neighbor to the north; rather, the Sudanese have a dialect similar to the Hijazi dialect.
* Gulf Arabic, spoken by around four million people, predominantly in Kuwait, Bahrain, some parts of Oman, eastern Saudi Arabia coastal areas and some parts of UAE and Qatar. Also spoken in Iran's Bushehr and Hormozgan provinces. Although Gulf Arabic is spoken in Qatar, most Qatari citizens speak Najdi Arabic (Bedawi).
* Yemeni Arabic spoken in Yemen, Somalia, Djibouti and southern Saudi Arabia by 15 million people. Similar to Gulf Arabic.
* Najdi Arabic, spoken by around 10 million people, mainly spoken in Najd, central and northern Saudi Arabia. Most Qatari citizens speak Najdi Arabic (Bedawi).
* Hejazi Arabic (6 million speakers), spoken in Hijaz, western Saudi Arabia
* Hassaniya Arabic (3 million speakers), spoken in Mauritania, Western Sahara, some parts of northern Mali, southern Morocco and south-western Algeria.
* Bahrani Arabic (600,000 speakers), spoken by Bahrani Shiah in Bahrain and Qatif, the dialect exhibits many big differences from Gulf Arabic. It is also spoken to a lesser extent in Oman.
* Judeo-Arabic dialects
* Central Asian Arabic, spoken in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan, is highly endangered
* The Muslim Hui people in China had knowledge of archaic forms of Arabic. The Hui of Yunnan (Burmaese called them Panthays) were reported to be fluent in Arabic. (Original from Harvard University) During the Panthay Rebellion, Arabic replaced Chinese as official language of the rebel kingdom. (Original from the University of Virginia) In 1844 "The Chinese repository, Volume 13" was published, including an account of an Englishman who stayed in Ningbo in China. There he visited the local mosque, the Hui running the mosque was from Shandong and he was a descendant of Muslims from the city of Medina. He spoke both Arabic and Chinese, and could read Arabic as well. (Original from Harvard University) In Tianjin, Hui could speak an old, archaic form of Arabic, when they met Arab Muslims in recent times, it was found out that Old Arabic and Modern Arabic were very different, so Modern Arabic is now being taught to Hui. 
* Samaritan Arabic - spoken by only several hundred in the Nablus region
* Shirvani Arabic, spoken in Azerbaijan and Dagestan until the 1930s, now extinct.
* Andalusian Arabic, spoken in Spain and Portugal until the 16th century.
* Sicilian Arabic, spoken in Sicily until the 14th century, developed into Maltese in Malta.

== Phonology ==

The "colloquial" spoken varieties of Arabic are learned at home and constitute the native languages of Arabic speakers. "Formal" Literary Arabic (usually specifically Modern Standard Arabic) is learned at school; although many speakers have a native-like command of the language, it is technically not the native language of any speakers. Both varieties can be both written and spoken, although the colloquial varieties are rarely written down and the formal variety is spoken mostly in formal circumstances, e.g., in radio broadcasts, formal lectures, parliamentary discussions and to some extent between speakers of different colloquial varieties. Even when the literary language is spoken, however, it is normally only spoken in its pure form when reading a prepared text out loud. When speaking extemporaneously (i.e. making up the language on the spot, as in a normal discussion among people), speakers tend to deviate somewhat from the strict literary language in the direction of the colloquial varieties. In fact, there is a continuous range of "in-between" spoken varieties: from nearly pure Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), to a form that still uses MSA grammar and vocabulary but with significant colloquial influence, to a form of the colloquial language that imports a number of words and grammatical constructions in MSA, to a form that is close to pure colloquial but with the "rough edges" (the most noticeably "vulgar" or non-Classical aspects) smoothed out, to pure colloquial. The particular variant (or register) used depends on the social class and education level of the speakers involved and the level of formality of the speech situation. Often it will vary within a single encounter, e.g., moving from nearly pure MSA to a more mixed language in the process of a radio interview, as the interviewee becomes more comfortable with the interviewer. This type of variation is characteristic of the diglossia that exists throughout the Arabic-speaking world.

=== Literary Arabic ===
Although Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is a unitary language, its pronunciation varies somewhat from country to country and from region to region within a country. The variation in individual "accents" of MSA speakers tends to mirror corresponding variations in the colloquial speech of the speakers in question, but with the distinguishing characteristics moderated somewhat. Note that it is important in descriptions of "Arabic" phonology to distinguish between pronunciation of a given colloquial (spoken) dialect and the pronunciation of MSA by these same speakers. Although they are related, they are not the same. For example, the phoneme that derives from Proto-Semitic /g/ has many different pronunciations in the modern spoken varieties, e.g., . Speakers whose native variety has either or will use the same pronunciation when speaking MSA, even speakers from Cairo, whose native Egyptian Arabic has , normally use when speaking MSA. of Persian Gulf is the only pronunciation which isn't pronounced in MSA, but instead .

Another example: Many colloquial varieties are known for a type of vowel harmony in which the presence of an "emphatic consonant" triggers backed allophones of nearby vowels (especially of the low vowels , which are backed to in these circumstances and very often fronted to in all other circumstances). In many spoken varieties, the backed or "emphatic" vowel allophones spread a fair distance in both directions from the triggering consonant; in some varieties (most notably Egyptian Arabic), the "emphatic" allophones spread throughout the entire word, usually including prefixes and suffixes, even at a distance of several syllables from the triggering consonant. Speakers of colloquial varieties with this vowel harmony tend to introduce it into their MSA pronunciation as well, but usually with a lesser degree of spreading than in the colloquial varieties. (For example, speakers of colloquial varieties with extremely long-distance harmony may allow a moderate, but not extreme, amount of spreading of the harmonic allophones in their MSA speech, while speakers of colloquial varieties with moderate-distance harmony may only harmonize immediately adjacent vowels in MSA.)

==== Vowels ====
Modern Standard Arabic has six pure vowels, with short and corresponding long vowels . There are also two diphthongs: and .

The pronunciation of the vowels differs from speaker to speaker, in a way that tends to echo the pronunciation of the corresponding colloquial variety. Nonetheless, there are some common trends. Most noticeable is the differing pronunciation of and , which tend towards fronted , or in most situations, but a back in the neighborhood of emphatic consonants. (Some accents and dialects, such as those of Hijaz, have central in all situations.) The vowels and are often affected somewhat in emphatic neighborhoods as well, with generally more back and/or centralized allophones, but the differences are less great than for the low vowels. The pronunciation of short and tends towards and in many dialects.

The definition of both "emphatic" and "neighborhood" vary in ways that echo (to some extent) corresponding variations in the spoken dialects. Generally, the consonants triggering "emphatic" allophones are the pharyngealized consonants ; ; and , if not followed immediately by . Frequently, the fricatives also trigger emphatic allophones; occasionally also the pharyngeal consonants (the former more than the latter). Many dialects have multiple emphatic allophones of each vowel, depending on the particular nearby consonants. In most MSA accents, emphatic coloring of vowels is limited to vowels immediately adjacent to a triggering consonant, although in some it spreads a bit farther: e.g., 'time'; 'homeland'; 'downtown' (sometimes or similar).

In a non-emphatic environment, the vowel /a/ in the diphthong tends to be fronted even more than elsewhere, often pronounced or : hence 'sword' but 'summer'. However, in accents with no emphatic allophones of /a/ (e.g., in the Hijaz), the pronunciation occurs in all situations.

==== Consonants ====

 Standardized Arabic consonant phonemes 
 Labial Inter-dental Dental/Alveolar Post-alveolar Palatal Velar Uvular Pharyn-geal4 Glottal 
 plain emphatic emphatic plain 
 Nasal 
 Plosive voiceless 
 voiced 3 ~~~~1 
 Fricative voiceless 6 ~5 4 
 voiced ~ ~5 4 
 Approximant 2 
 Trill 

# This phoneme is represented by the Arabic letter () and has many standard pronunciations. is characteristic of north Algeria, Iraq, also in most of the Arabian peninsula but with an allophonic in some positions; occurs in most of the Levant and most North Africa; and is used in most of Egypt and some regions in Yemen and Oman. Generally this corresponds with the pronunciation in the colloquial dialects. In some regions in Sudan and Yemen, as well as in some Sudanese and Yemeni dialects, it may be either or , representing the original pronunciation of Classical Arabic. Foreign words containing may be transcribed with , , , , , or , mainly depending on the regional spoken variety of Arabic or the commonly diacriticized Arabic letter. Note also that in northern Egypt, where the Arabic letter () is normally pronounced , a separate phoneme , which may be transcribed with , occurs in a small number of mostly non-Arabic loanwords, e.g., 'jacket'.
# is pronounced in , the name of God, q.e. Allah, when the word follows a, , u or  (after i or  it is unvelarized: bismi llh ). Some speakers velarize other occurrences of /l/ in MSA, in imitation of their spoken dialects.
# The emphatic consonant was actually pronounced , or possibly &mdash;either way, a highly unusual sound. The medieval Arabs actually termed their language 'the language of the d' (the name of the letter used for this sound), since they thought the sound was unique to their language. (In fact, it also exists in a few other minority Semitic languages, e.g., Mehri.)
# In many varieties, () are actually epiglottal (despite what is reported in many earlier works).
# and () are often post-velar, though velar and uvular pronunciations are also possible. 
# () can be pronounced as or even . In some places of Maghreb it can be also pronounced as .

Arabic has consonants traditionally termed "emphatic" (), which exhibit simultaneous pharyngealization as well as varying degrees of velarization , so they may be written with the "Velarized or pharyngealized" diacritic () as: . This simultaneous articulation is described as "Retracted Tongue Root" by phonologists. e.g., In some transcription systems, emphasis is shown by capitalizing the letter, for example, is written ; in others the letter is underlined or has a dot below it, for example, .

Vowels and consonants can be phonologically short or long. Long (geminate) consonants are normally written doubled in Latin transcription (i.e. bb, dd, etc.), reflecting the presence of the Arabic diacritic mark , which indicates doubled consonants. In actual pronunciation, doubled consonants are held twice as long as short consonants. This consonant lengthening is phonemically contrastive: 'he accepted' vs. 'he kissed'.

==== Syllable structure ====
Arabic has two kinds of syllables: open syllables (CV) and (CVV)and closed syllables (CVC), (CVVC) and (CVCC). The syllable types with three morae (units of time), i.e. CVC and CVV, are termed heavy syllables, while those with four morae, i.e. CVVC and CVCC, are superheavy syllables. Superheavy syllables in Classical Arabic occur in only two places: at the end of the sentence (due to pausal pronunciation) and in words such as 'hot', 'stuff, substance', 'they disputed with each other', where a long occurs before two identical consonants (a former short vowel between the consonants has been lost). (In less formal pronunciations of Modern Standard Arabic, superheavy syllables are common at the end of words or before clitic suffixes such as 'us, our', due to the deletion of final short vowels.)

In surface pronunciation, every vowel must be preceded by a consonant (which may include the glottal stop ). There are no cases of hiatus within a word (where two vowels occur next to each other, without an intervening consonant). Some words do have an underlying vowel at the beginning, such as the definite article al- or words such as 'he bought', 'meeting'. When actually pronounced, one of three things happens:
* If the word occurs after another word ending in a consonant, there is a smooth transition from final consonant to initial vowel, e.g., 'meeting' .
* If the word occurs after another word ending in a vowel, the initial vowel of the word is elided, e.g., 'house of the director' .
* If the word occurs at the beginning of an utterance, a glottal stop is added onto the beginning, e.g., 'The house is ...' .

==== Stress ====
Word stress is not phonemically contrastive in Standard Arabic. It bears a strong relationship to vowel length. The basic rules for Modern Standard Arabic are:
* A final vowel, long or short, may not be stressed.
* Only one of the last three syllables may be stressed.
* Given this restriction, the last heavy syllable (containing a long vowel or ending in a consonant) is stressed, if it is not the final syllable.
* If the final syllable is super heavy and closed (of the form CVVC or CVCC) it receives stress.
* If no syllable is heavy or super heavy, the first possible syllable (i.e. third from end) is stressed.
* As a special exception, in Form VII and VIII verb forms stress may not be on the first syllable, despite the above rules: Hence 'he subscribed' (whether or not the final short vowel is pronounced), 'he subscribes' (whether or not the final short vowel is pronounced), 'he should subscribe (juss.)'. Likewise Form VIII 'he bought', 'he buys'.

Examples: 'book', 'writer', 'desk', 'desks', 'library' (but 'library' in short pronunciation), (Modern Standard Arabic) 'they wrote' = (dialect), (Modern Standard Arabic) 'they wrote it' = (dialect), (Modern Standard Arabic) 'they (dual, fem) wrote', (Modern Standard Arabic) 'I wrote' = (short form or dialect). Doubled consonants count as two consonants: 'magazine', "place".

These rules may result in differently stressed syllables when final case endings are pronounced, vs. the normal situation where they are not pronounced, as in the above example of 'library' in full pronunciation, but 'library' in short pronunciation.

The restriction on final long vowels does not apply to the spoken dialects, where original final long vowels have been shortened and secondary final long vowels have arisen from loss of original final -hu/hi.

Some dialects have different stress rules. In the Cairo (Egyptian Arabic) dialect a heavy syllable may not carry stress more than two syllables from the end of a word, hence 'school', 'Cairo'. This also affects the way that Modern Standard Arabic is pronounced in Egypt. In the Arabic of Sanaa, stress is often retracted: 'two houses', 'their table', 'desks', 'sometimes', 'their school'. (In this dialect, only syllables with long vowels or diphthongs are considered heavy; in a two-syllable word, the final syllable can be stressed only if the preceding syllable is light; and in longer words, the final syllable cannot be stressed.)

==== Levels of pronunciation ====
The final short vowels (e.g., the case endings -a -i -u and mood endings -u -a) are often not pronounced in this language, despite forming part of the formal paradigm of nouns and verbs. The following levels of pronunciation exist:

===== Full pronunciation =====

===== Full pronunciation with pausa =====
This is the most formal level actually used in speech. All endings are pronounced as written, except at the end of an utterance, where the following changes occur:
* Final short vowels are not pronounced. (But possibly an exception is made for feminine plural -na and shortened vowels in the jussive/imperative of defective verbs, e.g., irmi! 'throw!'".)
* The entire indefinite noun endings -in and -un (with nunation) are left off. The ending -an is left off of nouns preceded by a t marbah  (i.e. the -t in the ending -at- that typically marks feminine nouns), but pronounced as - in other nouns (hence its writing in this fashion in the Arabic script).
* The t marbah itself (typically of feminine nouns) is pronounced as h. (At least, this is the case in extremely formal pronunciation, e.g., some Quranic recitations. In practice, this h is usually omitted.)

===== Formal short pronunciation =====
This is a formal level of pronunciation sometimes seen. It is somewhat like pronouncing all words as if they were in pausal position (with influence from the colloquial varieties). The following changes occur:
* Most final short vowels are not pronounced. However, the following short vowels are pronounced:
** feminine plural -na
** shortened vowels in the jussive/imperative of defective verbs, e.g., irmi! 'throw!'
** second-person singular feminine past-tense -ti and likewise anti 'you (fem. sg.)'
** sometimes, first-person singular past-tense -tu
** sometimes, second-person masculine past-tense -ta and likewise anta 'you (masc. sg.)'
** final -a in certain short words, e.g., laysa 'is not', sawfa (future-tense marker)
* The nunation endings -an -in -un are not pronounced. However, they are pronounced in adverbial accusative formations, e.g.,  'almost, approximately',  'usually'.
* The t marbah ending  is unpronounced, except in construct state nouns, where it sounds as t (and in adverbial accusative constructions, e.g.,  'usually', where the entire -tan is pronounced).
* The masculine singular nisbah ending is actually pronounced and is unstressed (but plural and feminine singular forms, i.e. when followed by a suffix, still sound as ).
* Full endings (including case endings) occur when a clitic object or possessive suffix is added (e.g., 'us/our').

===== Informal short pronunciation =====
This is the pronunciation used by speakers of Modern Standard Arabic in extemporaneous speech, i.e. when producing new sentences rather than simply reading a prepared text. It is similar to formal short pronunciation except that the rules for dropping final vowels apply even when a clitic suffix is added. Basically, short-vowel case and mood endings are never pronounced and certain other changes occur that echo the corresponding colloquial pronunciations. Specifically:
* All the rules for formal short pronunciation apply, except as follows.
* The past tense singular endings written formally as -tu -ta -ti are pronounced -t -t -ti. But masculine is pronounced in full.
* Unlike in formal short pronunciation, the rules for dropping or modifying final endings are also applied when a clitic object or possessive suffix is added (e.g., 'us/our'). If this produces a sequence of three consonants, then one of the following happens, depending on the speaker's native colloquial variety:
** A short vowel (e.g., -i- or --) is consistently added, either between the second and third or the first and second consonants.
** Or, a short vowel is added only if an otherwise unpronounceable sequence occurs, typically due to a violation of the sonority hierarchy (e.g., -rtn- is pronounced as a three-consonant cluster, but -trn- needs to be broken up).
** Or, a short vowel is never added, but consonants like r l m n occurring between two other consonants will be pronounced as a syllabic consonant (as in the English words "butter bottle bottom button").
** When a doubled consonant occurs before another consonant (or finally), it is often shortened to a single consonant rather than a vowel added. (But note that Moroccan Arabic never shortens doubled consonants or inserts short vowels to break up clusters, instead tolerating arbitrary-length series of arbitrary consonants and hence Moroccan Arabic speakers are likely to follow the same rules in their pronunciation of Modern Standard Arabic.)
* The clitic suffixes themselves tend also to be changed, in a way that avoids many possible occurrences of three-consonant clusters. In particular, -ka -ki -hu generally sound as -ak -ik -uh.
* Final long vowels are often shortened, merging with any short vowels that remain.
* Depending on the level of formality, the speaker's education level, etc., various grammatical changes may occur in ways that echo the colloquial variants:
** Any remaining case endings (e.g. masculine plural nominative -n vs. oblique -n) will be leveled, with the oblique form used everywhere. (However, in words like 'father' and 'brother' with special long-vowel case endings in the construct state, the nominative is used everywhere, hence 'father of', 'brother of'.)
** Feminine plural endings in verbs and clitic suffixes will often drop out, with the masculine plural endings used instead. If the speaker's native variety has feminine plural endings, they may be preserved, but will often be modified in the direction of the forms used in the speaker's native variety, e.g. -an instead of -na.
** Dual endings will often drop out except on nouns and then used only for emphasis (similar to their use in the colloquial varieties); elsewhere, the plural endings are used (or feminine singular, if appropriate).

=== Colloquial varieties ===

====Vowels====
As mentioned above, many spoken dialects have a process of emphasis spreading, where the "emphasis" (pharyngealization) of emphatic consonants spreads forward and back through adjacent syllables, pharyngealizing all nearby consonants and triggering the back allophone in all nearby low vowels. The extent of emphasis spreading varies. For example, in Moroccan Arabic, it spreads as far as the first full vowel (i.e. sound derived from a long vowel or diphthong) on either side; in many Levantine dialects, it spreads indefinitely, but is blocked by any or ; while in Egyptian Arabic, it usually spreads throughout the entire word, including prefixes and suffixes. In Moroccan Arabic, also have emphatic allophones .

Unstressed short vowels, especially , are deleted in many contexts. Many sporadic examples of short vowel change have occurred (especially /a//i/ and interchange /i//u/). Most Levantine dialects merge short /i u/ into // in most contexts (all except directly before a single final consonant). In Moroccan Arabic, on the other hand, short /u/ triggers labialization of nearby consonants (especially velar consonants and uvular consonants), and then short /a i u/ all merge into //, which is deleted in many contexts. (The labialization plus // is sometimes interpreted as an underlying phoneme .) This essentially causes the wholesale loss of the short-long vowel distinction, with the original long vowels remaining as half-long , phonemically , which are used to represent both short and long vowels in borrowings from Literary Arabic.

Most spoken dialects have monophthongized original to (in all circumstances, including adjacent to emphatic consonants). In Moroccan Arabic, these have subsequently merged into original .

====Consonants====
In some dialects, there may be more or fewer phonemes than those listed in the chart above. For example, non-Arabic is used in the Maghrebi dialects as well in the written language mostly for foreign names. Semitic became extremely early on in Arabic before it was written down; a few modern Arabic dialects, such as Iraqi (influenced by Persian and Turkish) distinguish between and . The Iraqi Arabic uses also sounds , and uses Persian adding letters, e.g.:  a plum;  a truffle and so on.

Early in the expansion of Arabic, the separate emphatic phonemes and coalesced into a single phoneme . Many dialects (such as Egyptian, Levantine, and much of the Maghreb) subsequently lost fricatives, converting into . Most dialects borrow "learned" words from the Standard language using the same pronunciation as for inherited words, but some dialects without interdental fricatives (particularly in Egypt and the Levant) render original in borrowed words as .

Another key distinguishing mark of Arabic dialects is how they render the original velar and uvular plosives , (Proto-Semitic ), and :
* retains its original pronunciation in widely scattered regions such as Yemen, Morocco, and urban areas of the Maghreb. It is pronounced as a glottal stop in several prestige dialects, such as those spoken in Cairo, Beirut and Damascus. But it is rendered as a voiced velar plosive in Persian Gulf, Upper Egypt, parts of the Maghreb, and less urban parts of the Levant (e.g. Jordan). In Iraqi Arabic it sometimes retains its original pronunciation and is sometimes rendered as a voiced velar plosive, depending on the word. Some traditionally Christian villages in rural areas of the Levant render the sound as , as do Shii Bahrainis. In some Gulf dialects, it is palatalized to or . It is pronounced as a voiced uvular constrictive in Sudanese Arabic. Many dialects with a modified pronunciation for maintain the pronunciation in certain words (often with religious or educational overtones) borrowed from the Classical language.
* is pronounced as an affricate in Iraq and much of the Arabian Peninsula, but is pronounced in most of North Egypt and parts of Yemen and Oman, in Morocco, Tunisia and the Levant, and , in most words in much of the Persian Gulf.
* usually retains its original pronunciation, but is palatalized to in many words in Israel and the Palestinian Territories, Iraq, and much of the Arabian Peninsula. Often a distinction is made between the suffixes ('you', masc.) and ('you', fem.), which become and , respectively. In Sana'a, Omani, and Bahrani is pronounced .

Pharyngealization of the emphatic consonants tends to weaken in many of the spoken varieties, and to spread from emphatic consonants to nearby sounds. In addition, the "emphatic" allophone automatically triggers pharyngealization of adjacent sounds in many dialects. As a result, it may difficult or impossible to determine whether a given coronal consonant is phonemically emphatic or not, especially in dialects with long-distance emphasis spreading. (A notable exception is the sounds vs. in Moroccan Arabic, because the former is pronounced as an affricate but the latter is not.)

== Grammar ==
Examples of how the Arabic root and form system works.

=== Literary Arabic ===

As in other Semitic languages, Arabic has a complex and unusual morphology (i.e. method of constructing words from a basic root). Arabic has a nonconcatenative "root-and-pattern" morphology: A root consists of a set of bare consonants (usually three), which are fitted into a discontinuous pattern to form words. For example, the word for 'I wrote' is constructed by combining the root 'write' with the pattern 'I Xed' to form 'I wrote'. Other verbs meaning 'I Xed' will typically have the same pattern but with different consonants, e.g. 'I read', 'I ate', 'I went', although other patterns are possible (e.g. 'I drank', 'I said', 'I spoke', where the subpattern used to signal the past tense may change but the suffix is always used).

From a single root , numerous words can be formed by applying different patterns:
* 'I wrote'
* 'I had (something) written'
* 'I corresponded (with someone)'"
* 'I dictated'
* 'I subscribed'
* 'we corresponded with each other'
* 'I write'
* 'I have (something) written'
* 'I correspond (with someone)'
* 'I dictate'
* 'I subscribe'
* 'we correspond each other'
* 'it was written'
* 'it was dictated'"
* 'written'
* 'dictated'
* 'book'
* 'books'
* 'writer'
* 'writers'
* 'desk, office'
* 'library, bookshop'
* etc.

====Nouns and adjectives====
Nouns in Literary Arabic have three grammatical cases (nominative, accusative, and genitive used when the noun is governed by a preposition); three numbers (singular, dual and plural); two genders (masculine and feminine); and three "states" (indefinite, definite, and construct). The cases of singular nouns (other than those that end in long ) are indicated by suffixed short vowels (/-u/ for nominative, /-a/ for accusative, /-i/ for genitive).

The feminine singular is often marked by /-at/, which is reduced to /-ah/ or /-a/ before a pause. Plural is indicated either through endings (the sound plural) or internal modification (the broken plural). Definite nouns include all proper nouns, all nouns in "construct state" and all nouns which are prefixed by the definite article /al-/. Indefinite singular nouns (other than those that end in long ) add a final /-n/ to the case-marking vowels, giving /-un/, /-an/ or /-in/ (which is also referred to as nunation or tanwn).

Adjectives in Literary Arabic are marked for case, number, gender and state, as for nouns. However, the plural of all non-human nouns is always combined with a singular feminine adjective, which takes the /-ah/ or /-at/ suffix.

Pronouns in Literary Arabic are marked for person, number and gender. There are two varieties, independent pronouns and enclitics. Enclitic pronouns are attached to the end of a verb, noun or preposition and indicate verbal and prepositional objects or possession of nouns. The first-person singular pronoun has a different enclitic form used for verbs (/-ni/) and for nouns or prepositions (/-/ after consonants, /-ya/ after vowels).

Nouns, verbs, pronouns and adjectives agree with each other in all respects. However, non-human plural nouns are grammatically considered to be feminine singular. Furthermore, a verb in a verb-initial sentence is marked as singular regardless of its semantic number when the subject of the verb is explicitly mentioned as a noun. Numerals between three and ten show "chiasmic" agreement, in that grammatically masculine numerals have feminine marking and vice versa.

====Verbs====
Verbs in Literary Arabic are marked for person (first, second, or third), gender, and number. They are conjugated in two major paradigms (past and non-past); two voices (active and passive); and six moods (indicative, imperative, subjunctive, jussive, shorter energetic and longer energetic), the fifth and sixth moods, the energetics, exist only in Classical Arabic but not in MSA. Rydin, Karin C. (2005). A reference grammar of Modern Standard Arabic. New York: Cambridge University Press. There are also two participles (active and passive) and a verbal noun, but no infinitive.

The past and non-past paradigms are sometimes also termed perfective and imperfective, indicating the fact that they actually represent a combination of tense and aspect. The moods other than the indicative occur only in the non-past, and the future tense is signaled by prefixing or onto the non-past. The past and non-past differ in the form of the stem (e.g., past vs. non-past ), and also use completely different sets of affixes for indicating person, number and gender: In the past, the person, number and gender are fused into a single suffixal morpheme, while in the non-past, a combination of prefixes (primarily encoding person) and suffixes (primarily encoding gender and number) are used. The passive voice uses the same person/number/gender affixes but changes the vowels of the stem.

The following shows a paradigm of a regular Arabic verb, 'to write'. Note that in Modern Standard Arabic, many final short vowels are dropped (indicated in parentheses below), and the energetic mood (in either long or short form, which have the same meaning) is almost never used.

====Derivation====
Unlike most languages, Arabic has virtually no means of deriving words by adding prefixes or suffixes to words. Instead, they are formed according to a finite (but fairly large) number of templates applied to roots.

For verbs, a given root can construct up to fifteen different verbs, each with one or more characteristic meanings and each with its own templates for the past and non-past stems, active and passive participles, and verbal noun. These are referred to by Western scholars as "Form I", "Form II", and so on through "Form XV" (although Forms XI to XV are rare). These forms encode concepts such as the causative, intensive and reflexive. These forms can be viewed as analogous to verb conjugations in languages such as Spanish in terms of the additional complexity of verb formation that they induce. (Note, however, that their usage in constructing vocabulary is somewhat different, since the same root can be conjugated in multiple forms, with different shades of meaning.)

Examples of the different verbs formed from the root 'write' (using 'red' for Form IX, which is limited to colors and physical defects):

+Most of these forms are exclusively Classical Arabic Form Past Meaning Non-past Meaning 
 I 'he wrote' 'he writes' 
 II 'he made (someone) write' \"he makes (someone) write\" 
 III 'he corresponded with, wrote to (someone)' 'he corresponds with, writes to (someone)' 
 IV 'he dictated' 'he dictates' 
 V 'nonexistent' 'nonexistent' 
 VI 'he corresponded (with someone, esp. mutually)' 'he corresponds (with someone, esp. mutually)' 
 VII 'he subscribed' 'he subscribes' 
 VIII 'he copied' 'he copies' 
 IX 'he turned red' 'he turns red' 
 X 'he asked (someone) to write' 'he asks (someone) to write' 

Form II is sometimes used to create transitive denominative verbs (verbs built from nouns); Form V is the equivalent used for intransitive denominatives.

The associated participles and verbal nouns of a verb are the primary means of forming new lexical nouns in Arabic. This is similar to the process by which, for example, the English gerund "meeting" (similar to a verbal noun) has turned into a noun referring to a particular type of social, often work-related event where people gather together to have a "discussion" (another lexicalized verbal noun). Another fairly common means of forming nouns is through one of a limited number of patterns that can be applied directly to roots, such as the "nouns of location" in ma- (e.g. 'desk, office' < 'write', 'kitchen' < 'cook').

The only three genuine suffixes are as follows:
* The feminine suffix -ah; variously derives terms from women from related terms for men, or more generally terms along the same lines as the corresponding masculine, e.g. 'library' (also a writing-related place, but different than , as above).
* The nisbah suffix -iyy-. This suffix is extremely productive, and forms adjectives meaning "related to X". It corresponds to English adjectives in -ic, -al, -an, -y, -ist, etc.
* The feminine nisbah suffix -iyyah. This is formed by adding the feminine suffix -ah onto nisba adjectives to form abstract nouns. For example, from the basic root 'share' can be derived the Form VIII verb 'to cooperate, participate', and in turn its verbal noun 'cooperation, participation' can be formed. This in turn can be made into a nisbah adjective 'socialist', from which an abstract noun 'socialism' can be derived. Other recent formations are 'republic' (lit. "public-ness", < 'multitude, general public'), and the Gaddafi-specific variation 'people's republic' (lit. "masses-ness", < 'the masses', pl. of , as above).

=== Colloquial varieties ===

The spoken dialects have lost the case distinctions and make only limited use of the dual (it occurs only on nouns and its use is no longer required in all circumstances). They have lost the mood distinctions other than imperative, but many have since gained new moods through the use of prefixes (most often /bi-/ for indicative vs. unmarked subjunctive). They have also mostly lost the indefinite "nunation" and the internal passive.

The following is an example of a regular verb paradigm in Egyptian Arabic.

+Example of a regular Form I verb in Egyptian Arabic, ktab/yktib \"write\" Tense/Mood Past Present Subjunctive Present Indicative Future Imperative 
 Singular 
 1st katb-t -ktib b-ktib -ktib 
 2nd masculine katb-t t-ktib bi-t-ktib a-t-ktib -ktib 
 feminine katb-ti ti-ktb-i bi-ti-ktb-i a-ti-ktb-i i-ktb-i 
 3rd masculine ktab y-ktib bi-y-ktib a-y-ktib 
 feminine ktab-it t-ktib bi-t-ktib a-t-ktib 
 Plural 
 1st katb-na n-ktib bi-n-ktib -n-ktib 
 2nd katb-tu ti-ktb-u bi-ti-ktb-u a-ti-ktb-u i-ktb-u 
 3rd ktab-u yi-ktb-u bi-yi-ktb-u a-yi-ktb-u 

== Writing system ==

Islamic calligraphy written by a Malay Muslim in Malaysia. The calligrapher is making a rough draft.
The Arabic alphabet derives from the Aramaic through Nabatean, to which it bears a loose resemblance like that of Coptic or Cyrillic scripts to Greek script. Traditionally, there were several differences between the Western (North African) and Middle Eastern versions of the alphabetin particular, the fa had a dot underneath and qaf a single dot above in the Maghreb, and the order of the letters was slightly different (at least when they were used as numerals).

However, the old Maghrebi variant has been abandoned except for calligraphic purposes in the Maghreb itself, and remains in use mainly in the Quranic schools (zaouias) of West Africa. Arabic, like all other Semitic languages (except for the Latin-written Maltese, and the languages with the Ge'ez script), is written from right to left. There are several styles of script, notably naskh, which is used in print and by computers, and ruqah, which is commonly used in handwriting. 

=== Calligraphy ===

After Khalil ibn Ahmad al Farahidi finally fixed the Arabic script around 786, many styles were developed, both for the writing down of the Quran and other books, and for inscriptions on monuments as decoration.

Arabic calligraphy has not fallen out of use as calligraphy has in the Western world, and is still considered by Arabs as a major art form; calligraphers are held in great esteem. Being cursive by nature, unlike the Latin script, Arabic script is used to write down a verse of the Quran, a hadith, or simply a proverb. The composition is often abstract, but sometimes the writing is shaped into an actual form such as that of an animal. One of the current masters of the genre is Hassan Massoudy.

=== Romanization ===

 Examples of different transliteration/transcription schemes Letter IPA UNGEGN ALA-LC Wehr DIN ISO SAS -2 BATR ArabTeX chat 
 , ' e ' 2 
 aa aa / A a a/e/ 
 , y y; y; e y; ii y y; i/ee; ei/ai 
 th  c _t s/th 
 ~~ j j j ^g j/g/dj 
 H .h 7 
 kh j x K _h kh/7'/5 
 dh  z' _d z/dh/th 
 sh x ^s sh/ch 
 S .s s/9 
 D .d d/9' 
 T .t t/6 
 ~  Z .z z/dh/6' 
  E ' 3 
 gh g j g .g gh/3'/8 

There are a number of different standards for the romanization of Arabic, i.e. methods of accurately and efficiently representing Arabic with the Latin script. There are various conflicting motivations involved, which leads to multiple systems. Some are interested in transliteration, i.e. representing the spelling of Arabic, while others focus on transcription, i.e. representing the pronunciation of Arabic. (They differ in that, for example, the same letter is used to represent both a consonant, as in "you" or "yet", and a vowel, as in "me" or "eat".) Some systems, e.g. for scholarly use, are intended to accurately and unambiguously represent the phonemes of Arabic, generally making the phonetics more explicit than the original word in the Arabic script. These systems are heavily reliant on diacritical marks such as "" for the sound equivalently written sh in English. Other systems (e.g. the Bah' orthography) are intended to help readers who are neither Arabic speakers nor linguists to intuitively pronounce Arabic names and phrases. Kharusi, N. S. & Salman, A. (2011) The English Transliteration of Place Names in Oman. Journal of Academic and Applied Studies Vol. 1(3) September 2011, pp. 127 Available online at www.academians.org These less "scientific" tend to avoid diacritics and use digraphs (like sh and kh). These are usually more simple to read, but sacrifice the definiteness of the scientific systems, and may lead to ambiguities, e.g. whether to interpret sh as a single sound, as in gash, or a combination of two sounds, as in gashouse. The ALA-LC romanization solves this problem by separating the two sounds with a prime symbol (  ); e.g., ashal 'easier'.

During the last few decades and especially since the 1990s, Western-invented text communication technologies have become prevalent in the Arab world, such as personal computers, the World Wide Web, email, bulletin board systems, IRC, instant messaging and mobile phone text messaging. Most of these technologies originally had the ability to communicate using the Latin script only, and some of them still do not have the Arabic script as an optional feature. As a result, Arabic speaking users communicated in these technologies by transliterating the Arabic text using the Latin script, sometimes known as IM Arabic.

To handle those Arabic letters that cannot be accurately represented using the Latin script, numerals and other characters were appropriated. For example, the numeral "3" may be used to represent the Arabic letter . There is no universal name for this type of transliteration, but some have named it Arabic Chat Alphabet. Other systems of transliteration exist, such as using dots or capitalization to represent the "emphatic" counterparts of certain consonants. For instance, using capitalization, the letter , may be represented by d. Its emphatic counterpart, , may be written as D.

=== Numerals ===
In most of present-day North Africa, the Western Arabic numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) are used. However, in Egypt and Arabic-speaking countries to the east of it, the Eastern Arabic numerals (          ) are in use. When representing a number in Arabic, the lowest-valued position is placed on the right, so the order of positions is the same as in left-to-right scripts. Sequences of digits such as telephone numbers are read from left to right, but numbers are spoken in the traditional Arabic fashion, with units and tens reversed from the modern English usage. For example, 24 is said "four and twenty" just like in the German language (vierundzwanzig) and Classical Hebrew, and 1975 is said "a thousand and nine-hundred and five and seventy" or, more eloquently, "five and seventy and nine-hundred and a thousand."

== Language-standards regulators ==
Academy of the Arabic Language is the name of a number of language-regulation bodies formed in the Arab League. The most active are in Damascus and Cairo. They review language development, monitor new words and approve inclusion of new words into their published standard dictionaries. They also publish old and historical Arabic manuscripts.

== Studying Arabic ==
Arabic has been taught worldwide in many elementary and secondary schools, especially Muslim schools. Universities around the world have classes that teach Arabic as part of their foreign languages, Middle Eastern studies, and religious studies courses. Arabic language schools exist to assist students to learn Arabic outside the academic world. There are many Arabic language schools in the Arab world and other Muslim countries. Because the Quran is written in Arabic and all Islamic terms are in Arabic, millions of Muslims (both Arab and non-Arab) study the language. Software and books with tapes are also important part of Arabic learning, as many of Arabic learners may live in places where there are no academic or Arabic language school classes available. Radio series of Arabic language classes are also provided from some radio stations. A number of websites on the Internet provide online classes for all levels as a means of distance education; most teach Modern Standard Arabic, but some teach regional varieties from numerous countries. 

 English Arabic Arabic (vowelled) Romanization (ALA-LC) IPA 
 English or or (varies) (varies) 
 Yes 
 No 
 Hello 
 Peace (Usually Islamic) 
 How are you? 
 Welcome 
 Goodbye 
 Please 
 Thanks 
 Excuse me 
 I'm sorry 
 What's your name? 
 How much? 
 I don't understand. 
 I don't speak Arabic. 
 I don't know. 
 I'm hungry. 
 Orange 
 Black 
 One 
 Two 
 Three 
 Four 
 Five 
 Six 
 Seven 
 Eight 
 Nine 
 Ten 
 Eleven 
 Twelve 

==Arabic speakers and other languages==

Historically, Arab linguists considered the Arabic language to be superior to all other languages, and took almost no interest in learning any language other than Arabic. With the sole example of Medieval linguist Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati - who, while a scholar of the Arabic language, was not ethnically Arab - scholars of the Arabic language made no efforts at studying comparative linguistics, considering all other languages inferior. Kees Versteegh, The Arabic Linguistic Tradition, pg. 106. Part of Landmarks in Linguistic Thought series, vol. 3. New York: Routledge, 1997. ISBN 9780415157575 

In modern times, the educated upper classes in the Arab world have taken a nearly opposite view. Yasir Suleiman wrote in 2011 that "studying and knowing English or French in most of the Middle East and North Africa have become a badge of sophistication and modernity and when feigning, or asserting, weakness or lack of facility in Arabic is sometimes paraded as a sign of status, class, and perversely, even education through a mlange of code-switching practises." Suleiman, p. 93 Arab-American professor Franck Salamah went as far as to declare Arabic a dead language conveying dead ideas, blaming its stagnation for Arab intellectual stagnation and lamenting that great writers in Arabic are judged by their command of the language and not the merit of the ideas they express with it. Franck Salamah, Language, Memory, and Identity in the Middle East: The Case for Lebanon, Introduction, pg. xvi. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2010. ISBN 9780739137406 

== See also ==

* Arabic diglossia
* AIDA - International Association of Arabic Dialectology
* Arabic grammar
* Arabic influence on the Spanish language
* Arabic literature
* ArabicEnglish Lexicon
* Arabist
* Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic

* Glossary of Islam
* List of arabophones
* List of countries where Arabic is an official language
* List of French words of Arabic origin
* List of Portuguese words of Arabic origin
* List of replaced loanwords in Turkish

== References ==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Suileman, Yasir. Arabic, Self and Identity: A Study in Conflict and Displacement. Oxford University Press, 10 August 2011. ISBN 0199747016, 9780199747016.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Arabic: a Category III language Languages which are difficult for native English speakers.
* Foreign Service Institute Arabic basic-intermediate courses, audio, assignments, G+ hangouts and media sources 
* Dr. Nizar Habash's, Columbia University, Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing
* Google Ta3reeb  Google Transliteration
* Transliteration Arabic language pronunciation applet
* USA Foreign Service Institute Arabic basic course
* How to speak Arabic
* 

 



[[Alfred Hitchcock]]

Sir Alfred Joseph Hitchcock, KBE (13 August 1899  29 April 1980) was an English film director and producer. Often nicknamed "The Master of Suspense", he pioneered many techniques in the suspense and psychological thriller genres. After a successful career in British cinema in both silent films and early talkies, renowned as England's best director, Hitchcock moved to Hollywood in 1939 Life, 19 June 1939, p. 66: Alfred Hitchcock: England's Best Director starts work in Hollywood. Retrieved 4 October 2012 and became a US citizen in 1955.

Over a career spanning more than half a century, Hitchcock fashioned for himself a distinctive and recognisable directorial style. He pioneered the use of a camera made to move in a way that mimics a person's gaze, forcing viewers to engage in a form of voyeurism. He framed shots to maximise anxiety, fear, or empathy, and used innovative film editing. His stories often feature fugitives on the run from the law alongside "icy blonde" female characters. Many of Hitchcock's films have twist endings and thrilling plots featuring depictions of violence, murder, and crime. Many of the mysteries, however, are used as decoys or "MacGuffins" that serve the film's themes and the psychological examinations of the characters. Hitchcock's films also borrow many themes from psychoanalysis and feature strong sexual overtones. Through his cameo appearances in his own films, interviews, film trailers, and the television program Alfred Hitchcock Presents, he became a cultural icon.

Hitchcock directed more than fifty feature films in a career spanning six decades. Often regarded as the greatest British filmmaker, he came first in a 2007 poll of film critics in Britain's Daily Telegraph, which said: "Unquestionably the greatest filmmaker to emerge from these islands, Hitchcock did more than any director to shape modern cinema, which would be utterly different without him. His flair was for narrative, cruelly withholding crucial information (from his characters and from us) and engaging the emotions of the audience like no one else." The magazine MovieMaker has described him as the most influential filmmaker of all time, and he is widely regarded as one of cinema's most significant artists. 

==Early life==
Born on 13 August 1899 in Leytonstone, (then part of Essex, now part of London), England, Hitchcock was the second son and the youngest of three children of William Hitchcock (18621914), a greengrocer and poulterer, and Emma Jane Hitchcock (ne Whelan; 18631942). Named Alfred after his father's brother, Hitchcock was brought up as a Roman Catholic and was sent to Salesian College and the Jesuit Classic school St Ignatius' College in Stamford Hill, London. His parents were both of half-English and half-Irish ancestry. Patrick McGilligan, p. 7 http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000033/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm He often described a lonely and sheltered childhood worsened by his obesity. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 1819 

Around age five, according to Hitchcock, he was sent by his father to the local police station with a note asking the officer to lock him away for five minutes as punishment for behaving badly. This incident not only implanted a lifetime fear of policemen in Hitchcock, but such harsh treatment and wrongful accusations would be found frequently throughout his films. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 78 

When Hitchcock was 15, his father died. In the same year, he left St. Ignatius to study at the London County Council School of Engineering and Navigation in Poplar, London. Patrick McGillang, p. 25. The school is now part of Tower Hamlets College. After leaving, he became a draftsman and advertising designer with a cable company called Henley's. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 2425 During the First World War, Hitchcock was rejected for military service because of his obesity  sometimes thought to have been caused by a glandular condition. Nevertheless, the young man signed up to a cadet regiment of the Royal Engineers in 1917. His military stint was limited: he received theoretical briefings, weekend drills and exercises. Hitchcock would march around Hyde Park and was required to wear puttees, which he could never master how to wrap around his legs properly. 

While working at Henley's, Hitchcock began to dabble creatively. After the company's in-house publication, The Henley Telegraph, was founded in 1919, he often submitted short articles and eventually became one of its most prolific contributors. His first piece was "Gas" (1919), published in the first issue, in which a young woman imagines that she is being assaulted one night in Paris  only for the twist to reveal that it was all just a hallucination in the dentist's chair, induced by the anaesthetic.

Hitchcock's second piece was "The Woman's Part" (1919), which involves the conflicted emotions a husband feels as he watches his wife, an actress, perform onstage. "Sordid" (1920) surrounds an attempt to buy a sword from an antiques dealer, with another twist ending. The short story "And There Was No Rainbow" (1920) was Hitchcock's first brush with possibly censurable material. A young man goes out looking for a brothel, only to stumble into the house of his best friend's girl. "What's Who?" (1920), while humorous, was also a forerunner to the famous Abbott and Costello "Who's on First?" routine. "The History of Pea Eating" (1920) was a satirical disquisition on the various attempts people have made over the centuries to eat peas successfully. His final piece, "Fedora" (1921), was his shortest and most enigmatic contribution. It also gave a strikingly accurate description of his future wife, Alma Reville (whom he had not yet met). Patrick McGilligan, pp. 3045 

During this period, Hitchcock became intrigued by photography and started working in film production in London, working as a title card designer for the London branch of what would become Paramount Pictures. In 1920, he received a full-time position at Islington Studios with its American owner, Famous Players-Lasky, and their British successor, Gainsborough Pictures, designing the titles for silent movies. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 4651 His rise from title designer to film director took five years.

==Inter-war British career==
Hitchcock's last collaboration with Graham Cutts led him to Germany in 1924. The film The Blackguard (German title Die Prinzessin und der Geiger, 1925), directed by Cutts and co-written by Hitchcock, was produced in the Babelsberg Studios in Potsdam near Berlin. Hitchcock also observed part of the making of F. W. Murnau's film The Last Laugh (1924). Sidney Gottlieb (ed), Alfred Hitchcock: Interviews By Alfred Hitchcock. Illustrated Edition. (Univ. Press of Mississippi, 2003). pp. 157158. He was very impressed with Murnau's work and later used many techniques for the set design in his own productions. In a book-length interview with Franois Truffaut, Hitchcock also said he was influenced by Fritz Lang's film Destiny (1921). He was likewise influenced by other foreign filmmakers whose work he absorbed as one of the earliest members of the "seminal" London Film Society, formed in 1925. 

Hitchcock (right) during the making of Number 13
Hitchcock's first few films faced a string of bad luck. His first directing project came in 1922 with the aptly titled Number 13. Donald Spoto. The Art of Alfred Hitchcock. New York: Anchor Books, 19761992. p. 3 ISBN 978-0-385-41813-3 The production was cancelled because of financial problems; filmed in London, the few scenes that had been finished at that point have been lost. In 1925, Michael Balcon of Gainsborough Pictures gave Hitchcock another opportunity for a directing credit with The Pleasure Garden made at UFA Studios in Germany; the film was a commercial flop. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 6871 Next, Hitchcock directed a drama called The Mountain Eagle (possibly released under the title Fear o' God in the United States). This film was also eventually lost. Donald Spoto. The Art of Alfred Hitchcock. New York: Anchor Books, 19761992. p. 5 ISBN 978-0-385-41813-3 

In 1926, Hitchcock's luck changed with his first thriller, , a suspense film about the hunt for a Jack the Ripper type of serial killer in London. Robert A. Harris, Michael S. Lasky. "The films of Alfred Hitchcock". p.6. Citadel Press, 1976 Released in January 1927, it was a major commercial and critical success in the United Kingdom. See Robert E. Kapsis, Hitchcock: The Making of a Reputation. Illustrated Edition. (University of Chicago Press, 1992). p. 19 As with many of his earlier works, this film was influenced by Expressionist techniques Hitchcock had witnessed first-hand in Germany. Alan Jones (2005) The rough guide to horror movies p. 20. Rough Guides, 2005 Some commentators regard this piece as the first truly "Hitchcockian" film, incorporating such themes as the "wrong man". Patrick McGilligan, p. 85 

Following the success of The Lodger, Hitchcock hired a publicist to help strengthen his growing reputation. On 2 December 1926, Hitchcock married his assistant director, Alma Reville, at the Brompton Oratory in South Kensington, London. Their only child, daughter Patricia, was born on 7 July 1928. Alma was to become Hitchcock's closest collaborator, but her contributions to his films (some of which were credited on screen) Hitchcock would discuss only in private, as she was keen to avoid public attention. 

Blackmail (1929), features one of the longest Hitchcock cameos. In the image, Hitchcock (left) is being bothered by a small boy in a train on the London Underground
In 1929, Hitchcock began work on his tenth film Blackmail. While the film was still in production, the studio, British International Pictures (BIP), decided to convert it to sound. As an early 'film#Transition: Europe|talkie]', the film is often cited by film historians as a landmark film, Rob White, Edward Buscombe. British Film Institute film classics, Volume 1 p. 94. Taylor & Francis, 2003 and is often considered to be the first British sound feature film. Richard Allen, S. Ishii-Gonzals. Hitchcock: past and future. p.xv. Routledge, 2004 Music hall mimesis in British film, 18951960: on the halls on the screen p.79. Associated University Presse, 2009 With the climax of the film taking place on the dome of the British Museum, Blackmail began the Hitchcock tradition of using famous landmarks as a backdrop for suspense sequences. It also features one of his longest cameo appearances, which shows him being bothered by a small boy as he reads a book on the London Underground. Walker, Michael (2005). Hitchcock's motifs. p.88. Amsterdam University Press In the PBS series The Men Who Made The Movies, Hitchcock explained how he used early sound recording as a special element of the film, stressing the word "knife" in a conversation with the woman suspected of murder. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 120123 During this period, Hitchcock directed segments for a BIP musical film revue Elstree Calling (1930) and directed a short film featuring two Film Weekly scholarship winners, An Elastic Affair (1930). Another BIP musical revue, Harmony Heaven (1929), reportedly had minor input from Hitchcock, but his name does not appear in the credits.

In 1933, Hitchcock was once again working for Michael Balcon at Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. His first film for the company, The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934), was a success and his second, The 39 Steps (1935), is often considered one of the best films from his early period with the British Film Institute ranking it the fourth best British film of the 20th century. Already acclaimed in Britain, the success of the film made Hitchcock a star in the US, and established the quintessential English 'Hitchcock blonde' Madeleine Carroll as the template for his succession of ice cold and elegant leading ladies. "From Hollywood starlet to wartime angel". Daily Mail. Retrieved 16 February 2014 This film was also one of the first to introduce the "MacGuffin". In The 39 Steps, the MacGuffin is a stolen set of design plans. Hitchcock told French director Franois Truffaut:

There are two men sitting in a train going to Scotland and one man says to the other, "Excuse me, sir, but what is that strange parcel you have on the luggage rack above you?", "Oh", says the other, "that's a Macguffin.", "Well", says the first man, "what's a Macguffin?", The other answers, "It's an apparatus for trapping lions in the Scottish Highlands.", "But", says the first man, "there are no lions in the Scottish Highlands.", "Well", says the other, "then that's no Macguffin." Patrick McGilligan, p. 158 

Hitchcock's next major success was his 1938 film The Lady Vanishes, a fast-paced film about the search for a kindly old Englishwoman Miss Froy (Dame May Whitty), who disappears while on board a train in the fictional country of Bandrika. 

By 1938, Hitchcock had become known for his alleged observation, "Actors are cattle". He once said that he first made this remark as early as the late 1920s, in connection to stage actors who were snobbish about motion pictures. However, Michael Redgrave said that Hitchcock had made the statement during the filming of The Lady Vanishes. The phrase would haunt Hitchcock for years to come. During the filming of his 1941 production of Mr. & Mrs. Smith, Carole Lombard brought some heifers onto the set with name tags of Lombard, Robert Montgomery, and Gene Raymond, the stars of the film, to surprise the director. Hitchcock said he was misquoted: "I said 'Actors should be treated like cattle'." Patrick McGilligan, pp. 210211, 277; American Movie Classics 

Lauded in Britain where he was dubbed "Alfred the Great" by Picturegoer magazine, by the end of the 1930s Hitchcock's reputation was beginning to soar overseas, with a New York Times feature writer stating; "Three unique and valuable institutions the British have that we in America have not. Magna Carta, the Tower Bridge and Alfred Hitchcock, the greatest director of screen melodramas in the world." Leff, 1999. p. 16 Variety magazine referred to him as, "probably the best native director in England." Leff, 1999. p. 21. David O. Selznick signed Hitchcock to a seven-year contract beginning in March 1939, and the Hitchcocks moved to Hollywood. Leff, 1999. p. 35. 

==Hollywood==
In Hollywood, the suspense and the gallows humour that had become Hitchcock's trademark in film continued to appear in his productions. The working arrangements with Selznick were less than ideal. Selznick suffered from constant money problems, and Hitchcock was often displeased with Selznick's creative control over his films. In a later interview, Hitchcock summarised the working relationship thus:

Alfred Hitchcock with Chandran Rutnam (centre) and Sri Lankan Film Maker Anton Wickremasinghe at the Academy Awards in Los Angeles.
 was the Big Producer. ... Producer was king, The most flattering thing Mr. Selznick ever said about meand it shows you the amount of controlhe said I was the "only director" he'd "trust with a film". Sidney Gottlieb, Alfred Hitchcock: Interviews By Alfred Hitchcock. Illustrated Edition. (Univ. Press of Mississippi, 2003). p. 206. 

Selznick lent Hitchcock to the larger studios more often than producing Hitchcock's films himself. In addition, Selznick, as well as fellow independent producer Samuel Goldwyn, made only a few films each year, so he did not always have projects for Hitchcock to direct. Goldwyn had also negotiated with Hitchcock on a possible contract, only to be outbid by Selznick. Hitchcock was quickly impressed with the superior resources of the American studios compared with the financial limits he had often faced in England. Leff, 1999. p. 30. 

With the prestigious Selznick picture Rebecca in 1940, Hitchcock made his first American movie, set in a Hollywood version of England's West Country and based on a novel by English author Daphne du Maurier. The film starred Laurence Olivier and Joan Fontaine. The story concerns a nave (and unnamed) young woman who marries a widowed aristocrat. She goes to live in his huge English country house, and struggles with the lingering reputation of the elegant and worldly first wife, whose name was Rebecca, and who died under mysterious circumstances. The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940. The statuette was given to Selznick, as the film's producer. Hitchcock was nominated for the Best Director award, his first of five such nominations, but did not win.

There were additional problems between Selznick and Hitchcock, with Selznick known to impose restrictive rules on Hitchcock. At the same time, Selznick complained about Hitchcock's "goddamn jigsaw cutting", which meant that the producer did not have nearly the leeway to create his own film as he liked, but had to follow Hitchcock's vision of the finished product. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 251252 Rebecca was the fourth longest of Hitchcock's films, at 130 minutes, exceeded only by The Paradine Case (132 minutes), North by Northwest (136 minutes), and Topaz (142 minutes). Patrick McGilligan, p. 253 

Hitchcock's second American film, the European-set thriller Foreign Correspondent (1940), based on Vincent Sheean's Personal History and produced by Walter Wanger, was nominated for Best Picture that year. Hitchcock and other British subjects felt uneasy living and working in Hollywood while their country was at war; his concern resulted in a film that overtly supported the British war effort. Duncan, Paul (2003). Alfred Hitchcock: architect of anxiety, 18991980. p.90. Taschen, 1 November 2003 The movie was filmed in the first year of the Second World War and was inspired by the rapidly changing events in Europe, as fictionally covered by an American newspaper reporter portrayed by Joel McCrea. The film mixed footage of European scenes with scenes filmed on a Hollywood back lot. The film avoided direct references to Nazism, Germany, and Germans to comply with Hollywood's Production Code censorship. Patrick McGilligan, p. 244 

===1940s films===
Cary Grant and Ingrid Bergman in Notorious (1946)
Hitchcock's films during the 1940s were diverse, ranging from the romantic comedy Mr. & Mrs. Smith (1941) to the courtroom drama The Paradine Case (1947) to the dark and disturbing film noir Shadow of a Doubt (1943).

In September 1940, the Hitchcocks bought the 200 acre Cornwall Ranch near Scotts Valley in the Santa Cruz Mountains. The ranch became the primary residence of the Hitchcocks for the rest of their lives, although they kept their Bel Air home. Suspicion (1941) marked Hitchcock's first film as a producer as well as director. The film was set in England, and Hitchcock used the north coast of Santa Cruz, California, for the English coastline sequence. This film was to be actor Cary Grant's first time working with Hitchcock, and it was one of the few times that Grant would be cast in a sinister role. Joan Fontaine won Best Actress Oscar for her "outstanding performance in Suspicion". Grant plays an irresponsible English con man whose actions raise suspicion and anxiety in his shy young English wife (Fontaine). Tom Scott Cadden (1984). "What a bunch of characters!: an entertaining guide to who played what in the movies". p. 131. Prentice-Hall, In a notable scene, Hitchcock uses a lightbulb to illuminate what might be a fatal glass of milk that Grant is bringing to his wife. In the book the movie is based on (Before the Fact by Francis Iles), the Grant character is a killer, but Hitchcock and the studio felt Grant's image would be tarnished by that ending. Though a homicide would have suited him better, as he stated to Franois Truffaut, Hitchcock settled for an ambiguous finale. Thomas Leitch, The Encyclopedia of Alfred Hitchcock, Facts on File, New York, pp. 324325, ISBN 978-0-8160-4386-6 

Saboteur (1942) was the first of two films that Hitchcock made for Universal, a studio where he would continue his career during his later years. Hitchcock was forced to use Universal contract players Robert Cummings and Priscilla Lane, both known for their work in comedies and light dramas. Patrick Humphries (1994). "The Films of Alfred Hitchcock". p. 71.Random House Value Pub, Breaking with Hollywood conventions of the time, Hitchcock did extensive location filming, especially in New York City, and depicted a confrontation between a suspected saboteur (Cummings) and a real saboteur (Norman Lloyd) atop the Statue of Liberty. That year he also directed Have You Heard?, a photographic dramatisation of the dangers of rumours during wartime, for Life magazine. 

Shadow of a Doubt (1943), Hitchcock's personal favourite of all his films and the second of the early Universal films, In an interview on the Dick Cavett show aired on 8 June 1972, when asked if he had a personal favourite, Hitchcock responded that it was Shadow of a Doubt. was about young Charlotte "Charlie" Newton (Teresa Wright), who suspects her beloved uncle Charlie Oakley (Joseph Cotten) of being a serial murderer. Hitchcock again filmed extensively on location, this time in the Northern California city of Santa Rosa, during the summer of 1942. The director showcased his personal fascination with crime and criminals when he had two of his characters discuss various ways of killing people, to the obvious annoyance of Charlotte.

Working at 20th Century Fox, Hitchcock adapted a script of John Steinbeck's that recorded the experiences of the survivors of a German U-boat attack in the film Lifeboat (1944). The action sequences were shot in a small boat in the studio water tank. The locale also posed problems for Hitchcock's traditional cameo appearance. That was solved by having Hitchcock's image appear in a newspaper that William Bendix is reading in the boat, showing the director in a before-and-after advertisement for "Reduco-Obesity Slayer". Leitch, p. 181 

While at Fox, Hitchcock seriously considered directing the film version of A. J. Cronin's novel about a Catholic priest in China, Patrick McGilligan, p. 343 The Keys of the Kingdom, but the plans for this fell through. John M. Stahl ended up directing the 1944 film, which was produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and starred Gregory Peck, among other luminaries. 

Returning to England for an extended visit in late 1943 and early 1944, Hitchcock made two short films for the British Ministry of Information, Bon Voyage and Aventure Malgache. The two British propaganda films made for the Free French, were the only films Hitchcock made in the French language, and "feature typical Hitchcockian touches". Patrick McGilligan, pp. 346348 In the 1990s, the two films were shown by Turner Classic Movies and released on home video.

In 1945, Hitchcock served as "treatment advisor" (in effect, a film editor) for a Holocaust documentary produced by the British Army. The film, which recorded the liberation of Nazi concentration camps, remained unreleased until 1985, when it was completed by PBS Frontline and distributed under the title Memory of the Camps. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 372374 

Hitchcock worked for Selznick again when he directed Spellbound (1945), which explored psychoanalysis and featured a dream sequence designed by Salvador Dal. Gregory Peck plays amnesiac Dr. Anthony Edwardes under the treatment of analyst Dr. Peterson (Ingrid Bergman), who falls in love with him while trying to unlock his repressed past. Leitch, p. 310 The dream sequence as it appears in the film is ten minutes shorter than was originally envisioned, having been edited by Selznick to make it "play" more effectively. Two point-of-view shots were achieved by building a large wooden hand (which would appear to belong to the character whose point of view the camera took) and out-sized props for it to hold: a bucket-sized glass of milk and a large wooden gun. For added novelty and impact, the climactic gunshot was hand-coloured red on (some copies of) the black-and-white film.
Some of the original musical score by Mikls Rzsa (which makes use of the theremin) was later adapted by the composer into a concert piano concerto.

Grant and Bergman in Notorious (1946)
Notorious (1946) followed Spellbound. According to Hitchcock, in his book-length interview with Franois Truffaut, Selznick sold the director, the two stars (Grant and Bergman) and the screenplay (by Ben Hecht) to RKO Radio Pictures as a "package" for $500,000 due to cost overruns on Selznick's Duel in the Sun (1946). Notorious starred Hitchcock regulars Ingrid Bergman and Cary Grant, and features a plot about Nazis, uranium, and South America. It was a huge box office success and has remained one of Hitchcock's most acclaimed films. His prescient use of uranium as a plot device led to Hitchcock's being briefly under FBI surveillance. McGilligan writes that Hitchcock consulted Dr. Robert Millikan of Caltech about the development of an atomic bomb. Selznick complained that the notion was "science fiction", only to be confronted by the news stories of the detonation of two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan in August 1945. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 366381 

After completing his final film for Selznick, The Paradine Case (a courtroom drama that critics found lost momentum because it apparently ran too long and exhausted its resource of ideas), Hitchcock filmed his first colour film, Rope (1948). Here Hitchcock experimented with marshaling suspense in a confined environment, as he had done earlier with Lifeboat (1943). Appearing to have been shot in a single take, Rope was actually shot in 10 takes ranging from four and a half to 10 minutes each; a 10-minute length of film being the maximum a camera's film magazine could hold at the time. Some transitions between reels were hidden by having a dark object fill the entire screen for a moment. Hitchcock used those points to hide the cut, and began the next take with the camera in the same place. Featuring James Stewart in the leading role, Rope was the first of four films Stewart would make with Hitchcock. It was based on the Leopold and Loeb case of the 1920s. Somehow Hitchcock's cameraman managed to move the bulky, heavy Technicolor camera quickly around the set as it followed the continuous action of the long takes.

Under Capricorn (1949), set in nineteenth-century Australia, also used the short-lived technique of long takes, but to a more limited extent. He again used Technicolor in this production, then returned to black-and-white films for several years. For Rope and Under Capricorn, Hitchcock formed a production company with Sidney Bernstein called Transatlantic Pictures, which became inactive after these two unsuccessful pictures. Hitchcock continued to produce his own films for the rest of his life.

===1950s: Peak years===
James Stewart and Grace Kelly in Rear Window (1954)

Hitchcock filmed Stage Fright (1950) in the UK. For the first time, he matched one of Warner Bros.' most popular stars, Jane Wyman, with the sultry German actress Marlene Dietrich. Hitchcock used several prominent British actors, including Michael Wilding, Richard Todd, and Alastair Sim. This was Hitchcock's first production for Warner Bros., which had distributed Rope and Under Capricorn, because Transatlantic Pictures was experiencing financial difficulties. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 429, 774775 

With the film Strangers on a Train (1951), based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith, Hitchcock combined many elements from his preceding films. He approached Dashiell Hammett to write the dialogue but Raymond Chandler took over, then left over disagreements with the director. Leitch, p. 320 Two men casually meet, one of whom speculates on a foolproof murder technique. He suggests that two people, each wishing to do away with someone, should each perform the other's murder. Farley Granger's role was as the innocent victim of the scheme, while Robert Walker, previously known for "boy-next-door" roles, played the villain. Leitch, p.322 

MCA head Lew Wasserman, whose client list included James Stewart, Janet Leigh and other actors who would appear in Hitchcock's films, had a significant impact in packaging and marketing Hitchcock's films beginning in the 1950s.

After I Confess (1953) with Montgomery Clift, three popular films starring Grace Kelly followed. Dial M for Murder (1954) was adapted from the stage play by Frederick Knott. Ray Milland plays the scheming villain, an ex-tennis pro who tries to murder his unfaithful wife Grace Kelly for her money. When she kills the hired assassin in self-defense, Milland manipulates the evidence to make it look like a premeditated murder by his wife. Her lover, Mark Halliday (Robert Cummings), and Police Inspector Hubbard (John Williams), work urgently to save her from execution. Leitch, pp. 7880 With Dial M, Hitchcock experimented with 3D cinematography. The public was growing weary of the gimmick by the time of the film's release, however, and it was shown in 3D only in a few first-run engagements. The 3D version has been revived occasionally, including a brief reissue in some major US cities in the 1980s. The film marked a return to color productions for Hitchcock.

Hitchcock then moved to Paramount Pictures and filmed Rear Window (1954), starring James Stewart and Kelly again, as well as Thelma Ritter and Raymond Burr. Stewart's character, a photographer based on Robert Capa, must temporarily use a wheelchair; out of boredom he begins observing his neighbours across the courtyard, and becomes convinced one of them (Raymond Burr) has murdered his wife. Stewart tries to sway both his glamorous model-girlfriend (Kelly), whom screenwriter John Michael Hayes based on his own wife, and his policeman buddy (Wendell Corey) to his theory, and eventually succeeds. Leitch, p. 269 As with Lifeboat and Rope, the principal characters were almost entirely confined to a small space, in this case Stewart's tiny studio apartment overlooking a massive courtyard. Hitchcock used close-ups of Stewart's face to show his character's reactions to all he sees, "from the comic voyeurism directed at his neighbours to his helpless terror watching Kelly and Burr in the villain's apartment". 

In 1955, Hitchcock became a United States citizen. Patrick Mcgilligan, p. 512 His third Kelly film, To Catch a Thief (1955), set in the French Riviera, paired her with Cary Grant. He plays retired thief John Robie, who becomes the prime suspect for a spate of robberies in the Riviera. A thrill-seeking American heiress played by Kelly surmises his true identity and tries to seduce him. "Despite the obvious age disparity between Grant and Kelly and a lightweight plot, the witty script (loaded with double entendres) and the good-natured acting proved a commercial success." Leitch, p. 366 It was Hitchcock's last film with Kelly. She married Prince Rainier of Monaco in 1956, and the residents of her new land were against her making any more films.

Hitchcock successfully remade his own 1934 film The Man Who Knew Too Much in 1956. This time, the film starred Stewart and Doris Day, who sang the theme song, "Que Sera, Sera (Whatever Will Be, Will Be)", which won the Oscar for Best Original Song and became a big hit for her. They play a couple whose son is kidnapped to prevent them from interfering with an assassination. As in the 1934 film, the climax takes place at the Royal Albert Hall, London. Royal S. Brown (1994). "Overtones and Undertones: Reading Film Music". p. 75. University of California Press, 1994 

James Stewart and Kim Novak in Vertigo (1958)

The Wrong Man (1957), Hitchcock's final film for Warner Bros., was a low-key black-and-white production based on a real-life case of mistaken identity reported in Life Magazine in 1953. This was the only film of Hitchcock's to star Henry Fonda. Fonda plays a Stork Club musician mistaken for a liquor store thief who is arrested and tried for robbery while his wife (newcomer Vera Miles) emotionally collapses under the strain. Hitchcock told Truffaut that his lifelong fear of the police attracted him to the subject and was embedded in many scenes. Leitch, p. 377 

Vertigo (1958) again starred Stewart, this time with Kim Novak and Barbara Bel Geddes. Stewart plays "Scottie", a former police investigator suffering from acrophobia, who develops an obsession with a woman he is shadowing (Novak). Scottie's obsession leads to tragedy, and this time Hitchcock does not opt for a happy ending. The film contains a camera technique developed by Irmin Roberts that has been copied many times by filmmakers, wherein the image appears to "stretch". This is achieved by moving the camera in the opposite direction of the camera's zoom. It has become known by many nicknames, including Dolly zoom, "Zolly," "Hitchcock Zoom," and "Vertigo Effect."

Although the film is widely considered a classic today, Vertigo met with negative reviews and poor box office receipts upon its release, and was the last collaboration between Stewart and Hitchcock. Leitch, pp. 376377 Although ranked second (behind Citizen Kane) for almost 50 years the film was voted top by critics in the 2012 Sight & Sound decade poll. It was premiered in the San Sebastin International Film Festival, where Hitchcock won a Silver Seashell.
Cary Grant in North by Northwest (1959)
By this time, Hitchcock had filmed in many areas of the United States. He followed Vertigo with three more successful films. Two are also recognised as among his best movies: North by Northwest (1959) and Psycho (1960). The third film was The Birds (1963).

In North by Northwest, Cary Grant portrays Roger Thornhill, a Madison Avenue advertising executive who is mistaken for a government secret agent. Leitch, p. 234 He is hotly pursued across the United States by enemy agents, apparently one of them being Eve Kendall (Eva Marie Saint), in fact working undercover.

===1960: Psycho===
Psycho is almost certainly Hitchcock's best-known film. Leitch, p. 260 Produced on a constrained budget of $800,000, it was shot in black-and-white on a spare set using crew members from his television show "Alfred Hitchcock Presents". Leitch, p. 261 The unprecedented violence of the shower scene, the early death of the heroine, the innocent lives extinguished by a disturbed murderer became the defining hallmarks of a new horror movie genre and have been copied by many authors of subsequent films. Leitch, p. 262 

The public loved the film, with lines stretching outside of theatres as people had to wait for the next showing. It broke box-office records in China and the rest of Asia, France, Britain, South America, the United States and Canada, and was a moderate success in Australia for a brief period. Leigh, Janet with Christopher Nickens. Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller. Harmony Press, 1995. It was the most profitable black-and-white sound film ever made, and Hitchcock personally realized well in excess of $15 million. He subsequently swapped his rights to Psycho and his TV anthology for 150,000 shares of MCA, making him the third largest shareholder in MCA Inc. and his own boss at Universal, in theory at least. But that did not stop them from interfering with him. Stephen Rebello, Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, Soft Skull Press, Berkeley, 1990. Psycho was the most profitable film of Hitchcock's career, earning $15 million by the end of the first year. Hitchcock's second most profitable was Family Plot, earning $7.5 million, and third place was a tie between Torn Curtain (1966) and Frenzy (1972), each earning $6.5 million.

===After 1960===
The Birds, inspired by a Daphne du Maurier short story and by a news story about a mysterious infestation of birds in Santa Cruz, California, was Hitchcock's 49th film. Leitch, p. 32 Newcomer Tippi Hedren made her screen debut in the film, co-starring Rod Taylor and Suzanne Pleshette. The scenes of the birds attacking included hundreds of shots mixing live and animated sequences. The cause of the birds' attack is left unanswered, "perhaps highlighting the mystery of forces unknown". Leitch, p. 33 Hitchcock cast Hedren again opposite Sean Connery in his next film, Marnie, a romantic drama and psychological thriller. Decades later, Hedren called Hitchcock a misogynist and said that Hitchcock effectively ended her career by keeping her to an exclusive contract for two years when she rebuffed his sexual advances. In 2012, Hedren described Hitchcock as a "sad character"; a man of "unusual genius", yet "evil, and deviant, almost to the point of dangerous, because of the effect that he could have on people that were totally unsuspecting." In response, a Daily Telegraph article quoted several actresses who had worked with Hitchcock, including Eva Marie Saint, Doris Day and Kim Novak, none of whom shared Hedren's opinion about him. Novak, who worked on Hitchcock's Vertigo, told the Telegraph "I never saw him make a pass at anybody or act strange to anybody." 

Psycho and The Birds had unconventional soundtracks: the screeching strings played in the murder scene in Psycho were unusually dissonant, and The Birds dispensed with any conventional score, instead using a new technique of electronically produced sound effects. Bernard Herrmann composed the former and was a consultant on the latter.

Failing health reduced Hitchcock's output during the last two decades of his career. Biographer Stephen Rebello claimed Universal "forced" two movies on him, Torn Curtain and Topaz. Leigh, Janet with Christopher Nickens. Both were spy thrillers set with Cold War-related themes. The first, Torn Curtain (1966), with Paul Newman and Julie Andrews, precipitated the bitter end of the twelve-year collaboration between Hitchcock and composer Bernard Herrmann. Herrmann was fired when Hitchcock was unsatisfied with his score. Topaz (1969), based on a Leon Uris novel, is partly set in Cuba. Both received mixed reviews from critics.
Hitchcock cameo in Frenzy features him wearing a bowler hat in the middle of a crowd in front of London's River Thames
In 1972, Hitchcock returned to England to film his penultimate film Frenzy. After two only moderately successful espionage films, the plot marks a return to the murder thriller genre of earlier in his career, and is based upon the novel Goodbye Piccadilly, Farewell Leicester Square. The plot centres on a serial killer in contemporary London. In a very early scene there is dialogue that mentions two actual London serial murder cases: the Christie murders in the early 1950s, and the Jack the Ripper murders in 1888. The basic story recycles his early film The Lodger. Richard Blaney (Jon Finch), a volatile barkeeper with a history of explosive anger, becomes the prime suspect for the "Necktie Murders," which are actually committed by his friend Bob Rusk (Barry Foster). Leitch, p. 114 This time, Hitchcock makes the victim and villain kindreds, rather than opposites, as in Strangers on a Train. Only one of them, however, has crossed the line to murder. For the first time, Hitchcock allowed nudity and profane language, which had previously been taboo, in one of his films. He also shows rare sympathy for the chief inspector and his comic domestic life. Leitch, p. 115 

Biographers have noted that Hitchcock had always pushed the limits of film censorship, often managing to fool Joseph Breen, the longtime head of Hollywood's Production Code. Many times Hitchcock slipped in subtle hints of improprieties forbidden by censorship until the mid-1960s. Yet Patrick McGilligan wrote that Breen and others often realised that Hitchcock was inserting such things and were actually amused as well as alarmed by Hitchcock's "inescapable inferences". Patrick McGilligan, p. 249 Beginning with Torn Curtain, Hitchcock was finally able to blatantly include plot elements previously forbidden in American films and this continued for the remainder of his film career.
Hitchcock at work on location in San Francisco for Family Plot
Family Plot (1976) was Hitchcock's last film. It relates the escapades of "Madam" Blanche Tyler, played by Barbara Harris, a fraudulent spiritualist, and her taxi driver lover Bruce Dern, making a living from her phony powers. William Devane, Karen Black and Cathleen Nesbitt co-starred. It is the only Hitchcock film scored by John Williams. Based on the Victor Canning novel The Rainbird Pattern, the novel's tone is more sinister and dark than what Hitchcock wanted for the film. Screenwriter Ernest Lehman originally wrote the film with a dark tone but was pushed to a lighter, more comical tone by Hitchcock. The film went through various titles including Deceit and Missing Heir. It was changed to Family Plot at the suggestion of the studio.

===Last project and death===
Near the end of his life, Hitchcock had worked on the script for a projected spy thriller, The Short Night, collaborating with screenwriters James Costigan and Ernest Lehman. Despite some preliminary work, the story was never filmed. This was caused primarily by Hitchcock's own failing health and his concerns over the health of his wife, Alma, who had suffered a stroke. The script was eventually published posthumously, in a book on Hitchcock's last years. Patrick McGilligan, pp. 731734 

Hitchcock died at age 80 in his Bel Air home of renal failure at 9:17 am on 29 April 1980. Patrick Mcgilligan (2010). "Alfred Hitchcock: A Life in Darkness and Light". p. 745. Harper Collins While biographer Spoto wrote that Hitchcock "rejected suggestions that he allow a priest ... to come for a visit, or celebrate a quiet, informal ritual at the house for his comfort," Jesuit priest Mark Henninger wrote that he and fellow priest Tom Sullivan celebrated Mass at the filmmaker's home; Father Sullivan heard Hitchcock's confession. He was survived by his wife and their daughter. Hitchcock's funeral Mass was held at Good Shepherd Catholic Church in Beverly Hills, after which his body was cremated and his remains were scattered over the Pacific Ocean. 

==Signature appearances in his films==

Hitchcock appeared briefly in most of his own films. For example, he is seen struggling to get a double bass onto a train (Strangers on a Train), or walking dogs out of a pet shop (The Birds), as a shadow (Family Plot), sitting at a table in a photograph (Dial M for Murder) and misses the bus (North by Northwest).

==Themes, plot devices and motifs==

Hitchcock returned several times to cinematic devices such as suspense, the audience as voyeur, and his well-known "MacGuffin," a plot device that is essential to the characters on the screen, but is irrelevant to the audience. Thus, the MacGuffin was always hazily described (in "North By Northwest," Leo G. Carroll describes James Mason as an "importer-exporter.")

A central theme of Hitchcock's films was murder and the psychology behind it. 

==Psychology of characters==
Hitchcock's films sometimes feature characters struggling in their relationships with their mothers. In North by Northwest (1959), Roger Thornhill (Cary Grant's character) is an innocent man ridiculed by his mother for insisting that shadowy, murderous men are after him. In The Birds (1963), the Rod Taylor character, an innocent man, finds his world under attack by vicious birds, and struggles to free himself of a clinging mother (Jessica Tandy). The killer in Frenzy (1972) has a loathing of women but idolises his mother. The villain Bruno in Strangers on a Train hates his father, but has an incredibly close relationship with his mother (played by Marion Lorne). Sebastian (Claude Rains) in Notorious has a clearly conflictual relationship with his mother, who is (correctly) suspicious of his new bride Alicia Huberman (Ingrid Bergman). Norman Bates has troubles with his mother in Psycho.

Hitchcock heroines tend to be blondes. The famous victims in The Lodger are all blondes. In The 39 Steps, Hitchcock's glamorous blonde star, Madeleine Carroll, is put in handcuffs. In Marnie (1964), the title character (played by Tippi Hedren) is a thief. In To Catch a Thief (1955), Francie (Grace Kelly) offers to help a man she believes is a burglar. In Rear Window, Lisa (Grace Kelly again) risks her life by breaking into Lars Thorwald's apartment. The best-known example is in Psycho where Janet Leigh's unfortunate character steals $40,000 and is murdered by a reclusive psychopath. Hitchcock's last blonde heroine wasyears after Dany Robin and her "daughter" Claude Jade in TopazBarbara Harris as a phony psychic turned amateur sleuth in his final film, 1976's Family Plot. In the same film, the diamond smuggler played by Karen Black could also fit that role, as she wears a long blonde wig in various scenes and becomes increasingly uncomfortable about her line of work.

Some critics and Hitchcock scholars, including Donald Spoto and Roger Ebert, agree that Vertigo represents the director's most personal and revealing film, dealing with the obsessions of a man who crafts a woman into the woman he desires. Vertigo explores more frankly and at greater length his interest in the relation between sex and death than any other film in his filmography. 

Hitchcock often said that his favourite film (of his own work) was Shadow of a Doubt. Cavett Show interview, 8 June 1972 

==Style of working==

===Writing===
Hitchcock once commented, "The writer and I plan out the entire script down to the smallest detail, and when we're finished all that's left to do is to shoot the film. Actually, it's only when one enters the studio that one enters the area of compromise. Really, the novelist has the best casting since he doesn't have to cope with the actors and all the rest." In an interview with Roger Ebert in 1969, Hitchcock elaborated further:

In Writing with Hitchcock, a book-length study of Hitchcock's working method with his writers, author Steven DeRosa noted that "Although he rarely did any actual 'writing', especially on his Hollywood productions, Hitchcock supervised and guided his writers through every draft, insisting on a strict attention to detail and a preference for telling the story through visual rather than verbal means. While this exasperated some writers, others admitted the director inspired them to do their very best work. Hitchcock often emphasised that he took no screen credit for the writing of his films. However, over time the work of many of his writers has been attributed solely to Hitchcocks creative genius, a misconception he rarely went out of his way to correct. Notwithstanding his technical brilliance as a director, Hitchcock relied on his writers a great deal." Steven DeRosa, Writing with Hitchcock, New York: Faber and Faber, 2001, p. xi. 

===Storyboards and production===
Hitchcock's films were strongly believed to have been extensively storyboarded to the finest detail by the majority of commentators over the years. He was reported to have never even bothered looking through the viewfinder, since he did not need to, though in publicity photos he was shown doing so. He also used this as an excuse to never have to change his films from his initial vision. If a studio asked him to change a film, he would claim that it was already shot in a single way, and that there were no alternate takes to consider.
Alfred Hitchcock by Jack Mitchell
However, this view of Hitchcock as a director who relied more on pre-production than on the actual production itself has been challenged by the book Hitchcock at Work, written by Bill Krohn, the American correspondent of Cahiers du cinma. Krohn, after investigating several script revisions, notes to other production personnel written by or to Hitchcock alongside inspection of storyboards, and other production material, has observed that Hitchcock's work often deviated from how the screenplay was written or how the film was originally envisioned. He noted that the myth of storyboards in relation to Hitchcock, often regurgitated by generations of commentators on his movies, was to a great degree perpetuated by Hitchcock himself or the publicity arm of the studios. A great example would be the celebrated crop-spraying sequence of North by Northwest which was not storyboarded at all. After the scene was filmed, the publicity department asked Hitchcock to make storyboards to promote the film and Hitchcock in turn hired an artist to match the scenes in detail.

Even when storyboards were made, scenes that were shot differed from them significantly. Krohn's extensive analysis of the production of Hitchcock classics like Notorious reveals that Hitchcock was flexible enough to change a film's conception during its production. Another example Krohn notes is the American remake of The Man Who Knew Too Much, whose shooting schedule commenced without a finished script and moreover went over schedule, something that, as Krohn notes, was not an uncommon occurrence on many of Hitchcock's films, including Strangers on a Train and Topaz. While Hitchcock did do a great deal of preparation for all his movies, he was fully cognizant that the actual film-making process often deviated from the best-laid plans and was flexible to adapt to the changes and needs of production as his films were not free from the normal hassles faced and common routines utilized during many other film productions.

Krohn's work also sheds light on Hitchcock's practice of generally shooting in chronological order, which he notes sent many films over budget and over schedule and, more importantly, differed from the standard operating procedure of Hollywood in the Studio System Era. Equally important is Hitchcock's tendency to shoot alternate takes of scenes. This differed from coverage in that the films were not necessarily shot from varying angles so as to give the editor options to shape the film how he/she chooses (often under the producer's aegis). Rather they represented Hitchcock's tendency of giving himself options in the editing room, where he would provide advice to his editors after viewing a rough cut of the work. According to Krohn, this and a great deal of other information revealed through his research of Hitchcock's personal papers, script revisions and the like refute the notion of Hitchcock as a director who was always in control of his films, whose vision of his films did not change during production, which Krohn notes has remained the central long-standing myth of Alfred Hitchcock.

His fastidiousness and attention to detail also found its way into each film poster for his films. Hitchcock preferred to work with the best talent of his dayfilm poster designers such as Bill Gold and Saul Bassand kept them busy with countless rounds of revision until he felt that the single image of the poster accurately represented his entire film.

===Approach to actors===

Similarly, much of Hitchcock's supposed dislike of actors has been exaggerated. Hitchcock simply did not tolerate the method approach, as he believed that actors should only concentrate on their performances and leave work on script and character to the directors and screenwriters. In a Sight and Sound interview, he stated that, 'the method actor is OK in the theatre because he has a free space to move about. But when it comes to cutting the face and what he sees and so forth, there must be some discipline'. He often used the same actors in many of his films.

During the making of Lifeboat, Walter Slezak, who played the German character, stated that Hitchcock knew the mechanics of acting better than anyone he knew. Several critics have observed that despite his reputation as a man who disliked actors, several actors who worked with him gave fine, often brilliant performances and these performances contribute to the film's success. As more fully discussed above, in "Inter-War British Career," actress Dolly Haas, who was a personal friend of Hitchcock's and who acted for him in the 1953 film I Confess, stated that Hitchcock regarded actors as "animated props."

For Hitchcock, the actors, like the props, were part of the film's setting, as he said to Truffaut:

In my opinion, the chief requisite for an actor is the ability to do nothing well, which is by no means as easy as it sounds. He should be willing to be utilised and wholly integrated into the picture by the director and the camera. He must allow the camera to determine the proper emphasis and the most effective dramatic highlights. Truffaut, Franois. "Hitchcock by Truffaut: The Definitive Study". Grafton Books, 1984. p. 153 

Regarding Hitchcock's sometimes less than pleasant relationship with actors, there was a persistent rumour that he had said that actors were cattle. Hitchcock addressed this story in his interview with Franois Truffaut:

I'm not quite sure in what context I might have made such a statement. It may have been made...when we used actors who were simultaneously performing in stage plays. When they had a matinee, and I suspected they were allowing themselves plenty of time for a very leisurely lunch. And this meant that we had to shoot our scenes at breakneck speed so that the actors could get out on time. I couldn't help feeling that if they'd been really conscientious, they'd have swallowed their sandwich in the cab, on the way to the theatre, and get there in time to put on their make-up and go on stage. I had no use for that kind of actor. Truffaut, Franois. "Hitchcock". Simon & Schuster, 1984. p. 140 

Carole Lombard, tweaking Hitchcock and drumming up a little publicity, brought some cows along with her when she reported to the set of Mr. and Mrs. Smith. 

In the late 1950s, French New Wave critics, especially ric Rohmer, Claude Chabrol and Franois Truffaut, were among the first to see and promote Hitchcock's films as artistic works. Hitchcock was one of the first directors to whom they applied their auteur theory, which stresses the artistic authority of the director in the film-making process.

Hitchcock's innovations and vision have influenced a great number of filmmakers, producers, and actors. His influence helped start a trend for film directors to control artistic aspects of their movies without answering to the movie's producer.

==Awards and honours==

Hitchcock was a multiple nominee and winner of a number of prestigious awards, receiving two Golden Globes, eight Laurel Awards, and five lifetime achievement awards including the first BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, as well as being five times nominated for, albeit never winning, an Academy Award as Best Director. His film Rebecca (nominated for 11 Oscars) won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940particularly notable as another Hitchcock film, Foreign Correspondent, was also nominated that same year. "The 13th Academy Awards (1941) Nominees and Winners". 2012 Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 

In addition to these, Hitchcock received a knighthood in 1980 when he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (KBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in the 1980 New Year Honours. Adair, Gene. "Alfred Hitchcock: Filming Our Fears". p. 145. Oxford University Press, 2002 Asked by a reporter why it had taken the Queen so long, Hitchcock quipped, "I suppose it was a matter of carelessness". Haley, Michael. "The Alfred Hitchcock album". p. 2. Prentice-Hall, 1981 An English Heritage blue plaque, unveiled in 1999, marks where Sir Alfred Hitchcock lived in London at 153 Cromwell Road, Kensington and Chelsea, SW5. 

In June 2013, nine restored versions of Hitchcock's early silent films, including his 1925 directorial debut, The Pleasure Garden, were shown at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Harvey Theater. Known as "The Hitchcock 9," the traveling tribute was made possible by a $3 million program organized by the British Film Institute. 

==Television, radio, and books==
Along with Walt Disney, Hitchcock was among the first prominent motion picture producers to fully envisage just how popular the medium of television would become. From 1955 to 1965, Hitchcock was the host and producer of a television series titled Alfred Hitchcock Presents. While his films had made Hitchcock's name strongly associated with suspense, the TV series made Hitchcock a celebrity himself. His irony-tinged voice and signature droll delivery, gallows humour, iconic image and mannerisms became instantly recognisable and were often the subject of parody.

The title-sequence of the show pictured a minimalist caricature of Hitchcock's profile (he drew it himself; it is composed of only nine strokes), which his real silhouette then filled. His introductions before the stories in his program always included some sort of wry humour, such as the description of a recent multi-person execution hampered by having only one electric chair, while two are now shown with a sign "Two chairsno waiting!". He directed 18 episodes of the TV series himself, which aired from 1955 to 1965 in two versions. It became The Alfred Hitchcock Hour in 1962.

The series used a curious little tune as its title-theme. Funeral March of a Marionette, by the French composer Charles Gounod (18181893), the composer of the 1859 opera Faust, was suggested to him by composer Bernard Herrmann.

Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops Orchestra included the piece on one of their extended play 45-rpm discs for RCA Victor during the 1950s. Alfred Hitchcock Presents was parodied by Friz Freleng's 1961 cartoon The Last Hungry Cat, which contains a plot similar to Blackmail.

In the 1980s, a new version of Alfred Hitchcock Presents was produced for television, making use of Hitchcock's original introductions in a colourised form.

Hitchcock appears as a character in the popular juvenile detective book series, Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators. The long-running detective series was created by Robert Arthur, who wrote the first several books, although other authors took over after he left the series. The Three InvestigatorsJupiter Jones, Bob Andrews and Peter Crenshawwere amateur detectives, slightly younger than the Hardy Boys. In the introduction to each book, "Alfred Hitchcock" introduces the mystery, and he sometimes refers a case to the boys to solve. At the end of each book, the boys report to Hitchcock, and sometimes give him a memento of their case.

At the height of Hitchcock's success, he was also asked to introduce a set of books with his name attached. The series was a collection of short stories by popular short-story writers, primarily focused on suspense and thrillers. These titles included Alfred Hitchcock's Anthology, Alfred Hitchcock Presents: Stories to be Read with the Door Locked, Alfred Hitchcock's Monster Museum, Alfred Hitchcock's Supernatural Tales of Terror and Suspense, Alfred Hitchcock's Spellbinders in Suspense, Alfred Hitchcock's Witch's Brew, Alfred Hitchcock's Ghostly Gallery, Alfred Hitchcock's A Hangman's Dozen, Alfred Hitchcock's Stories Not For the Nervous and Alfred Hitchcock's Haunted Houseful. Hitchcock himself was not actually involved in the reading, reviewing, editing or selection of the short stories; in fact, even his introductions were ghost-written. The entire extent of his involvement with the project was to lend his name and collect a check.

Some notable writers whose works were used in the collection include Shirley Jackson (Strangers in Town, The Lottery), T. H. White (The Once and Future King), Robert Bloch, H. G. Wells (The War of the Worlds), Robert Louis Stevenson, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Mark Twain and the creator of The Three Investigators, Robert Arthur. In a similar manner, Hitchcock's name was licensed for a digest-sized monthly, Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine, which has been published since 1956.

Hitchcock also wrote a mystery story for Look magazine in 1943, "The Murder of Monty Woolley". This was a sequence of captioned photographs inviting the reader to inspect the pictures for clues to the murderer's identity; Hitchcock cast the performers as themselves, such as Woolley, Doris Merrick and make-up man Guy Pearce, whom Hitchcock identified, in the last photo, as the murderer. The article was reprinted in Games Magazine in November/December 1980.

In September 2010, BBC Radio 7 broadcast a series of five fifteen-minute programs entitled The Late Alfred Hitchcock Presents with Michael Roberts impersonating Alfred Hitchcock for introductory/concluding comments and reading the stories in his own voice. "The Late Alfred Hitchcock Presents". BBC Radio 4 Extra. These five stories were originally intended for the television series, but were rejected because of their rather gruesome nature:
* "The Waxwork" by A. M. Burrage (broadcast 13 September 2010)
* "Sredni Vashtar" by Saki (broadcast 14 September 2010)
* "The Perfectionist" by Margaret St. Clair (broadcast 15 September 2010)
* "Being a Murderer Myself" by Arthur Williams (broadcast 16 September 2010)
* "The Dancing Partner" by Jerome K. Jerome (broadcast 17 September 2010)

==Filmography==

* Number 13 (1922) (unfinished)
* Always Tell Your Wife (1923) 
* The Pleasure Garden (1925)
* The Mountain Eagle (1926) (lost)
* (1927)
* The Ring (1927)
* Downhill (1927)
* The Farmer's Wife (1928)
* Easy Virtue (1928)
* Champagne (1928)
* The Manxman (1929)
* Blackmail (1929)
* Juno and the Paycock (1930)
* Murder! (1930)
* Elstree Calling (1930)
* The Skin Game (1931)
* Mary (1931)
* Rich and Strange (1931)
* Number Seventeen (1932)
* Waltzes from Vienna (1934)

* The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934)
* The 39 Steps (1935)
* Secret Agent (1936)
* Sabotage (1936)
* Young and Innocent (1937)
* The Lady Vanishes (1938)
* Jamaica Inn (1939)
* Rebecca (1940)
* Foreign Correspondent (1940)
* Mr. & Mrs. Smith (1941)
* Suspicion (1941)
* Saboteur (1942)
* Shadow of a Doubt (1943)
* Lifeboat (1944)
* Aventure Malgache (1944)
* Bon Voyage (1944)
* Spellbound (1945)
* Notorious (1946)
* The Paradine Case (1947)
* Rope (1948)

* Under Capricorn (1949)
* Stage Fright (1950)
* Strangers on a Train (1951)
* I Confess (1953)
* Dial M for Murder (1954)
* Rear Window (1954)
* To Catch a Thief (1955)
* The Trouble with Harry (1955)
* The Man Who Knew Too Much (1956)
* The Wrong Man (1956)
* Vertigo (1958)
* North by Northwest (1959)
* Psycho (1960)
* The Birds (1963)
* Marnie (1964)
* Torn Curtain (1966)
* Topaz (1969)
* Frenzy (1972)
* Family Plot (1976)
* The Short Night (1979) (cancelled)

==Frequently cast actors and actresses==

7 films

* Clare Greet: Number 13 (1922), The Ring (1927), The Manxman (1929), Murder! (1930), The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934), Sabotage (1936), Jamaica Inn (1939)

6 films

* Leo G. Carroll: Rebecca (1940), Suspicion (1941), Spellbound (1945), The Paradine Case (1947), Strangers on a Train (1951), and North By Northwest (1959)

5 films

* Hannah Jones: Downhill (1927), Champagne (1928), Blackmail (1929), Murder! (1930), and Rich and Strange (1932)

4 films

* Donald Calthrop: Blackmail (1929), Murder! (1930), Juno and the Paycock (1930), and Number Seventeen (1932)
* Cary Grant: Suspicion (1941), Notorious (1946), To Catch a Thief (1955), and North By Northwest (1959)
* Edmund Gwenn: The Skin Game (1931), Waltzes from Vienna (1934), Foreign Correspondent (1940), and The Trouble with Harry (1955)
* Phyllis Konstam: Champagne (1928), Blackmail (1929), Murder! (1930), and The Skin Game (1931)
* John Longden: Blackmail (1929), Juno and the Paycock (1930), The Skin Game (1931), and Young and Innocent (1937)
* James Stewart: Rope (1948), Rear Window (1954), The Man Who Knew Too Much (1956), and Vertigo (1958)

3 films

* Ingrid Bergman: Spellbound (1945), Notorious (1946), Under Capricorn (1949)
* Charles Halton: Foreign Correspondent (1940), Mr. & Mrs. Smith (1941), Saboteur (1942)
* Patricia Hitchcock: Stage Fright (1950), Strangers on a Train (1951), Psycho (1960)
* Ian Hunter: The Ring (1927), Downhill (1927), Easy Virtue (1928)
* Grace Kelly: Dial M for Murder (1954), Rear Window (1954), and To Catch a Thief (1955)
* Basil Radford: Young and Innocent (1937), The Lady Vanishes (1938), Jamaica Inn (1939)
* John Williams: The Paradine Case (1947), Dial M for Murder, (1954), To Catch a Thief (1955)

==Frequent collaborators==

;Actors and actresses
* Sara Allgood
* Murray Alper
* Ingrid Bergman
* Paul Bryar
* Donald Calthrop
* Leonard Carey
* Leo G. Carroll
* Edward Chapman
* Joseph Cotten (actor  Hitchcock movies and TV series)
* Hume Cronyn (also as writer)
* Violet Farebrother
* Bess Flowers
* Cary Grant
* Clare Greet
* Edmund Gwenn
* Gordon Harker
* Tippi Hedren
* Tom Helmore
* Patricia Hitchcock (daughter)
* Ian Hunter
* Isabel Jeans
* Hannah Jones
* Malcolm Keen
* Grace Kelly
* Phyllis Konstam
* John Longden
* Percy Marmont
* Eve McVeagh (actress  7 Hitchcock TV episodes)
* Vera Miles (actress  Hitchcock movies and TV series)
* Basil Radford
* Jeffrey Sayre
* Mary Scott
* James Stewart
* John Williams
;Screenwriters
* Charles Bennett
* James Bridie
* Joan Harrison
* John Michael Hayes
* Ben Hecht
* Angus MacPhail
* Eliot Stannard (9 films)

;Film crew
* Fred Ahern  production manager
* Michael Balcon  producer
* Jack Barron  make-up
* Saul Bass  main titles design
* Robert F. Boyle  art director/production designer
* Henry Bumstead  art director
* Robert Burks  cinematographer
* Herbert Coleman  assistant director/associate producer
* Jack E. Cox  cinematographer
* Graham Cutts  director
* Lowell J. Farrell  assistant director
* Charles Frend  film editor
* Bill Gold  film poster designer
* Hilton A. Green  assistant director
* Bobby Greene  first assistant camera
* Edith Head  costume designer
* Bernard Herrmann  music composer
* J. McMillan Johnson  art director/production designer
* Barbara Keon  production assistant
* Emile Kuri  set decoration
* Bryan Langley  cinematographer/assistant camera
* Louis Levy  musical director/music composer
* Norman Lloyd  producer/director
* John Maxwell  producer
* Daniel McCauley  assistant director
* Frank Mills  assistant director
* George Milo  set decoration
* Ivor Montagu  editor/producer
* Hal Pereira  art director
* Alec Patterson  make-up/special effects artist
* Michael Powell  still photographer/assistant camera
* Alma Reville (wife)  assistant director/writer
* Rita Riggs  costume designer
* Peggy Robertson  assistant
* Emile de Ruelle  film editor
* William Russell  sound recordist
* David O. Selznick  producer
* Harry Stradling  cinematographer/director of photography
* Lois Thurman  script supervisor
* Dimitri Tiomkin  music composer
* George Tomasini  film editor
* Joseph A. Valentine  cinematographer
* Gaetano di Ventimiglia  cinematographer
* Waldon O. Watson  sound recordist
* Franz Waxman  music composer
* Albert Whitlock  matte painter
* William H. Ziegler  film editor
* James H. Brown  assistant director

== Portrayals in film and television ==
* Anthony Hopkins, in the 2012 film Hitchcock. 
* Toby Jones, in the 2012 HBO telefilm The Girl.
* Roger Ashton-Griffiths, in the 2014 film Grace of Monaco.

Keith Staskiewicz wrote in Entertainment Weekly about the 2012 films, "...Hitchcock was depicted in his twin biopics as either a charming but troubled genius or a monstrous sexual obsessive..." Staskiewicz, Keith. "This Was The Year That Everyone Was Obsessed with Lincoln & Hitchcock." Entertainment Weekly, 28 December 2012, p. 19. 

==See also==

* Alfred Hitchcock filmography
* Alfred Hitchcock Presents
* List of Hitchcock cameo appearances
* List of film collaborations
* List of unproduced Hitchcock projects

==Notes==

==References==

* Leff, Leonard J: The Rich and Strange Collaboration of Alfred Hitchcock and David O. Selznick in Hollywood. University of California Press, 1999
* Leitch, Thomas: The Encyclopedia of Alfred Hitchcock (ISBN 978-0-8160-4387-3). Checkmark Books, 2002. A single-volume encyclopaedia of all things about Alfred Hitchcock.
* McGilligan, Patrick: Alfred Hitchcock: A Life in Darkness and Light. Regan Books, 2003. A comprehensive biography of the director.

==Further reading==
* Auiler, Dan: Hitchcock's notebooks: an authorised and illustrated look inside the creative mind of Alfred Hitchcock. New York, Avon Books, 1999. Much useful background to the films.
* Barr, Charles: English Hitchcock. Cameron & Hollis, 1999. On the early films of the director.
* Clues: A Journal of Detection'31.1 (2013). Theme issue on Hitchcock and adaptation.
* Conrad, Peter: The Hitchcock Murders. Faber and Faber, 2000. A highly personal and idiosyncratic discussion of Hitchcock's oeuvre.
* DeRosa, Steven: Writing with Hitchcock. Faber and Faber, 2001. An examination of the collaboration between Hitchcock and screenwriter John Michael Hayes, his most frequent writing collaborator in Hollywood. Their films include Rear Window and The Man Who Knew Too Much.
* Deutelbaum, Marshall; Poague, Leland (ed.): A Hitchcock Reader. Iowa State University Press, 1986. A wide-ranging collection of scholarly essays on Hitchcock.
* Durgnat, Raymond: The strange case of Alfred Hitchcock Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1974 OCLC 1233570
* Durgnat, Raymond; James, Nick; Gross, Larry: Hitchcock British Film Institute, 1999 OCLC 42209162
* Durgnat, Raymond: A long hard look at Psycho London: British Film Institute Pub., 2002 OCLC 48883020
* Giblin, Gary: Alfred Hitchcock's London. Midnight Marquee Press, 2006, (Paperback: ISBN 978-1-887664-67-7)
* Gottlieb, Sidney: Hitchcock on Hitchcock. Faber and Faber, 1995. Articles, lectures, etc. by Hitchcock himself. Basic reading on the director and his films.
* Gottlieb, Sidney: Alfred Hitchcock: Interviews. University Press of Mississippi, 2003. A collection of Hitchcock interviews.
* Grams, Martin, Jr. & Wikstrom, Patrik: The Alfred Hitchcock Presents Companion. OTR Pub, 2001, (Paperback: ISBN 978-0-9703310-1-4)
* Haeffner, Nicholas: Alfred Hitchcock. Longman, 2005. An undergraduate-level text.
* Hitchcock, Patricia; Bouzereau, Laurent: Alma Hitchcock: The Woman Behind the Man. Berkley, 2003.
* Henry Keazor (ed.): Hitchcock und die Knste, Schren, Marburg 2013, ISBN 978-3-89472-828-1. Examines the way Hitchcock was inspired by other arts such as literature, theatre, painting, architecture, music and cooking, used them in his films, and how they then inspired other art forms such as dancing and media art.
* Krohn, Bill: Hitchcock at Work. Phaidon, 2000. Translated from the award-winning French edition. The nitty-gritty of Hitchcock's filmmaking from scripting to post-production.
* Leff, Leonard J.: Hitchcock and Selznick. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1987. An in-depth examination of the rich collaboration between Hitchcock and David O Selznick.
* Loker, Altan: Film and Suspense. Trafford Publishing, 2006. (ISBN 978-1412058407). Discusses the psychological means by which Hitchcock created the sense of reality in his works and manipulated his audience.
* McDevitt, Jim; San Juan, Eric: A Year of Hitchcock: 52 Weeks with the Master of Suspense. Scarecrow Press, 2009, (ISBN 978-0-8108-6388-0). A comprehensive film-by-film examination of Hitchcock's artistic development from 1927 through 1976.
* Modleski, Tania: The Women Who Knew Too Much: Hitchcock And Feminist Theory. Routledge, 2005 (2nd edition). A collection of critical essays on Hitchcock and his films; argues that Hitchcock's portrayal of women was ambivalent, rather than simply misogynist or sympathetic (as widely thought).
* Mogg, Ken. The Alfred Hitchcock Story. Titan, 2008 (revised edition). Note: the original 1999 UK edition, from Titan, and the 2008 re-issue world-wide, also from Titan, have significantly more text than the 1999 abridged US edition from Taylor Publishing. New material on all the films.
* Moral, Tony Lee: Hitchcock and the Making of Marnie. Scarecrow Press, 2005 (2nd edition). Well researched making of Hitchcock's "Marnie".
* Paglia, Camille. The Birds. British Film Institute, January 2008 ISBN 978-0-85170-651-1
* Poague, Leland and Thomas Leitch: A Companion to Alfred Hitchcock. Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. Collection of original essays by leading scholars examining all facets of Hitchcocks influence
* Rebello, Stephen: Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho. St. Martin's, 1990. Intimately researched and detailed history of the making of Psycho,.
* Rohmer, Eric; Chabrol, Claude. Hitchcock, the first forty-four films (ISBN 978-0-8044-2743-2). F. Ungar, 1979. First book-long study of Hitchock art and probably still the best one.
* Rothman, William. The Murderous Gaze. Harvard Press, 1980. Auteur study that looks at several Hitchcock films intimately.
* San Juan, Eric; McDevitt, Jim: Hitchcock's Villains: Murderers, Maniacs, and Mother Issues. Scarecrow Press, 2013, (ISBN 978-0-8108-8775-6). An in-depth analysis of the villains who were critically important to Hitchcock's films and were often emblematic of Hitchcock himself.
* Spoto, Donald: The Art of Alfred Hitchcock. Anchor Books, 1992. The first detailed critical survey of Hitchcock's work by an American.
* Spoto, Donald: The Dark Side of Genius. Ballantine Books, 1983. A biography of Hitchcock, featuring a controversial exploration of Hitchcock's psychology.
* Sullivan, Jack: Hitchcock's Music. Yale University Press, 2006. The first book to fully explore the role music played in the Hitchcock's films. ISBN 0-300-11050-2
* Truffaut, Franois: Hitchcock. Simon and Schuster, 1985. A series of interviews of Hitchcock by the influential French director.
* Vest, James: Hitchcock and France: The Forging of an Auteur. Praeger Publishers, 2003. A study of Hitchcock's interest in French culture and the manner by which French critics, such as Truffaut, came to regard him in such high esteem.
* Weibel, Adrian: Spannung bei Hitchcock. Zur Funktionsweise der auktorialen Suspense. (ISBN 978-3-8260-3681-1) Wrzburg: Knigshausen & Neumann, 2008
* Wikstrom, Patrik & Grams, Martin, Jr.: The Alfred Hitchcock Presents Companion. OTR Pub, 2001, (Paperback: ISBN 978-0-9703310-1-4)
* Wood, Robin: Hitchcock's Films Revisited. Columbia University Press, 2002 (2nd edition). A much-cited collection of critical essays, now supplemented and annotated in this second edition with additional insights and changes that time and personal experience have brought to the author (including his own coming-out as a gay man).
* Contains interviews with Alfred Hitchcock and a discussion of the making of The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934) and Secret Agent (1936), which co-starred classic film actor Peter Lorre.
* iek, Slavoj: Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Lacan... But Were Afraid to Ask Hitchcock, London: Verso, 1993

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Anaconda]]

Green Anaconda
An anaconda is a large, non-venomous snake found in tropical South America. Although the name applies to a group of snakes, it is often used to refer only to one species in particular, the common or green anaconda, Eunectes murinus, which is one of the largest snakes in the world.

Anaconda may refer to:

* Any member of the genus Eunectes, a group of large, aquatic snakes found in South America
** Eunectes murinus, the green anaconda, the largest species, is found east of the Andes in Colombia, Venezuela, the Guianas, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil and Trinidad and Tobago.
** Eunectes notaeus, the yellow anaconda, a small species, is found in eastern Bolivia, southern Brazil, Paraguay and northeastern Argentina.
** Eunectes deschauenseei, the darkly-spotted anaconda, is a rare species found in northeastern Brazil and coastal French Guiana.
** Eunectes beniensis, the Bolivian anaconda, the most recently defined species, is found in the Departments of Beni and Pando in Bolivia.
* The giant anaconda is a mythical snake of enormous proportions said to be found in South America.
* Any large snake that "constricts" its prey (see Constriction), if applied loosely, could be called anaconda. Oxford. 1991. The Compact Oxford English Dictionary. Second Edition. Clarendon Press, Oxford. ISBN 0-19-861258-3. 

==Etymology==
Although the name refers to a snake found only in South America, the name commonly used in Brazil is sucuri, sucuriju or sucuriuba. The South American names anacauchoa and anacaona were suggested in an account by Peter Martyr d'Anghiera but the idea of a South American origin was questioned by Henry Walter Bates who, in his travels in South America, failed to find any similar name in use. The word anaconda is derived from the name of a snake from Ceylon (Sri Lanka) that John Ray described in Latin in his Synopsis Methodica Animalium (1693) as serpens indicus bubalinus anacandaia zeylonibus, ides bubalorum aliorumque jumentorum membra conterens. Ray used a catalogue of snakes from the Leyden museum supplied by Dr. Tancred Robinson but the description of its habit was based on Andreas Cleyer who in 1684 described a gigantic snake that crushed large animals by coiling and crushing their bones. Henry Yule in his Hobson-Jobson notes that the word became more popular due to a piece of fiction published in 1768 in the Scots Magazine by a certain R. Edwin. Edwin described a tyger being crushed and killed by an anaconda when in fact tigers never occurred in Sri Lanka. Yule and Frank Wall noted that the snake was in fact a python and suggested a Tamil origin anai-kondra meaning elephant killer. A Sinhalese origin was suggested by Donald Ferguson who pointed out that the word Henakandaya (hena lightning and kanda stem/trunk) was used in Sri Lanka for the small whip snake (Ahaetulla pulverulenta) and somehow got misapplied to the python before myths were created. 

==References==

==Further reading==

* Ray J. 1693. Synopsis methodica animalium quadrupedum et serpentini generis. Vulgarium natas characteristicas, rariorum descriptiones integras exhibens: cum historiis & observationibus anatomicis perquam curiosis. Prmittuntur nonnulla de animalium in genere, sensu, generatione, divisione, &c. - pp. , 1-336, . Londini. (Smith & Walford).
* Yule H, Burnell AC. 1886. Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, and of Kindred terms, Etymological, Historical, Geographical, and Discursive. London: J. Murray. pp. 133134. (reprinted in 1903 by W. Crooke).



[[Altaic languages]]

Altaic is a proposed language family of central Eurasia. Various versions include the Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Koreanic, and Japonic languages. Georg et al. 1999: 73-74 These languages are spoken in a wide arc stretching from northeast Asia through Central Asia to Anatolia and eastern Europe. The group is named after the Altai Mountains, a mountain range in Central Asia.

The Altaic language families share numerous characteristics. The debate is over the origin of their similarities. One camp, often called the "Altaicists", views these similarities as arising from common descent from a proto-Altaic language spoken several thousand years ago. The other camp, often called the "anti-Altaicists", views these similarities as arising from areal interaction between the language groups concerned. Some linguists believe the case for either interpretation is about equally strong; they have been called the "skeptics". Georg et al. 1999: 81 

Another view accepts Altaic as a valid family but includes in it only Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic. This view was widespread prior to the 1960s, but has almost no supporters among specialists today. Georg et al. 1999: 73-74 The expanded grouping, including Korean and Japanese, came to be known as "Macro-Altaic", leading to the designation of the smaller grouping as "Micro-Altaic" by retronymy. Most proponents of Altaic continue to support the inclusion of Korean and Japanese. Stratification in the peopling of China: how far does the linguistic evidence match genetics and archaeology? In; Sanchez-Mazas, Blench, Ross, Lin & Pejros eds. Human migrations in continental East Asia and Taiwan: genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence. 2008. Taylor & Francis. 

Micro-Altaic includes about 66 living languages, to which Macro-Altaic would add Korean, Japanese, and the Ryukyuan languages for a total of about 74. (These are estimates, depending on what is considered a language and what is considered a dialect. They do not include earlier states of language, such as Middle Mongol or Old Japanese.) Micro-Altaic has a total of about 348 million speakers today, Macro-Altaic about 558 million.

==History of the Altaic idea==
The Altai Mountains give their name to the proposed language family.

The idea that the Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic languages are closely related to each other was allegedly first published in 1730 by Philip Johan von Strahlenberg, a Swedish officer who traveled in the eastern Russian Empire while a prisoner of war after the Great Northern War. However, as has been pointed out by Alexis Manaster Ramer and Paul Sidwell (1997), von Strahlenberg actually opposed the idea of a closer relationship among the languages which later became known as "Altaic". Von Strahlenberg's classification was the first attempt at classification of a large number of languages some of which are Altaic. Poppe 1965: 125 

The term "Altaic", as the name for a language family, was introduced in 1844 by Matthias Castrn, a pioneering Finnish philologist who made major contributions to the study of the Uralic languages. As originally formulated by Castrn, Altaic included not only Turkic, Mongolian, and Manchu-Tungus (=Tungusic) but also Finno-Ugric and Samoyed. Poppe 1965: 126 

Finno-Ugric and Samoyed eventually came to be grouped in a separate family, known as Uralic (though doubts long persisted about its validity). The original Altaic family thus came to be known as the UralAltaic. Poppe 1965: 127 In the "UralAltaic" nomenclature, Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic are regarded as "Uralic", whereas Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic are regarded as "Altaic" - while Korean is sometimes considered Altaic, as is, less often, Japanese.

For much of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the theory of a common UralAltaic family was widespread, based on such shared features as vowel harmony and agglutination. However, while the UralAltaic hypothesis can still be found in encyclopedias, atlases, and similar general references, it has generally been abandoned by linguists. For instance it was characterized by Sergei Starostin as "an idea now completely discarded". Starostin et al. 2003: 8 

In 1857, the Austrian scholar Anton Boller suggested adding Japanese to the UralAltaic family. Miller 1986: 34 In the 1920s, G.J. Ramstedt and E.D. Polivanov advocated the inclusion of Korean. However, Ramstedt's two-volume magnum opus, Einfhrung in die altaische Sprachwissenschaft ('Introduction to Altaic Linguistics'), published in 19521957, rejected the UralAltaic hypothesis and included Korean in Altaic, an inclusion followed by most leading Altaicists to date. The first volume of his work, Lautlehre ('Phonology'), contained the first comprehensive attempt to identify regular correspondences among the sound systems within the Altaic language families. 

In 1960, Nicholas Poppe published what was in effect a heavily revised version of Ramstedts volume on phonology Miller 1991: 298 that has since set the standard in Altaic studies. Poppe considered the issue of the relationship of Korean to Turkic-Mongolic-Tungusic not settled. Poppe 1965: 148 In his view, there were three possibilities: (1) Korean did not belong with the other three genealogically, but had been influenced by an Altaic substratum; (2) Korean was related to the other three at the same level they were related to each other; (3) Korean had split off from the other three before they underwent a series of characteristic changes.

===Development of the Macro-Altaic theory===
Roy Andrew Miller's 1971 book Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages convinced most Altaicists that Japanese also belonged to Altaic. Poppe 1976: 470 Since then, the standard set of languages included in Macro-Altaic has been Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Korean, and Japanese.

An alternative classification, though one with much less currency among Altaicists, was proposed by John C. Street (1962), according to which Turkic-Mongolic-Tungusic forms one grouping and Korean-Japanese-Ainu another, the two being linked in a common family that Street designated as "North Asiatic". The same schema was adopted by James Patrie (1982) in the context of an attempt to classify the Ainu language. The Turkic-Mongolic-Tungusic and Korean-Japanese-Ainu groupings were also posited by Joseph Greenberg (20002002); however, he treated them as independent members of a larger family, which he termed Eurasiatic.
 

Anti-Altaicists Gerard Clauson (1956), Gerhard Doerfer (1963), and Alexander Shcherbak argued that the words and features shared by Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic languages were for the most part borrowings and that the rest could be attributed to chance resemblances. They noted that there was little vocabulary shared by Turkic and Tungusic languages, though more shared with Mongolic languages. They reasoned that if all three families had a common ancestor, we should expect losses to happen at random, not only at the geographical margins of the family; and that the observed pattern is consistent with borrowing. Furthermore, they argued that many of the typological features of the supposed Altaic languages, such as agglutinative morphology and SOV word order, usually co-occur in languages. In sum, the idea was that Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic languages form a Sprachbund  the result of convergence through intensive borrowing and long contact among speakers of languages that are not necessarily closely related.

Doubt was also raised about the affinities of Korean and Japanese; in particular, some authors tried to connect Japanese to the Austronesian languages. Starostin et al. 2003: 89 

Starostin's (1991) lexicostatistical research claimed that the proposed Altaic groups shared about 1520% of potential cognates within a 110-word Swadesh-Yakhontov list (e.g. TurkicMongolic 20%, TurkicTungusic 18%, TurkicKorean 17%, MongolicTungusic 22%, MongolicKorean 16%, TungusicKorean 21%). Altogether, Starostin concluded that the Altaic grouping was substantiated, though "older than most other language families in Eurasia, such as Indo-European or Finno-Ugric, and this is the reason why the modern Altaic languages preserve few common elements".

Unger (1990) advocates a family consisting of Tungusic, Korean, and Japonic languages but not Turkic or Mongolic; and Doerfer (1988) rejects all the genetic claims over these major groups. In 2003, Claus Schnig published a critical overview of the history of the Altaic hypothesis up to that time. He concluded:

In 2003, "An Etymological Dictionary of the Altaic Languages" was published by Starostin, Dybo, and Mudrak. It contains 2800 proposed cognate sets, a set of sound laws based on those proposed sets, and a number of grammatical correspondences, as well as a few important changes to the reconstruction of Proto-Altaic. For example, while most of today's Altaic languages have vowel harmony, Proto-Altaic as reconstructed by Starostin et al. lacked itinstead various vowel assimilations between the first and second syllables of words occurred in Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Korean, and Japonic. It tries hard to distinguish loans between Turkic and Mongolic and between Mongolic and Tungusic from cognates; and it suggests words that occur in Turkic and Tungusic but not Mongolic. All other combinations between the five branches also occur in the book. Starostin et al. 2003: 20 It lists 144 items of shared basic vocabulary (most of them already present in Starostin 1991), including words for such items as 'eye', 'ear', 'neck', 'bone', 'blood', 'water', 'stone', 'sun', and 'two'. Starostin et al. 2003: 230-234 This work has not changed the minds of any of the principal authors in the field, however. The debate continues unabated  e.g. S. Georg 2004, A. Vovin 2005, S. Georg 2005 (anti-Altaic); S. Starostin 2005, V. Blaek 2006, M. Robbeets 2007, A. Dybo and G. Starostin 2008 (pro-Altaic).

According to Roy Andrew Miller (1996: 98-99), the ClausonDoerfer critique of Altaic relies exclusively on lexicon, whereas the fundamental evidence for Altaic consists in verbal morphology. Lars Johanson (2010: 15-17) suggests that a resolution of the Altaic dispute may yet come from the examination of verbal morphology and calls for a muting of the polemic. In his view, "The dark age of pro and contra slogans, unfair polemics, and humiliations is not yet completely over and done with, but there seems to be some hope for a more constructive discussion" (ib. 17).

==Postulated Urheimat==
The earliest known texts in a Turkic language are the Orkhon inscriptions, of which the earliest dates from around 720 AD and the latest from 735 AD (Miller 1971: 3). They were deciphered in 1893 by the Danish linguist Vilhelm Thomsen in a scholarly race with his rival, the Germano-Russian linguist Wilhelm Radloff. However, Radloff was the first to publish the inscriptions.

The first Tungusic language to be attested is Jurchen, the language of the ancestors of the Manchus. A writing system for it was devised in 1119 AD and an inscription using this system is known from 1185 (see List of Jurchen inscriptions).

The earliest Mongolic language of which we have written evidence is known as Middle Mongol. It is first attested by an inscription dated to 1224 or 1225 AD and by the Secret History of the Mongols, written in 1228 (see Mongolic languages). The earliest Para-Mongolic text is the Memorial for Yelu Yanning, written in the Khitan Large Script and dated to 986 AD.

The prehistory of the peoples speaking these languages is largely unknown. Whereas for certain other language families, such as the speakers of Indo-European, Uralic, and Austronesian, we are able to frame substantial hypotheses, in the case of the proposed Altaic family everything remains to be done. Miller 1991: 319320 In the absence of written records, there are several ways to study the (pre)history of a people:

*Identification of archaeological cultures: the material remains found at dwelling sites, burial grounds, and other places where people left traces of their activity.
*Physical anthropology, which studies the physical characteristics of peoples, ancient and modern.
*Genetics, in particular the study of ancient DNA.
*Philology, which studies the evidence in language families for their primitive locations and the nature of their cultures. (For an example, see Proto-Uralic language.) Mythology and legend often contain important clues to the earlier history of peoples.
*Glottochronology, which attempts to estimate the time depth of a language family based on an assumed rate of change in languages. Related to this is lexicostatistics, which attempts to determine the degree of relation between a set of languages by comparing the percentage of basic vocabulary (words like "I", "you", "heart", "stone", "two", "be", "and") they share in common.
*Developing a family tree of languages and noting the relative distance of the splits that occur in it.
*Observing evidence for contact between languages, which may indicate approximately when and where they were adjacent to each other.

All of these methods remain to be applied to the languages attributed to Altaic with the same degree of focus and intensity they have been applied to the Indo-European family (e.g. Mallory 1989, Anthony 2007).

===Macro-Altaic Urheimat===
Japanese is first attested in a few short inscriptions from the 5th century AD, such as the Inariyama Sword. The first substantial text in Japanese, however, is the Kojiki, which dates from 712 AD. It is followed by the Nihon shoki, completed in 720, and that by the Man'ysh, which dates from c. 771-785, but includes material that is about 400 years earlier (Miller 1971: 4).

The most important text for the study of early Korean is the Hyangga, a collection of 25 poems, of which some go back to the Three Kingdoms period (57668 AD), but are preserved in an orthography that only goes back to the 9th century AD (Miller 1996: 60). Korean is copiously attested from the mid-15th century on in the phonetically precise Hangul system of writing (ib. 61).

According to Juha Janhunen, the ancestral languages of Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Korean, and Japanese were spoken in a relatively small area comprising present-day North Korea, Southern Manchuria, and Southeastern Mongolia (Johanson and Robbeets 2010: 2). However Janhunen (1992) is skeptical about an affiliation of Japanese to Altaic languages, while Rna-Tas (1998: 77) remarked that a relationship between Altaic and Japanese, if it ever existed, must be more remote than the relationship of any two of the Indo-European languages. Ramsey (2004: 340) stated that "the genetic relationship between Korean and Japanese, if it in fact exists, is probably more complex and distant than we can imagine on the basis of our present state of knowledge", a concept later restated by Lee (2011).

Supporters of Altaic formerly set the date of the Proto-Altaic language at around 4000 BC, but today at around 5000 BC (Starostin et al. 2003) or 6000 BC (Kuz'mina 2007: 364). This would make it a language family about as old as Indo-European (4000 to 7,000 BC according to several hypotheses cited in Mallory 1997: 106) but considerably younger than Afroasiatic (c. 10,000 BC according to Diakonoff 1988: 33n, 11,000 to 16,000 BC according to Ehret 2002: 3536).

==List of Altaicists and critics of Altaic==
Note: This list is limited to linguists who have worked specifically on the Altaic problem since the publication of the first volume of Ramstedt's Einfhrung in 1952. The dates given are those of works concerning Altaic. For Altaicists, the version of Altaic they favor is given at the end of the entry, if other than the prevailing one of TurkicMongolicTungusicKoreanJapanese.

===Altaicists===
*Pentti Aalto (1955). TurkicMongolicTungusicKorean.
*Anna V. Dybo (S. Starostin et al. 2003, A. Dybo and G. Starostin 2008).
*Ki-Moon Lee (K.-M. Lee and S.R. Ramsey 2011). TurkicMongolicTungusicKorean and perhaps Japanese.
*Karl H. Menges (1975). Common ancestor of Korean, Japanese and traditional Altaic dated back to the 7th or 8th millennium BC (1975: 125).
*Roy Andrew Miller (1971, 1980, 1986, 1996).
*Oleg A. Mudrak (S. Starostin et al. 2003).
*Nicholas Poppe (1965). TurkicMongolicTungusic and perhaps Korean.
*Alexis Manaster Ramer.
*Martine Robbeets (2004, 2005, 2007, 2008).
*G.J. Ramstedt (19521957). TurkicMongolicTungusicKorean.
*George Starostin (A. Dybo and G. Starostin 2008).
*Sergei Starostin (1991, S. Starostin et al. 2003).
*John C. Street (1962). TurkicMongolicTungusic and KoreanJapaneseAinu, grouped as "North Asiatic".
*Talat Tekin (1994). TurkicMongolicTungusicKorean.

===Major critics of Altaic===
*Gerard Clauson (1956, 1959, 1962).
*Gerhard Doerfer (1963, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1981, 1985, 1988, 1993).
*Stefan Georg (2004, 2005).
*Juha Janhunen (1992).
*Claus Schnig (2003).
*Alexander Shcherbak.
*Alexander Vovin (2005, 2010). Formerly an advocate of Altaic (1994, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001), now a critic of it.

===Alternative hypotheses===
*Joseph Greenberg (20002002). TurkicMongolicTungusic and KoreanJapaneseAinu, grouped in Eurasiatic.
*Lars Johanson (2010). Agnostic, proponent of a "Transeurasian" verbal morphology not necessarily genealogically linked.
*James Patrie (1982). TurkicMongolicTungusic and KoreanJapaneseAinu, grouped in a common taxon (cf. John C. Street 1962).
*J. Marshall Unger (1990). TungusicKoreanJapanese ("Macro-Tungusic"), with Turkic and Mongolic as separate language families.

==Comparative grammar==

===Reconstructed phonology===
Based on the proposed correspondences listed below, the following phoneme inventory has been reconstructed for the hypothetical Proto(-Macro)-Altaic language (taken from Blaek's summary of the newest Altaic etymological dictionary et al. 2003 and transcribed into the IPA):

====Consonants====

 Bilabial Alveolar or dental Alveolopalatal Postalveolar Palatal Velar 
 Plosives aspirated /p/ /t/ /k/ 
 voiceless /p/ /t/ /k/ 
 voiced /b/ /d/ // 
 Affricates aspirated /t/ 
 voiceless /t/ 
 voiced /d/ 
 Fricatives voiceless /s/ // 
 voiced /z/-1 
 Nasals /m/ /n/ /n/ // 
 Trills -/r/-2 /r/ 
 Approximants /l/ /l/ -/j/-2 

1 This phoneme only occurred at the beginnings of words.
2 These phonemes only occurred in the interior of words.

====Vowels====

 Front Back 
 unrounded rounded 
 Close /i/ /y/ /u/ 
 Mid /e/ // /o/ 
 Near-open // 
 Open /a/ 

It is not clear whether , , were monophthongs as shown here (presumably ) or diphthongs (); the evidence is equivocal. In any case, however, they only occurred in the first (and sometimes only) syllable of any word.

Every vowel occurred in long and short versions which were different phonemes in the first syllable. Starostin et al. (2003) treat length together with pitch as a prosodic feature.

====Prosody====
As reconstructed by Starostin et al. (2003), Proto-Altaic was a pitch accent or tone language; at least the first and probably every syllable could have a high or a low pitch.

===Sound correspondences===
If a Proto(-Macro)-Altaic language really existed, it should be possible to reconstruct regular sound correspondences between that protolanguage and its descendants; such correspondences would make it possible to distinguish cognates from loanwords (in many cases). Such attempts have repeatedly been made. The latest version is reproduced here, taken from Blaek's (2006) summary of the newest Altaic etymological dictionary (Starostin et al. 2003) and transcribed into the IPA.

When a Proto-Altaic phoneme developed differently depending on its position in a word (beginning, interior, or end), the special case (or all cases) is marked with a hyphen; for example, Proto-Altaic disappears (marked "0") or becomes at the beginning of a Turkic word and becomes elsewhere in a Turkic word.

====Consonants====
Only single consonants are considered here. In the middle of words, clusters of two consonants were allowed in Proto-Altaic as reconstructed by Starostin et al. (2003); the correspondence table of these clusters spans almost 7 pages in their book (8389), and most clusters are only found in one or a few of the reconstructed roots.

 Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean Proto-Japonic 
 /p/ 0-1, /j/-, /p/ /h/-2, /j/-, -/b/-, -/h/-2, -/b/ /p/ /p/ /p/ 
 /p/ /b/ /b/-6, /h/-2, /b/ /p/-, /b/ 
 /b/ /b/-, -/h/-, -/b/-9, -/b/ /b/ /p/, -/b/- /p/-, /w/, /b/10, /p/11 
 /t/ /t/-, /d/-3, /t/ /t/, /t/4, -/d/ /t/ /t/ /t/ 
 /t/ /d/-, /t/ /t/, /t/4 /d/-, /d/-7, /t/ /t/, -/r/- /t/-, /d/-, /t/ 
 /d/ /j/-, /d/ /d/, /d/4 /d/ /d/-, /t/-, /t/, /j/ 
 /t/ /t/ /t/ /t/ /t/ /t/ 
 /t/ /d/-, /t/ /d/-, /d/-4, /t/ /s/-, -/d/-, -/s/- /t/-, -/s/- 
 /d/ /j/ /d/ /d/ /d/-, /j/ 
 /k/ /k/ /k/-, -/k/-, -//-5, -// /x/-, /k/, /x/ /k/, /h/ /k/ 
 /k/ /k/-, /k/, //8 /k/-, // /k/-, //-, // /k/-, -/h/-, -0-, -/k/ 
 // // //-, -/h/-, -//-5, -// // /k/, -/h/-, -0- /k/-, /k/, 012 
 /s/ /s/ /s/ /s/ /s/-, /h/-, /s/ /s/ 
 /z/ /j/ /s/ 
 // /s/-, /t/-13, /s/ /s/-, /t/-13, /s/ // 
 /m/ /b/-, -/m/- /m/ /m/ /m/ /m/ 
 /n/ /j/-, -/n/- /n/ /n/ /n/ /n/ 
 /n/ /j/-, /n/ /d/-, /j/, /n/ /n/ /n/-, /n/14 /m/-, /n/, /m/ 
 // 0-, /j/-, // 0-, /j/-, //-15, /n/-16, //, /n/, /m/, /h/ // /n/-, //, 0 0-, /n/-, /m/-7, /m/, /n/ 
 /r/ /r/ /r/ /r/ /r/ /r/, /t/4, 15 
 /r/ /r/ /r/, /t/ 
 /l/ /j/-, /l/ /n/-, /l/-, /l/ /l/ /n/-, /r/ /n/-, /r/ 
 /l/ /j/-, /l/ /d/-, /d/-4, /l/ /n/-, /s/ 
 /j/ /j/ /j/, /h/ /j/ /j/, 0 /j/, 0 

1 The Khalaj language has instead. (It also retains a number of other archaisms.) However, it has also added in front of words for which no initial consonant (except in some cases , as expected) can be reconstructed for Proto-Altaic; therefore, and because it would make them dependent on whether Khalaj happens to have preserved any given root, Starostin et al. (2003: 2628) have not used Khalaj to decide whether to reconstruct an initial in any given word and have not reconstructed a for Proto-Turkic even though it was probably there.
2 The Monguor language has here instead (Kaiser & Shevoroshkin 1988); it is therefore possible that Proto-Mongolian also had which then became (and then usually disappeared) in all descendants except Monguor. Tabga and Kitan, two extinct Mongolic languages not considered by Starostin et al. (2003), even preserve in these places (Blaek 2006).
3 This happened when the next consonant in the word was , , or .
4 Before .
5 When the next consonant in the word was .
6 This happened "in syllables with original high pitch" (Starostin et al. 2003:135).
7 Before , or .
8 When the next consonant in the word was .
9 When the preceding consonant was , , , or , or when the next consonant was .
10 Before , , or any vowel followed by .
11 Before , or and then another vowel.
12 When preceded by a vowel preceded by .
13 Before .
14 Starostin et al. (2003) follow a minority opinion (Vovin 1993) in interpreting the sound of the Middle Korean letter as or rather than . (Dybo & Starostin 2008:footnote 50)
15 Before .
16 Before , , or .

====Vowels====
Vowel harmony is pervasive in the languages attributed to Altaic: most Turkic and Mongolic as well as some Tungusic languages have it, Korean is arguably in the process of losing its traces, and it is (controversially) hypothesized for Old Japanese. (Vowel harmony is also typical of the neighboring Uralic languages and was often counted among the arguments for the UralAltaic hypotheses.) Nevertheless, Starostin et al. (2003) reconstruct Proto-Altaic as lacking vowel harmony. Instead, according to them, vowel harmony originated in each daughter branch as assimilation of the vowel in the first syllable to the vowel in the second syllable (which was usually modified or lost later). "The situation therefore is very close, e.g., to Germanic Germanic umlaut or to the Nakh languages in the Eastern Caucasus, where the quality of non-initial vowels can now only be recovered on the basis of umlaut processes in the first syllable." (Starostin et al. 2003:91) The table below is taken from Starostin et al. (2003):

 Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic Proto-Tungusic Middle Korean Proto-Japonic 
 first s. second s. first syllable 
 /a/ /a/ /a/, /a/1, //1 /a/ /a/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ /a/, // /a/, /i/ // 
 /i/ //, /a/ /a/, /e/ /a/, /e/, /i/ /i/ 
 /o/ /o/, /ja/, /aj/ /a/, /i/, /e/ //, /o/ /a/ 
 /u/ /a/ /a/, /o/, /u/ /a/, //, /o/, /u/ /u/ 
 /e/ /a/ /a/, //, // /a/, /e/ /e/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ /ja/-, //, /e/2 /e/, /ja/ /a/, /e/, /i/, // // 
 /i/ /ja/-, //, /e/2 /e/, /i/ /i/, //, /a/, /e/ /i/ 
 /o/ //, /e/ /a/, /e/, /y/3, //3 //, /o/, /u/ //, /a/ 
 /u/ //, /a/, // /e/, /a/, /o/3 /o/, /u/, /a/ /u/ 
 /i/ /a/ //, /i/ /i/ /i/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ , /e/2 /e/, /i/ /i/, // /i/ 
 /i/ /i/ /i/, /e/1 /i/ /i/ 
 /o/ // /i/ /o/, /u/, // /i/, // 
 /u/ //, /i/ /i/, // /u/ 
 /o/ /a/ /o/ /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ //, /o/ //, /y/, /o/ //, /o/, /u/ // 
 /i/ //, /o/ // /o/, /u/ /u/ 
 /o/ /o/ /u/ /a/, /e/ // 
 /u/ /o/ /o/, /u/ //, /o/, /u/ /u/ 
 /u/ /a/ /u/, /o/ /a/, /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ /y/ /o/, /u/, /y/ /u/ /a/, /e/ /ua/, /a/1 
 /i/ /y/, /u/ /y/, // /o/, /u/, // /u/ 
 /o/ /u/ /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/, // // 
 /u/ /o/, /u/ /u/ 
 // /a/ /ia/, /ja/, // /a/ /ia/, /i/4 //, /a/3 /a/ 
 /e/ /ia/, /ja/ /i/, /a/, /e/ /i/ /i/, /e/, /je/ // 
 /i/ /ia/, /ja/, // /i/, /e/ /ia/, /i/4 //, /e/, /je/ /i/ 
 /o/ /ia/, /ja/, /a/1 /e/ /o/, /u/ //, /o/, /u/ /a/ 
 /u/ /e/, /a/, //1 /a/, /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/, /e/, /je/ /u/ 
 // /a/ /ia/, /ja/, /a/1 /a/, /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/, // /a/ 
 /e/ /e/, /a/, //1 /e/, // /o/, /u/, /je/ //, /u/ 
 /i/ /ia/, /ja/, /a/1 /i/, /e/, // /o/, /u/, // /i/ 
 /o/ /o/, /u/ //, /y/, /o/, /u/ /i/ /i/, /e/, /je/ //, /a/ 
 /u/ /u/, /o/ /e/, /i/, /u/ /ia/, /i/4 //, /u/, /je/ /u/ 
 /y/ /a/ // /o/, /u/, /i/ /o/, /u/ /a/, /e/ /a/ 
 /e/ /y/, //, /i/2 //, /y/, /o/, /u/ /y/, /u/1 /a/, /e/, /ja/, /je/, /o/, /u/ /u/, // 
 /i/ /y/, // /i/, /u/1 //, /i/, /o/, /u/ /i/ 
 /o/ /u/, /o/ /o/, /u/ /y/ /a/, /e/, /ja/, /je/, /o/, /u/ /u/, // 
 /u/ // /i/, /o/, /u/, /y/, // /o/, /u/ /o/, /u/, /i/, // /u/ 

1 When preceded by a bilabial consonant.
2 When followed by a trill, , or .
3 When preceded or followed by a bilabial consonant.
4 When preceded by a fricative ().

====Prosody====
Length and pitch in the first syllable evolved as follows according to Starostin et al. (2003), with the caveat that it is not clear which pitch was high and which was low in Proto-Altaic (Starostin et al. 2003:135). For simplicity of input and display every syllable is symbolized as "a" here:

 Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean Proto-Japonic 
 1 2 
 
 1 2 
 

 "Proto-Mongolian has lost all traces of the original prosody except for voicing *p > *b in syllables with original high pitch" (Starostin et al. 2003:135).
 " several secondary metatonic processes happened in Korean, basically in the verb subsystem: all verbs have a strong tendency towards low pitch on the first syllable." (Starostin et al. 2003:135)

===Morphological correspondences===
Starostin et al. (2003) have reconstructed the following correspondences between the case and number suffixes (or clitics) of the (Macro-)Altaic languages (taken from Blaek, 2006):

 Case 
 Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic (*), Old Turkic Proto-Mongolic (*), Classical Mongolian Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean (*), Middle Korean Proto-Japonic (*), Old Japanese 
 nominative: - - - - - - 
 accusative: 
 partitive: (accusative) (possessive) 
 genitive: 
 dative-locative: (locative-ablative) (dative-locative), (attributive) (dative), (locative) (attributive-locative) 
 dative-instrumental: (instrumental) (dative-locative) 
 dative-directive: (dative) (directive) 
 comitative-locative: (locative), (prolative), (comitative) (instrumental-lative) 
 comitative-equative: (equative) (ablative), (terminative) (comitative) 
 allative: (directive) (allative) 
 directive: (lative) 
 instrumental-ablative: *? terminal dative (ablative) 
 singulative: 
 Number 
 dual: (plural for paired objects) (plural) (plural for paired objects) 
 plural: 
 plural: 
 plural: 

/V/ symbolizes an uncertain vowel. Suffixes reconstructed for Proto-Turkic, Proto-Mongolic, Proto-Korean, or Proto-Japonic, but not attested in Old Turkic, Classical Mongolian, Middle Korean, or Old Japanese are marked with asterisks.

===Selected cognates===

====Personal pronouns====
The table below is taken (with slight modifications) from Blaek (2006) and transcribed into IPA.

 Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic (*), Classical Mongolian Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean (*), Middle Korean Proto-Japonic 
 \"I\" (nominative) 
 \"me\" (oblique cases) 
 \"I\" Old Chinese: (oblique) (Korean: ) (Sino-Korean: *//, *//), ()1 (Sino-Japanese: */,/, - ) 
 \"thou\" (nominative) and/or (Turkic: Sen, ) (Mongolian: ) (Manchu: Si, Nanai: ) 1 
 \"thee\" (oblique cases) (Turkic: Sen, ) ? 
 \"thou\" Proto-Tibeto-Burman (Korean: ) (Japanese:  *//) 
 \"we\" (nominative) (Turkic: Biz, ) (Mongolian: ) (Nanai:  Manchu: be) (Korean: , *//) 
 \"us\" (oblique cases) (Manchu: muse) 
 \"ye\" (nominative) and/or (Turkic: Siz, ) (Mongolian:  ) (Manchu: suwe) 
 \"you\" (oblique) 

As above, forms not attested in Classical Mongolian or Middle Korean but reconstructed for their ancestors are marked with an asterisk, and /V/ represents an uncertain vowel.

====Other basic vocabulary====
The following table is a brief selection of further proposed cognates in basic vocabulary across the Altaic family (from Starostin et al. ). Their reconstructions and equivalences are not widely accepted by the mainstream linguists.

 Proto-Altaic meaning Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean Proto-Japonic 
 that /di/- or /ti/- /te-re/ /ta/ /tj/ /tso-re/ 
 eye /ni-dy/ 5 /n-n/ /m/- 
 neck /mje-k/ /nmpV/ 
 breast 1 /kk-n/2 /kuku-n/2 /kokaji/ \"pith; medulla; core\" /kk-r/1 \"heart\" 
 stone 3 
 star /ho-dun/ /osi/4 
 oath, god, sky /tagarag/ /tagura/ 

1 Contains the Proto-Altaic dual suffix : "both breasts"  "chest"  "heart".
2 Contains the Proto-Altaic singulative suffix -/nV/: "one breast".
3 Compare Baekje */turak/ "stone" (Blaek 2006).
4 This is in the Jurchen language. In modern Manchu it is usiha.
5 This is disputed by Georg (2004), who states: "The traditional Tungusological reconstruction *ysa [ = ] cannot be replaced by the nasal-initial one espoused here, needed for the comparison." However, Starostin (2005) mentions evidence from several Tungusic languages cited by Starostin et al. (2003). Georg (2005) does not accept this, referring to Georg (1999/2000) and a then upcoming paper. Georg 2005 

====Numerals and related words====
In the Indo-European family, the numerals are remarkably stable. This is a rather exceptional case; especially words for higher numbers are often borrowed wholesale. (Perhaps the most famous cases are Japanese and Korean, which have two complete sets of numerals each  one native, one Chinese.) Indeed, the Altaic numerals are less stable than the Indo-European ones, but nevertheless Starostin et al. (2003) reconstruct them as follows:

 Proto-Altaic meaning Proto-Altaic Proto-Turkic Proto-Mongolic Proto-Tungusic Proto-Korean Proto-Japonic 
 1 /byri/ /bir/ /byri/ \"all, each\" \"at first\" /pi-t/ 
 single /ne/ /nige/ \"1\" /no/~/non/ \"be the first, begin\" /nmi/ \"only\" 
 front /emo/ /m-gen/ \"upper part of breast\" /emy/- /emu/~/ume/ \"1\" /maen-/~/mn-ch \"first of all\"26 /upe/ \"upper\" /mape/ \"front\" 
 single, one of a pair \"one of a pair\" /son-du-/ \"odd\" 1 \"1\" or /ht-/ 1 /sa/- \"together, reciprocally\" 
 2 /tybu/ 2 \"2 (feminine)\"3 4 
 pair, couple /eki/ \"2\", \"twins\"; ? \"20\" /(h)ekire/ \"twins\" 
 different, other /gojV/ /gojar/ \"2\" /goj/~/gia/ /ka/ 
 pair, half /puta/- \"2\" 
 3 /y/ \"30\"5 /gu-rban/; \"30\" 6 /mi/-7 
 (footnote 8) /l/ /l/9 /ila-n/ \"3\" /r-pu/ \"bissextile (year or month)\" 
 object consisting of 3 parts /sjra/ \"trident, pitchfork\" \"3\" /srpi/ \"rake, pitchfork\" 
 4 /d-rben/; \"40\"10 /dy-gin/ /d/- 
 5 /ta-bun/; /ta-bin/ \"50\"11 /t/- /i-tu-/12 
 6 ; \"60\"13 14 /mu/- 
 7 15 /jeti/ ; /dala-n/ \"70\"15 /nada-n/ /nr-(kp)/16 /nana/- 
 8 /j-t-/17 /da/- 
 9 /xegyn/ /kkn/ 
 10 or /tbe/ /tw/18,/-so/\"-0\"/i-so/50 
 many, a big number \"100\" 19 /jr(h)/ \"10\" /jr/ \"many\" \"10,000\" /jr/ \"many\" 
 \"10\" /ha-rban/ \"10\", /ha-na/ \"all\" 20 -/p/, -/pua/ \"-00\"21 
 20 or \"40\"22 /kori-n/ /xori-n/ /pata-ti/23 
 100 ?/jom/ \"big number, all\" 24 
 1000 /dymen/ or /tymen/ \"10,000\"25 /ti/ 

1 Manchu /soni/ "single, odd".
2 Old Bulgarian /tvi-rem/ "second".
3 Kitan has "2" (Blaek 2006).
4 is probably a contraction of -/ubu/-.
5 The /y/- of "3" "may also reflect the same root, although the suffixation is not clear." (Starostin et al. 2003:223)
6 Compare Silla /mir/ "3" (Blaek 2006).
7 Compare Goguryeo /mir/ "3" (Blaek 2006).
8 "third (or next after three = fourth)", "consisting of three objects"
9 "song with three out of four verses rhyming (first, second and fourth)"
10 Kitan has "4" (Blaek 2006).
11 Kitan has "5" (Blaek 2006).
12 "(the prefixed i- is somewhat unclear: it is also used as a separate word meaning fifty, but the historical root here is no doubt *tu-)" (Starostin et al. 2003:223).  Blaek (2006) also considers Goguryeo "5" (from ) to be related.
13 Kitan has "6" (Blaek 2006).
14 Middle Korean has "6", which may fit here, but the required loss of initial "is not quite regular" (Starostin et al. 2003:224).
15 The Mongolian forms "may suggest an original proto-form" or "with dissimilation or metathesis in" Proto-Mongolic (Starostin et al. 2003:224).  Kitan has "7".
16 in Early Middle Korean(/ in ).
17 "Problematic" (Starostin et al. 2003:224).
18 Compare Goguryeo "10" (Blaek 2006).
19 Manchu "a very big number".
20 Orok "a bundle of 10 squirrels", Nanai "collection, gathering".
21 "Hundred" in names of hundreds.
22 Starostin et al. (2003) suspect this to be a reduplication: "20 + 20".
23 would be expected; Starostin et al. (2003) think that this irregular change from to is due to influence from "2" .
24 From .
25 Also see Tmen.
26 Modern Korean  needs further investigations

==See also==
*Classification of Japonic
*Nostratic languages
*Uralo-Siberian languages
*Xiongnu

==References==

==Bibliography==

===Works cited===
*Aalto, Pentti. 1955. "On the Altaic initial *p-." Central Asiatic Journal 1, 916.
*Anonymous. 2008. missing. Bulletin of the Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas, 31 March 2008, 264: ____.
*Anthony, David W. 2007. The Horse, the Wheel, and Language. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
*Blaek, Vclav. 2006. "Current progress in Altaic etymology." Linguistica Online, 30 January 2006.
*Boller, Anton. 1857. Nachweis, da das Japanische zum ural-altaischen Stamme gehrt. Wien.
*Clauson, Gerard. 1956. "The case against the Altaic theory." Central Asiatic Journal 2, 181187 
*Clauson, Gerard. 1959. "The case for the Altaic theory examined." Akten des vierundzwanzigsten internationalen Orientalisten-Kongresses, edited by H. Franke. Wiesbaden: Deutsche Morgenlndische Gesellschaft, in Komission bei Franz Steiner Verlag.
*Clauson, Gerard. 1968. "A lexicostatistical appraisal of the Altaic theory." Central Asiatic Journal 13: 123.
*Diakonoff, Igor M. 1988. Afrasian Languages. Moscow: Nauka.
*Doerfer, Gerhard. 1963. "Bemerkungen zur Verwandtschaft der sog. altaische Sprachen", 'Remarks on the relationship of the so-called Altaic languages'. In Gerhard Doerfer, Trkische und mongolische Elemente im Neupersischen, Bd. I: Mongolische Elemente im Neupersischen, 1963, 51105. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
*Doerfer, Gerhard. 1973. "Lautgesetze und Zufall: Betrachtungen zum Omnicomparativismus." Innsbrucker Beitrge zur Sprachwissenschaft 10.
*Doerfer, Gerhard. 1974. "Ist das Japanische mit den altaischen Sprachen verwandt?" Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlndischen Gesellschaft 114.1.
*Doerfer, Gerhard. 1985. Mongolica-Tungusica. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
*Doerfer, Gerhard. 1988. Grundwort und Sprachmischung: Eine Untersuchung an Hand von Krperteilbezeichnungen. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
*Dybo, Anna V. and Georgiy S. Starostin. 2008. "In defense of the comparative method, or the end of the Vovin controversy." Aspects of Comparative Linguistics 3, 109258. Moscow: RSUH Publishers.
*Georg, Stefan, Peter A. Michalove, Alexis Manaster Ramer, and Paul J. Sidwell. 1999. "Telling general linguists about Altaic." Journal of Linguistics 35:6598.
*Georg, Stefan. 1999 / 2000. "Haupt und Glieder der altaischen Hypothese: die Krperteilbezeichnungen im Trkischen, Mongolischen und Tungusischen" ('Head and members of the Altaic hypothesis: The body-part designations in Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic'). Ural-altaische Jahrbcher, neue Folge B 16, 143182.
*Georg, Stefan. 2004. Review of Etymological Dictionary of the Altaic Languages. Diachronica 21.2, 445450.
*Georg, Stefan. 2005. "Reply Starostin 2005." Diachronica 22(2), 455457.
*Greenberg, Joseph H. 20002002. Indo-European and Its Closest Relatives: The Eurasiatic Language Family, 2 volumes. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
*Johanson, Lars. 2010. "The high and low spirits of Transeurasian language studies" in Johanson and Robbeets (2010), 720. 
*Johanson, Lars and Martine Robbeets (editors). 2010. Transeurasian Verbal Morphology in a Comparative Perspective: Genealogy, Contact, Chance. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. (Includes contributions by Rna-Tas, Janhunen, Comrie, and others.)
*Kuzmina, Elena E. edited by J. P. Mallory. 2007. The Origin of the Indo-Iranians. BRILL. ISBN 978-9004160-54-5
*Lee, Ki-Moon and S. Robert Ramsey. 2011. A History of the Korean Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Manaster Ramer, Alexis and Paul Sidwell. 1997. "The truth about Strahlenberg's classification of the languages of Northeastern Eurasia." Journal de la Socit finno-ougrienne 87, 139160.
*Menges, Karl. H. 1975. Altajische Studien II. Japanisch und Altajisch. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
*Mallory, J.P. 1989. In Search of the Indo-Europeans. London: Thames and Hudson.
*Miller, Roy Andrew. 1971. Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-52719-0.
*Miller, Roy Andrew. 1980. Origins of the Japanese Language: Lectures in Japan during the Academic Year 19771978. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-95766-2.
*Miller, Roy Andrew. 1986. Nihongo: In Defence of Japanese. London: Athlone Press. ISBN 0-485-11251-5.
*Miller, Roy Andrew. 1991. "Genetic connections among the Altaic languages." In Sydney M. Lamb and E. Douglas Mitchell (editors), Sprung from Some Common Source: Investigations into the Prehistory of Languages, 1991, 293327. ISBN 0-8047-1897-0.
*Miller, Roy Andrew. 1996. Languages and History: Japanese, Korean and Altaic. Oslo: Institute for Comparative Research in Human Culture. ISBN 974-8299-69-4.
*Patrie, James. 1982. The Genetic Relationship of the Ainu Language. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-0724-3.
*Poppe, Nicholas. 1960. Vergleichende Grammatik der altaischen Sprachen. Teil I. Vergleichende Lautlehre, 'Comparative Grammar of the Altaic Languages, Part 1: Comparative Phonology'. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. (Only part to appear of a projected larger work.)
*Poppe, Nicholas. 1965. Introduction to Altaic Linguistics. Ural-altaische Bibliothek 14. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
*Poppe, Nicholas. 1976. Review of Karl H. Menges, Altajische Studien II. Japanisch und Altajisch (1975). In The Journal of Japanese Studies 2.2, 470474.
*Ramsey, S. Robert. 2004. Accent, Liquids, and the Search for a Common Origin for Korean and Japanese, 'Japanese Language and Literature Vol.38, No.2, Special Issue: In Honor of Samuel E. Martin', American Association of Teachers of Japanese.
*Ramstedt, G.J. 1952. Einfhrung in die altaische Sprachwissenschaft II. Formenlehre, 'Introduction to Altaic Linguistics, Volume 2: Morphology', edited and published by Pentti Aalto. Helsinki: Suomalais-Ugrilainen Seura.
*Ramstedt, G.J. 1957. Einfhrung in die altaische Sprachwissenschaft I. Lautlehre, 'Introduction to Altaic Linguistics, Volume 1: Phonology', edited and published by Pentti Aalto. Helsinki: Suomalais-Ugrilainen Seura.
*Ramstedt, G.J. 1966. Einfhrung in die altaische Sprachwissenschaft III. Register, 'Introduction to Altaic Linguistics, Volume 3: Index', edited and published by Pentti Aalto. Helsinki: Suomalais-Ugrilainen Seura.
*Robbeets, Martine. 2004. "Swadesh 100 on Japanese, Korean and Altaic." Tokyo University Linguistic Papers, TULIP 23, 99118.
*Robbeets, Martine. 2005. Is Japanese related to Korean, Tungusic, Mongolic and Turkic? Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
*Robbeets, Martine. 2007. "How the actional suffix chain connects Japanese to Altaic." In Turkic Languages 11.1, 358.
*Schnig, Claus. 2003. "Turko-Mongolic Relations." In The Mongolic Languages, edited by Juha Janhunen, 403419. London: Routledge.
*Starostin, Sergei A. 1991. Altajskaja problema i proisxodenie japonskogo jazyka, 'The Altaic Problem and the Origin of the Japanese Language'. Moscow: Nauka.
*Starostin, Sergei A., Anna V. Dybo, and Oleg A. Mudrak. 2003. Etymological Dictionary of the Altaic Languages, 3 volumes. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-04-13153-1.
*Starostin, Sergei A. 2005. "Response to Stefan Georg's review of the Etymological Dictionary of the Altaic Languages." Diachronica 22(2), 451454.
*Strahlenberg, P.J.T. von. 1730. Das nord- und ostliche Theil von Europa und Asia.... Stockholm. (Reprint: 1975. Studia Uralo-Altaica. Szeged and Amsterdam.)
*Strahlenberg, P.J.T. von. 1738. Russia, Siberia and Great Tartary, an Historico-geographical Description of the North and Eastern Parts of Europe and Asia.... (Reprint: 1970. New York: Arno Press.) English translation of the previous.
*Street, John C. 1962. Review of N. Poppe, Vergleichende Grammatik der altaischen Sprachen, Teil I (1960). Language 38, 9298.
*Tekin, Talat. 1994. "Altaic languages." In The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, Vol. 1, edited by R.E. Asher. Oxford and New York: Pergamon Press.
*Unger, J. Marshall. 1990. "Summary report of the Altaic panel." In Linguistic Change and Reconstruction Methodology, edited by Philip Baldi, 479482. Berlin  New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
*Vovin, Alexander. 1993. "About the phonetic value of the Middle Korean grapheme ." Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 56(2), 247259.
*Vovin, Alexander. 1994. "Genetic affiliation of Japanese and methodology of linguistic comparison." Journal de la Socit finno-ougrienne 85, 241256.
*Vovin, Alexander. 2001. "Japanese, Korean, and Tungusic: evidence for genetic relationship from verbal morphology." Altaic Affinities (Proceedings of the 40th Meeting of PIAC, Provo, Utah, 1997), edited by David B. Honey and David C. Wright, 83202. Indiana University, Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies.
*Vovin, Alexander. 2005. "The end of the Altaic controversy" (review of Starostin et al. 2003). Central Asiatic Journal 49.1, 71132.
*Vovin, Alexander. 2010. Koreo-Japonica: A Re-Evaluation of a Common Genetic Origin. University of Hawaii Press.
*Whitney Coolidge, Jennifer. 2005. Southern Turkmenistan in the Neolithic: A Petrographic Case Study. Oxbow Books.

===Further reading===
*Greenberg, Joseph H. 1997. "Does Altaic exist?" In Irn Hegedus, Peter A. Michalove, and Alexis Manaster Ramer (editors), Indo-European, Nostratic and Beyond: A Festschrift for Vitaly V. Shevoroshkin, Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man, 1997, 8893. (Reprinted in Joseph H. Greenberg, Genetic Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005, 325330.)
*Hahn, Reinhard F. 1994. LINGUIST List 5.908, 18 August 1994.
*Janhunen, Juha. 1992. "Das Japanische in vergleichender Sicht." Journal de la Socit finno-ougrienne 84, 145161.
*Johanson, Lars. 1999. "Cognates and copies in Altaic verb derivation." Language and Literature  Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages: Studies in Honour of Roy Andrew Miller on His 75th Birthday, edited by Karl H. Menges and Nelly Naumann, 113. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. (Also: HTML version.)
*Johanson, Lars. 1999. "Attractiveness and relatedness: Notes on Turkic language contacts." Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society: Special Session on Caucasian, Dravidian, and Turkic Linguistics, edited by Jeff Good and Alan C.L. Yu, 8794. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
*Johanson, Lars. 2002. Structural Factors in Turkic Language Contacts, translated by Vanessa Karam. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press.
*Kortlandt, Frederik. 1993. "The origin of the Japanese and Korean accent systems." Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 26, 5765.
*Martin, Samuel E. 1966. "Lexical evidence relating Korean to Japanese." Language 12.2, 185251.
*Nichols, Johanna. 1992. Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
*Robbeets, Martine. 2004. "Belief or argument? The classification of the Japanese language." Eurasia Newsletter 8. Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University.
*Ruhlen, Merritt. 1987. A Guide to the World's Languages. Stanford University Press.
*Sinor, Denis. 1990. Essays in Comparative Altaic Linguistics. Bloomington: Indiana University, Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies. ISBN 0-933070-26-8.

==External links==
*Altaic at the Linguist List MultiTree Project: Genealogical trees attributed to Ramstedt 1957, Miller 1971, and Poppe 1982
*Swadesh vocabulary lists for Altaic languages (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix)
*Monumenta altaica Altaic linguistics website, maintained by Ilya Gruntov
*Altaic Etymological Dictionary, database version by Sergei A. Starostin, Anna V. Dybo, and Oleg A. Mudrak (does not include introductory chapters)
*LINGUIST List 5.911 defense of Altaic by Alexis Manaster Ramer (1994)
*LINGUIST List 5.926 1. Remarks by Alexander Vovin. 2. Clarification by J. Marshall Unger. (1994)

 



[[Austrian German]]

Austrian German (), or Austrian Standard German (sterreichisches Standard-Deutsch), is the standard variety of the German language written and spoken in Austria. In Austria it has the highest sociolinguistic prestige, as it is the variation used in the media and for other formal situations. When a lower grade of formality has to be expressed, Austrians tend to use variations, which are closer to or identical with the Bavarian and Alemannic dialects traditionally spoken but rarely written in Austria. 

Austrian German has its beginning in the mid-18th century, when empress Maria Theresa and her son Joseph II introduced compulsory schooling (in 1774) and several reforms of administration in their multilingual Empire. At the time the written standard was Oberdeutsche Schreibsprache, which was highly influenced by the Bavarian and Alemannic dialects of Austria. Another option was to create a new standard based on the Southern German dialects, as proposed by the linguist Janez iga Popovi (=Johann Siegmund Popowitsch). Instead they decided for pragmatic reasons to adopt the already standardized Chancellery language of Saxony (Schsische Kanzleisprache or Meiner Kanzleideutsch), which was based on the standard language used for administrative purposes in the area of the cities of Meien and Dresden, which were not part of the Austrian lands. Thus Austrian German is based on the same historical standard as the Federal German High German (Bundesdeutsches Hochdeutsch or nowadays also called Deutschlndisches Deutsch, the Standard German of Germany) and Swiss High German (Schweizer Hochdeutsch, not to be confused with Swiss German, a group of Alemannic dialects spoken in Switzerland). The process of introducing the new written Standard was led by Joseph von Sonnenfels.

Since 1951 the standardized form of Austrian German for official texts and schools is defined by the Austrian Dictionary (), published under the authority of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education, Arts and Culture.

== General situation of German language ==
As German is a pluricentric language, Austrian German is merely one among several varieties of Standard German. Much like the relationship between British English and American English, the German varieties differ in minor respects (e.g., spelling, word usage and grammar) but are recognizably equivalent and largely mutually intelligible. The official Austrian dictionary, "Das sterreichische Wrterbuch", gives grammar and spelling rules defining the official language. In addition to this standard variety, in everyday life most Austrians speak one of a number of Upper German dialects.

== Standard German in Austria ==
A street sign in Vienna, "Fugeher" (meaning "pedestrian") is normally seen as "Fugnger" in Germany.
With German being a pluricentric language, German dialects in Austria should not be confused with the variety of Standard German spoken by most Austrians, which is distinct from that of Germany or Switzerland. Distinctions in vocabulary persist, for example, in culinary terms, where communication with Germans is frequently difficult, and administrative and legal language, which is due to Austria's exclusion from the development of a German nation-state in the late 19th century and its manifold particular traditions. A comprehensive collection of Austrian-German legal, administrative and economic terms is offered in: Markhardt, Heidemarie: Wrterbuch der sterreichischen Rechts-, Wirtschafts- und Verwaltungsterminologie (Peter Lang, 2006).

===Former Standard (spoken)===
The "Former Standard", used for about 300 years or more in speech in refined language, was the "Schnbrunner Deutsch", a sociolect spoken by the imperial Habsburg Family and the nobility of Austria-Hungary. It differed from other dialects in vocabulary and pronunciation: it appears to have been spoken slightly nasally. This was not a standard in a modern technical sense  it was the social standard of "upper class" speech. Here are some examples of Schnbrunner Deutsch: 
* "Crown Prince" Otto von Habsburg Otto von Habsburg - Quo vadis Integration - Festvortrag Eggenberg 2004
* Emperor Charles I. of Austria (19161918) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMU9FFzez1A
* Emperor Franz Joseph (18481916) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jecUwMPk8pE&feature=related 

===Special forms in written language===
For many years, Austria had a special form of the language for official government documents. This form is known as: "sterreichische Kanzleisprache" or "Austrian chancellery language" in English. It is a very traditional form of the language, probably derived from medieval deeds and documents, and has a very complicated structure and vocabulary which is generally reserved only for such documents. For most speakers (even native speakers), this form of the language is generally difficult to understand, as it contains many highly specialised terms for diplomatic, internal, official, and military matters. There are no regional variations, because this special written form has mainly been used by a government that has now for centuries been based in Vienna. "sterreichische Kanzleisprache" is now used less and less, thanks to various administrative reforms which have led to there being fewer of the classic civil servants, the Beamter. As a result, Standard German is replacing it in government and administrative texts.

=== European Union ===
When Austria became a member of the European Union, the Austrian variety of the German language  limited to 23 agricultural terms  was "protected" in Protocol No 10, regarding the use of specific Austrian terms of the German language in the framework of the European Union, which forms part of the Austrian EU accession treaty. Austrian German is the only variety of a pluricentric language recognized under international law / EU primary law. All facts concerning Protocol no. 10 are documented in Markhardt, Heidemarie: Das sterreichische Deutsch im Rahmen der EU, Peter Lang, 2005.

=== Grammar ===

====Verbs====
In Austria, as in the German-speaking parts of Switzerland and in southern Germany, verbs that express a state tend to use sein as the auxiliary verb in the perfect, as well as verbs of movement. Verbs which fall into this category include sitzen (to sit), liegen (to lie) and, in parts of Carinthia, schlafen (to sleep). Therefore the perfect of these verbs would be ich bin gesessen, ich bin gelegen and ich bin geschlafen respectively (note: ich bin geschlafen is a rarely used form, more commonly ich habe geschlafen is used; however ich bin eingeschlafen fell asleep is not uncommon). 
In the variant of German that is spoken in Germany, the words stehen (to stand) and gestehen (to confess) are identical in the present perfect: habe gestanden. The Austrian variant avoids this potential ambiguity (bin gestanden from stehen, "to stand"; and habe gestanden from gestehen, "to confess").

In addition, the preterite (simple past) is very rarely used in Austria, especially in the spoken language, with the exception of some modal verbs (i.e. ich sollte, ich wollte).

=== Vocabulary ===
There are many official terms that differ in Austrian German from their usage in most parts of Germany. Words primarily used in Austria are Jnner (January) rather than Januar, heuer (this year) rather than dieses Jahr, Stiege (stairs) instead of Treppe, Rauchfang (chimney) instead of Schornstein, many administrative, legal and political terms  and a whole series of foods such as: Erdpfel (potatoes) German Kartoffeln (but Dutch Aardappel), Schlagobers (whipped cream) German Schlagsahne, Faschiertes (ground beef) German Hackfleisch (but Hungarian fasrt), Fisolen (green beans) German Gartenbohne (but Czech fazole, Italian fagioli, Hungarian folkish paszuly), Karfiol (cauliflower) German Blumenkohl (but Hungarian and Slovak karfiol, Italian cavolfiore), Kohlsprossen (Brussels sprouts) German Rosenkohl, Marillen (apricots) German Aprikosen (but Slovak marhua, Polish morela, Slovenian marelice, Croatian marelica), Paradeiser (tomatoes) German Tomaten (but Hungarian paradicsom, Slovak paradajka, Slovenian paradinik, Serbian paradajz), Palatschinken (pancakes) German Pfannkuchen (but Czech palainky, Hungarian palacsinta), Topfen (a semi-sweet cottage cheese) German Quark and Kren (horseradish) German Meerrettich (but Czech ken, Slovak chren etc.). Otto Back, Erich Benedikt, Karl Blml, et al.: sterreichisches Wrterbuch (neue Rechtschreibung). Herausgegeben im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums fr Unterricht, Kunst und Kultur. Auf der Grundlage des amtlichen Regelwerks. 41. circulation, sterreichischer Bundesverlag, Wien 2009, ISBN 978-3-209-06875-0 

There are, however, some false friends between the two languages:
* Kasten (wardrobe) instead of Schrank  as opposed to Kiste (box) instead of Kasten (Kiste in Germany means both box and kist).
* Sessel (chair) instead of Stuhl  whereas Sessel means easy chair in Germany and Stuhl means stool (feces) in both varieties
* Vorzimmer (hall) instead of Diele  whereas Vorzimmer means antechamber in Germany
* Ofen (oven) instead of Kamin  whereas Kamin means Schornstein in Germany

==Dialects==

=== Classification ===
* Dialects of the Austro-Bavarian group, which also comprises the dialects of German Bavaria
** Central Austro-Bavarian (along the main rivers Isar and Danube, spoken in the northern parts of the State of Salzburg, Upper Austria, Lower Austria, and the Northern Burgenland)
***Viennese German
** Southern Austro-Bavarian (in Tyrol, South Tyrol, Carinthia, Styria, and the southern parts of Salzburg and Burgenland).
* Vorarlbergerisch, spoken in Vorarlberg, is a High Alemannic dialect.

=== Intercomprehensibility and regional accents ===
While strong forms of the various dialects are not normally fully comprehensible to Northern Germans, communication is much easier in Bavaria, especially rural areas, where Bavarian dialect still predominates as the mother tongue. The Central Austro-Bavarian dialects are more intelligible to speakers of Standard German than the Southern Austro-Bavarian dialects of Tyrol. Viennese, the Austro-Bavarian dialect of Vienna, is most frequently used in Germany for impersonations of the typical inhabitant of Austria. The people of Graz, the capital of Styria, speak yet another dialect which is not very Styrian and more easily understood by people from other parts of Austria than other Styrian dialects, for example from western Styria.

Simple words in the various dialects are very similar, but pronunciation is distinct for each and, after listening to a few spoken words it may be possible for an Austrian to realise which dialect is being spoken. However, in regard to the dialects of the deeper valleys of the Tirol, other Tyroleans are often unable to understand them. Speakers from the different states of Austria can easily be distinguished from each other by their particular accents (probably more so than Bavarians), those of Carinthia, Styria, Vienna, Upper Austria, and the Tyrol being very characteristic. Speakers from those regions, even those speaking Standard German, can usually be easily identified by their accent, even by an untrained listener.

Several of the dialects have been influenced by contact with non-Germanic linguistic groups, such as the dialect of Carinthia, where in the past many speakers were bilingual with Slovene, and the dialect of Vienna, which has been influenced by immigration during the Austro-Hungarian period, particularly from what is today the Czech Republic. The German dialects of South Tyrol have been influenced by local Romance languages, in particular with many loan words from Italian, and Ladin.

Interestingly, the geographic borderlines between the different accents (isoglosses) coincide strongly with the borders of the states and also with the border with Bavaria, with Bavarians having a markedly different rhythm of speech in spite of the similarities in the language.

== See also ==
* Austro-Bavarian
* German language

== Sources ==
 

== References and further reading ==
* Ammon, Ulrich: Die deutsche Sprache in Deutschland, sterreich und der Schweiz: Das Problem der nationalen Varietten. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York 1995.
* Ammon, Ulrich / Hans Bickel, Jakob Ebner u. a.: Variantenwrterbuch des Deutschen. Die Standardsprache in sterreich, der Schweiz und Deutschland sowie in Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Ostbelgien und Sdtirol. Berlin/New York 2004, ISBN 3-11-016574-0.
* Grzega, Joachim: Deutschlndisch und sterreichisches Deutsch: Mehr Unterschiede als nur in Wortschatz und Aussprache. In: Joachim Grzega: Sprachwissenschaft ohne Fachchinesisch. Shaker, Aachen 2001, S. 7-26. ISBN 3-8265-8826-6.
* Grzega, Joachim: On the Description of National Varieties: Examples from (German and Austrian) German and (English and American) English. In: Linguistik Online 7 (2000).
* Grzega, Joachim: Nonchalance als Merkmal des sterreichischen Deutsch. In: Muttersprache 113 (2003): 242-254.
* Muhr, Rudolf / Schrodt, Richard: sterreichisches Deutsch und andere nationale Varietten plurizentrischer Sprachen in Europa. Wien, 1997
* Muhr, Rudolf/Schrodt, Richard/Wiesinger, Peter (eds.): sterreichisches Deutsch: Linguistische, sozialpsychologische und sprachpolitische Aspekte einer nationalen Variante des Deutschen. Wien, 1995.
* Pohl, Heinz Dieter: sterreichische Identitt und sterreichisches Deutsch aus dem Krntner Jahrbuch fr Politik 1999
* Wiesinger, Peter: Die deutsche Sprache in sterreich. Eine Einfhrung, In: Wiesinger (Hg.): Das sterreichische Deutsch. Schriften zur deutschen Sprache. Band 12. (Wien, Kln, Graz, 1988, Verlag, Bhlau)

 



[[Anglican Church]]

#redirect Anglican Communion

[[Axiom of choice]]

(Si) is a family of sets indexed over the real numbers R; that is, there is a set Si for each real number i, with a small sample shown above. Each set contains a nonzero, and possibly infinite, number of elements. The axiom of choice allows us to arbitrarily select a single element from each set, forming a corresponding family of elements (x'i) also indexed over the real numbers, with x'i drawn from Si. In general the collections may be indexed over any set I, not just R.

In mathematics, the axiom of choice, or AC, is an axiom of set theory equivalent to the statement that the cartesian product of a collection of non-empty sets is non-empty. It states that for every indexed family of nonempty sets there exists an indexed family of elements such that for every . The axiom of choice was formulated in 1904 by Ernst Zermelo in order to formalize his proof of the well-ordering theorem. 

Informally put, the axiom of choice says that given any collection of bins, each containing at least one object, it is possible to make a selection of exactly one object from each bin. In many cases such a selection can be made without invoking the axiom of choice; this is in particular the case if the number of bins is finite, or if a selection rule is available: a distinguishing property that happens to hold for exactly one object in each bin. To give an informal example, for any (even infinite) collection of pairs of shoes, one can pick out the left shoe from each pair to obtain an appropriate selection, but for an infinite collection of pairs of socks (assumed to have no distinguishing features), such a selection can be obtained only by invoking the axiom of choice.

Although originally controversial, the axiom of choice is now used without reservation by most mathematicians, Jech, 1977, p. 348ff; Martin-Lf 2008, p. 210. and it is included in ZermeloFraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC), the standard form of axiomatic set theory. One motivation for this use is that a number of generally accepted mathematical results, such as Tychonoff's theorem, require the axiom of choice for their proofs. Contemporary set theorists also study axioms that are not compatible with the axiom of choice, such as the axiom of determinacy. The axiom of choice is avoided in some varieties of constructive mathematics, although there are varieties of constructive mathematics in which the axiom of choice is embraced.

==Statement==
A choice function is a function f, defined on a collection X of nonempty sets, such that for every set s in X, f(s) is an element of s. With this concept, the axiom can be stated:
:For any set X of nonempty sets, there exists a choice function f defined on X.

Formally, this may be expressed as follows:

:

Thus the negation of the axiom of choice states, there exists a set of nonempty sets that has no choice function.

Each choice function on a collection X of nonempty sets is an element of the Cartesian product of the sets in X. This is not the most general situation of a Cartesian product of a family of sets, where a same set can occur more than once as a factor; however, one can focus on elements of such a product that select the same element every time a given set appears as factor, and such elements correspond to an element of the Cartesian product of all distinct sets in the family. The axiom of choice asserts the existence of such elements; it is therefore equivalent to:

:Given any family of nonempty sets, their Cartesian product is a nonempty set.

=== Nomenclature ZF, AC, and ZFC ===
In this article and other discussions of the Axiom of Choice the following abbreviations are common:
*AC &ndash; the Axiom of Choice.
*ZF &ndash; ZermeloFraenkel set theory omitting the Axiom of Choice.
*ZFC &ndash; ZermeloFraenkel set theory, extended to include the Axiom of Choice.

===Variants===
There are many other equivalent statements of the axiom of choice. These are equivalent in the sense that, in the presence of other basic axioms of set theory, they imply the axiom of choice and are implied by it.

One variation avoids the use of choice functions by, in effect, replacing each choice function with its range.
:Given any set X of pairwise disjoint non-empty sets, there exists at least one set C that contains exactly one element in common with each of the sets in X. Herrlich, p. 9. 
This guarantees for any partition of a set X the existence of a subset C of X containing exactly one element from each part of the partition.

Another equivalent axiom only considers collections X that are essentially powersets of other sets:
:For any set A, the power set of A (with the empty set removed) has a choice function.
Authors who use this formulation often speak of the choice function on A, but be advised that this is a slightly different notion of choice function. Its domain is the powerset of A (with the empty set removed), and so makes sense for any set A, whereas with the definition used elsewhere in this article, the domain of a choice function on a collection of sets is that collection, and so only makes sense for sets of sets. With this alternate notion of choice function, the axiom of choice can be compactly stated as
:Every set has a choice function. Patrick Suppes, "Axiomatic Set Theory", Dover, 1972 (1960), ISBN 0-486-61630-4, p. 240 
which is equivalent to
:For any set A there is a function f such that for any non-empty subset B of A, f(B) lies in B.
The negation of the axiom can thus be expressed as:
:There is a set A such that for all functions f (on the set of non-empty subsets of A), there is a B such that f(B) does not lie in B.

=== Restriction to finite sets ===
The statement of the axiom of choice does not specify whether the collection of nonempty sets is finite or infinite, and thus implies that every finite collection of nonempty sets has a choice function. However, that particular case is a theorem of ZermeloFraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice (ZF); it is easily proved by mathematical induction. Tourlakis (2003), pp. 209210, 215216. In the even simpler case of a collection of one set, a choice function just corresponds to an element, so this instance of the axiom of choice says that every nonempty set has an element; this holds trivially. The axiom of choice can be seen as asserting the generalization of this property, already evident for finite collections, to arbitrary collections.

==Usage==
Until the late 19th century, the axiom of choice was often used implicitly, although it had not yet been formally stated. For example, after having established that the set X contains only non-empty sets, a mathematician might have said "let F(s) be one of the members of s for all s in X." In general, it is impossible to prove that F exists without the axiom of choice, but this seems to have gone unnoticed until Zermelo.

Not every situation requires the axiom of choice. For finite sets X, the axiom of choice follows from the other axioms of set theory. In that case it is equivalent to saying that if we have several (a finite number of) boxes, each containing at least one item, then we can choose exactly one item from each box. Clearly we can do this: We start at the first box, choose an item; go to the second box, choose an item; and so on. The number of boxes is finite, so eventually our choice procedure comes to an end. The result is an explicit choice function: a function that takes the first box to the first element we chose, the second box to the second element we chose, and so on. (A formal proof for all finite sets would use the principle of mathematical induction to prove "for every natural number k, every family of k nonempty sets has a choice function.") This method cannot, however, be used to show that every countable family of nonempty sets has a choice function, as is asserted by the axiom of countable choice. If the method is applied to an infinite sequence (X'i : i) of nonempty sets, a function is obtained at each finite stage, but there is no stage at which a choice function for the entire family is constructed, and no "limiting" choice function can be constructed, in general, in ZF without the axiom of choice.

==Examples==
The nature of the individual nonempty sets in the collection may make it possible to avoid the axiom of choice even for certain infinite collections. For example, suppose that each member of the collection X is a nonempty subset of the natural numbers. Every such subset has a smallest element, so to specify our choice function we can simply say that it maps each set to the least element of that set. This gives us a definite choice of an element from each set, and makes it unnecessary to apply the axiom of choice.

The difficulty appears when there is no natural choice of elements from each set. If we cannot make explicit choices, how do we know that our set exists? For example, suppose that X is the set of all non-empty subsets of the real numbers. First we might try to proceed as if X were finite. If we try to choose an element from each set, then, because X is infinite, our choice procedure will never come to an end, and consequently, we will never be able to produce a choice function for all of X. Next we might try specifying the least element from each set. But some subsets of the real numbers do not have least elements. For example, the open interval (0,1) does not have a least element: if x is in (0,1), then so is x/2, and x/2 is always strictly smaller than x. So this attempt also fails.

Additionally, consider for instance the unit circle S, and the action on S by a group G consisting of all rational rotations. Namely, these are rotations by angles which are rational multiples of . Here G is countable while S is uncountable. Hence S breaks up into uncountably many orbits under G. Using the axiom of choice, we could pick a single point from each orbit, obtaining an uncountable subset X of S with the property that all of its translates by G are disjoint from X. The set of those translates partitions the circle into a countable collection of disjoint sets, which are all pairwise congruent. Since X is not measurable for any rotation-invariant countably additive finite measure on S, finding an algorithm to select a point in each orbit requires the axiom of choice. See non-measurable set for more details.

The reason that we are able to choose least elements from subsets of the natural numbers is the fact that the natural numbers are well-ordered: every nonempty subset of the natural numbers has a unique least element under the natural ordering. One might say, "Even though the usual ordering of the real numbers does not work, it may be possible to find a different ordering of the real numbers which is a well-ordering. Then our choice function can choose the least element of every set under our unusual ordering." The problem then becomes that of constructing a well-ordering, which turns out to require the axiom of choice for its existence; every set can be well-ordered if and only if the axiom of choice holds.

==Criticism and acceptance==

A proof requiring the axiom of choice may establish the existence of an object without explicitly defining the object in the language of set theory. For example, while the axiom of choice implies that there is a well-ordering of the real numbers, there are models of set theory with the axiom of choice in which no well-ordering of the reals is definable. Similarly, although a subset of the real numbers that is not Lebesgue measurable can be proven to exist using the axiom of choice, it is consistent that no such set is definable.

The axiom of choice produces these intangibles (objects that are proven to exist, but which cannot be explicitly constructed), which may conflict with some philosophical principles. Because there is no canonical well-ordering of all sets, a construction that relies on a well-ordering may not produce a canonical result, even if a canonical result is desired (as is often the case in category theory). This has been used as an argument against the use of the axiom of choice.

Another argument against the axiom of choice is that it implies the existence of objects that may seem counterintuitive. One example is the BanachTarski paradox which says that it is possible to decompose the 3-dimensional solid unit ball into finitely many pieces and, using only rotations and translations, reassemble the pieces into two solid balls each with the same volume as the original. The pieces in this decomposition, constructed using the axiom of choice, are non-measurable sets.

Despite these facts, most mathematicians accept the axiom of choice as a valid principle for proving new results in mathematics. The debate is interesting enough, however, that it is considered of note when a theorem in ZFC (ZF plus AC) is logically equivalent (with just the ZF axioms) to the axiom of choice, and mathematicians look for results that require the axiom of choice to be false, though this type of deduction is less common than the type which requires the axiom of choice to be true.

It is possible to prove many theorems using neither the axiom of choice nor its negation; such statements will be true in any model of ZermeloFraenkel set theory (ZF), regardless of the truth or falsity of the axiom of choice in that particular model. The restriction to ZF renders any claim that relies on either the axiom of choice or its negation unprovable. For example, the BanachTarski paradox is neither provable nor disprovable from ZF alone: it is impossible to construct the required decomposition of the unit ball in ZF, but also impossible to prove there is no such decomposition. Similarly, all the statements listed below which require choice or some weaker version thereof for their proof are unprovable in ZF, but since each is provable in ZF plus the axiom of choice, there are models of ZF in which each statement is true. Statements such as the BanachTarski paradox can be rephrased as conditional statements, for example, "If AC holds, then the decomposition in the BanachTarski paradox exists." Such conditional statements are provable in ZF when the original statements are provable from ZF and the axiom of choice.

== In constructive mathematics ==

As discussed above, in ZFC, the axiom of choice is able to provide "nonconstructive proofs" in which the existence of an object is proved although no explicit example is constructed. ZFC, however, is still formalized in classical logic. The axiom of choice has also been thoroughly studied in the context of constructive mathematics, where non-classical logic is employed. The status of the axiom of choice varies between different varieties of constructive mathematics.

In Martin-Lf type theory and higher-order Heyting arithmetic, the appropriate statement of the axiom of choice is (depending on approach) included as an axiom or provable as a theorem. Per Martin-Lf, Intuitionistic type theory, 1980. 
Anne Sjerp Troelstra, Metamathematical investigation of intuitionistic arithmetic and analysis, Springer, 1973. Errett Bishop argued that the axiom of choice was constructively acceptable, saying
:"A choice function exists in constructive mathematics, because a choice is implied by the very meaning of existence." Errett Bishop and Douglas S. Bridges, Constructive analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1985. 

In constructive set theory, however, Diaconescu's theorem shows that the axiom of choice implies the Law of excluded middle (unlike in Martin-Lf type theory, where it does not). Thus the axiom of choice is not generally available in constructive set theory. A cause for this difference is that the axiom of choice in type theory does not have the extensionality properties that the axiom of choice in constructive set theory does. Per Martin-Lf, "100 Years of Zermelos Axiom of Choice: What was the Problem with It?", The Computer Journal (2006) 49 (3): 345-350. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/bxh162 

Some results in constructive set theory use the axiom of countable choice or the axiom of dependent choice, which do not imply the law of the excluded middle in constructive set theory. Although the axiom of countable choice in particular is commonly used in constructive mathematics, its use has also been questioned. Fred Richman, Constructive mathematics without choice, in: Reuniting the AntipodesConstructive and Nonstandard Views of the Continuum (P. Schuster et al., eds), Synthse Library 306, 199205, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, 2001. 

==Independence==

Assuming ZF is consistent, Kurt Gdel showed that the negation of the axiom of choice is not a theorem of ZF by constructing an inner model (the constructible universe) which satisfies ZFC and thus showing that ZFC is consistent. Assuming ZF is consistent, Paul Cohen employed the technique of forcing, developed for this purpose, to show that the axiom of choice itself is not a theorem of ZF by constructing a much more complex model which satisfies ZFC (ZF with the negation of AC added as axiom) and thus showing that ZFC is consistent. Together these results establish that the axiom of choice is logically independent of ZF. The assumption that ZF is consistent is harmless because adding another axiom to an already inconsistent system cannot make the situation worse. Because of independence, the decision whether to use the axiom of choice (or its negation) in a proof cannot be made by appeal to other axioms of set theory. The decision must be made on other grounds.

One argument given in favor of using the axiom of choice is that it is convenient to use it because it allows one to prove some simplifying propositions that otherwise could not be proved. Many theorems which are provable using choice are of an elegant general character: every ideal in a ring is contained in a maximal ideal, every vector space has a basis, and every product of compact spaces is compact. Without the axiom of choice, these theorems may not hold for mathematical objects of large cardinality.

The proof of the independence result also shows that a wide class of mathematical statements, including all statements that can be phrased in the language of Peano arithmetic, are provable in ZF if and only if they are provable in ZFC. This is because arithmetical statements are absolute to the constructible universe L. Shoenfield's absoluteness theorem gives a more general result. Statements in this class include the statement that P = NP, the Riemann hypothesis, and many other unsolved mathematical problems. When one attempts to solve problems in this class, it makes no difference whether ZF or ZFC is employed if the only question is the existence of a proof. It is possible, however, that there is a shorter proof of a theorem from ZFC than from ZF.

The axiom of choice is not the only significant statement which is independent of ZF. For example, the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) is not only independent of ZF, but also independent of ZFC. However, ZF plus GCH implies AC, making GCH a strictly stronger claim than AC, even though they are both independent of ZF.

==Stronger axioms==
The axiom of constructibility and the generalized continuum hypothesis each imply the axiom of choice and so are strictly stronger than it. In class theories such as Von NeumannBernaysGdel set theory and MorseKelley set theory, there is a possible axiom called the axiom of global choice which is stronger than the axiom of choice for sets because it also applies to proper classes. And the axiom of global choice follows from the axiom of limitation of size.

==Equivalents==
There are important statements that, assuming the axioms of ZF but neither AC nor AC, are equivalent to the axiom of choice. The most important among them are Zorn's lemma and the well-ordering theorem. In fact, Zermelo initially introduced the axiom of choice in order to formalize his proof of the well-ordering theorem.

*Set theory
**Well-ordering theorem: Every set can be well-ordered. Consequently, every cardinal has an initial ordinal.
**Tarski's theorem: For every infinite set A, there is a bijective map between the sets A and AA.
**Trichotomy: If two sets are given, then either they have the same cardinality, or one has a smaller cardinality than the other.
**The Cartesian product of any family of nonempty sets is nonempty.
**Knig's theorem: Colloquially, the sum of a sequence of cardinals is strictly less than the product of a sequence of larger cardinals. (The reason for the term "colloquially" is that the sum or product of a "sequence" of cardinals cannot be defined without some aspect of the axiom of choice.)
**Every surjective function has a right inverse.

*Order theory
**Zorn's lemma: Every non-empty partially ordered set in which every chain (i.e. totally ordered subset) has an upper bound contains at least one maximal element.
**Hausdorff maximal principle: In any partially ordered set, every totally ordered subset is contained in a maximal totally ordered subset. The restricted principle "Every partially ordered set has a maximal totally ordered subset" is also equivalent to AC over ZF.
**Tukey's lemma: Every non-empty collection of finite character has a maximal element with respect to inclusion.
**Antichain principle: Every partially ordered set has a maximal antichain.

*Abstract algebra
**Every vector space has a basis. 
**Every unital ring other than the trivial ring contains a maximal ideal.
**For every non-empty set S there is a binary operation defined on S that gives it a group structure. A. Hajnal, A. Kertsz: Some new algebraic equivalents of the axiom of choice, Publ. Math. Debrecen, 19(1972), 339&ndash;340, see also H. Rubin, J. Rubin, Equivalents of the axiom of choice, II, North-Holland, 1985, p. 111. (A cancellative binary operation is enough.)

*Functional analysis
**The closed unit ball of the dual of a normed vector space over the reals has an extreme point.

*Point-set topology
**Tychonoff's theorem: Every product of compact topological spaces is compact.
**In the product topology, the closure of a product of subsets is equal to the product of the closures.

*Mathematical logic
**If S is a set of sentences of first-order logic and B is a consistent subset of S, then B is included in a set that is maximal among consistent subsets of S. The special case where S is the set of all first-order sentences in a given signature is weaker, equivalent to the Boolean prime ideal theorem; see the section "Weaker forms" below.

*Graph theory
**Every connected graph has a spanning tree. ; . See in particular Theorem 2.1, pp. 192193. 

=== Category theory ===
There are several results in category theory which invoke the axiom of choice for their proof. These results might be weaker than, equivalent to, or stronger than the axiom of choice, depending on the strength of the technical foundations. For example, if one defines categories in terms of sets, that is, as sets of objects and morphisms (usually called a small category), or even locally small categories, whose hom-objects are sets, then there is no category of all sets, and so it is difficult for a category-theoretic formulation to apply to all sets. On the other hand, other foundational descriptions of category theory are considerably stronger, and an identical category-theoretic statement of choice may be stronger than the standard formulation,  la class theory, mentioned above.

Examples of category-theoretic statements which require choice include:
*Every small category has a skeleton.
*If two small categories are weakly equivalent, then they are equivalent.
*Every continuous functor on a small-complete category which satisfies the appropriate solution set condition has a left-adjoint (the Freyd adjoint functor theorem).

==Weaker forms==
There are several weaker statements that are not equivalent to the axiom of choice, but are closely related. One example is the axiom of dependent choice (DC). A still weaker example is the axiom of countable choice (AC or CC), which states that a choice function exists for any countable set of nonempty sets. These axioms are sufficient for many proofs in elementary mathematical analysis, and are consistent with some principles, such as the Lebesgue measurability of all sets of reals, that are disprovable from the full axiom of choice.

Other choice axioms weaker than axiom of choice include the Boolean prime ideal theorem and the axiom of uniformization. The former is equivalent in ZF to the existence of an ultrafilter containing each given filter, proved by Tarski in 1930.

===Results requiring AC (or weaker forms) but weaker than it===
One of the most interesting aspects of the axiom of choice is the large number of places in mathematics that it shows up. Here are some statements that require the axiom of choice in the sense that they are not provable from ZF but are provable from ZFC (ZF plus AC). Equivalently, these statements are true in all models of ZFC but false in some models of ZF.

*Set theory
**Any union of countably many countable sets is itself countable.
**If the set A is infinite, then there exists an injection from the natural numbers N to A (see Dedekind infinite).
**Every infinite game in which is a Borel subset of Baire space is determined.

*Measure theory
**The Vitali theorem on the existence of non-measurable sets which states that there is a subset of the real numbers that is not Lebesgue measurable.
**The Hausdorff paradox.
**The BanachTarski paradox.
**The Lebesgue measure of a countable disjoint union of measurable sets is equal to the sum of the measures of the individual sets.

*Algebra
**Every field has an algebraic closure.
**Every field extension has a transcendence basis.
**Stone's representation theorem for Boolean algebras needs the Boolean prime ideal theorem.
**The NielsenSchreier theorem, that every subgroup of a free group is free.
**The additive groups of R and C are isomorphic. http://www.cs.nyu.edu/pipermail/fom/2006-February/009959.html http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFulltext?type=1&fid=4931240&aid=4931232 

*Functional analysis
**The HahnBanach theorem in functional analysis, allowing the extension of linear functionals
**The theorem that every Hilbert space has an orthonormal basis.
**The BanachAlaoglu theorem about compactness of sets of functionals.
**The Baire category theorem about complete metric spaces, and its consequences, such as the open mapping theorem and the closed graph theorem.
**On every infinite-dimensional topological vector space there is a discontinuous linear map.

*General topology
**A uniform space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded.
**Every Tychonoff space has a Stoneech compactification.

*Mathematical logic
**Gdel's completeness theorem for first-order logic: every consistent set of first-order sentences has a completion. That is, every consistent set of first-order sentences can be extended to a maximal consistent set.

==Stronger forms of the negation of AC==
Now, consider stronger forms of the negation of AC. For example, if we abbreviate by BP the claim that every set of real numbers has the property of Baire, then BP is stronger than AC, which asserts the nonexistence of any choice function on perhaps only a single set of nonempty sets. Note that strengthened negations may be compatible with weakened forms of AC. For example, ZF + DC Axiom of dependent choice + BP is consistent, if ZF is.

It is also consistent with ZF + DC that every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable; however, this consistency result, due to Robert M. Solovay, cannot be proved in ZFC itself, but requires a mild large cardinal assumption (the existence of an inaccessible cardinal). The much stronger axiom of determinacy, or AD, implies that every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, has the property of Baire, and has the perfect set property (all three of these results are refuted by AC itself). ZF + DC + AD is consistent provided that a sufficiently strong large cardinal axiom is consistent (the existence of infinitely many Woodin cardinals).

==Statements consistent with the negation of AC==
There are models of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory in which the axiom of choice is false. We will abbreviate "Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory plus the negation of the axiom of choice" by ZFC. For certain models of ZFC, it is possible to prove the negation of some standard facts.
Note that any model of ZFC is also a model of ZF, so for each of the following statements, there exists a model of ZF in which that statement is true.

*There exists a model of ZFC in which there is a function f from the real numbers to the real numbers such that f is not continuous at a, but f is sequentially continuous at a, i.e., for any sequence {xn} converging to a, limn f(xn)=f(a).
*There exists a model of ZFC which has an infinite set of real numbers without a countably infinite subset.
*There exists a model of ZFC in which real numbers are a countable union of countable sets. Jech, Thomas (1973) "The axiom of choice", ISBN 0-444-10484-4, CH. 10, p. 142. 
*There exists a model of ZFC in which there is a field with no algebraic closure.
*In all models of ZFC there is a vector space with no basis.
*There exists a model of ZFC in which there is a vector space with two bases of different cardinalities.
*There exists a model of ZFC in which there is a free complete boolean algebra on countably many generators. 

For proofs, see Thomas Jech, The Axiom of Choice, American Elsevier Pub. Co., New York, 1973.

*There exists a model of ZFC in which every set in Rn is measurable. Thus it is possible to exclude counterintuitive results like the BanachTarski paradox which are provable in ZFC. Furthermore, this is possible whilst assuming the Axiom of dependent choice, which is weaker than AC but sufficient to develop most of real analysis.
*In all models of ZFC, the generalized continuum hypothesis does not hold.

==Quotes==
"The Axiom of Choice is obviously true, the well-ordering principle obviously false, and who can tell about Zorn's lemma?"  Jerry Bona
:This is a joke: although the three are all mathematically equivalent, many mathematicians find the axiom of choice to be intuitive, the well-ordering principle to be counterintuitive, and Zorn's lemma to be too complex for any intuition.

"The Axiom of Choice is necessary to select a set from an infinite number of socks, but not an infinite number of shoes."  Bertrand Russell
:The observation here is that one can define a function to select from an infinite number of pairs of shoes by stating for example, to choose the left shoe. Without the axiom of choice, one cannot assert that such a function exists for pairs of socks, because left and right socks are (presumably) indistinguishable from each other.

"Tarski tried to publish his theorem equivalence between AC and 'every infinite set A has the same cardinality as AxA, see above in Comptes Rendus, but Frchet and Lebesgue refused to present it. Frchet wrote that an implication between two well known propositions is not a new result, and Lebesgue wrote that an implication between two false propositions is of no interest".
:Polish-American mathematician Jan Mycielski relates this anecdote in a 2006 article in the Notices of the AMS.

"The axiom gets its name not because mathematicians prefer it to other axioms."  A. K. Dewdney
:This quote comes from the famous April Fools' Day article in the computer recreations column of the Scientific American, April 1989.

== Notes ==
 

==References==
* Horst Herrlich, Axiom of Choice, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1876, Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (2006). ISBN 3-540-30989-6.
*Paul Howard and Jean Rubin, "Consequences of the Axiom of Choice". Mathematical Surveys and Monographs 59; American Mathematical Society; 1998.
*Thomas Jech, "About the Axiom of Choice." Handbook of Mathematical Logic, John Barwise, ed., 1977.
* Per Martin-Lf, "100 years of Zermelo's axiom of choice: What was the problem with it?", in Logicism, Intuitionism, and Formalism: What Has Become of Them?, Sten Lindstrm, Erik Palmgren, Krister Segerberg, and Viggo Stoltenberg-Hansen, editors (2008). ISBN 1-4020-8925-2
*Gregory H Moore, "Zermelo's axiom of choice, Its origins, development and influence", Springer; 1982. ISBN 0-387-90670-3, available as a Dover Publications reprint, 2013, ISBN 0-486-48841-1.
*Herman Rubin, Jean E. Rubin: Equivalents of the axiom of choice. North Holland, 1963. Reissued by Elsevier, April 1970. ISBN 0-7204-2225-6.
*Herman Rubin, Jean E. Rubin: Equivalents of the Axiom of Choice II. North Holland/Elsevier, July 1985, ISBN 0-444-87708-8.
*George Tourlakis, Lectures in Logic and Set Theory. Vol. II: Set Theory, Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-511-06659-7
*Ernst Zermelo, "Untersuchungen ber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I," Mathematische Annalen 65: (1908) pp. 26181. PDF download via digizeitschriften.de
::Translated in: Jean van Heijenoort, 2002. From Frege to Gdel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931. New edition. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-32449-8
::*1904. "Proof that every set can be well-ordered," 139-41.
::*1908. "Investigations in the foundations of set theory I," 199-215.

==External links==
*
*Axiom of Choice and Its Equivalents at ProvenMath includes formal statement of the Axiom of Choice, Hausdorff's Maximal Principle, Zorn's Lemma and formal proofs of their equivalence down to the finest detail.
*Consequences of the Axiom of Choice, based on the book by Paul Howard and Jean Rubin.
*

 

[[Attila]]

Attila ( or ; ?453), frequently referred to as Attila the Hun, was the ruler of the Huns from 434 until his death in 453. He was leader of the Hunnic Empire, which stretched from the Ural River to the Rhine River and from the Danube River to the Baltic Sea.

During his reign he was one of the most feared enemies of the Western and Eastern Roman Empires. He crossed the Danube twice and plundered the Balkans, but was unable to take Constantinople. His unsuccessful campaign in Persia was followed in 441 by an invasion of the Eastern Roman Empire, the success of which emboldened Attila to invade the West. He also attempted to conquer Roman Gaul (modern France), crossing the Rhine in 451 and marching as far as Aurelianum (Orlans) before being defeated at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains.

Subsequently he invaded Italy, devastating the northern provinces, but was unable to take Rome. He planned for further campaigns against the Romans but died in 453.

== Appearance and character ==
While there is no surviving first-person account of Attila's appearance, there is a possible second-hand source, provided by Jordanes, who cites a description given by Priscus. 

The description suggests a person typical of Asian or Mongoloid features. 

== Etymology ==
The origin of Attila's name is unclear. Menander used the term Attila as the name of the Volga River. Pritsak considers it to mean "universal ruler" in a Turkic language related to Danube Bulgarian. 

The turkologist Otto J. Maenchen-Helfen rejects a Turkic etymology, and suggests an East Germanic origin: "Attila is formed from Gothic or Gepidic atta, "father", by means of the diminutive suffix -ila." He finds Pritsak's etymology "ingenious but for many reasons unacceptable". However, he suggests that these names were 

The name of Attila's brother Bleda is also of Germanic origin. Judging by a hypothetical Germanic etymology of Attila's name and the status of Gothic and the lingua franca at his court, historian Peter Heather states that the possibility of Attila being of Germanic ancestry cannot be ruled out. 

The name has many variants in modern languages: Atli and Atle in Norse, Attila/Atilla/Etele in Hungarian (Attila is the most popular), Etzel in German (Nibelungenlied), Attila, Atilla, Atilay or Atila in Turkish, and Adil and Edil in Kazakh or Adil ("same/similar") or Edil ("to use") in Mongolian.

== Historiography and source ==
The historiography of Attila is faced with a major challenge, in that the only complete sources are written in Greek and Latin, by the enemies of the Huns. His contemporaries left many testimonials of his life, but only fragments of these remain. Priscus, a Roman diplomat and historian who wrote in Greek, was both a witness to and an actor in the story of Attila, as a member of the embassy of Theodosius II at the Hunnic court in 449. Although he was obviously biased by his political position, his writing is a major source for the life of Attila and he is the only person known to have recorded a physical description of him. He was the author of an eight-volume work of history covering the period from 434 to 452.

Today we have only fragments of this work, but it was cited extensively by the 6th-century historians Procopius and Jordanes, especially in Jordanes' The Origin and Deeds of the Goths. As it contains numerous references to Priscus's history, it is an important source of information about the Hunnic empire and its neighbors. Here, he describes the legacy of Attila and the Hunnic people for a century after Attila's death. Marcellinus Comes, a chancellor of Justinian during the same era, also describes the relations between the Huns and the Eastern Roman Empire. 

Numerous ecclesiastical writings contain useful albeit scattered information, sometimes difficult to authenticate or distorted by years of hand-copying between the 6th and 17th centuries. The Hungarian writers of the 12th century, wishing to portray the Huns in a positive light as their glorious ancestors, repressed certain historical elements and added their own legends. 

The literature and knowledge of the Huns themselves was transmitted solely orally, by means of epics and chanted poems that were handed down from generation to generation. Indirectly, fragments of this oral history have reached us via the literature of the Scandinavians and Germans, neighbors of the Huns who wrote between the 9th and 13th centuries. Attila is a major character in many Medieval epics, such as the Nibelungenlied, as well as various Eddas and sagas. 

Archaeological investigation has uncovered some details about the lifestyle, art and warfare of the Huns. There are a few traces of battles and sieges, but today the tomb of Attila and the location of his capital have not yet been found. 

== Early life and background ==

The Huns were a group of Eurasian nomads, appearing from east of the Volga, who migrated into Europe c. 370 and built up an enormous empire there. Their main military techniques were mounted archery and javelin throwing. They were possibly the descendants of the Xiongnu (Hsiung-nu) who had been northern neighbors of China three hundred years before and may be the first expansion of Turkic people across Eurasia. Even though they were in the process of developing settlements before their arrival in Europe, the Huns were a society of pastoral warriors whose primary form of nourishment was meat and milk, products of their herds.

The origin and language of the Huns has been the subject of debate for centuries. According to some theories, their leaders at least may have spoken a Turkic language, perhaps closest to the modern Chuvash language. One scholar suggests a relationship to Yeniseian. According to the Encyclopedia of European Peoples, "the Huns, especially those who migrated to the west, may have been a combination of central Asian Turkic, Mongolic, and Ugric stocks." 

Attila's father, Mundzuk, was the brother of the kings Octar and Rugila, who reigned jointly over the Hunnic empire in the early fifth century. This form of diarchy was recurrent with the Huns, but historians are unsure whether it was institutionalized, merely customary, or an occasional occurrence. His family was from a noble lineage, but it is uncertain whether they constituted a royal dynasty. Attila's birthdate is not known, but the journalist ric Deschodt and the writer Herman Schreiber have proposed a date of 395. However, the historian Iaroslav Lebedynsky and archaeologist Katalin Escher prefer an estimate between the 390s and the first decade of the fifth century. 

Attila grew up in a rapidly changing world. His people were nomads who had only recently arrived in Europe. After crossing the Volga river during the 370s and annexing the territory of the Alans, they attacked the Gothic kingdom between the Carpathian mountains and the Danube. They were a very mobile people, whose mounted archers had acquired a reputation of invincibility, and the Germanic tribes seemed unable to withstand them. Vast populations fleeing the Huns moved from Germania into the Roman Empire in the west and south, and along the banks of the Rhine and Danube. In 376, the Goths crossed the Danube, initially submitting to the Romans but soon rebelling against the emperor Valens, whom they killed in the Battle of Adrianople in 378. On December 31, 406, to escape the Huns, large numbers of Vandals, Alans, Suebi and Burgundians crossed the Rhine and invaded Roman Gaul. The Roman Empire had been split into half since 395 and was ruled by two distinct governments, one based in Ravenna in the West, and the other in Constantinople in the East. In Attila's lifetime, despite several power struggles, the Roman Emperors both East and West were generally from the same family, the Theodosians. 

The Huns dominated a vast territory with nebulous borders determined by the will of a constellation of ethnically varied peoples. Some were assimilated to Hunnic nationality, whereas many retained their own identities and rulers but acknowledged the suzerainty of the king of the Huns. While the Huns were the indirect source of many of the Romans' problems by driving various Germanic tribes into Roman territory, relations between the two empires were cordial: the Romans used the Huns as mercenaries against the Germans and even in their civil wars. Thus, the usurper Joannes was able to recruit thousands of Huns for his army against Valentinian III in 424. They exchanged ambassadors and hostages, the alliance lasting from 401 to 450 and permitting the Romans numerous military victories. The Huns considered the Romans to be paying them tribute, whereas the Romans preferred to view this as payment for services rendered. By the time Attila came of age during the reign of his uncle Rugila, the Huns had become a great power, to the point that the Patriarch of Constantinople, Nestorius, deplored the situation with these words: "They have become both masters and slaves of the Romans." 

== Campaigns against the Eastern Roman Empire ==
Hunnic Empire (green)
The death of Rugila (also known as Rua or Ruga) in 434 left the sons of his brother Mundzuk, Attila and Bleda (Buda), in control of the united Hun tribes. At the time of two brothers' accession, the Hun tribes were bargaining with Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius II's envoys for the return of several renegades (possibly Hunnic nobles who disagreed with the brothers' assumption of leadership) who had taken refuge within the Eastern Roman Empire.

The following year Attila and Bleda met with the imperial legation at Margus (Poarevac) and, all seated on horseback in the Hunnic manner, negotiated a successful treaty. The Romans agreed, not only to return the fugitives, but also to double their previous tribute of 350 Roman pounds (c. 115 kg) of gold, to open their markets to Hunnish traders, and to pay a ransom of eight solidi for each Roman taken prisoner by the Huns. The Huns, satisfied with the treaty, decamped from the Roman Empire and returned to their home in the Great Hungarian Plain, perhaps to consolidate and strengthen their empire. Theodosius used this opportunity to strengthen the walls of Constantinople, building the city's first sea wall, and to build up his border defenses along the Danube.

The Huns remained out of Roman sight for the next few years while they invaded the Sassanid Empire. When defeated in Armenia by the Sassanids, the Huns abandoned their invasion and turned their attentions back to Europe. In 440 they reappeared in force on the borders of the Roman Empire, attacking the merchants at the market on the north bank of the Danube that had been established by the treaty.

Crossing the Danube, they laid waste to the cities of Illyricum and forts on the river, including (according to Priscus) Viminacium, a city of Moesia. Their advance began at Margus, where they demanded that the Romans turn over a bishop who had retained property that Attila regarded as his. While the Romans discussed turning the bishop over, he slipped away secretly to the Huns and betrayed the city to them.

While the Huns attacked city-states along the Danube, the Vandals led by Geiseric captured the Western Roman province of Africa and its capital of Carthage. Carthage was the richest province of the Western Empire and a main source of food for Rome. The Sassanid Shah Yazdegerd II invaded Armenia in 441.

The Romans stripped the Balkan area of forces, sending them to Sicily in order to mount an expedition against the Vandals in Africa. This left Attila and Bleda a clear path through Illyricum into the Balkans, which they invaded in 441. The Hunnish army sacked Margus and Viminacium, and then took Singidunum (Belgrade) and Sirmium. During 442 Theodosius recalled his troops from Sicily and ordered a large issue of new coins to finance operations against the Huns. Believing he could defeat the Huns, he refused the Hunnish kings' demands.

Attila responded with a campaign in 443. Striking along the Danube, the Huns, equipped with new military weapons like the battering rams and rolling siege towers, overran the military centers of Ratiara and successfully besieged Naissus (Ni).

Advancing along the Niava River, the Huns next took Serdica (Sofia), Philippopolis (Plovdiv), and Arcadiopolis (Lleburgaz). They encountered and destroyed a Roman army outside Constantinople but were stopped by the double walls of the Eastern capital. They defeated a second army near Callipolis (Gelibolu).

Theodosius, stripped of his armed forces, admitted defeat, sending the Magister militum per Orientem Anatolius to negotiate peace terms. The terms were harsher than the previous treaty: the Emperor agreed to hand over 6,000 Roman pounds (c. 2000 kg) of gold as punishment for having disobeyed the terms of the treaty during the invasion; the yearly tribute was tripled, rising to 2,100 Roman pounds (c. 700 kg) in gold; and the ransom for each Roman prisoner rose to 12 solidi.

Their demands were met for a time; the Hun kings withdrew into the interior of their empire. Following the Huns' withdrawal from Byzantium (probably around 445), Bleda died. Attila then took the throne for himself, becoming the sole ruler of the Huns. 

== Solitary kingship ==
Mr Than's painting The Feast of Attila, based on a fragment of Priscus

In 447 Attila again rode south into the Eastern Roman Empire through Moesia. The Roman army under the Gothic magister militum Arnegisclus met him in the Battle of the Utus and was defeated, though not without inflicting heavy losses. The Huns were left unopposed and rampaged through the Balkans as far as Thermopylae.

Constantinople itself was saved by the Isaurian troops of the magister militum per Orientem Zeno and protected by the intervention of the prefect Constantinus, who organized the reconstruction of the walls that had been previously damaged by earthquakes, and, in some places, to construct a new line of fortification in front of the old. An account of this invasion survives:

== In the west ==
The general path of the Hun forces in the invasion of Gaul

In 450 Attila proclaimed his intent to attack the Visigoth kingdom of Toulouse by making an alliance with Emperor Valentinian III. He had previously been on good terms with the Western Roman Empire and its influential general Flavius Atius. Atius had spent a brief exile among the Huns in 433, and the troops Attila provided against the Goths and Bagaudae had helped earn him the largely honorary title of magister militum in the west. The gifts and diplomatic efforts of Geiseric, who opposed and feared the Visigoths, may also have influenced Attila's plans.

However, Valentinian's sister was Honoria, who, in order to escape her forced betrothal to a Roman senator, had sent the Hunnish king a plea for helpand her engagement ringin the spring of 450. Though Honoria may not have intended a proposal of marriage, Attila chose to interpret her message as such. He accepted, asking for half of the western Empire as dowry.

When Valentinian discovered the plan, only the influence of his mother Galla Placidia convinced him to exile, rather than kill, Honoria. He also wrote to Attila strenuously denying the legitimacy of the supposed marriage proposal. Attila sent an emissary to Ravenna to proclaim that Honoria was innocent, that the proposal had been legitimate, and that he would come to claim what was rightfully his.

Attila the Hun on horseback by George S. Stuart
Attila interfered in a succession struggle after the death of a Frankish ruler. Attila supported the elder son, while Atius supported the younger. (The location and identity of these kings is not known and subject to conjecture.) Attila gathered his vassalsGepids, Ostrogoths, Rugians, Scirians, Heruls, Thuringians, Alans, Burgundians, among othersand began his march west. In 451 he arrived in Belgica with an army exaggerated by Jordanes to half a million strong. J. B. Bury believes that Attila's intent, by the time he marched west, was to extend his kingdomalready the strongest on the continentacross Gaul to the Atlantic Ocean. 

On April 7 he captured Metz. Other cities attacked can be determined by the hagiographic vitae written to commemorate their bishops: Nicasius was slaughtered before the altar of his church in Rheims; Servatus is alleged to have saved Tongeren with his prayers, as Saint Genevieve is to have saved Paris. Lupus, bishop of Troyes, is also credited with saving his city by meeting Attila in person. 

Atius moved to oppose Attila, gathering troops from among the Franks, the Burgundians, and the Celts. A mission by Avitus, and Attila's continued westward advance, convinced the Visigoth king Theodoric I (Theodorid) to ally with the Romans. The combined armies reached Orlans ahead of Attila, thus checking and turning back the Hunnish advance. (Later accounts of the battle report that the Huns were either already within the city or in the midst of storming it when the Roman-Visigoth army arrived; Jordanes mentions no such thing.) Atius gave chase and caught the Huns at a place usually assumed to be near Catalaunum (modern Chlons-en-Champagne).

The two armies clashed in the Battle of Chlons, whose outcome is commonly considered to be a strategic victory for the Visigothic-Roman alliance. Theodoric was killed in the fighting and Atius failed to press his advantage, according to Edward Gibbon and Edward Creasy, because he feared the consequences of an overwhelming Visigothic triumph as much as he did a defeat. From Atius' point of view, the best outcome was what occurred: Theodoric died, Attila was in retreat and disarray, and the Romans had the benefit of appearing victorious.

== Invasion of Italy and death ==
Raphael's The Meeting between Leo the Great and Attila depicts Leo, escorted by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, meeting with the Hun king outside Rome

Attila returned in 452 to claim his marriage to Honoria anew, invading and ravaging Italy along the way. The city of Venice was founded as a result of these attacks when the residents fled to small islands in the Venetian Lagoon. His army sacked numerous cities and razed Aquileia so completely that it was afterwards hard to recognize its original site. 

Legend has it he had his soldiers carry dirt in their helmets to build a hill north of Aquileia from which he could watch the destruction of the city, thus founding the town of Udine, where a castle now stands on the legendary hill. Atius, who lacked the strength to offer battle, managed to harass and slow Attila's advance with only a shadow force. Attila finally halted at the River Po. By this point disease and starvation may have broken out in Attila's camp, thus helping to stop his invasion.

Emperor Valentinian III sent three envoys, the high civilian officers Gennadius Avienus and Trigetius, as well as the Bishop of Rome Leo I, who met Attila at Mincio in the vicinity of Mantua, and obtained from him the promise that he would withdraw from Italy and negotiate peace with the Emperor. Prosper of Aquitaine gives a short description of the historic meeting, but gives all the credit of the successful negotiation to Leo. Priscus reports that superstitious fear of the fate of Alaricwho died shortly after sacking Rome in 410gave him pause.

In reality, Italy had suffered from a terrible famine in 451 and her crops were faring little better in 452; Attila's devastating invasion of the plains of northern Italy this year did not improve the harvest. To advance on Rome would have required supplies which were not available in Italy, and taking the city would not have improved Attila's supply situation. Therefore, it was more profitable for Attila to conclude peace and retreat back to his homeland. 

Secondly, an East Roman force had crossed the Danube under the command of another officer also named Aetiuswho had participated in the Council of Chalcedon the previous yearand proceeded to defeat the Huns who had been left behind by Attila to safeguard their home territories. Attila, hence, faced heavy human and natural pressures to retire "from Italy without ever setting foot south of the Po." As Hydatius writes in his Chronica Minora:

Huns, led by Attila, invade Italy (Attila, the Scourge of God, by Ulpiano Checa, as reproduced in [http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/10522 Beacon Lights of History, Volume IV by John Lord.)]]

After Attila left Italy and returned to his palace across the Danube, he planned to strike at Constantinople again and reclaim the tribute which Marcian had stopped. (Marcian was the successor of Theodosius and had ceased paying tribute in late 450 while Attila was occupied in the west; multiple invasions by the Huns and others had left the Balkans with little to plunder). However, Attila died in the early months of 453.

The conventional account, from Priscus, says that at a feast celebrating his latest marriage to the beautiful and young Ildico (if uncorrupted, the name suggests a Gothic, more likely Ostrogoth origin) he suffered a severe nosebleed and choked to death in a stupor. An alternative theory is that he succumbed to internal bleeding after heavy drinking, possibly a condition called esophageal varices, where dilated veins in the lower part of the esophagus rupture leading to death by hemorrhage. 

Another account of his death, first recorded 80 years after the events by the Roman chronicler Marcellinus Comes, reports that "Attila, King of the Huns and ravager of the provinces of Europe, was pierced by the hand and blade of his wife." The Volsunga saga and the Poetic Edda also claim that King Atli (Attila) died at the hands of his wife, Gudrun. Most scholars reject these accounts as no more than hearsay, preferring instead the account given by Attila's contemporary Priscus. Priscus' version, however, has recently come under renewed scrutiny by Michael A. Babcock. Based on detailed philological analysis, Babcock concludes that the account of natural death, given by Priscus, was an ecclesiastical "cover story" and that Emperor Marcian (who ruled the Eastern Roman Empire from 450 to 457) was the political force behind Attila's death.

Jordanes says: "The greatest of all warriors should be mourned with no feminine lamentations and with no tears, but with the blood of men." His horsemen galloped in circles around the silken tent where Attila lay in state, singing in his dirge, according to Cassiodorus and Jordanes: "Who can rate this as death, when none believes it calls for vengeance?"

Then they celebrated a strava (lamentation) over his burial place with great feasting. Legend says that he was laid to rest in a triple coffin made of gold, silver, and iron, along with some of the spoils of his conquests. His men diverted a section of the river, buried the coffin under the riverbed, and then were killed to keep the exact location a secret.

His sons Ellac (his appointed successor), Dengizich, and Ernakh fought over the division of his legacy, specifically which vassal kings would belong to which brother. As a consequence they were divided, defeated and scattered the following year in the Battle of Nedao by the Ostrogoths and the Gepids under Ardaric who had been Attila's most prized chieftain.

Attila's many children and relatives are known by name and some even by deeds, but soon valid genealogical sources all but dry up and there seems to be no verifiable way to trace Attila's descendants. This has not stopped many genealogists from attempting to reconstruct a valid line of descent for various medieval rulers. One of the most credible claims has been that of the khans of Bulgaria (see Nominalia of the Bulgarian khans). A popular, but ultimately unconfirmed, attempt tries to relate Attila to Charlemagne.

== Later folklore and iconography ==
Attila himself is said to have claimed the titles "Descendant of the Great Nimrod", and "King of the Huns, the Goths, the Danes, and the Medes"the last two peoples being mentioned to show the extent of his control over subject nations even on the peripheries of his domain. 

Jordanes embellished the report of Priscus, reporting that Attila had possessed the "Holy War Sword of the Scythians", which was given to him by Mars and made him a "prince of the entire world." 

Attila was the standard source of legitimacy on the European steppe until Genghis Khan. By the end of the 12th century the royal court of Hungary proclaimed their descent from Attila. Lampert of Hersfeld's contemporary chronicles report that shortly before the year 1071, the Sword of Attila had been presented to Otto of Nordheim by the exiled queen of Hungary, Anastasia of Kiev. This sword, a cavalry sabre now in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna, appears to be the work of Hungarian goldsmiths of the ninth or tenth century. 

Illustration of the meeting between Attila and Pope Leo from the Chronicon Pictum, c. 1360
Later writers developed the meeting of Leo I and Attila into a pious "fable which has been represented by the pencil of Raphael and the chisel of Algardi", reporting that the Pope, aided by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, convinced Attila to turn away from the city. 

According to a version of this legend related in the Chronicon Pictum, a mediaeval Hungarian chronicle, the Pope promised Attila that if he left Rome in peace, one of his successors would receive a holy crown (which has been understood as referring to the Holy Crown of Hungary).

Attila in the Nuremberg Chronicle (1493)
Some histories and chronicles describe him as a great and noble king, and he plays major roles in three Norse sagas: Atlakvia, Vlsungasaga, and Atlaml. The Polish Chronicle represents Attila's name as Aquila.

Frutolf of Michelsberg and Otto of Freising pointed out that some songs as "vulgar fables" made Theoderic the Great, Attila and Ermanaric contemporaries, when any reader of Jordanes knew that this was not the case. 

In 1812, Ludwig van Beethoven conceived the idea of writing an opera about Attila and approached August von Kotzebue to write the libretto. It was, however, never written. 

In World War I, Allied propaganda referred to Germans as the "Huns", based on a 1900 speech by Emperor Wilhelm II praising Attila the Hun's military prowess, according to Jawaharlal Nehru's Glimpses of World History. 

Der Spiegel commented on November 6, 1948, that the Sword of Attila was hanging menacingly over Austria. 

American writer Cecelia Holland wrote The Death of Attila (1973), a historical novel in which Attila appears as a powerful background figure whose life and death deeply impact the protagonists, a young Hunnish warrior and a Germanic one.

In modern Hungary and in Turkey, "Attila" and its Turkish variation "Atilla" are commonly used as a male first name. In Hungary, several public places are named after Attila; for instance, in Budapest there are 10 Attila Streets, one of which is an important street behind the Buda Castle. When the Turkish Armed Forces invaded Cyprus in 1974, the operations were named after Attila ("The Attila Plan"). 

The 1954 Universal International film Sign of the Pagan starred Jack Palance as Attila.

== Depictions of Attila ==

File:Attila Museum.JPG|Attila in a museum in Hungary
File:Attila 01.jpg|A depiction of Attila in the Badisches Landes museum, Karlsruhe, Germany

File:Attila statue.jpg|Renaissance statue representing Attila
File:Alessandro Algardi Meeting of Leo I and Attila 01.jpg|The Meeting of Leo I and Attila by Alessandro Algardi
File:Attila leo.jpg|Detail of The Meeting by Algardi from another perspective

== See also ==

* Attila (opera) by Verdi
* Attila the Hun in popular culture
* Attila (TV miniseries)

== Notes ==

== References ==

=== Primary sources ===
* Priscus. Byzantine History. Bury, J. B. (English translation). Priscus at the court of Attila (Archived Online.) Dindorf, Ludwig (1870) (the original Greek). Historici Graeci Minores. Leipzig: Teubner.
* Jordanes. The Origin and Deeds of the Goths (Online). Translated by Mierow, Charles C.. 

=== Historiography ===
* 
* This is a collection of fragments from Priscus, Olympiodorus, and others, with original text and translation.
* Guttenberg Project 199697 online edition of the revised 1845 edition.
* This is a translated collection, with commentary and annotation, of ancient writings on the subject, including Priscus.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* This is the authoritative English work on the subject. Originally titled, A History of Attila and the Huns.Afterword" by Heather which adds substantial new material. Thompson did not enter controversies over Hunnic origins and considers that Attila's victories were achieved only when there was no concerted opposition. The 1999 edition includes an "Afterword" by Heather which adds substantial new material and explains how the revised edition came to be. A preview of many of the pages of the Afterword is available at the link if you are a registered Amazon buyer via their "Look Inside!" feature. Click on the cover and use "Afterword" as the search term to preview several pages from that section.



[[Aegean Sea]]

Map of the Aegean Sea
upright=1.10
Topographical and bathymetric map

The Aegean Sea (; ; or Ege Denizinin Orijinal Ad Nedir?, Turkish Naval Force web site (in Turkish) ) is an elongated embayment of the Mediterranean Sea located between the southern Balkan and Anatolian peninsulas, i.e., between the mainlands of Greece and Turkey. In the north, it is connected to the Marmara Sea and Black Sea by the Dardanelles and Bosporus. The Aegean Islands are within the sea and some bound it on its southern periphery, including Crete and Rhodes.

The sea was traditionally known as Archipelago (in Greek, , meaning "chief sea"), but in English this word's meaning has changed to refer to the Aegean Islands and, generally, to any island group.

==Name==
In ancient times, there were various explanations for the name Aegean. It was said to have been named after the Greek town of Aegae, or after Aegea, a queen of the Amazons who died in the sea, or Aigaion, the "sea goat", another name of Briareus, one of the archaic Hecatonchires, or, especially among the Athenians, Aegeus, the father of Theseus, who drowned himself in the sea when he thought his son had died.

A possible etymology is a derivation from the Greek word  aiges = "waves" (Hesychius of Alexandria; metaphorical use of (aix) "goat"), hence "wavy sea", cf. also (aigialos = aiges (waves) + hals (sea)), Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, s.v. "" hence meaning "sea-shore".

In some South Slavic language the sea is often called White Sea (, Byalo more, Macedonian and Serbian:  , Belo more). Zbornik Matice srpske za drutvene nauke: (1961), Volumes 28-31, p.74 

==Geography==
The Aegean Sea covers about 214000 km2 in area, and measures about 610 km longitudinally and 300 km latitudinally. The sea's maximum depth is 3543 m, east of Crete. The Aegean Islands are found within its waters, with the following islands delimiting the sea on the south (generally from west to east): Kythera, Antikythera, Crete, Kasos, Karpathos and Rhodes.

The Aegean Islands, which almost all belong to Greece, can be divided into seven groups:

#Northeastern Aegean Islands
#Euboea
#Northern Sporades
#Cyclades
#Saronic Islands (or Argo-Saronic Islands)
#Dodecanese (or Southern Sporades), with the exclusion of Kastellorizo
#Crete

The word archipelago was originally applied specifically to the Aegean Sea and its islands. Many of the Aegean Islands, or chains of islands, are actually extensions of the mountains on the mainland. One chain extends across the sea to Chios, another extends across Euboea to Samos, and a third extends across the Peloponnese and Crete to Rhodes, dividing the Aegean from the Mediterranean.

The bays and gulfs of the Aegean beginning at the South and moving clockwise include on Crete, the Mirabelli, Almyros, Souda and Chania bays or gulfs, on the mainland the Myrtoan Sea to the west, the Saronic Gulf northwestward, the Petalies Gulf which connects with the South Euboic Sea, the Pagasetic Gulf which connects with the North Euboic Sea, the Thermian Gulf northwestward, the Chalkidiki Peninsula including the Cassandra and the Singitic Gulfs, northward the Strymonian Gulf and the Gulf of Kavala and the rest are in Turkey; Saros Gulf, Edremit Gulf, Dikili Gulf, Gulf of andarl, zmir Gulf, Kuadas Gulf, Gulf of Gkova, Gllk Gulf.

===Extent===
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Aegean Sea as follows: 

On the South. A line running from Cape Aspro (2816'E) in Asia Minor, to Cum Burn (Capo della Sabbia) the Northeast extreme of the Island of Rhodes, through the island to Cape Prasonisi, the Southwest point thereof, on to Vrontos Point (3533'N) in Skarpanto [Karpathos], through this island to Castello Point, the South extreme thereof, across to Cape Plaka (East extremity of Crete), through Crete to Agria Grabusa, the Northwest extreme thereof, thence to Cape Apolitares in Antikithera Island, through the island to Psira Rock (off the Northwest point) and across to Cape Trakhili in Kithera Island, through Kithera to the Northwest point (Cape Karavugia) and thence to Cape Santa Maria () in the Morea.
In the Dardanelles. A line joining Kum Kale (2611'E) and Cape Helles.

Panoramic view of the Santorini caldera, taken from Oia.

===Hydrography===
The cliffs in Santorini, Greece.
Traditional street of Lefkes,Paros
Aegean surface water circulates in a counter-clockwise gyre, with hypersaline Mediterranean water moving northward along the west coast of Turkey, before being displaced by less dense Black Sea outflow. The dense Mediterranean water sinks below the Black Sea inflow to a depth of 23 -, then flows through the Dardanelles Strait and into the Sea of Marmara at velocities of 515 cm/s. The Black Sea outflow moves westward along the northern Aegean Sea, then flows southwards along the east coast of Greece. Aksu, A. E., D. Yasar, et al. (1995). "LATE GLACIAL-HOLOCENE PALEOCLIMATIC AND PALEOCEANOGRAPHIC EVOLUTION OF THE AEGEAN SEA  MICROPALEONTOLOGICAL AND STABLE ISOTOPIC EVIDENCE." Marine Micropaleontology 25(1): 128. 

The physical oceanography of the Aegean Sea is controlled mainly by the regional climate, the fresh water discharge from major rivers draining southeastern Europe, and the seasonal variations in the Black Sea surface water outflow through the Dardanelles Strait.

Analysis Yagar, D., 1994. Late glacial-Holocene evolution of the Aegean Sea. Ph.D. Thesis, Inst. Mar. Sci. Technol., Dokuz Eyltil Univ., 329 pp. (Unpubl.) of the Aegean during 1991 and 1992 revealed 3 distinct water masses:

*Aegean Sea Surface Water  40 - thick veneer, with summer temperatures of 2126 C and winter temperatures ranging from 10 C in the north to 16 C in the south.
*Aegean Sea Intermediate Water  Aegean Sea Intermediate Water extends from 4050 m to 200 - with temperatures ranging from 1118 C.
*Aegean Sea Bottom Water  occurring at depths below 5001000 m with a very uniform temperature (1314 C) and salinity (39.139.2%).

==History==
Historic map (1528) of Aegean Sea by Ottoman geographer Piri Reis.
The current coastline dates back to about 4000 BC. Before that time, at the peak of the last ice age (c. 16,000 BC) sea levels everywhere were 130 metres lower, and there were large well-watered coastal plains instead of much of the northern Aegean. When they were first occupied, the present-day islands including Milos with its important obsidian production were probably still connected to the mainland. The present coastal arrangement appeared c. 7000 BC, with post-ice age sea levels continuing to rise for another 3,000 years after that. 

The subsequent Bronze Age civilizations of Greece and the Aegean Sea have given rise to the general term Aegean civilization. In ancient times, the sea was the birthplace of two ancient civilizations  the Minoans of Crete and the Mycenean Civilization of the Peloponnese. Tracey Cullen, Aegean Prehistory: A Review (American Journal of Archaeology. Supplement, 1); Oliver Dickinson, The Aegean Bronze Age (Cambridge World Archaeology). 
Satellite view of the Aegean Sea
Later arose the city-states of Athens and Sparta among many others that constituted the Athenian Empire and Hellenic Civilization. Plato described the Greeks living round the Aegean "like frogs around a pond". The Aegean Sea was later invaded by the Persians and the Romans, and inhabited by the Byzantine Empire, the Bulgarians, the Venetians, the Genoese, the Seljuq Turks, and the Ottoman Empire. The Aegean was the site of the original democracies, and its seaways were the means of contact among several diverse civilizations of the Eastern Mediterranean.

==Economics and politics==
Many of the islands in the Aegean have safe harbours and bays. In ancient times, navigation through the sea was easier than travelling across the rough terrain of the Greek mainland (and to some extent the coastal areas of Anatolia). Many of the islands are volcanic, and marble and iron are mined on other islands. The larger islands have some fertile valleys and plains. Of the main islands in the Aegean Sea, two belong to Turkey  Bozcaada (Tenedos) and Gkeada (Imbros); the rest belong to Greece. Between the two countries, there are political disputes over several aspects of political control over the Aegean space, including the size of territorial waters, air control and the delimitation of economic rights to the continental shelf.

==See also==

*Aegean languages
*List of traditional Greek place names
*Thracian Sea

==References==

 ^ The word "Aegean" is pronounced "i-Jee-en". "Aegean islands  Definition and More", Merriam-Webster.com, 2011, web:MWaegean. 

==External links==

* 

 



[[A Clockwork Orange]]

A Clockwork Orange is a dystopian novella by Anthony Burgess published in 1962. Set in a not-so-distant future English society that has a culture of extreme youth violence, the novel's teenage protagonist, Alex, narrates his violent exploits and his experiences with state authorities intent on reforming him. When the state undertakes to reform Alexto "redeem" himthe novel asks, "At what cost?". The book is partially written in a Russian-influenced argot called "Nadsat". According to Burgess it was a jeu d'esprit written in just three weeks. 

In 2005, A Clockwork Orange was included on Time magazine's list of the 100 best English-language novels written since 1923, and it was named by Modern Library and its readers as one of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century. "100 Best Novels". Modern Library. Retrieved 31 October 2012 The original manuscript of the book is located at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada since that institution purchased the documents in 1971. 

==Plot summary==

===Part 1: Alex's world===
Alex, a teenager living in near-future dystopian England, leads his gang on a night of opportunistic, random "ultra-violence". Alex's friends ("droogs" in the novel's Anglo-Russian slang, 'Nadsat') are: Dim, a slow-witted bruiser who is the gang's muscle; Georgie, an ambitious second-in-command; and Pete, who mostly plays along as the droogs indulge their taste for ultra-violence. Characterized as a sociopath and a hardened juvenile delinquent, Alex is also intelligent and quick-witted, with sophisticated taste in music, being particularly fond of Beethoven, referred to as "Lovely Ludwig Van".

The novel begins with the droogs sitting in their favorite hangout (the Korova Milk Bar), drinking "milk-plus", a drink consisting of milk, prodded with the customer's choice of certain drugs, including "vellocet", "synthemesc", or "drencrom" (which is what Alex and his droogs were drinking, according to Alex's own first-person narration). This drug, referred to as "knives", would "sharpen you up", as it did for Alex, in preparation of the night's mayhem. They assault a scholar walking home from the public library, rob a store, leaving the owner and his wife bloodied and unconscious, stomp a panhandling derelict, then scuffle with a rival gang. Joyriding through the countryside in a stolen car, they break into an isolated cottage and maul the young couple living there, beating the husband and raping his wife. In a metafictional touch, the husband is a writer working on a manuscript called "A Clockwork Orange," and Alex contemptuously reads out a paragraph that states the novel's main theme before shredding the manuscript. Back at the milk bar, Alex punishes Dim for some crude behaviour, and strains within the gang become apparent. At home in his dreary flat, Alex plays classical music at top volume while fantasizing about more orgiastic violence.

Alex skips school the next day. Following an unexpected visit from P. R. Deltoid, his "post-corrective advisor," Alex meets a pair of ten-year-old girls and takes them back to his parents' flat, where he serves them scotch and soda, injects himself with hard drugs, and then rapes them. That evening, Alex finds his droogs in a mutinous mood. Georgie challenges Alex for leadership of the gang, demanding that they pull a "man-sized" job. Alex quells the rebellion by slashing Dim's hand and fighting with Georgie, then in a show of generosity takes them to a bar, where Alex insists on following through on Georgie's idea to burgle the home of a wealthy old woman. The break-in starts as farce and ends in tragic pathos, as Alex's attack kills the elderly woman. His escape is blocked by an attack by Dim, as payback for the earlier fight, leaving Alex incapacitated on the front step when the police arrive.

===Part 2: The Ludovico Technique===
Sentenced to prison for murder, Alex gets a job at the Wing chapel playing religious music on the stereo before and after services as well as during the singing of hymns. The prison chaplain mistakes Alex's Bible studies for stirrings of faith (Alex is actually reading Scripture for the violent passages). After Alex's fellow cellmates blame him for beating a troublesome cellmate to death, he agrees to undergo an experimental behaviour-modification treatment called the Ludovico Technique. The technique is a form of aversion therapy in which Alex receives an injection that makes him feel sick while watching graphically violent films, eventually conditioning him to suffer crippling bouts of nausea at the mere thought of violence. As an unintended consequence, the soundtrack to one of the filmsBeethoven's Ninth Symphonyrenders Alex unable to listen to his beloved classical music.

The effectiveness of the technique is demonstrated to a group of VIPs, who watch as Alex collapses before a walloping bully, and abases himself before a scantily-clad young woman whose presence has aroused his predatory sexual inclinations. Although the prison chaplain accuses the state of stripping Alex of free will, the government officials on the scene are pleased with the results and Alex is released into society early as a result.

===Part 3: After prison===
Since his parents are now renting his room to a lodger, Alex wanders the streets homeless. He enters a public library where he hopes to learn a painless way to commit suicide. There, he accidentally encounters the old scholar he assaulted earlier in the book, who, keen on revenge, beats Alex with the help of his friends. The policemen who come to Alex's rescue turn out to be none other than Dim and former gang rival Billyboy. The two policemen take Alex outside of town and beat him up. Dazed and bloodied, Alex collapses at the door of an isolated cottage, realizing too late that it is the house he and his droogs invaded in the first part of the story. Because the gang wore masks during the assault, the writer does not recognize Alex. The writer, whose name is revealed as F. Alexander, shelters Alex and questions him about the conditioning. During this sequence, it is revealed that Mrs. Alexander died of injuries inflicted during the gang-rape, while her husband has decided to continue living "where her fragrant memory persists" despite the horrid memories. Alex reveals in his description that he has been conditioned to feel intolerable deathly nausea on hearing certain classical music. Alexander, a critic of the government, intends to use Alex's therapy as a symbol of state brutality and thereby prevent the incumbent government from being re-elected, but a careless Alex soon inadvertently reveals that he was the ringleader during the night two years ago. Frightened for his own safety, Alex blurts out a confession to the writer's radical associates after they remove him from F. Alexander's home. Instead of protecting him, however, they imprison Alex in a dreary flat not far from his parents' residence. They pretend to leave, and then while he is sleeping in a locked bedroom subject him to a relentless barrage of classical music, prompting him to attempt suicide by leaping from a high window.

Alex wakes up in a hospital, where he is courted by government officials anxious to counter the bad publicity created by his suicide attempt. With Alexander placed in a mental institution, Alex is offered a well-paying job if he agrees to side with the government. As photographers snap pictures, Alex daydreams of orgiastic violence and reflects upon the news that his Ludovico conditioning has been reversed as part of his recovery: "I was cured, all right".

In the final chapter, Alex finds himself half-heartedly preparing for yet another night of crime with a new trio of droogs. After a chance encounter with Pete, who has reformed and married, Alex finds himself taking less and less pleasure in acts of senseless violence. He begins contemplating giving up crime himself to become a productive member of society and start a family of his own, while reflecting on the notion that his own children will be just as destructiveif not more sothan he himself.

==Omission of the final chapter==
The book has three parts, each with seven chapters. Burgess has stated that the total of 21 chapters was an intentional nod to the age of 21 being recognised as a milestone in human maturation. The 21st chapter was omitted from the editions published in the United States prior to 1986. Burgess, Anthony (1986) A Clockwork Orange Resucked in A Clockwork Orange, W. W. Norton & Company, New York. In the introduction to the updated American text (these newer editions include the missing 21st chapter), Burgess explains that when he first brought the book to an American publisher, he was told that U.S. audiences would never go for the final chapter, in which Alex sees the error of his ways, decides he has lost all energy for and thrill from violence and resolves to turn his life around (a slow-ripening but classic moment of metanoiathe moment at which one's protagonist realises that everything he thought he knew was wrong).

At the American publisher's insistence, Burgess allowed their editors to cut the redeeming final chapter from the U.S. version, so that the tale would end on a darker note, with Alex succumbing to his violent, reckless naturean ending which the publisher insisted would be 'more realistic' and appealing to a U.S. audience. The film adaptation, directed by Stanley Kubrick, is based on the American edition of the book (which Burgess considered to be "badly flawed"). Kubrick called Chapter 21 "an extra chapter" and claimed that he had not read the original version until he had virtually finished the screenplay, and that he had never given serious consideration to using it. In Kubrick's opinion, the final chapter was unconvincing and inconsistent with the book.

==Characters==
* Alex: The novel's anti-hero and leader among his droogs. He often refers to himself as "Your Humble Narrator". (Having seduced two girls in his bedroom, Alex refers to himself as "Alexander the Large" while ravishing them; this was later the basis for Alex's claimed surname DeLarge in the 1971 film.)
* George or Georgie: Effectively Alex's greedy second-in-command. Georgie attempts to undermine Alex's status as leader of the gang. He is later killed during a botched robbery, while Alex is in prison.
*Pete: The most rational and least violent member of the gang. He is the only one who doesn't take particular sides when the droogs fight among themselves. He later meets and marries a girl, renouncing his old ways and even losing his former (Nadsat) speech patterns. A chance encounter with Pete in the final chapter influences Alex to realize that he grows bored with violence and recognises that human energy is better expended on creation than destruction. A Clockwork Orange Resucked. The Floating Library. Retrieved on 2013-10-31. 
* Dim: An idiotic and thoroughly gormless member of the gang, persistently condescended to by Alex, but respected to some extent by his droogs for his formidable fighting abilities, his weapon of choice being a length of bike chain. He later becomes a police officer, exacting his revenge on Alex for the abuse he once suffered under his command.
* P. R. Deltoid: A criminal rehabilitation social worker assigned the task of keeping Alex on the straight and narrow. He seemingly has no clue about dealing with young people, and is devoid of empathy or understanding for his troublesome charge. Indeed, when Alex is arrested for murdering an old woman, and then ferociously beaten by several police officers, Deltoid simply spits on him.
* The prison chaplain: The character who first questions whether it's moral to turn a violent person into a behavioural automaton who can make no choice in such matters. This is the only character who is truly concerned about Alex's welfare; he is not taken seriously by Alex, though. (He is nicknamed by Alex "prison charlie" or "chaplin", possibly an allusion to Charlie Chaplin.)
* Billyboy: A rival of Alex's. Early on in the story, Alex and his droogs battle Billyboy and his droogs, which ends abruptly when the police arrive. Later, after Alex is released from prison, Billyboy (along with Dim, who like Billyboy has become a police officer) rescue Alex from a mob, then subsequently beat him, in a location out of town.
* The prison governor: The man who decides to let Alex "choose" to be the first reformed by the Ludovico technique.
* The Minister of the Interior, or the Inferior, as Alex refers to him. The government high-official who is determined that Ludovico's technique will be used to cut recidivism.
* Dr. Branom: Brodsky's colleague and co-developer of the Ludovico technique. He appears friendly and almost paternal towards Alex at first, before forcing him into the theatre and what Alex calls the "chair of torture".
* Dr. Brodsky: The scientist and co-developer of the "Ludovico technique". He seems much more passive than Branom, and says considerably less.
* F. Alexander: An author who was in the process of typing his magnum opus A Clockwork Orange, when Alex and his droogs broke into his house, beat him, tore up his work and then brutally gang-raped his wife, which caused her subsequent death. He is left deeply scarred by these events, and when he encounters Alex two years later he uses him as a guinea pig in a sadistic experiment intended to prove the Ludovico technique unsound.
* Cat Woman: An indirectly named woman who blocks Alex's gang's entrance scheme, and threatens to shoot Alex and set her cats on him if he doesn't leave. After Alex breaks into her house, she fights with him, ordering her cats to join the melee, but reprimands Alex for fighting them off. She sustains a fatal blow to the head during the scuffle.

==Analysis==

===Background===
A Clockwork Orange was written in Hove, then a senescent seaside town. Burgess had arrived back in Britain after his stint abroad to see that much had changed. A youth culture had grown, including coffee bars, pop music and teenage gangs. A Clockwork Orange (Penguin Modern Classics) (Paperback) by Anthony Burgess, Blake Morrison xv England was gripped by fears over juvenile delinquency. Burgess claimed that the novel's inspiration was his first wife Lynne's beating by a gang of drunk American servicemen stationed in England during World War II. She subsequently miscarried. Burgess, A. A Clockwork Orange, Penguin UK, 2011, introduction by Blake Morrison, page 17 : his first wife, Lynne, was beaten, kicked and robbed in London by a gang of four GI deserters . In its investigation of free will, the book's target is ostensibly the concept of behaviourism, pioneered by such figures as B. F. Skinner. A Clockwork Orange (Paperback) by Anthony Burgess, Will Self 

Burgess later stated that he wrote the book in three weeks. 

===Title===
Burgess gave three possible origins for the title:

* He had overheard the phrase "as queer as a clockwork orange" in a London pub in 1945 and assumed it was a Cockney expression. In Clockwork Marmalade, an essay published in the Listener in 1972, he said that he had heard the phrase several times since that occasion. He also explained the title in response to a question from William Everson on the television programme, Camera Three in 1972, "Well, the title has a very different meaning but only to a particular generation of London Cockneys. It's a phrase which I heard many years ago and so fell in love with, I wanted to use it, the title of the book. But the phrase itself I did not make up. The phrase "as queer as a clockwork orange" is good old East London slang and it didn't seem to me necessary to explain it. Now, obviously, I have to give it an extra meaning. I've implied an extra dimension. I've implied the junction of the organic, the lively, the sweet  in other words, life, the orange  and the mechanical, the cold, the disciplined. I've brought them together in this kind of oxymoron, this sour-sweet word." An examination of Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange Camera Three: Creative Arts Television, 2010-08-04. (Video) Clockwork Orange: A review with William Everson. Retrieved: 2012-03-11. However, no other record of the expression being used before 1962 has ever appeared. Kingsley Amis notes in his Memoirs (1991) that no trace of it appears in Eric Partridge's Dictionary of Historical Slang.
* His second explanation was that it was a pun on the Malay word orang, meaning "man." The novel contains no other Malay words or links. 
* In a prefatory note to A Clockwork Orange: A Play with Music, he wrote that the title was a metaphor for "...an organic entity, full of juice and sweetness and agreeable odour, being turned into a mechanism." 

In his essay, "Clockwork Oranges," Burgess asserts that "this title would be appropriate for a story about the application of Pavlovian or mechanical laws to an organism which, like a fruit, was capable of colour and sweetness." This title alludes to the protagonist's positively conditioned responses to feelings of evil which prevent the exercise of his free will. To induce this conditioning, the protagonist is subjected to a technique in which violent scenes displayed on screen, which he is forced to watch, are systematically paired with negative stimulation in the form of nausea and "feelings of terror" caused by an emetic medicine administered just before the presentation of the films.

===Point of view===
A Clockwork Orange is written using a narrative first-person singular perspective of a seemingly biased and unreliable narrator. The protagonist, Alex, never justifies his actions in the narration, giving a sense that he is somewhat sincere; a narrator who, as unlikeable as he may attempt to seem, evokes pity from the reader by telling of his unending suffering, and later through his realisation that the cycle will never end. Alex's perspective is effective in that the way that he describes events is easy to relate to, even if the situations themselves are not.

===Use of slang===

The book, narrated by Alex, contains many words in a slang argot which Burgess invented for the book, called Nadsat. It is a mix of modified Slavic words, rhyming slang, derived Russian (like baboochka), and words invented by Burgess himself. For instance, these terms have the following meanings in Nadsat: droog = friend; korova = cow; gulliver ('golova') = head; malchick or malchickiwick = boy; soomka = sack or bag; Bog = God; khorosho ('horrorshow') = good; prestoopnick = criminal; rooka ('rooker') = hand; cal = crap; veck ('chelloveck') = man or guy; litso = face; malenky = little; and so on. Compare Polari.

One of Alex's doctors explains the language to a colleague as "odd bits of old rhyming slang; a bit of gypsy talk, too. But most of the roots are Slav propaganda. Subliminal penetration." Some words are not derived from anything, but merely easy to guess, e.g. 'in-out, in-out' or 'the old in-out' means sexual intercourse. Cutter, however, means 'money,' because 'cutter' rhymes with 'bread-and-butter'; this is rhyming slang, which is intended to be impenetrable to outsiders (especially eavesdropping policemen). Additionally, slang like Appypolly loggy (Apology) seems to derive from school boy slang. This reflects Alex's age of 15.

In the first edition of the book, no key was provided, and the reader was left to interpret the meaning from the context. In his appendix to the restored edition, Burgess explained that the slang would keep the book from seeming dated, and served to muffle "the raw response of pornography" from the acts of violence. Furthermore, in a novel where a form of brainwashing plays a role, the narrative itself brainwashes the reader into understanding Nadsat. The fact that the reader is forced to buy a Russian dictionary, also forms part of the brainwashing.

The term "ultraviolence," referring to excessive and/or unjustified violence, was coined by Burgess in the book, which includes the phrase "do the ultra-violent." The term's association with aesthetic violence has led to its use in the media. 

===Banning and censorship history in the US===
In 1976, A Clockwork Orange was removed from an Aurora, Colorado high school because of "objectionable language". A year later in 1977 it was removed from high school classrooms in Westport, Massachusetts over similar concerns with "objectionable" language. In 1982, it was removed from two Anniston, Alabama libraries, later to be reinstated on a restricted basis. Also, in 1973 a bookseller was arrested for selling the novel. Charges were later dropped. "Banned and/or Challenged Books from the Radcliffe Publishing Course Top 100 Novels of the 20th Century". American Library Association, 29 March 2007. (Accessed 24 April 2012)Document ID: a6b9d0cb-cf04-dcc4-e1b3-acda735f48bd However, each of these instances came after the release of Stanley Kubrick's popular 1971 film adaptation of A Clockwork Orange, itself the subject of much controversy.

===Writer's dismissal===
Burgess in 1986
In 1985, Burgess published Flame into Being: The Life and Work of D. H. Lawrence, and while discussing Lady Chatterley's Lover in his biography, Burgess compared that novel's notoriety with A Clockwork Orange: "We all suffer from the popular desire to make the known notorious. The book I am best known for, or only known for, is a novel I am prepared to repudiate: written a quarter of a century ago, a jeu d'esprit knocked off for money in three weeks, it became known as the raw material for a film which seemed to glorify sex and violence. The film made it easy for readers of the book to misunderstand what it was about, and the misunderstanding will pursue me until I die. I should not have written the book because of this danger of misinterpretation, and the same may be said of Lawrence and Lady Chatterley's Lover." Flame into Being: The Life and Work of D. H. Lawrence (Heinemann, London 1985) Anthony Burgess, p 205 Burgess also dismissed A Clockwork Orange as "too didactic to be artistic". A Clockwork Orange (Penguin Modern Classics) (Paperback) by Anthony Burgess, Blake Morrison xxii 

==Awards and nominations and rankings==
* 1983  Prometheus Award (Preliminary Nominee)
* 1999  Prometheus Award (Nomination)
* 2002  Prometheus Award (Nomination)
* 2003  Prometheus Award (Nomination)
* 2006  Prometheus Award (Nomination) 
* 2008  Prometheus Award (Hall of Fame Award)

The novel was chosen by Time magazine as one of the 100 best English-language novels from 1923 to 2005. 

==Adaptations==
Stanley Kubrick film version's theatrical release poster by Bill Gold
The best known adaptation of the novel to other forms is the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange by Stanley Kubrick, starring Malcolm McDowell as Alex. 

A 1965 film by Andy Warhol entitled Vinyl http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IuENhAm5Tks was an adaptation of Burgess' novel.

After Kubrick's film was released, Burgess wrote a stage play titled A Clockwork Orange. In it, Dr. Branom defects from the psychiatric clinic when he grasps that the aversion therapy has destroyed Alex's ability to enjoy music. The play restores the novel's original ending.

In 1988, a German adaptation of A Clockwork Orange at the intimate theatre of Bad Godesberg featured a musical score by the German punk rock band Die Toten Hosen which, combined with orchestral clips of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and "other dirty melodies" (so stated by the subtitle), was released on the album Ein kleines bisschen Horrorschau. The track Hier kommt Alex became one of the band's signature songs.

Vanessa Claire Smith, Sterling Wolfe, Michael Holmes, and Ricky Coates in Brad Mays' multi-media stage production of A Clockwork Orange, 2003, Los Angeles. (photo: Peter Zuehlke) Vanessa Claire Smith in Brad Mays' multi-media stage production of A Clockwork Orange, 2003, Los Angeles. (photo: Peter Zuehlke) 
In February 1990, another musical version was produced at the Barbican Theatre in London by the Royal Shakespeare Company. Titled A Clockwork Orange: 2004, it received mostly negative reviews, with John Peter of The Sunday Times of London calling it "only an intellectual Rocky Horror Show," and John Gross of The Sunday Telegraph calling it "a clockwork lemon." Even Burgess himself, who wrote the script based on his novel, was disappointed. According to The Evening Standard, he called the score, written by Bono and The Edge of the rock group U2, "neo-wallpaper." Burgess had originally worked alongside the director of the production, Ron Daniels, and envisioned a musical score that was entirely classical. Unhappy with the decision to abandon that score, he heavily criticised the band's experimental mix of hip hop, liturgical and gothic music. Lise Hand of The Irish Independent reported The Edge as saying that Burgess' original conception was "a score written by a novelist rather than a songwriter." Calling it "meaningless glitz," Jane Edwardes of 20/20 Magazine said that watching this production was "like being invited to an expensive French Restaurant - and being served with a Big Mac."

In 1994, Chicago's Steppenwolf Theater put on a production of A Clockwork Orange directed by Terry Kinney. The American premiere of novelist Anthony Burgess' own adaptation of his A Clockwork Orange starred K. Todd Freeman as Alex. In 2001, UNI Theatre (Mississauga, Ontario) presented the Canadian premiere of the play under the direction of Terry Costa. 

In 2002, Godlight Theatre Company presented the New York Premiere adaptation of A Clockwork Orange at Manhattan Theatre Source. The production went on to play at the SoHo Playhouse (2002), Ensemble Studio Theatre (2004), 59E59 Theaters (2005) and the Edinburgh Festival Fringe (2005). While at Edinburgh, the production received rave reviews from the press while playing to sold-out audiences. The production was directed by Godlight's Artistic Director, Joe Tantalo.

In 2003, Los Angeles director Brad Mays and the ARK Theatre Company staged a multi-media adaptation of A Clockwork Orange, which was named "Pick Of The Week" by the LA Weekly and nominated for three of the 2004 LA Weekly Theater Awards: Direction, Revival Production (of a 20th-century work), and Leading Female Performance. Vanessa Claire Smith won Best Actress for her gender-bending portrayal of Alex, the music-loving teenage sociopath. This production utilised three separate video streams outputted to seven onstage video monitors - six 19-inch and one 40-inch. In order to preserve the first-person narrative of the book, a pre-recorded video stream of Alex, "your humble narrator," was projected onto the 40-inch monitor, thereby freeing the onstage character during passages which would have been awkward or impossible to sustain in the breaking of the fourth wall. 

David Bowie referenced the book/film in various songs in his early 1970s oeuvre: "Suffragette City" mentions "droogie" in its lyrics, which is a reference to a term used in the book. Live appearances would include tracks from the soundtrack album, usually opening with Beethoven's Ninth Symphony segment "Ode To Joy" (as can be heard on live albums "Santa Monica '72" and the "" soundtrack CD & DVD). The song "Sex and Violence" by American thrash metal band Carnivore (band) is about A Clockwork Orange. The Brazilian heavy metal group Sepultura used the plot of A Clockwork Orange for their concept album A-Lex. German punk rock band Die Toten Hosen wrote an album based on A Clockwork Orange, titled Ein kleines bisschen Horrorschau or "A Tiny Bit of Horrorshow." English punk rock band the Adicts became known for their "droog" image inspired by Kubrick's movie. Their third studio album was also entitled smart alex, referring to the book's protagonist.
* Rapper Cage previously rapped under the name of Alex, after the books protagonist, and he has since released the song Agent Orange which uses the title theme from the 1971 film as the beat

==Release details==

* 1962, UK, William Heinemann (ISBN ?), December 1962, Hardcover
* 1962, US, W. W. Norton & Co Ltd (ISBN ?), 1962, Hardcover
* 1963, US, W. W. Norton & Co Ltd (ISBN 0-345-28411-9), 1963, Paperback
* 1965, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-01708-0), 1965, Paperback
* 1969, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN ?), 1969, Paperback
* 1971, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-02624-1), 1971, Paperback,Movie released
* 1972, UK, Lorrimer, (ISBN 0-85647-019-8), 11 September 1972, Hardcover
* 1972, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-003219-3), 25 January 1973, Paperback
* 1973, US, Caedmon Records, 1973, Vinyl LP (First 4 chapters read by Anthony Burgess)
* 1977, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-27321-4), 12 September 1977, Paperback
* 1979, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-31483-2), April 1979, Paperback
* 1983, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-31483-2), 12 July 1983, Unbound
* 1986, US, W. W. Norton & Company (ISBN 0-393-31283-6), November 1986, Paperback (Adds final chapter not previously available in U.S. versions)
* 1987, UK, W. W. Norton & Co Ltd (ISBN 0-393-02439-3), July 1987, Hardcover
* 1988, US, Ballantine Books (ISBN 0-345-35443-5), March 1988, Paperback
* 1995, UK, W. W. Norton & Co Ltd (ISBN 0-393-31283-6), June 1995, Paperback
* 1996, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-018882-7), 25 April 1996, Paperback
* 1996, UK, HarperAudio (ISBN 0-694-51752-6), September 1996, Audio Cassette
* 1997, UK, Heyne Verlag (ISBN 3-453-13079-0), 31 January 1997, Paperback
* 1998, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-027409-X), 3 September 1998, Paperback
* 1999, UK, Rebound by Sagebrush (ISBN 0-8085-8194-5), October 1999, Library Binding
* 2000, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-118260-1), 24 February 2000, Paperback
* 2000, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-029105-9), 2 March 2000, Paperback
* 2000, UK, Turtleback Books (ISBN 0-606-19472-X), November 2000, Hardback
* 2001, UK, Penguin Books Ltd (ISBN 0-14-100855-5), 27 September 2001, Paperback
* 2002, UK, Thorndike Press (ISBN 0-7862-4644-8), October 2002, Hardback
* 2005, UK, Buccaneer Books (ISBN 1-56849-511-0), 29 January 2005, Library Binding
* 2010, Greece, Anubis Publications (ISBN 978-960-306-847-1), 2010, Paperback (Adds final chapter not previously available in Greek versions)
* 2012, US, W. W. Norton & Company (ISBN 978-0-393-08913-4) October 22, 2012, Hardback (50th Anniversary Edition, revised text version. Andrew Biswell, PhD, director of the International Burgess Foundation, has taken a close look at the three varying published editions alongside the original typescript to recreate the novel as Anthony Burgess envisioned it. 

==See also==

* Aestheticization of violence
* List of cultural references to A Clockwork Orange
* List of stories set in a future now past
* Nadsat
* Project MKUltra

==References==

==Further reading==
* A Clockwork Orange: A Play With Music. Century Hutchinson Ltd. (1987). An extract is quoted on several web sites: Anthony Burgess from A Clockwork Orange: A play with music (Century Hutchinson Ltd, 1987), , A Clockwork Orange - From A Clockwork Orange: A Play With Music
* Burgess, Anthony (1978). Clockwork Oranges. In 1985. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 0-09-136080-3 (extracts quoted here)
*
* 

==External links==

* 
* A Clockwork Orange at SparkNotes
* A Clockwork Orange at Literapedia
* A Clockwork Orange (1962) | Last chapter | Anthony Burgess (1917-1993)

;Comparisons with the Kubrick film adaptation
* Dalrymple, Theodore. "A Prophetic and Violent Masterpiece", City Journal
* Giola, Ted. "A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess" at Conceptual Fiction
* Priestley, Brenton. "Of Clockwork Apples and Oranges: Burgess and Kubrick (2002)"

 



[[Amsterdam]]

Amsterdam (; ) is the capital city of and the most populous within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Its status as the Dutch capital is mandated by the Constitution of the Netherlands though it is not the seat of the Dutch government, which is at The Hague (Den Haag). Amsterdam has a population of within the city-proper, in the urban region and in the greater metropolitan area. The city is located in the province of North Holland (Noord Holland) in the west of the country. It comprises much of the northern part of the Randstad, one of the larger conurbations in Europe, with a population of approximately 7 million. 

Amsterdam's name derives from Amstelredamme, Encyclopdia Britannica Eleventh Edition, Vol 1, pp. 896-898. indicative of the city's origin as a dam of the river Amstel. Originating as a small fishing village in the late 12th century, Amsterdam became one of the most important ports in the world during the Dutch Golden Age (17th century), a result of its innovative developments in trade. During that time, the city was the leading center for finance and diamonds. Cambridge.org, Capitals of Capital -A History of International Financial Centres  17802005, Youssef Cassis, ISBN 978-0-521-84535-9 In the 19th and 20th centuries, the city expanded, and many new neighborhoods and suburbs were planned and built. The 17th-century canals of Amsterdam and the 1920th century Defence Line of Amsterdam are on the UNESCO World Heritage List.

As the commercial capital of the Netherlands and one of the top financial centres in Europe, Amsterdam is considered an alpha world city by the Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) study group. The city is also the cultural capital of the Netherlands. After Athens in 1888 and Florence in 1986, Amsterdam was in 1986 chosen as the European Capital of Culture, confirming its eminent position in Europe and the Netherlands. See EC.europa.eu for an overview of the European cities and capitals of culture over the years. Many large Dutch institutions have their headquarters there, and 7 of the world's top 500 companies, including Philips and ING, are based in the city. Forbes.com, Forbes Global 2000 Largest Companies  Dutch rankings. In 2012, Amsterdam was ranked 2nd best city to live by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) and 12th globally on quality of living by Mercer. The city was previously ranked 3rd in innovation by 2thinknow in the Innovation Cities Index 2009. 

The Amsterdam Stock Exchange, the oldest stock exchange in the world, is located in the city center. Amsterdam's main attractions, including its historic canals, the Rijksmuseum, the Van Gogh Museum, Stedelijk Museum, Hermitage Amsterdam, Anne Frank House, Amsterdam Museum, its red-light district, and its many cannabis coffee shops draw more than 3.66 million international visitors annually.

==History==

===Etymology===
The Oude Kerk was consecrated in 1306.

Shortly after the floods of 1170 en 1173 locals of the river Amstel vicinity built a bridge over- and a dam across the river, hence giving its name to the village: "Aemstelredamme". The earliest recorded use of the name "Aemstelredamme" (Amsterdam) comes from a document dated October 27, 1275. Inhabitants of the village, by this document, were exempted from paying a bridge toll in the County of Holland by Count Floris V. 
 Een kleine geschiedenis van Amsterdam, page 19. Geert Mak. (1994) Uitgeverij Atlas, Amsterdam/Antwerpen, 
This meant it had been allowed to the inhabitants of the village of Aemstelredamme to travel freely through the County of Holland without having to pay toll at bridges, locks and dams all through the county. The certificate describes the inhabitants as homines manentes apud Amestelledamme (people living near Amestelledamme). By 1327, the name had developed into Aemsterdam. Een kleine geschiedenis van Amsterdam,pp 18-20. Geert Mak. (1994) Uitgeverij Atlas, Amsterdam/Antwerpen, 

A woodcut depicting Amsterdam as of 1544. The famous Grachtengordel had not yet been established.

===Founding and Middle Ages===
Amsterdam's founding is relatively recent compared with much older Dutch cities such as Nijmegen, Rotterdam, and Utrecht. In October 2008, historical geographer Chris de Bont suggested that the land around Amsterdam was being reclaimed as early as the late 10th century. This does not necessarily mean that there was already a settlement then since reclamation of land may not have been for farmingit may have been for peat, used as fuel. 

Amsterdam was granted city rights in either 1300 or 1306. From the 14th century on, Amsterdam flourished, largely because of trade with the Hanseatic League. In 1345, an alleged Eucharistic miracle in the Kalverstraat rendered the city an important place of pilgrimage until the adoption of the Protestant faith. The Stille Omganga silent procession in civil attireis today a remnant of the rich pilgrimage history. 

===Conflict with Spain===
In the 16th century, the Dutch rebelled against Philip II of Spain and his successors. The main reasons for the uprising were the imposition of new taxes, the tenth penny, and the religious persecution of Protestants by the Spanish Inquisition. The revolt escalated into the Eighty Years' War, which ultimately led to Dutch independence. Strongly pushed by Dutch Revolt leader William the Silent, the Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance. Jews from the Iberian Peninsula, Huguenots from France, prosperous merchants and printers from Flanders, and economic and religious refugees from the Spanish-controlled parts of the Low Countries found safety in Amsterdam. The influx of Flemish printers and the city's intellectual tolerance made Amsterdam a centre for the European free press. Case in point: After his trial and sentencing in Rome in 1633, Galileo chose Lodewijk Elzevir in Amsterdam to publish one of his finest works, Two New Sciences. See Wade Rowland (2003), Galileo's Mistake, A new look at the epic confrontation between Galileo and the Church, New York: Arcade Publishing, ISBN 1-55970-684-8, p. 260. 

===Center of the Dutch Golden Age===
The Royal Palace, Nieuwe Kerk, and now demolished weigh house on Dam Square in 1814.

The 17th century is considered Amsterdam's Golden Age, during which it became the wealthiest city in the world. E. Haverkamp-Bergmann, Rembrandt; The Night Watch (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1982), p. 57 Ships sailed from Amsterdam to the Baltic Sea, North America, and Africa, as well as present-day Indonesia, India, Sri Lanka, and Brazil, forming the basis of a worldwide trading network. Amsterdam's merchants had the largest share in both the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company. These companies acquired overseas possessions that later became Dutch colonies. Amsterdam was Europe's most important point for the shipment of goods and was the leading Financial Centre of the world. Amsterdam in the 17th century, The University of North Carolina at Pembroke In 1602, the Amsterdam office of the Dutch East India Company became the world's first stock exchange by trading in its own shares. 

===Decline and modernization===
Amsterdam's prosperity declined during the 18th and early 19th centuries. The wars of the Dutch Republic with England and France took their toll on Amsterdam. During the Napoleonic Wars, Amsterdam's significance reached its lowest point, with Holland being absorbed into the French Empire. However, the later establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815 marked a turning point.

Vijzelstraat looking towards Muntplein in 1891

The end of the 19th century is sometimes called Amsterdam's second Golden Age. New museums, a train station, and the Concertgebouw were built; in this same time, the Industrial Revolution reached the city. The Amsterdam-Rhine Canal was dug to give Amsterdam a direct connection to the Rhine, and the North Sea Canal was dug to give the port a shorter connection to the North Sea. Both projects dramatically improved commerce with the rest of Europe and the world. In 1906, Joseph Conrad gave a brief description of Amsterdam as seen from the seaside, in The Mirror of the Sea.

===Twentieth century===
Shortly before the First World War, the city began expanding, and new suburbs were built. Even though the Netherlands remained neutral in this war, Amsterdam suffered a food shortage, and heating fuel became scarce. The shortages sparked riots in which several people were killed. These riots are known as the Aardappeloproer (Potato rebellion). People started looting stores and warehouses in order to get supplies, mainly food. 
National Monument a memorial to the war victims

After landflood in 1916 the depleted municipalities, Durgerdam, Holysloot, Zunderdorp and Schellingwoude, all lying north of Amsterdam, were, on their own request, annexed to the city on 1-1-1921. Amsterdan city archives http://www.centraledorpenraad.nl/landelijk-noord/historie | website centrale dorpen raad (villages central council) 

Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940 and took control of the country. Some Amsterdam citizens sheltered Jews, thereby exposing themselves and their families to the high risk of being imprisoned or sent to concentration camps. More than 100,000 Dutch Jews were deported to Nazi concentration camps of which some 60.000 lived in Amsterdam. Perhaps the most famous deportee was the young Jewish girl Anne Frank, who died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. At the end of the Second World War, communication with the rest of the country broke down, and food and fuel became scarce. Many citizens traveled to the countryside to forage. Dogs, cats, raw sugar beets, and Tulip bulbscooked to a pulpwere consumed to stay alive. Most of the trees in Amsterdam were cut down for fuel, and all the wood was taken from the apartments of deported Jews.

The (reconstructed) bookcase that covered the entrance to the "Secret Annex" where Anne Frank hid from Germans occupying Amsterdam during World War II.
Many new suburbs, such as Osdorp, Slotervaart, Slotermeer, and Geuzenveld, were built in the years after the Second World War. 
These suburbs contained many public parks and wide, open spaces, and the new buildings provided improved housing conditions with larger and brighter rooms, gardens, and balconies. Because of the war and other incidents of the 20th century, almost the entire city centre had fallen into disrepair. As society was changing, politicians and other influential figures made plans to redesign large parts of it. There was an increasing demand for office buildings and new roads as the automobile became available to most common people. A metro started operating in 1977 between the new suburb of Bijlmer and the centre of Amsterdam. Further plans were to build a new highway above the metro to connect the Central Station and city centre with other parts of the city.

The incorporated large-scale demolitions began in Amsterdam's formerly Jewish neighbourhood. Smaller streets, such as the Jodenbreestraat, were widened and saw almost all of their houses demolished. During the destruction's peak, the Nieuwmarktrellen (Nieuwmarkt riots) broke out, where people expressed their fury about the demolition caused by the restructuring of the city.

As a result, the demolition was stopped, and the highway was never built, with only the metro being finished. Only a few streets remained widened. The new city hall was built on the almost completely demolished Waterlooplein. Meanwhile, large private organisations, such as Stadsherstel Amsterdam, were founded with the aim of restoring the entire city centre. Although the success of this struggle is visible today, efforts for further restoration are still ongoing. The entire city centre has reattained its former splendor and, as a whole, is now a protected area. Many of its buildings have become monuments, and in July 2010 the Grachtengordel (Herengracht, Keizersgracht, and Prinsengracht) was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List. 

The Zuidas district is the headquarters of many Dutch multinationals.

===Twenty-first century===
At the beginning of the new millennium, social problems such as safety, ethnic discrimination and segregation between religious and social groups began to develop. Forty-five percent of the population of Amsterdam has non-Dutch parents. Large social groups come from Suriname, the Dutch Antilles, Morocco and Turkey. Amsterdam is characterized by its (perceived) social tolerance and diversity. The former mayor of Amsterdam, Job Cohen, and his alderman for integration Ahmed Aboutaleb (Now mayor of Rotterdam) formulated a policy of "keeping things together" which involves social dialogue, tolerance and harsh measures against those who break the law.

==Geography==
Topographic map of Amsterdam, March 2014
Amsterdam is located in the western Netherlands, in the province of North Holland. The river Amstel terminates in the city centre and connects to a large number of canals that eventually terminate in the IJ. Amsterdam is situated 2 metres below sea level. The surrounding land is flat as it is formed of large polders. A man made forest, Amsterdamse Bos, is situated southwest. Amsterdam is connected to the North Sea through the long North Sea Canal.

Amsterdam canals in summer
Amsterdam is intensely urbanized, as is the Amsterdam metropolitan area surrounding the city. Comprising 219.4 km of land, the city proper has 4,457 inhabitants per km2 and 2,275 houses per km2. 
 Parks and nature reserves make up 12% of Amsterdam's land area. 
 

===Climate===
Amsterdam has an oceanic climate (Kppen climate classification Cfb), strongly influenced by its proximity to the North Sea to the west, with prevailing westerly winds. Winters are cold, and summers are mild, although occasionally quite cool. Amsterdam, as well as most of the North Holland province, lies in USDA Hardiness zone 8b. Frosts mainly occur during spells of easterly or northeasterly winds from the inner European continent. Even then, because Amsterdam is surrounded on three sides by large bodies of water, as well as having a significant heat-island effect, nights rarely fall below -5 C, while it could easily be 12 C in Hilversum, 25 km southeast. Summers are moderately warm but rarely hot. The average daily high in August is 22.1 C, and 30 C or higher is only measured on average on 2.5 days, placing Amsterdam in AHS Heat Zone 2. The record extremes range from -24 C to 36.8 C. 
Days with more than 1 mm of precipitation are common, on average 133 days per year. Amsterdam's average annual precipitation is 838 mm, more than what is measured at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport. A large part of this precipitation falls as light rain or brief showers. Cloudy and damp days are common during the cooler months of October through March.

==Demographics==

Amsterdam has a population of 810,084 inhabitants within city limits. On 1 January 2012, the ethnic makeup of Amsterdam was 49.5% of Dutch ancestry and 50.5% of foreign origin.
In the 16th and 17th century non-Dutch immigrants to
Amsterdam were mostly Huguenots, Flemings, Sephardi Jews and Westphalians. Huguenots came after the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, while the Flemish Protestants came during the Eighty Years' War. The Westphalians came to Amsterdam mostly for economic reasons  their influx continued through the 18th and 19th centuries. Before the Second World War, 10% of the city population was Jewish. Just twenty percent of them survived the Shoah.

The first mass immigration in the 20th century were by people from Indonesia, who came to Amsterdam after the independence of the Dutch East Indies in the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s guest workers from Turkey, Morocco, Italy and Spain emigrated to Amsterdam. After the independence of Suriname in 1975, a large wave of Surinamese settled in Amsterdam, mostly in the Bijlmer area. Other immigrants, including refugees asylum seekers and illegal immigrants, came from Europe, America, Asia, and Africa. In the 1970s and 1980s, many 'old' Amsterdammers moved to 'new' cities like Almere and Purmerend, prompted by the third planological bill of the Dutch government. This bill promoted suburbanisation and arranged for new developments in so called "groeikernen", literally "cores of growth". Young professionals and artists moved into neighbourhoods de Pijp and the Jordaan abandoned by these Amsterdammers. The non-Western immigrants settled mostly in the social housing projects in Amsterdam-West and the Bijlmer. Today, people of non-Western origin make up approximately one-third of the population of Amsterdam, and more than 50% of children. A tendence to ethnical segregation is clearly visible, with people of non-Western origins, considered as a separate group by Statistics Netherlands, concentrating in specific neighborhoods especially in Nieuw-West, Zeeburg, Bijlmer and in certain areas of Amsterdam-Noord. 

The largest religious group are Christians (17% in 2000), who are divided between Roman Catholics and Protestants. The next largest religion is Islam (14% in 2000), most of whose followers are Sunni. 

In 1578 the previously Roman Catholic city of Amsterdam joined the revolt against Spanish rule, late in comparison to other major northern Dutch cities. In line with Protestant procedure of that time, all churches were converted to Protestant worship. Calvinism became the dominant religion, and although Catholicism was not forbidden and priests allowed to serve, the Catholic hierarchy was prohibited. This led to the establishment of schuilkerken, covert churches, behind seemingly ordinary canal side house fronts. One example is the current debate centre de Rode Hoed.
A large influx of foreigners of many religions came to 17th-century Amsterdam, in particular Sefardic Jews from Spain and Portugal, Huguenots from France, and Protestants from the Southern Netherlands. This led to the establishment of many non-Dutch-speaking religious churches. In 1603, the first notification was made of Jewish religious service. In 1639, the first synagogue was consecrated. The Jews came to call the town Jerusalem of the West, a reference to their sense of belonging there.

The Church of St Nicholas
As they became established in the city, other Christian denominations used converted Catholic chapels to conduct their own services. The oldest English-language church congregation in the world outside the United Kingdom is found at the Begijnhof. Regular services there are still offered in English under the auspices of the Church of Scotland. The Huguenots accounted for nearly 20% of Amsterdam's inhabitants in 1700. Being Calvinists, they soon integrated into the Dutch Reformed Church, though often retaining their own congregations. Some, commonly referred by the moniker 'Walloon', are recognizable today as they offer occasional services in French.

In the second half of the 17th century, Amsterdam experienced an influx of Ashkenazim, Jews from Central and Eastern Europe, which continued into the 19th century. Jews often fled the pogroms in those areas. The first Ashkenazi who arrived in Amsterdam were refugees from the Chmielnicki Uprising in Poland and the Thirty Years' War. They not only founded their own synagogues, but had a strong influence on the 'Amsterdam dialect' adding a large Yiddish local vocabulary.

Despite an absence of an official Jewish ghetto, most Jews preferred to live in the eastern part of the old medieval heart of the city. The main street of this Jewish neighborhood was the Jodenbreestraat. The neighborhood comprised the Waterlooplein and the Nieuwmarkt. Buildings in this neighborhood fell into disrepair after the Second World War, and a large section of the neighbourhood was demolished during the construction of the subway. This led to riots, and as a result the original plans for large-scale reconstruction were abandoned and the neighborhood was rebuilt with smaller-scale residence buildings on the basis of its original layout.

Vondelpark is the largest park in Amsterdam.
Catholic churches in Amsterdam have been constructed since the restoration of the episcopal hierarchy in 1853. One of the principal architects behind the city's Catholic churches, Cuypers, was also responsible for the Amsterdam Central Station and the Rijksmuseum, which led to a refusal of Protestant King William III to open 'that monastery'.
In 1924, the Roman Catholic Church of the Netherlands hosted the International Eucharistic Congress in Amsterdam, and numerous Catholic prelates visited the city, where festivities were held in churches and stadiums. Catholic processions on the public streets, however, were still forbidden under law at the time. Only in the 20th century was Amsterdam's relation to Catholicism normalized, but despite its far larger population size, the Catholic clergy chose to place its episcopal see of the city in the nearby provincial town of Haarlem. 

In recent times, religious demographics in Amsterdam have been changed by large-scale immigration from former colonies. Immigrants from Suriname have introduced Evangelical Protestantism and Lutheranism, from the Hernhutter variety; Hinduism has been introduced mainly from Suriname; and several distinct branches of Islam have been brought from various parts of the world. Islam is now the largest non-Christian religion in Amsterdam. The large community of Ghanaian and Nigerian immigrants have established African churches, often in parking garages in the Bijlmer area, where many have settled. In addition, a broad array of other religious movements have established congregations, including Buddhism, Confucianism and Hinduism.

The De Gooyer Windmill was constructed in 1725 and moved to its current location in 1814; it is one of eight windmills in Amsterdam.
Although the saying "Leef en laat leven" or "Live and let live" summarizes the Dutch and especially the Amsterdam open and tolerant society, the increased influx of many races, religions, and cultures after the Second World War, has on a number of occasions strained social relations. With 176 different nationalities, Amsterdam is home to one of the widest varieties of nationalities of any city in the world. Quest, issue of March 2009 The share of the population of immigrant ancestry in the city proper now is about 50%. 

The city has been at times marked by ethnic tension. In 2004 film director Theo van Gogh was murdered by an Islamic extremist in Amsterdam. Among others, in line with attitude changes in Dutch politics towards certain (especially Islamic) minorities Turkish-language and Arabic-language TV channels have been dropped from the basic cable TV package. In recent years, politicians are actively discouraged against campaigning in minority languages. In the previous local elections politicians were criticized by current Amsterdam mayor Mr van der Laan (then minister of Integration) for distributing election leaflets in minority languages and in some cases leaflets were collected. Due to this anti-Multicultural stand, van der Laan has been accused of hypocrisy by its own party's PvdA main candidate. Also during the same period, possibly due to his belief in integration via (possibly not always voluntary) assimilation, Amsterdam has been one of the municipalities in the Netherlands which provided immigrants with extensive and free Dutch-language courses, which have benefited many immigrants.

==Cityscape and architecture==

Amsterdam fans out south from the Amsterdam Centraal railway station. The oldest area of the town is known as de Wallen (the quays). It lies to the east of Damrak and contains the city's famous red light district. To the south of de Wallen is the old Jewish quarter of Waterlooplein. The medieval and colonial age canals of Amsterdam, known as Grachten, embraces the heart of the city where homes have interesting gables. Beyond the Grachtengordel are the former working class areas of Jordaan and de Pijp. The Museumplein with the city's major museums, the Vondelpark, a 19th-century park named after the Dutch writer Joost van den Vondel, and the Plantage neighbourhood, with the zoo, are also located outside the Grachtengordel.

Several parts of the city and the surrounding urban area are polders. This can be recognised by the suffix -meer which means lake, as in Aalsmeer, Bijlmermeer, Haarlemmermeer, and Watergraafsmeer.

===Canals===

Canal in Amsterdam
The Amsterdam canal system is the result of conscious city planning. In the early 17th century, when immigration was at a peak, a comprehensive plan was developed that was based on four concentric half-circles of canals with their ends emerging at the IJ bay. Known as the Grachtengordel, three of the canals were mostly for residential development: the Herengracht (where "Heren" refers to Heren Regeerders van de stad Amsterdam (ruling lords of Amsterdam), and gracht means canal, so the name can be roughly translated as "Canal of the lords"), Keizersgracht (Emperor's Canal), and Prinsengracht (Prince's Canal). The fourth and outermost canal is the Singelgracht, which is often not mentioned on maps, because it is a collective name for all canals in the outer ring. The Singelgracht should not be confused with the oldest and most inner canal Singel. The canals served for defence, water management and transport. The defences took the form of a moat and earthen dikes, with gates at transit points, but otherwise no masonry superstructures. The original plans have been lost, so historians, such as Ed Taverne, need to speculate on the original intentions: it is thought that the considerations of the layout were purely practical and defensive rather than ornamental. 

A view of the Reguliersgracht on the corner with the Keizersgracht at dusk.
Construction started in 1613 and proceeded from west to east, across the breadth of the layout, like a gigantic windshield wiper as the historian Geert Mak calls it  and not from the centre outwards, as a popular myth has it. The canal construction in the southern sector was completed by 1656. Subsequently, the construction of residential buildings proceeded slowly. The eastern part of the concentric canal plan, covering the area between the Amstel river and the IJ bay, has never been implemented. In the following centuries, the land was used for parks, senior citizens' homes, theatres, other public facilities, and waterways without much planning. 

Bridges over a canal.
Over the years, several canals have been filled in, becoming streets or squares, such as the Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal and the Spui. 

===Expansion===

After the development of Amsterdam's canals in the 17th century, the city did not grow beyond its borders for two centuries. During the 19th century, Samuel Sarphati devised a plan based on the grandeur of Paris and London at that time. The plan envisaged the construction of new houses, public buildings and streets just outside the grachtengordel. The main aim of the plan, however, was to improve public health. Although the plan did not expand the city, it did produce some of the largest public buildings to date, like the Paleis voor Volksvlijt. 

Following Sarphati, Van Niftrik and Kalff designed an entire ring of 19th century neighbourhoods surrounding the citys centre, with the city preserving the ownership of all land outside the 17th century limit, thus firmly controlling development. Most of these neighbourhoods became home to the working class. 

In response to overcrowding, two plans were designed at the beginning of the 20th century which were very different from anything Amsterdam had ever seen before: Plan Zuid, designed by the architect Berlage, and West. These plans involved the development of new neighbourhoods consisting of housing blocks for all social classes. 

After the Second World War, large new neighbourhoods were built in the western, southeastern, and northern parts of the city. These new neighbourhoods were built to relieve the city's shortage of living space and give people affordable houses with modern conveniences. The neighbourhoods consisted mainly of large housing blocks situated among green spaces, connected to wide roads, making the neighbourhoods easily accessible by motor car. The western suburbs which were built in that period are collectively called the Westelijke Tuinsteden. The area to the southeast of the city built during the same period is known as the Bijlmer. 

===Architecture===
The Westerkerk (1631), designed by Dutch architect Hendrick de Keyser in the Renaissance style. At 85m (280 ft) the cathedral's "Westertoren" steeple is the highest in Amsterdam. The canal houses on the right are characteristic of the architectural styles from the Dutch Golden Age.
The old city houses on Damrak
Amsterdam has a rich architectural history. The oldest building in Amsterdam is the Oude Kerk (Old Church), at the heart of the Wallen, consecrated in 1306. The oldest wooden building is het Houten Huys at the Begijnhof.
It was constructed around 1425 and is one of only two existing wooden buildings. It is also one of the few examples of Gothic architecture in Amsterdam.
In the 16th century, wooden buildings were razed and replaced with brick ones. During this period, many buildings were constructed in the architectural style of the Renaissance. Buildings of this period are very recognisable with their stepped gable faades, which is the common Dutch Renaissance style. Amsterdam quickly developed its own Renaissance architecture. These buildings were built according to the principles of the architect Hendrick de Keyser. One of the most striking buildings designed by Hendrick de Keyer is the Westerkerk. In the 17th century baroque architecture became very popular, as it was elsewhere in Europe. This roughly coincided with Amsterdams Golden Age. The leading architects of this style in Amsterdam were Jacob van Campen, Philips Vingboons and Daniel Stalpaert. 

The Scheepvaarthuis, by architects Johan van der Mey, Michel de Klerk, Piet Kramer is characteristic of the architecture of the Amsterdam School.
Philip Vingboons designed splendid merchants' houses throughout the city. A famous building in baroque style in Amsterdam is the Royal Palace on Dam Square. Throughout the 18th century, Amsterdam was heavily influenced by French culture. This is reflected in the architecture of that period. Around 1815, architects broke with the baroque style and started building in different neo-styles. Most Gothic style buildings date from that era and are therefore said to be built in a neo-gothic style. At the end of the 19th century, the Jugendstil or Art Nouveau style became popular and many new buildings were constructed in this architectural style. Since Amsterdam expanded rapidly during this period, new buildings adjacent to the city centre were also built in this style. The houses in the vicinity of the Museum Square in Amsterdam Oud-Zuid are an example of Jugendstil. The last style that was popular in Amsterdam before the modern era was Art Deco. Amsterdam had its own version of the style, which was called the Amsterdamse School. Whole districts were built this style, such as the Rivierenbuurt. A notable feature of the faades of buildings designed in Amsterdamse School is that they are highly decorated and ornate, with oddly shaped windows and doors.

The old city centre is the focal point of all the architectural styles before the end of the 19th century.
Jugendstil and Georgian are mostly found outside the citys centre in the neighbourhoods built in the early
20th century, although there are also some striking examples of these styles in the city centre.
Most historic buildings in the city centre and nearby are houses, such as the famous merchants' houses lining the canals.

===Parks and recreational areas===
Amsterdam has many parks, open spaces, and squares throughout the city. Vondelpark, the largest park in the city, is located in the Oud-Zuid borough and is named after the 17th century Amsterdam author, Joost van den Vondel. Yearly, the park has around 10 million visitors. In the park is an open air theatre, a playground and several horeca facilities. In the Zuid borough, is Beatrixpark, named after Queen Beatrix. Between Amsterdam and Amstelveen is the Amsterdamse Bos (Amsterdam Forest), the largest recreational area in Amsterdam. Annually, almost 4.5 million people visit the park, which has a size of 1,000 hectares and is approximately three times the size of Central Park. Amsterdamse Bos - English site. City of Amsterdam. Retrieved on 2008-11-27. Amstelpark in the Zuid borough houses the Rieker windmill, which dates to 1636. Other parks include Sarphatipark in the De Pijp neighborhood, Oosterpark in the Oost borough, and Westerpark in the Westerpark neighborhood. The city has four beaches, the Nemo Beach, Citybeach "Het stenen hoofd" (Silodam), Blijburg, and one in Amsterdam-Noord.

The city has many open squares (plein in Dutch). The namesake of the city as the site of the original dam, Dam Square, is the main town square and has the Royal Palace and National Monument. Museumplein hosts various museums, including the Rijksmuseum, Van Gogh Museum, and Stedelijk Museum. Other squares include Rembrandtplein, Muntplein, Nieuwmarkt, Leidseplein, Spui, and Waterlooplein.

==Economy==
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange, right, is the oldest stock exchange in the world.
Amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the Netherlands. 
Amsterdam is currently one of the best European cities in which to locate an international business. It is ranked fifth in this category and is only surpassed by London, Paris, Frankfurt and Barcelona. Many large corporations and banks have their headquarters in Amsterdam, including Akzo Nobel, Heineken International, ING Group, Ahold, TomTom, Delta Lloyd Group and Philips. KPMG International's global headquarters is located in nearby Amstelveen, where many non-Dutch companies have settled as well, because surrounding communities allow full land ownership, contrary to Amsterdam's land-lease system.

Though many small offices are still located on the old canals, companies are increasingly relocating outside the city centre. The Zuidas (English: South Axis) has become the new financial and legal hub. The five largest law firms of the Netherlands, a number of Dutch subsidiaries of large consulting firms like Boston Consulting Group and Accenture, and the World Trade Center Amsterdam are also located in Zuidas.

There are three other smaller financial districts in Amsterdam. The first is the area surrounding Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station, where several newspapers like De Telegraaf have their offices. Also, Deloitte, the municipal public transport company (Gemeentelijk Vervoersbedrijf) and the Dutch tax offices (Belastingdienst) are located there. The second Financial District is the area surrounding Amsterdam Arena. The third is the area surrounding Amsterdam Amstel railway station. The tallest building in Amsterdam, the Rembrandt Tower, is situated there, as is the headquarters of Philips. 

The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), now part of Euronext, is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses. It is situated near Dam Square in the city's centre.

Together with Eindhoven (Brainport) and Rotterdam (Seaport), Amsterdam (Airport) forms the foundation of the Dutch economy. 

Tourists near Munttoren

===Tourism===

Canal boats, such as this one on Keizersgracht, give tours of the city.
Amsterdam is one of the most popular tourist destinations in Europe, receiving more than 4.63 million international visitors annually, this is excluding the 16 million day trippers visiting the city every year. The number of visitors has been growing steadily over the past decade. This can be attributed to an increasing number of European visitors. Two thirds of the hotels are located in the city's centre. Hotels with 4 or 5 stars contribute 42% of the total beds available and 41% of the overnight stays in Amsterdam. The room occupation rate was 78% in 2006, up from 70% in 2005. The majority of tourists (74%) originate from Europe. The largest group of non-European visitors come from the United States, accounting for 14% of the total. Certain years have a theme in Amsterdam to attract extra tourists. For example, the year 2006 was designated "Rembrandt 400", to celebrate the 400th birthday of Rembrandt van Rijn. Some hotels offer special arrangements or activities during these years. The average number of guests per year staying at the four campsites around the city range from 12,000 to 65,000. 

====Red light district====

The red-light district is the main tourist attraction.
De Wallen, also known as Walletjes or Rosse Buurt, is a designated area for legalised prostitution and is Amsterdam's largest and most well known red-light district. This neighborhood has become a famous attraction for tourists. It consists of a network of roads and alleys containing several hundred small, one-room apartments rented by sex workers who offer their services from behind a window or glass door, typically illuminated with red lights.

===Retail===
Shops in Amsterdam range from large department stores such as De Bijenkorf founded in 1870 and Maison de Bonneterie a Parisian style store founded in 1889, to small specialty shops. Amsterdam's high-end shops are found in the streets Pieter Cornelisz Hooftstraat and Cornelis Schuytstraat, which are located in the vicinity of the Vondelpark. One of Amsterdam's busiest high streets is the narrow, medieval Kalverstraat in the heart of the city. Other shopping areas include the Negen Straatjes and Haarlemmerdijk and Haarlemmerstraat. Negen Straatjes are nine narrow streets within the Grachtengordel, the concentric canal system of Amsterdam. The Negen Straatjes differ from other shopping districts with the presence of a large diversity of privately owned shops. The Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk were voted best shopping street in the Netherlands in 2011. These streets have as the Negen Straatjes a large diversity of privately owned shops. But as the Negen Straatjes are dominated by fashion stores the Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk offer a very wide variety of all kinds of stores, just to name some specialties: candy and other food related stores, lingerie, sneakers, wedding clothing, interior shops, books, Italian deli's, racing and mountain bikes, skatewear, etc.

The city also features a large number of open-air markets such as the Albert Cuypmarkt, Westerstraat-markt, Ten Katemarkt, and Dappermarkt. Some of these markets are held on a daily basis, like the Albert Cuypmarkt and the Dappermarkt. Others, like the Westerstraatmarkt, are held on a weekly basis.

===Fashion===
Fashion brands like G-star, Gsus, BlueBlood, Iris van Herpen, 10 feet and Warmenhoven & Venderbos, and fashion designers like Mart Visser, Viktor & Rolf, Sheila de Vries, Marlies Dekkers and Frans Molenaar are based in Amsterdam. Modelling agencies Elite Models, Touche models and Tony Jones have opened branches in Amsterdam. Supermodels Yfke Sturm, Doutzen Kroes and Kim Noorda started their careers in Amsterdam. Amsterdam has its garment centre in the World Fashion Center. Buildings which formerly housed brothels in the red light district have been converted to ateliers for young fashion designers, AKA eagle fuel.

==Culture==
The Rijksmuseum houses The Night Watch.
The Van Gogh Museum houses the world's largest collection of Van Gogh's paintings and letters.
During the later part of the 16th century Amsterdam's Rederijkerskamer (Chamber of Rhetoric) organized contests between different Chambers in the reading of poetry and drama. In 1638, Amsterdam opened its first theatre. Ballet performances were given in this theatre as early as 1642. In the 18th century, French theatre became popular. While Amsterdam was under the influence of German music in the 19th century there were few national opera productions; the Hollandse Opera of Amsterdam was built in 1888 for the specific purpose of promoting Dutch opera. In the 19th century, popular culture was centred on the Nes area in Amsterdam (mainly vaudeville and music-hall). The metronome, one of the most important advances in European classical music, was invented here in 1812 by Dietrich Nikolaus Winkel. At the end of this century, the Rijksmuseum and Stedelijk Museum were built. In 1888, the Concertgebouworkest was established. With the 20th century came cinema, radio and television. Though most studios are located in Hilversum and Aalsmeer, Amsterdam's influence on programming is very strong. Many people who work in the television industry live in Amsterdam. Also, the headquarters of SBS 6 is located in Amsterdam. 

===Museums===
The most important museums of Amsterdam are located on the Museumplein (Museum Square), located at the southwestern side of the Rijksmuseum. It was created in the last quarter of the 19th century on the grounds of the former World's fair. The northeastern part of the square is bordered by the very large Rijksmuseum. In front of the Rijksmuseum on the square itself is a long, rectangular pond. This is transformed into an ice rink in winter. The northwestern part of the square is bordered by the Van Gogh Museum, Stedelijk Museum, House of Bols Cocktail & Genever Experience and Coster Diamonds. The southwestern border of the Museum Square is the Van Baerlestraat, which is a major thoroughfare in this part of Amsterdam. The Concertgebouw is situated across this street from the square. To the southeast of the square are situated a number of large houses, one of which contains the American consulate. A parking garage can be found underneath the square, as well as a supermarket. Het Museumplein is covered almost entirely with a lawn, except for the northeastern part of the square which is covered with gravel. The current appearance of the square was realized in 1999, when the square was remodeled. The square itself is the most prominent site in Amsterdam for festivals and outdoor concerts, especially in the summer. Plans were made in 2008 to remodel the square again, because many inhabitants of Amsterdam are not happy with its current appearance. 

Rembrandt monument on Rembrandtplein
The Rijksmuseum possesses the largest and most important collection of classical Dutch art. 
It opened in 1885. Its collection consists of nearly one million objects. 
 The artist most associated with Amsterdam is Rembrandt, whose work, and the work of his pupils, is displayed in the Rijksmuseum. Rembrandt's masterpiece De Nachtwacht (The Night Watch) is one of top pieces of art of the museum. It also houses paintings from artists like Van der Helst, Vermeer, Frans Hals, Ferdinand Bol, Albert Cuyp, Jacob van Ruisdael and Paulus Potter. Aside from paintings, the collection consists of a large variety of decorative art. This ranges from Delftware to giant dollhouses from the 17th century. The architect of the gothic revival building was P.J.H. Cuypers. The museum underwent a 10 year, 375 million euro renovation starting in 2003. The full collection was reopened to the public on April 13, 2013.

Van Gogh lived in Amsterdam for a short while and there is a museum dedicated to his work. The museum is housed in one of the few modern buildings in this area of Amsterdam. The building was designed by Gerrit Rietveld. This building is where the permanent collection is displayed. A new building was added to the museum in 1999. This building, known as the performance wing, was designed by Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa. Its purpose is to house temporary exhibitions of the museum. Some of Van Gogh's most famous paintings, like the Aardappeleters (The Potato Eaters) and Zonnebloemen (Sunflowers), are present in the collection. The Van Gogh museum is the most visited museum in Amsterdam. 

Next to the Van Gogh museum stands the Stedelijk Museum. This is Amsterdam's most important museum of modern art . The museum is as old as the square it borders and was opened in 1895. The permanent collection consists of works of art from artists like Piet Mondriaan, Karel Appel, and Kazimir Malevich. After renovations lasting several years the museum opened in September 2012 with a new composite extension that has been called "The Bathtub" due to its resemblance to one.

Amsterdam contains many other museums throughout the city. They range from small museums such as the Verzetsmuseum (Resistance Museum), the Anne Frank Huis (Anne Frank House), and the Rembrandthuis (Rembrandt House), to the very large, like the Tropenmuseum (Museum of the Tropics), Amsterdam Museum (formerly known as "Amsterdams Historisch Museum", Amsterdam Historical Museum), Hermitage Amsterdam (a dependency of the Hermitage Museum of Saint Petersburg) and the Joods Historisch Museum (Jewish Historical Museum). The modern-styled NEMO (museum) is dedicated to child-friendly science exhibitions.

===Music===

Amsterdam's musical culture includes a large collection of songs which treat the city nostalgically and lovingly. The 1949 song "Aan de Amsterdamse grachten" ("On the canals of Amsterdam") was performed and recorded by many artists, including John Kraaijkamp sr.; the best-known version is probably that by Wim Sonneveld (1962). In the 1950s Johnny Jordaan rose to fame with "Geef mij maar Amsterdam" ("I prefer Amsterdam"), which praises the city above all others (explicitly Paris); Jordaan sang especially about his own neighborhood, the Jordaan ("Bij ons in de Jordaan"). Colleagues and contemporaries of Johnny include Tante Leen, Zwarte Riek, and Manke Nelis. Other notable Amsterdam songs are "Amsterdam" by Jacques Brel (1964) and "Deze Stad" by De Dijk (1989). A 2011 poll by Amsterdam paper Het Parool found, somewhat surprisingly, that Trio Bier's "Oude Wolf" was voted "Amsterdams lijflied". Notable Amsterdam bands from the modern era include the Osdorp Posse and The Ex.

The Heineken Music Hall is a concert hall located near the Amsterdam ArenA. Its main purpose is to serve as a podium for pop concerts for big audiences. Many famous international artists have performed there. Two other notable venues, Paradiso and the Melkweg are located near the Leidseplein. Both focus on broad programming, ranging from indie rock to hip hop, R&B, and other popular genres. Other more subculturally focused music venues are OCCII, OT301, De Nieuwe Anita, Winston Kingdom and Zaal 100. Jazz has a strong following in Amsterdam, with the Bimhuis being the premier venue. In 2012, Ziggo Dome was opened, also near Amsterdam ArenA, a state of the art indoor music arena.

The Heineken Music Hall is also host to many electronic dance music festivals, alongside many other venues. Armin van Buuren and Tiesto, some of the worlds leading Trance DJ's hail from the Netherlands and perform frequently in Amsterdam. Each year in October, the city hosts the Amsterdam Dance Event (ADE) which is one of the leading electronic music conferences and one of the biggest club festivals for electronic music in the world. Another popular dance festival is 5daysoff, which takes place in the venues Paradiso and Melkweg. In summer time there are several big outdoor dance parties in or nearby Amsterdam, such as Awakenings, Dance Valley, Mystery Land, Loveland, A Day at the Park, Welcome to the Future, and Valtifest.

The Concertgebouw concert hall has some of the finest acoustics in the world.
Amsterdam has a world-class symphony orchestra, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra. Their home is the Concertgebouw, which is across the Van Baerlestraat from the Museum Square. It is considered by critics to be a concert hall with some of the best acoustics in the world. The building contains three halls, Grote Zaal, Kleine Zaal, and Spiegelzaal. Some nine hundred concerts and other events per year take place in the Concertgebouw, for a public of over 700,000, making it one of the most-visited concert halls in the world. The opera house of Amsterdam is situated adjacent to the city hall. Therefore, the two buildings combined are often called the Stopera, (a word originally coined by protesters against it very construction: Stop the Opera). This huge modern complex, opened in 1986, lies in the former Jewish neighbourhood at Waterlooplein next to the river Amstel. The Stopera is the homebase of Dutch National Opera, Dutch National Ballet and the Holland Symfonia. Muziekgebouw aan 't IJ is a concert hall, which is situated in the IJ near the central station. Its concerts perform mostly modern classical music. Located adjacent to it, is the Bimhuis, a concert hall for improvised and Jazz music.

===Performing arts===
Amsterdam has three main theatre buildings.

The Stadsschouwburg Amsterdam at the Leidseplein is the home base of Toneelgroep Amsterdam. The current building dates from 1894. Most plays are performed in the Grote Zaal (Great Hall). The normal program of events encompasses all sorts of theatrical forms. The Stadsschouwburg is currently being renovated and expanded. The third theater space, to be operated jointly with next door Melkweg, will open in late 2009 or early 2010.

Dutch National Opera & Ballet (formerly known as Het Muziektheater), dating from 1986, is the principal opera house and home to Dutch National Opera and Dutch National Ballet.

Royal Theatre Carr was built as a permanent circus theatre in 1887 and is currently mainly used for musicals, cabaret performances and pop concerts.

The recently re-opened DeLaMar Theater houses the more commercial plays and musicals.

The Netherlands has a tradition of cabaret or kleinkunst, which combines music, storytelling, commentary, theatre and comedy. Cabaret dates back to the 1930s and artists like Wim Kan, Wim Sonneveld and Toon Hermans were pioneers of this form of art in the Netherlands. In Amsterdam is the Kleinkunstacademie (English: Cabaret Academy). Contemporary popular artists are Youp van 't Hek, Freek de Jonge, Herman Finkers, Hans Teeuwen, Theo Maassen, Herman van Veen, Najib Amhali, Raoul Heertje, Jrgen Raymann, Brigitte Kaandorp and Comedytrain. The English spoken comedy scene was established with the founding of Boom Chicago in 1993. They have their own theatre at Leidseplein.

===Nightlife===
Amsterdam is famous for its vibrant and diverse nightlife. Amsterdam has many cafs (bars). They range from large and modern to small and cozy. The typical Bruine Kroeg (brown caf) breathe a more old fashioned atmosphere with dimmed lights, candles, and somewhat older clientele. Most cafs have terraces in summertime. A common sight on the Leidseplein during summer is a square full of terraces packed with people drinking beer or wine. Many restaurants can be found in Amsterdam as well. Since Amsterdam is a multicultural city, a lot of different ethnic restaurants can be found. Restaurants range from being rather luxurious and expensive to being ordinary and affordable. Amsterdam also possesses many discothques. The two main nightlife areas for tourists are the Leidseplein and the Rembrandtplein. The Paradiso, Melkweg and Sugar Factory are cultural centres, which turn into discothques on some nights. Examples of discothques near the Rembrandtplein are the Escape and Club Home. Also noteworthy are Panama, Hotel Arena (East), The Sand and The Powerzone. Bimhuis located near the Central Station, with its rich programming hosting the best in the field is considered one of the best jazz clubs in the world. The Reguliersdwarsstraat is the main street for the LGBT community and nightlife.

===Festivals===
Koninginnedag 2009 in Amsterdam
In 2008, there were 140 festivals and events in Amsterdam. 
Famous festivals and events in Amsterdam include: Koninginnedag (In 2013 Koningsdag since the crowning of king Willem-Alexander) (Queen's Day - King's Day); the Holland Festival for the performing arts; the yearly Prinsengrachtconcert (classical concerto on the Prinsen canal) in August; the 'Stille Omgang' (a silent Roman Catholic evening procession held every March); Amsterdam Gay Pride; The Cannabis Cup; and the Uitmarkt. On Koninginnedagheld each year on 30 Aprilhundreds of thousands of people travel to Amsterdam to celebrate with the city's residents. The entire city becomes overcrowded with people buying products from the freemarket, or visiting one of the many music concerts.

The yearly Holland Festival attracts international artists and visitors from all over Europe. Amsterdam Gay Pride is a yearly local LGBT parade of boats in Amsterdam's canals, held on the first Saturday in August. The Gay Pride event is a frequent source of both criticism and praise. The annual Uitmarkt is a three-day cultural event at the start of the cultural season in late August. It offers previews of many different artists, such as musicians and poets, who perform on podia. 

===Sports===
The European Champion Clubs' Cup, won by Ajax Amsterdam in 1971, 1972, 1973 and 1995.
Amsterdam is home of the Eredivisie football club Ajax Amsterdam. The stadium Amsterdam ArenA is the home of Ajax. It is located in the south-east of the city next to the new Amsterdam Bijlmer ArenA railway station. Before moving to their current location in 1996, Ajax played their regular matches in De Meer Stadion. 
 
In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Summer Olympics. The Olympic Stadium built for the occasion has been completely restored and is now used for cultural and sporting events, such as the Amsterdam Marathon. 
 In 1920, Amsterdam assisted in hosting some of the sailing events for the Summer Olympics held in neighboring Antwerp, Belgium by hosting events at Buiten Y.

The city holds the Dam to Dam Run, a 10-mile race from Amsterdam to Zaandam, as well as the Amsterdam Marathon.

The ice hockey team Amstel Tijgers play in the Jaap Eden ice rink. The team competes in the Dutch ice hockey premier league. Speed skating championships have been held on the 400-metre lane of this ice rink.

Amsterdam holds two American Football franchises: the Amsterdam Crusaders and the Amsterdam Panthers.
The Amsterdam Pirates baseball team competes in the Dutch Major League. There are three field hockey teams: Amsterdam, Pinok and Hurley, who play their matches around the Wagener Stadium in the nearby city of Amstelveen. The basketball team MyGuide Amsterdam competes in the Dutch premier division and play their games in the Sporthallen Zuid. 

There is one rugbyclub in Amsterdam, which also hosts sports training classes such as RTC(Rugby Talenten Centrum or Rugby Talent Centre) and the National Rugby stadium.

Since 1999 the city of Amsterdam honours the best sportsmen and women at the Amsterdam Sports Awards. Boxer Raymond Joval and field hockey midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards, in 1999.

==Government==
The administration of the municipality of Amsterdam used to be divided into 15 boroughs or stadsdelen; the central one, Centrum, being circled by Westerpark, Bos en Lommer, De Baarsjes, Oud-West, Oud-Zuid, Oost/Watergraafsmeer, Zeeburg and Amsterdam-Noord, with the six outer boroughs (Westpoort, Geuzenveld-Slotermeer, Osdorp, Slotervaart, Zuideramstel, and Zuidoost) creating a further encirclement. On 1 May 2010, the number of boroughs was reduced to eight (Centrum, Noord, Oost, Zuid, West, Nieuw-West, Zuidoost, and Westpoort).

===Definitions===
The 8 boroughs of Amsterdam

"Amsterdam" is mostly understood to refer to the municipality of Amsterdam. Colloquially, some areas within the municipality, such as the village of Durgerdam, may not be considered part of Amsterdam. Statistics Netherlands uses three other definitions of Amsterdam: metropolitan agglomeration Amsterdam (Grootstedelijke Agglomeratie Amsterdam, not to be confused with Grootstedelijk Gebied Amsterdam, a synonym of Groot Amsterdam), Greater Amsterdam (Groot Amsterdam, a COROP region) and the urban region Amsterdam (Stadsgewest Amsterdam). The Amsterdam Department for Research and Statistics uses a fourth conurbation, namely the City region Amsterdam. This region is similar to Greater Amsterdam but includes the municipalities Zaanstad and Wormerland. It excludes Graft-De Rijp.

The smallest of these areas is the municipality, with a population of 802,938 in 2013. The metropolitan agglomeration had a population of 1,096,042 in 2013. It includes the municipalities of Zaanstad, Wormerland, Oostzaan, Diemen and Amstelveen only, as well as the municipality of Amsterdam. Greater Amsterdam includes 15 municipalities, and had a population of 1,293,208 in 2013. Though much larger in area, the population of this area is only slightly larger, because the definition excludes the relatively populous municipality of Zaanstad. The largest area by population, the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area (Dutch: Metropoolregio Amsterdam), has a population of 2,33 million. It includes for instance Zaanstad, Wormerveer, Muiden, Abcoude, Haarlem, Almere and Lelystad but excludes Graft-De Rijp. Amsterdam is part of the conglomerate metropolitan area Randstad, with a total population of 6,659,300 inhabitants. 

===City government===

As with all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a mayor, aldermen, and the municipal council. However, unlike most other Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is subdivided into seven "stadsdelen" (boroughs), a system that was implemented in the 1980s to improve local governance. The stadsdelen are responsible for many activities that had previously been run by the central city. The city had initially been divided into 15 stadsdelen. 14 of those had their own council, chosen by a popular election. The 15th, Westpoort, covers the harbour of Amsterdam, had very few residents, and was governed by the central municipal council. Local decisions are made at borough level, and only affairs pertaining to the whole city, such as major infrastructure projects, are handled by the central city council.

===National government===
Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands in a technical legal sense. The present version of the Dutch constitution mentions "Amsterdam" and "capital" only in one place, chapter 2, article 32: The king's confirmation by oath and his coronation take place in "the capital Amsterdam" ("de hoofdstad Amsterdam"). Previous versions of the constitution spoke of "the city of Amsterdam" ("de stad Amsterdam"), without mention of capital. In any case, the seat of the government, parliament and supreme court of the Netherlands is (and always has been, with the exception of a brief period between 1808 and 1810) located at The Hague. Foreign embassies are also in The Hague. The capital of North Holland is Haarlem.

The Magere Brug or "Skinny Bridge" at night

===Symbols===

The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of several historical elements. First and centre are three St Andrew's crosses, aligned in a vertical band on the city's shield (although Amsterdam's patron saint was Saint Nicholas). These St Andrew's crosses can also be found on the cityshields of neighbours Amstelveen and Ouder-Amstel. This part of the coat of arms is the basis of the flag of Amsterdam, flown by the city government, but also as civil ensign for ships registered in Amsterdam. Second is the Imperial Crown of Austria. In 1489, out of gratitude for services and loans, Maximilian I awarded Amsterdam the right to adorn its coat of arms with the king's crown. Then, in 1508, this was replaced with Maximilian's imperial crown when he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor. In the early years of the 17th century, Maximilian's crown in Amsterdam's coat of arms was again replaced, this time with the crown of Emperor Rudolph II, a crown that became the Imperial Crown of Austria. The lions date from the late 16th century, when city and province became part of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands. Last came the city's official motto: Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig ("Heroic, Determined, Merciful"), bestowed on the city in 1947 by Queen Wilhelmina, in recognition of the city's bravery during the Second World War.

==Transport==

A tram on Damrak with Centraal Station in the background
In the city centre, driving a car is discouraged. Parking fees are expensive, and many streets are closed to cars or are one-way. The local government sponsors carsharing and carpooling initiatives such as Autodelen and Meerijden.nu. 

Regional buses, and some suburban buses, are operated by Connexxion and EBS. Currently, there are sixteen tram lines, and four metro lines, with a fifth line, the North/South line, under construction, all operated by GVB. Three free ferries carry pedestrians and cyclists across the IJ to Amsterdam-Noord, and two fare-charging ferries run east and west along the harbour. There are also water taxis, a water bus, a boat sharing operation, electric rental boats (Boaty) and canal cruises, that transport people along Amsterdam's waterways.

The A10 ringroad surrounding the city connects Amsterdam with the Dutch national network of freeways. Interchanges on the A10 allow cars to enter the city by transferring to one of the 18 city roads, numbered S101 through to S118. These city roads are regional roads without grade separation, and sometimes without a central reservation. Most are accessible by cyclists. The S100 Centrumring is a smaller ringroad circumnavigating the city's centre.

Amsterdam was intended in 1932 to be the hub, a kind of Kilometre Zero, of the highway system of the Netherlands, with freeways numbered One to Eight planned to originate from the city. The outbreak of the Second World War and shifting priorities led to the current situation, where only roads A1, A2, and A4 originate from Amsterdam according to the original plan. The A3 road to Rotterdam was cancelled in 1970 in order to conserve the Groene Hart. Road A8, leading north to Zaandam and the A10 Ringroad were opened between 1968 and 1974. Besides the A1, A2, A4 and A8, several freeways, such as the A7 and A6, carry traffic mainly bound for Amsterdam.

Amsterdam Airport Schiphol ranks as Europe's 4th busiest airport and the world's 16th busiest for passenger traffic.
Amsterdam is served by ten stations of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways). Six are intercity stops: Sloterdijk, Zuid, Amstel, Bijlmer ArenA, Lelylaan and Amsterdam Centraal. The stations for local services are: RAI, Holendrecht, Muiderpoort and Science Park. Amsterdam Centraal is also an international railway station. From the station there are regular services to destinations such as Austria, Belarus, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia and Switzerland. Among these trains are international trains of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Amsterdam-Berlin) and the Thalys (Amsterdam-Brussels-Paris/Lille), CityNightLine, and InterCityExpress (Amsterdam-Cologne-Frankfurt). 

Eurolines has coaches from Amsterdam Amstel railway station to destinations all over Europe. IDBUS has a coach service from Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station to Paris, Brussels and London. Megabus (Europe) offers coach services from Zuiderzeeweg in east Amsterdam to Paris, Brussels and London.

Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is less than 20 minutes by train from Amsterdam Central Station and is also served by domestic and international intercity trains, such as Thalys and Intercity Brussel. Schiphol is the biggest airport in the Netherlands, the fourth largest in Europe, and the twelfth largest in the world in terms of passengers. It handles about 50 million passengers per year and is the home base of four airlines, KLM, transavia.com, Martinair and Arkefly. As of 2013, Schiphol was the sixth busiest airport in the world measured by international passenger numbers. 

Amsterdam Police Bicyclist crossing a bridge over Prinsengracht.

===Cycling===

Amsterdam is one of the most bicycle-friendly large cities in the world and is a centre of bicycle culture with good facilities for cyclists such as bike paths and bike racks, and several guarded bike storage garages (fietsenstalling) which can be used for a nominal fee. In 2013, there were about 1,200,000 bicycles in Amsterdam outnumbering the amount of citizens in the city. Theft is widespread  in 2011, about 83,000 bicycles were stolen in Amsterdam. Bicycles are used by all socio-economic groups because of their convenience, Amsterdam's small size, the 400 km of bike paths, 
 the flat terrain, and the arguable inconvenience of driving an automobile. 

==Education==
The Agnietenkapel Gate at the University of Amsterdam, founded in 1632 as the Athenaeum Illustre
Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the VU University Amsterdam (Vrije Universiteit or "VU"). Other institutions for higher education include an art school  Gerrit Rietveld Academie, a university of applied sciences - the Hogeschool van Amsterdam, and the Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten. Amsterdam's International Institute of Social History is one of the world's largest documentary and research institutions concerning social history, and especially the history of the labour movement. Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus, founded in the early 17th century, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the world, with many old and rare specimens, among them the coffee plant that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and South America. 

Some of Amsterdam's primary schools base their teachings on particular pedagogic theories like the various Montessori schools. The biggest Montessori High School in Amsterdam is the Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam. Many schools, however, are based on religion. This used to be primarily Roman Catholicism and various Protestant denominations, but with the influx of Muslim immigrants there has been a rise in the number of Islamic schools. Jewish schools can be found in the southern suburbs of Amsterdam.

Amsterdam is noted for having five independent grammar schools (Dutch: gymnasia), the Vossius Gymnasium, Barlaeus Gymnasium, St. Ignatius Gymnasium, Het 4e Gymnasium and the Cygnus Gymnasium where a classical curriculum including Latin and classical Greek is taught. Though believed until recently by many to be an anachronistic and elitist concept that would soon die out, the gymnasia have recently experienced a revival, leading to the formation of a fourth and fifth grammar school in which the three aforementioned schools participate. Most secondary schools in Amsterdam offer a variety of different levels of education in the same school. The city also has various colleges ranging from art and design to politics and economics which are mostly also available for students coming from other countries.

==Notable people==
* Frits Bolkestein (born 1933), politics
* Charlene de Carvalho-Heineken (born 1954), business
* Paul Crutzen (born 1933), atmospheric chemist
* Willem Drees sr. (18861988), politics
* Freddy Heineken (19232002, business)
* Jaap de Hoop Scheffer (born 1948), politics
* Andr Kuipers (born 1958), astronaut
* Baruch Spinoza (16321677), philosophy
* Anne Frank (February 1934-3 September 1944), diarist and Holocaust victim

===Entertainment===
* Karel Appel (19212006), painter
* Jan Akkerman (born 1946), musician
* Willeke van Ammelrooy (born 1944), actress
* Willem Breuker (19442010), musician
* Frans Brggen (born 1934), musician
* Bernard Haitink (born 1929), orchestra conductor
* Rudi van Dantzig (19332012), ballet
* Joop van den Ende (born 1942), producer

===Sports===
* Co Adriaanse (born 1947), football trainer
* Dennis Bergkamp (born 1969), football player
* Jan van Beveren (19482011) 
* Michael Bleekemolen (born 1949) 
* Cor Brom (19322008), football player and football trainer
* Ellie van den Brom (born 1949) 
* Johan Cruijff (born 1947), football player and football trainer
* Max Euwe (19011981) 
* Louis van Gaal (born 1951), football trainer
* Ruud Gullit (born 1962), football player
* Bobby Haarms (19342009), football player and football trainer
* Cor van der Hart (19282006), football player and football trainer
* Rinus Isral (born 1942), football player and football trainer
* Jan Jongbloed (born 1940), football player (goalkeeper)
* Piet Keizer (born 1943), football player
* Patrick Kluivert (born 1976), football player
* Gerrie Knetemann (19512004), cyclist
* Ada Kok (born 1947), swimmer
* Ruud Krol (born 1949), football player and football coach
* Edward Metgod (born 1959), football player (goalkeeper) and football trainer
* John Metgod (born 1958), football player and football traine
* Rinus Michels (19282005), football player and football trainer
* Bennie Muller (born 1938), football (47 caps)
* Eddy Pieters Graafland (born 1934) Football player (goalkeeper)
* Peter Post (19332011), cyclist
* Anton (Ton) Pronk (born 1941), football (19 caps)
* Rob Rensenbrink (born 1947), football
* Frank Rijkaard (born 1962), football player and football coach
* Wim Ruska (born 1940) 
* Ton Sijbrands (born 1949) 
* Sjaak Swart (born 1938), football player

===Originating from elsewhere===
* Fanny Blankers-Koen (19182004), athlete
* Inge de Bruijn (born 1973), swimmer
* Joop den Uyl (19191987), politics
* Jan Hein Donner (19271988), chess
* Sren Lerby (born 1958), football
* Theo van Gogh (19572004), film director
* Carice van Houten (born 1976), actress
* Rembrandt van Rijn (1606/71669), painter

==Media==
Amsterdam is a prominent center for national and international media. Some locally-based newspapers include Het Parool, a national daily paper; De Telegraaf, the largest Dutch daily newspaper; the daily newspapers Trouw, De Volkskrant and NRC Handelsblad; De Groene Amsterdammer, a weekly newspaper; the free newspapers Sp!ts, Metro, and The Holland Times (printed in English).

Amsterdam is home to the Netherlands' second-largest commercial TV group SBS Broadcasting Group, consisting of TV-stations SBS 6, Net 5 and Veronica. However, Amsterdam is not being considered 'the media city of the Netherlands'. The town of Hilversum, 30 km (19 mi) south-east of Amsterdam, has been crowned with this unofficial title. Hilversum is the principal center for radio and television broadcasting in the Netherlands. Radio Netherlands, heard worldwide via shortwave radio since the 1920s, is also based there. Hilversum is home to an extensive complex of audio and television studios belonging to the national broadcast production company NOS, as well as to the studios and offices of all the Dutch public broadcasting organizations and many commercial TV production companies.

Amsterdam is also featured in John Green's book 'The Fault in Our Stars,' which has also been made in a film, and part of the film takes place in Amsterdam.

==Housing==
The housing market is heavily regulated. In Amsterdam, 55% of existing housing and 30% of new housing is owned by Housing Associations, which are Government sponsored entities.

Squat properties are common throughout Amsterdam, due to property law strongly favouring tenants. A number of these squats have become well known, such as OT301, Paradiso, Vrankrijk (closed down by city government), and the Binnenpret, and several are now businesses, such as health clubs and licensed restaurants.

==International relations==

Amsterdam is twinned with the following cities: 

 * Algiers, Algeria * Athens, Greece * Bogot, Colombia * Beijing, China * Braslia, Brazil * Istanbul, Turkey * Kiev, Ukraine * Manchester, United Kingdom (2006) * Managua, Nicaragua (1984) * Montreal, Canada * Moscow, Russia * Nicosia, Cyprus * Recife, Brazil (2009) * Riga, Latvia * Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina * Willemstad, Curaao, Kingdom of the Netherlands (2009) * Jakarta, Indonesia * Prague, Czech Republic * Tbilisi, Georgia (2012) 

==See also==

* Amsterdammertje
* Amstel
* Dam Square
* Government of Amsterdam
* History of Amsterdam

==References==

;Attribution
* 

==External links==

* Tourist information about Amsterdam  Website of the Netherlands Board of Tourism and Conventions
* Amsterdam.nl  Official government site
* I amsterdam  Portal for international visitors
* Amsterdam City Archives
* ; voted "Amsterdams lijflied" in 2011
* Free Amsterdam audio guide

 



[[Museum of Work]]

The Iron is a famous 19th century landmark in central Norrkping
The Museum of Work, or Arbetets museum, is a museum located in Norrkping, Sweden. The museum can be found in the 19th century building The Iron in the Motala strm river in central Norrkping.

==See also==
* List of museums in Sweden
* Culture of Sweden

==External links==
*Museum of Work - Official site



[[Audi]]

Audi head office in Ingolstadt
 () is a German automobile manufacturer that designs, engineers, manufactures, market and distributes automobiles. Audi oversees worldwide operations from its headquarters in Ingolstadt, Bavaria, Germany. Audi-branded vehicles are produced in nine production facilities worldwide.

Audi has been a majority owned (99.55%) subsidiary of Volkswagen Group since 1966, following a phased purchase of AUDI AG's predecessor, Auto Union, from Daimler-Benz. Volkswagen relaunched the Audi brand with the 1965 introduction of the Audi F103 series.

The company name is based on the surname of the founder, August Horch. "Horch", meaning "listen" in German, becomes "Audi" when translated into Latin. The four rings of the Audi logo each represent one of four car companies that banded together to create Audi's predecessor company, Auto Union. Audi's slogan is Vorsprung durch Technik, meaning "Advancement through Technology". Recently in the United States, Audi has updated the slogan to "Truth in Engineering". Audi is a member of the "German Big 3" luxury automakers, along with BMW and Mercedes-Benz, which are the three best-selling luxury automakers in the world. 

==History==

===Birth of the company and its name===
Originally in 1885, automobile company Wanderer was established, later becoming a branch of Audi AG. Another company, NSU, which also later merged into Audi, was founded during this time, and later supplied the chassis for Gottlieb Daimler's four-wheeler. 

On 14 November 1899, August Horch (18681951) established the company A. Horch & Cie. in the Ehrenfeld district of Cologne. Three years later in 1902 he moved with his company to Reichenbach im Vogtland. On May, 10th, 1904 he founded the August Horch & Cie. Motorwagenwerke AG, a joint-stock company in Zwickau (State of Saxony).

After troubles with Horch chief financial officer, August Horch left Motorwagenwerke and founded in Zwickau on 16 July 1909, his second company, the August Horch Automobilwerke GmbH. His former partners sued him for trademark infringement. The German Reichsgericht (Supreme Court) in Leipzig, Audi AG motion picture 1994: "The Silver Arrows from Zwickau", running time approx. 49 mins. eventually determined that the Horch brand belonged to his former company. Audi History audiusa.com 
Audi Type E
Since August Horch was banned from using "Horch" as a trade name in his new car business, he called a meeting with close business friends, Paul and Franz Fikentscher from Zwickau, Germany. At the apartment of Franz Fikentscher, they discussed how to come up with a new name for the company. During this meeting, Franz's son was quietly studying Latin in a corner of the room. Several times he looked like he was on the verge of saying something but would just swallow his words and continue working, until he finally blurted out, "Father  audiatur et altera pars... wouldn't it be a good idea to call it audi instead of horch?" August Horch: "Ich baute Autos  Vom Schmiedelehrling zum Autoindustriellen", Schtzen-Verlag Berlin 1937 "Horch!" in German means "Hark!" or "hear", which is "Audi" in the singular imperative form of "audire"  "to listen"  in Latin. The idea was enthusiastically accepted by everyone attending the meeting. On 25 April 1910 the Audi Automobilwerke GmbH Zwickau (from 1915 on Audiwerke AG Zwickau) was entered in the company's register of Zwickau registration court.

The first Audi automobile, the Audi Type A 10/22 hp Sport-Phaeton, was produced in the same year, followed by the successor Type B 10/28PS in the same year. 

Audi started with a 2,612 cc inline-four engine model Type A, followed by a 3,564 cc model, as well as 4,680 cc and 5,720 cc models. These cars were successful even in sporting events. The first six-cylinder model Type M, 4,655 cc appeared in 1924. 

August Horch left the Audiwerke in 1920 for a high position at the ministry of transport, but he was still involved with Audi as a member of the board of trustees. In September 1921, Audi became the first German car manufacturer to present a production car, the Audi Type K, with left-handed drive. Audi chronicle 19151929. audi.com Left-hand drive spread and established dominance during the 1920s because it provided a better view of oncoming traffic, making overtaking safer. 

===The merger of the four companies under the logo of four rings===

In August 1928, Jrgen Rasmussen,the owner of Dampf-Kraft-Wagen (DKW), acquired the majority of shares in Audiwerke AG. Audi chronicle 19301944. Audi.com In the same year, Rasmussen bought the remains of the U.S. automobile manufacturer Rickenbacker, including the manufacturing equipment for eight-cylinder engines. These engines were used in Audi Zwickau and Audi Dresden models that were launched in 1929. At the same time, six-cylinder and four-cylinder (the "four" with a Peugeot engine) models were manufactured. Audi cars of that era were luxurious cars equipped with special bodywork.

In 1932, Audi merged with Horch, DKW, and Wanderer, to form Auto Union AG, Chemnitz. It was during this period that the company offered the Audi Front that became the first European car to combine a six-cylinder engine with front-wheel drive. It used a powertrain shared with the Wanderer, but turned 180-degrees, so that the drive shaft faced the front.

Before World War II, Auto Union used the four interlinked rings that make up the Audi badge today, representing these four brands. This badge was used, however, only on Auto Union racing cars in that period while the member companies used their own names and emblems. The technological development became more and more concentrated and some Audi models were propelled by Horch or Wanderer built engines.

Reflecting the economic pressures of the time, Auto Union concentrated increasingly on smaller cars through the 1930s, so that by 1938 the company's DKW brand accounted for 17.9% of the German car market, while Audi held only 0.1%. After the final few Audis were delivered in 1939 the "Audi" name disappeared completely from the new car market for more than two decades.

===Post-World War II===
IFA F9
Like most German manufacturing, at the onset of World War II the Auto Union plants were retooled for military production, and were a target for allied bombing during the war which left them damaged.

Overrun by the Soviet Army in 1945, on the orders of the Soviet Union military administration the factories were dismantled as part of war reparations. Following this, the company's entire assets were expropriated without compensation. On 17 August 1948, Auto Union AG of Chemnitz was deleted from the commercial register. These actions had the effect of liquidating Germany's Auto Union AG. The remains of the Audi plant of Zwickau became the VEB (for "People Owned Enterprise") Automobilwerk Zwickau or AWZ (in English: Automobile Works Zwickau).

The former Audi factory in Zwickau restarted assembly of the pre-war-models in 1949. These DKW models were renamed to IFA F8 and IFA F9 and were similar to the West German versions. West and East German models were equipped with the traditional and renowned DKW two-stroke engines. The Zwickau plant manufactured the infamous Trabant until 1991, when it came under Volkswagen controleffectively bringing it under the same umbrella as Audi since 1945.

===New Auto Union unit===
A new West German headquartered Auto Union was launched in Ingolstadt, Bavaria with loans from the Bavarian state government and Marshall Plan aid. The reformed company was launched 3 September 1949 and continued DKW's tradition of producing front-wheel drive vehicles with two-stroke engines. This included production of a small but sturdy 125 cc motorcycle and a DKW delivery van, the DKW F 89 L at Ingolstadt. The Ingolstadt site was large, consisting of an extensive complex of formerly military buildings which was suitable for administration as well as vehicle warehousing and distribution, but at this stage there was at Ingolstadt no dedicated plant suitable for mass production of automobiles: for manufacturing the company's first post-war mass-market passenger car plant capacity in Dsseldorf was rented from Rheinmetall-Borsig. It was only ten years later, after the company had attracted an investor that funds became available for construction of major car plant at the Ingolstadt head office site.

In 1958, in response to pressure from Friedrich Flick, then their largest single shareholder, Oswald, p 263 Daimler-Benz took an 87% holding in the Auto Union company, and this was increased to a 100% holding in 1959. However, small two-stroke cars were not the focus of Daimler-Benz's interests, and while the early 1960s saw major investment in new Mercedes models and in a state of the art factory for Auto Union's, the company's aging model range at this time did not benefit from the economic boom of the early 1960s to the same extent as competitor manufacturers such as Volkswagen and Opel. The decision to dispose of the Auto Union business was based on its lack of profitability. Ironically, by the time they sold the business, it also included a large new factory and near production-ready modern four-stroke engine, which would enable the Auto Union business, under a new owner, to embark on a period of profitable growth, now producing not Auto Unions or DKWs, but using the "Audi" name, resurrected in 1965 after a 25 year gap. Under the terms of the sale, Daimler-Benz retained the old Dsseldorf plant, which survives to the present day as a centre for Mercedes-Benz commercial vehicle assembly.

In 1964, Volkswagen acquired a 50% holding in the business, which included the new factory in Ingolstadt and the trademark rights of the Auto Union. Eighteen months later, Volkswagen bought complete control of Ingolstadt, and by 1966 were using the spare capacity of the Ingolstadt plant to assemble an additional 60,000 Volkswagen Beetles per year. Two-stroke engines became less popular during the 1960s as customers were more attracted to the smoother four-stroke engines. In September 1965, the DKW F102 was fitted with a four-stroke engine and a facelift for the car's front and rear. Volkswagen dumped the DKW brand because of its associations with two-stroke technology, and having classified the model internally as the F103, sold it simply as the "Audi." Later developments of the model were named after their horsepower ratings and sold as the Audi 60, 75, 80, and Super 90, selling until 1972. Initially, Volkswagen was hostile to the idea of Auto Union as a standalone entity producing its own models having acquired the company merely to boost its own production capacity through the Ingolstadt assembly plant. Then VW chief Heinz Nordhoff explicitly forbade Auto Union from any further product development. Fearing that the company's heritage would disappear underneath VW badge engineering, Auto Union engineers under the leadership of Ludwig Kraus developed the first Audi 100 in secret, without Nordhoff's knowledge. When presented with a finished prototype, Nordhoff was so impressed he authorised the car for production, which when launched in 1968, went on to be a huge success. With this, the resurrection of the Audi brand was now complete, this being followed by the first generation Audi 80 in 1972, which would in turn provide a template for VW's new front wheel drive watercooled range which debuted from the mid-1970s onward.

Audi 80 assembly line in Wolfsburg, 1973
In 1969, Auto Union merged with NSU, based in Neckarsulm, near Stuttgart. In the 1950s, NSU had been the world's largest manufacturer of motorcycles, but had moved on to produce small cars like the NSU Prinz, the TT and TTS versions of which are still popular as vintage race cars. NSU then focused on new rotary engines based on the ideas of Felix Wankel. In 1967, the new NSU Ro 80 was a car well ahead of its time in technical details such as aerodynamics, light weight, and safety. However, teething problems with the rotary engines put an end to the independence of NSU. The Neckarsulm plant is now used to produce the larger Audi models A6 and A8. The Neckarsulm factory is also home of the quattro GmbH, a subsidiary responsible for development and production of Audi high-performance models: the R8 and the "RS" model range.

The mid-sized car that NSU had been working on, the K70, was intended to slot between the rear-engined Prinz models and the futuristic NSU Ro 80. However, Volkswagen took the K70 for its own range, spelling the end of NSU as a separate brand.

===Modern era===
The new merged company was known as Audi NSU Auto Union AG, and saw the emergence of Audi as a separate brand for the first time since the pre-war era. Volkswagen introduced the Audi brand to the United States for the 1970 model year.

The first new car of this regime was the Audi 100 of 1968. This was soon joined by the Audi 80/Fox (which formed the basis for the 1973 Volkswagen Passat) in 1972 and the Audi 50 (later rebadged as the Volkswagen Polo) in 1974. The Audi 50 was a seminal design because it was the first incarnation of the Golf/Polo concept, one that led to a hugely successful world car.

The Audi image at this time was a conservative one, and so, a proposal from chassis engineer Jrg Bensinger was accepted to develop the four-wheel drive technology in Volkswagen's Iltis military vehicle for an Audi performance car and rally racing car. The performance car, introduced in 1980, was named the "Audi Quattro", a turbocharged coup which was also the first German large-scale production vehicle to feature permanent all-wheel drive through a centre differential. Commonly referred to as the "Ur-Quattro" (the "Ur-" prefix is a German augmentative used, in this case, to mean "original" and is also applied to the first generation of Audi's S4 and S6 Sport Saloons, as in "UrS4" and "UrS6"), few of these vehicles were produced (all hand-built by a single team), but the model was a great success in rallying. Prominent wins proved the viability of all-wheel drive racecars, and the Audi name became associated with advances in automotive technology.

In 1985, with the Auto Union and NSU brands effectively dead, the company's official name was now shortened to simply Audi AG.

Audi Quattro
In 1986, as the Passat-based Audi 80 was beginning to develop a kind of "grandfather's car" image, the type 89 was introduced. This completely new development sold extremely well. However, its modern and dynamic exterior belied the low performance of its base engine, and its base package was quite spartan (even the passenger-side mirror was an option.) In 1987, Audi put forward a new and very elegant Audi 90, which had a much superior set of standard features. In the early 1990s, sales began to slump for the Audi 80 series, and some basic construction problems started to surface.

In the early part of the 21st century, Audi set forth on a German racetrack to claim and maintain several world records, such as top speed endurance. This effort was in-line with the company's heritage from the 1930s racing era Silver Arrows.

Through the early 1990s, Audi began to shift its target market upscale to compete against German automakers Mercedes-Benz and BMW. This began with the release of the Audi V8 in 1990. It was essentially a new engine fitted to the Audi 100/200, but with noticeable bodywork differences. Most obvious was the new grille that was now incorporated in the bonnet.

By 1991, Audi had the four-cylinder Audi 80, the 5-cylinder Audi 90 and Audi 100, the turbocharged Audi 200 and the Audi V8. There was also a coupe version of the 80/90 with both 4- and 5-cylinder engines.

Although the five-cylinder engine was a successful and robust powerplant, it was still a little too different for the target market. With the introduction of an all-new Audi 100 in 1992, Audi introduced a 2.8L V6 engine. This engine was also fitted to a face-lifted Audi 80 (all 80 and 90 models were now badged 80 except for the USA), giving this model a choice of four-, five-, and six-cylinder engines, in Saloon, Coup and Cabriolet body styles.

The five-cylinder was soon dropped as a major engine choice; however, a turbocharged 230 hp version remained. The engine, initially fitted to the 200 quattro 20V of 1991, was a derivative of the engine fitted to the Sport Quattro. It was fitted to the Audi Coup, and named the S2 and also to the Audi 100 body, and named the S4. These two models were the beginning of the mass-produced S series of performance cars.

===Audi 5000 unintended acceleration allegations===
Sales in the United States fell after a series of recalls from 1982 to 1987 of Audi 5000 models associated with reported incidents of sudden unintended acceleration linked to six deaths and 700 accidents. At the time, NHTSA was investigating 50 car models from 20 manufacturers for sudden surges of power. 

A 60 Minutes report aired 23 November 1986, featuring interviews with six people who had sued Audi after reporting unintended acceleration, showing an Audi 5000 ostensibly suffering a problem when the brake pedal was pushed. Subsequent investigation revealed that 60 Minutes had engineered the failure  fitting a canister of compressed air on the passenger-side floor, linked via a hose to a hole drilled into the transmission. 

Audi 100 C3, sold as the Audi 5000 in the U.S.

Audi contended, prior to findings by outside investigators, that the problems were caused by driver error, specifically pedal misapplication. Subsequently, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) concluded that the majority of unintended acceleration cases, including all the ones that prompted the 60 Minutes report, were caused by driver error such as confusion of pedals. CBS did not acknowledge the test results of involved government agencies, but did acknowledge the similar results of another study. 

In a review study published in 2012, NHTSA summarized its past findings about the Audi unintended acceleration problems: "Once an unintended acceleration had begun, in the Audi 5000, due to a failure in the idle-stabilizer system (producing an initial acceleration of 0.3g), pedal misapplication resulting from panic, confusion, or unfamiliarity with the Audi 5000 contributed to the severity of the incident." 

This summary is consistent with the conclusions of NHTSA's most technical analysis at the time: "Audi idle-stabilization systems were prone to defects which resulted in excessive idle speeds and brief unanticipated accelerations of up to 0.3g is similar in magnitude to an emergency stop in a subway car. These accelerations could not be the sole cause of sudden acceleration incidents (SAI), but might have triggered some SAIs by startling the driver. The defective idle-stabilization system performed a type of electronic throttle control. Significantly: multiple "intermittent malfunctions of the electronic control unit were observed and recorded ... and also observed and reported by Transport Canada." 

With a series of recall campaigns, Audi made several modifications; the first adjusted the distance between the brake and accelerator pedal on automatic-transmission models. Later repairs, of 250,000 cars dating back to 1978, added a device requiring the driver to press the brake pedal before shifting out of park. A legacy of the Audi 5000 and other reported cases of sudden unintended acceleration are intricate gear stick patterns and brake interlock mechanisms to prevent inadvertent shifting into forward or reverse. It is unclear how the defects in the idle-stabilization system were addressed.

Audi's U.S. sales, which had reached 74,061 in 1985, dropped to 12,283 in 1991 and remained level for three years.  with resale values falling dramatically. Audi subsequently offered increased warranty protection and renamed the affected models  with the 5000 becoming the 100 and 200 in 1989  and only reached the same sales levels again by model year 2000. 

A 2010 BusinessWeek article  outlining possible parallels between Audi's experience and 20092010 Toyota vehicle recalls  noted a class-action lawsuit filed in 1987 by about 7,500 Audi 5000-model owners remains unsettled and is currently being contested in county court in Chicago after appeals at the Illinois state and U.S. federal levels. 

===Model introductions===
Audi TT
In the mid-to-late 1990s, Audi introduced new technologies including the use of aluminum construction. Produced from 1999 to 2005, the Audi A2 was a futuristic super mini, born from the Al2 concept, with many features that helped regain consumer confidence, like the aluminium space frame, which was a first in production car design. In the A2 Audi further expanded their TDI technology through the use of frugal three-cylinder engines. The A2 was extremely aerodynamic and was designed around a wind tunnel. The Audi A2 was criticised for its high price and was never really a sales success but it planted Audi as a cutting-edge manufacturer. The model, a Mercedes-Benz A-Class competitor, sold relatively well in Europe. However, the A2 was discontinued in 2005 and Audi decided not to develop an immediate replacement.

The next major model change came in 1995 when the Audi A4 replaced the Audi 80. The new nomenclature scheme was applied to the Audi 100 to become the Audi A6 (with a minor facelift). This also meant the S4 became the S6 and a new S4 was introduced in the A4 body. The S2 was discontinued. The Audi Cabriolet continued on (based on the Audi 80 platform) until 1999, gaining the engine upgrades along the way. A new A3 hatchback model (sharing the Volkswagen Golf Mk4's platform) was introduced to the range in 1996, and the radical Audi TT coup and roadster were debuted in 1998 based on the same underpinnings.

The engines available throughout the range were now a 1.4 L, 1.6 L and 1.8 L four-cylinder, 1.8 L four-cylinder turbo, 2.6 L and 2.8 L V6, 2.2 L turbo-charged five-cylinder and the 4.2 L V8 engine. The V6s were replaced by new 2.4 L and 2.8 L 30V V6s in 1998, with marked improvement in power, torque and smoothness. Further engines were added along the way, including a 3.7 L V8 and 6.0 L W12 engine for the A8.

===Audi AG today===
Audi Q7
Audi's sales grew strongly in the 2000s, with deliveries to customers increasing from 653,000 in 2000 to 1,003,000 in 2008. The largest sales increases came from Eastern Europe (+19.3%), Africa (+17.2%) and the Middle East (+58.5%). China in particular has become a key market, representing 108,000 out of 705,000 cars delivered in the first three quarters of 2009. One factor for its popularity in China is that Audis have become the car of choice for purchase by the Chinese government for officials, and purchases by the government are responsible for 20% of its sales in China. As of late 2009, Audi's operating profit of 1.17-billion ($1.85-billion) made it the biggest contributor to parent Volkswagen Group's nine-month operating profit of 1.5-billion, while the other marques in Group such as Bentley and SEAT had suffered considerable losses. May 2011 saw record sales for Audi of America with the new Audi A7 and Audi A3 TDI Clean Diesel. In May 2012, Audi reported a 10% increase in its salesfrom 408 units to 480 in the last year alone. 

Audi manufactures vehicles in seven plants around the world, some of which are shared with other VW Group marques although many sub-assemblies such as engines and transmissions are manufactured within other Volkswagen Group plants.

Audi's two principal assembly plants are:

* Ingolstadt, Opened by Auto Union in 1964, (A3, A4, A5, Q5)
* Neckarsulm, Acquired from NSU in 1969 (A4, A6, A7, A8, R8 & all RS variants)

Outside of Germany, Audi produces vehicles at:

* Aurangabad, India since 2006
* Bratislava, Slovakia, shared with Volkswagen, SEAT, koda and Porsche (Q7)
* Brussels, Belgium, acquired from Volkswagen in 2007 (A1)
* Changchun, China since 1995
* Gyr, Hungary, (TT and some A3 variants)
* Jakarta, Indonesia since 2011
* Martorell, Spain shared with SEAT and Volkswagen (Q3)

In September 2012, Audi announced the construction of its first North American manufacturing plant in Puebla, Mexico. This plant is expected to be operative in 2016 and produce the second generation Q5. 

From 2002 up to 2003, Audi headed the Audi Brand Group, a subdivision of the Volkswagen Group's Automotive Division consisting of Audi, Lamborghini and SEAT, that was focused on sporty values, with the marques' product vehicles and performance being under the higher responsibility of the Audi brand.

In 2014 Audi UK falsely claimed that the Audi A7, A8, and R8 were Euro NCAP safety tested, all achieving five out of five stars. In fact none were tested. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-27392157 

==Technology==

===Bodyshells===
Audi produces 100% galvanised cars to prevent corrosion, Corrosion protection. audiusa.com and was the first mass-market vehicle to do so, following introduction of the process by Porsche, c.1975. Along with other precautionary measures, the full-body zinc coating has proved to be very effective in preventing rust. The body's resulting durability even surpassed Audi's own expectations, causing the manufacturer to extend its original 10-year warranty against corrosion perforation to currently 12 years (except for aluminium bodies which do not rust). 

===Space frame===
The Audi R8 uses Audi Space Frame technology
Audi introduced a new series of vehicles in the mid-1990s and continues to pursue new technology and high performance. An all-aluminium car was brought forward by Audi, and in 1994 the Audi A8 was launched, which introduced aluminium space frame technology (called Audi Space Frame or ASF) which saves weight and improves torsion rigidity compared to a conventional steel frame. Prior to that effort, Audi used examples of the Type 44 chassis fabricated out of aluminium as test-beds for the technique. The disadvantage of the aluminium frame is that it is very expensive to repair and requires a specialized aluminium bodyshop. The weight reduction is somewhat offset by the quattro four-wheel drive system which is standard in most markets. Nonetheless, the A8 is usually the lightest all-wheel drive car in the full-size luxury segment, also having best-in-class fuel economy. The Audi A2, Audi TT and Audi R8 also use Audi Space Frame designs.

===Drivetrains===

====Layout====
Audi A4
For most of its lineup (excluding the A3, A1, and TT models), Audi has not adopted the transverse engine layout which is typically found in economy cars (such as Peugeot and Citron), since that would limit the type and power of engines that can be installed. In order to be able to mount powerful engines (such as a V8 engine in the Audi S4 and Audi RS4, as well as the W12 engine in the Audi A8L W12), Audi has usually engineered its more expensive cars with a longitudinally front-mounted engine, in an "overhung" position, over the front wheels in front of the axle line. While this allows for the easy adoption of all-wheel drive, it goes against the ideal 50:50 weight distribution.

In all its post Volkswagen-era models, Audi has firmly refused to adopt the traditional rear-wheel drive layout favored by its two arch rivals Mercedes-Benz and BMW, favoring either front-wheel drive or all-wheel drive. The majority of Audi's lineup in the United States features all-wheel drive standard on most of its expensive vehicles (only the entry-level trims of the A4 and A6 are available with front-wheel drive), in contrast to Mercedes-Benz and BMW whose lineup treats all-wheel drive as an option. BMW did not offer all-wheel drive on its V8-powered cars (as opposed to crossover SUVs) until the 2010 BMW 7 Series and 2011 BMW 5 Series, while the Audi A8 has had all-wheel drive available/standard since the 1990s. Regarding high-performance variants, Audi S and RS models have always had all-wheel drive, unlike their direct rivals from BMW M and Mercedes-AMG whose cars are rear-wheel drive only (although their performance crossover SUVs are all-wheel drive).

Audi has recently applied the quattro badge to models such as the A3 and TT which do not use the Torsen-based system as in prior years with a mechanical center differential, but with the Haldex Traction electro-mechanical clutch AWD system.

====Engines====
Volkswagen Group W12 engine from the Volkswagen Phaeton W12

In the 1980s, Audi, along with Volvo, was the champion of the inline-five cylinder, 2.1/2.2 L engine as a longer-lasting alternative to more traditional six-cylinder engines. This engine was used not only in production cars but also in their race cars. The 2.1 L inline five-cylinder engine was used as a base for the rally cars in the 1980s, providing well over 400 hp after modification. Before 1990, there were engines produced with a displacement between 2.0 L and 2.3 L. This range of engine capacity allowed for both fuel economy and power.

For the ultra-luxury version of its Audi A8 fullsize luxury flagship sedan, the Audi A8L W12, Audi uses the Volkswagen Group W12 engine instead of the conventional V12 engine favored by rivals Mercedes-Benz and BMW. The W12 engine configuration (also known as a "WR12") is created by forming two imaginary narrow-angle 15 VR6 engines at an angle of 72, and the narrow angle of each set of cylinders allows just two overhead camshafts to drive each pair of banks, so just four are needed in total. The advantage of the W12 engine is its compact packaging, allowing Audi to build a 12-cylinder sedan with all-wheel drive, whereas a conventional V12 engine could only have a rear-wheel drive configuration as it would have no space in the engine bay for a differential and other components required to power the front wheels. In fact, the 6.0 L W12 in the Audi A8L W12 is smaller in overall dimensions than the 4.2 L V8 that powers the Audi A8 4.2 variants. The 2011 Audi A8 debuted a revised 6.3-litre version of the W12 (WR12) engine with 500 PS.

====Fuel Stratified Injection====
New models of the A3, A4, A6 and A8 have been introduced, with the ageing 1.8-litre engine now having been replaced by new Fuel Stratified Injection (FSI) engines. Nearly every petroleum burning model in the range now incorporates this fuel-saving technology.

V8 FSI engine

====Direct-Shift Gearbox====
At the turn of the century, Volkswagen introduced the Direct-Shift Gearbox (DSG), a type of dual clutch transmission. It is an automated semi-automatic transmission, drivable like a conventional automatic transmission. Based on the gearbox found in the Group B S1, the system includes dual electrohydraulically controlled clutches instead of a torque converter. This is implemented in some VW Golfs, Audi A3, Audi A4 and TT models where DSG is called S-tronic.

===LED daytime running lights===
Beginning in 2006, Audi has implemented white LED technology as daytime running lights (DRL) in their products. The distinctive shape of the DRLs has become a trademark of sorts. LEDs were first introduced on the Audi A8 W12, the world's first production car to have LED DRLs, and have since spread throughout the entire model range. The LEDs are present on some Audi billboards.

Since 2010, Audi has also offered the LED technology in low- and high-beam headlights. 

The DRL in an Audi A4 B8

===Multi Media Interface===
Audi has recently started offering a computerised control system for its cars, called Multi Media Interface (MMI). This came amid criticism of BMW's iDrive control. It is essentially a rotating control knob and 'segment' buttons  designed to control all in-car entertainment devices (radio, CD changer, iPod, TV tuner), satellite navigation, heating and ventilation, and other car controls with a screen. MMI was widely reported to be a considerable improvement on BMW's iDrive, although BMW has since made their iDrive more user-friendly.

MMI has been generally well-received, as it requires less menu-surfing with its segment buttons around a central knob, along with 'main function' direct access buttons  with shortcuts to the radio or phone functions. The screen, either colour or monochrome, is mounted on the upright dashboard, and on the A4 (new), A5, A6, A8, and Q7, the controls are mounted horizontally.

An "MMI-like" system is also available on the A3, TT, A4 (B7), and R8 models  when equipped with the Audi Navigation System Plus (RNS-E) satellite navigation system.

==Models==

===Current model range===
The following tables list Audi production vehicles that are sold as of 2012:

 Audi cars 
 A1 75px Supermini * 3-door Hatchback * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 A3 75px Small Family Car * 3-door Hatchback * Saloon (Sedan) * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) * Cabriolet 
 A4 75px Compact Executive Car * Saloon (Sedan) * Avant (Estate/Wagon) * Allroad (Crossover Estate/Wagon) 
 A5 75px Compact Executive Car * Coup * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) * Cabriolet (Convertible) 
 A6 75px Executive Car * Saloon (Sedan) * Avant (Estate/Wagon) * Allroad (Crossover Estate/Wagon) 
 A7 75px Executive Car * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 A8 75px Full-size Luxury Car * Saloon (Sedan) 

 Audi coups and SUVs 
 TT 75px Compact Sports Car * Coup * Roadster (Convertible) 
 R8 75px Sports Car * Coup * Spyder (Convertible) 
 Q3 75px Compact Crossover SUV * SUV 
 Q5 75px Compact Crossover SUV * SUV 
 Q7 75px Full-size Crossover SUV * SUV 

===S and RS models===

 S (Sport) models 
 S3 75px Small Family Car * 3-door Hatchback * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 S4 75px Compact Executive Car * Saloon (Sedan) * Avant (Estate/Wagon) 
 S5 75px Compact Executive Car * Coup * Cabriolet (Convertible) * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 S6 75px Executive Car * Saloon (Sedan) * Avant (Estate/Wagon) 
 S7 75px Executive Car * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 S8 75px Full-size Luxury Car * Saloon (Sedan) 
 TTS 75px Compact Sports Car * Coup * Roadster (Convertible) 

 RS (RennSport/Racing) models 
 RS4 75px Compact Executive Car * Avant (Estate/Wagon) 
 RS5 75px Compact Executive Car * Coup * Cabriolet (Convertible) 
 RS7 75px Executive Car * Sportback (5-door Hatchback) 
 TT RS 75px Compact Sports Car * Coup * Roadster (Convertible) 

RS Q3 Concept

===Electric vehicles===

Audi is planning an alliance with the Japanese electronics giant Sanyo to develop a pilot hybrid electric project for the Volkswagen Group. The alliance could result in Sanyo batteries and other electronic components being used in future models of the Volkswagen Group. Audi Plans To Run On Sanyo Hybrid Batteries. lexisnexis.com (1 June 2008). Concept electric vehicles unveiled to date include the Audi A1 Sportback Concept, Audi A4 TDI Concept E, and the fully electric Audi e-tron Concept Supercar. 

==Production figures==

 A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 Q3 Q5 Q7 TT R8 
 1998 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 1999 (Including 1998) p. 50 volkswagenag.com   143,974 271,152  174,867  15,355    13,682  
 1999   143,505 252,514  162,573  14,636    52,579  
 2000 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2000. p. 53 volkswagenag.com  32,164 136,141 231,869  180,715  12,894    56,776  
 2001 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2001. p. 41 volkswagenag.com  49,369 131,082 308,778  186,467  11,708    39,349  
 2002 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2002. p. 77 volkswagenag.com  37,578 125,538 360,267  178,773  10,942    34,711  
 2003 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2003. p. 97 volkswagenag.com  27,323 159,417 353,836  168,612  21,748    32,337  
 2004 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2004. p. 91 volkswagenag.com  19,745 181,274 345,231  195,529  22,429    23,605  
 2005 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2005. p. 41 volkswagenag.com  10,026 224,961 337,705  215,437  21,515   1,185 12,307  
 2006 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2006. p. 45 volkswagenag.com   231,752 341,110 487 229,021  22,468   72,169 23,675 164 
 2007 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2007. p. 83 volkswagenag.com   231,117 289,806 25,549 243,842  22,182  162 77,395 56,766 4,125 
 2008 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2008. p. 83 volkswagenag.com   222,164 378,885 57,650 214,074  20,140  20,324 59,008 41,789 5,656 
 2009 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2009. p. 93 volkswagenag.com   206,747 282,033 84,883 182,090  8,599  105,074 27,929 22,821 2,101 
 2010 Volkswagen AG Annual Report 2010. p. 111 volkswagenag.com 51,937  198,974 306,291 111,270 211,256 8,496 22,435  154,604 48,937 26,217 3,485 
 2011 117,566  189,068 321,045 111,758 241,862 37,301 38,542 19,613 183,678 53,703 25,508 3,551 
 2012 123,111  164,666 329,759 103,357 284,888 28,950 35,932 106,918 209,799 54,558 21,880 2,241 

* Data from 1998 to 2010. Figures for different body types/versions of models have been merged to create overall figures for each model.

==Motorsport==
Audi has competed in various forms of motorsports. Audi's tradition in motorsport began with their former company Auto Union in the 1930s. In the 1990s, Audi found success in the Touring and Super Touring categories of motor racing after success in circuit racing in North America.

===Rallying===

Walter Rhrl with his Quattro A2 during the 1984 Rally Portugal
In 1980, Audi released the Quattro, a four-wheel drive (4WD) turbocharged car that went on to win rallies and races worldwide. It is considered one of the most significant rally cars of all time, because it was one of the first to take advantage of the then-recently changed rules which allowed the use of four-wheel drive in competition racing. Many critics doubted the viability of four-wheel drive racers, thinking them to be too heavy and complex, yet the Quattro was to become a successful car. Leading its first rally it went off the road, however the rally world had been served notice 4WD was the future. The Quattro went on to achieve much success in the World Rally Championship. It won the 1983 (Hannu Mikkola) and the 1984 (Stig Blomqvist) drivers' titles, and brought Audi the manufacturers' title in 1982 and 1984. 
Audi Quattro S1 driven at the 2007 Rallye Deutschland

In 1984, Audi launched the short-wheelbase Sport Quattro which dominated rally races in Monte Carlo and Sweden, with Audi taking all podium places, but succumbed to problems further into WRC contention. In 1985, after another season mired in mediocre finishes, Walter Rhrl finished the season in his Sport Quattro S1, and helped place Audi second in the manufacturers' points. Audi also received rally honours in the Hong Kong to Beijing rally in that same year. Michle Mouton, the only female driver to win a round of the World Rally Championship and a driver for Audi, took the Sport Quattro S1, now simply called the "S1", and raced in the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb. The 1439 m climb race pits a driver and car to drive to the summit of the 4302 m Pikes Peak mountain in Colorado, and in 1985, Michle Mouton set a new record of 11:25.39, and being the first woman to set a Pikes Peak record. In 1986, Audi formally left international rally racing following an accident in Portugal involving driver Joaquim Santos in his Ford RS200. Santos swerved to avoid hitting spectators in the road, and left the track into the crowd of spectators on the side, killing three and injuring 30. Bobby Unser used an Audi in that same year to claim a new record for the Pikes Peak Hill Climb at 11:09.22.

In 1987, Walter Rhrl claimed the title for Audi setting a new Pikes Peak International Hill Climb record of 10:47.85 in his Audi S1, which he had retired from the WRC two years earlier. The Audi S1 employed Audi's time-tested inline-five-cylinder turbocharged engine, with the final version generating 441 kW. The engine was mated to a six-speed gearbox and ran on Audi's famous four-wheel drive system. All of Audi's top drivers drove this car; Hannu Mikkola, Stig Blomqvist, Walter Rhrl and Michle Mouton. This Audi S1 started the range of Audi 'S' cars, which now represents an increased level of sports-performance equipment within the mainstream Audi model range.

===In the USA===
As Audi moved away from rallying and into circuit racing, they chose to move first into America with the Trans-Am in 1988.

In 1989, Audi moved to International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) GTO with the Audi 90, however as they avoided the two major endurance events (Daytona and Sebring) despite winning on a regular basis, they would lose out on the title.

===Touring cars===
In 1990, having completed their objective to market cars in North America, Audi returned to Europe, turning first to the Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft (DTM) series with the Audi V8, and then in 1993, being unwilling to build cars for the new formula, they turned their attention to the fast growing Super Touring series, which are a series of national championships. Audi first entered in the French Supertourisme and Italian Superturismo. In the following year, Audi would switch to the German Super Tourenwagen Cup (known as STW), and then to British Touring Car Championship (BTCC) the year after that.

The Fdration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), having difficulty regulating the quattro four-wheel drive system, and the impact it had on the competitors, would eventually ban all four-wheel drive cars from competing in 1998, but by then, Audi switched all their works efforts to sports car racing.

By 2000, Audi would still compete in the US with their RS4 for the SCCA Speed World GT Challenge, through dealer/team Champion Racing competing against Corvettes, Vipers, and smaller BMWs (where it is one of the few series to permit 4WD cars). In 2003, Champion Racing entered an RS6. Once again, the quattro four-wheel drive was superior, and Champion Audi won the championship. They returned in 2004 to defend their title, but a newcomer, Cadillac with the new Omega Chassis CTS-V, gave them a run for their money. After four victories in a row, the Audis were sanctioned with several negative changes that deeply affected the car's performance. Namely, added ballast weights, and Champion Audi deciding to go with different tyres, and reducing the boost pressure of the turbocharger.

In 2004, after years of competing with the TT-R in the revitalised DTM series, with privateer team Abt Racing/Christian Abt taking the 2002 title with Laurent Aello, Audi returned as a full factory effort to touring car racing by entering two factory supported Joest Racing A4 DTM cars.

===24 Hours of Le Mans===

Audi R10 TDI
Audi began racing prototype sportscars in 1999, debuting at the Le Mans 24 hour. Two car concepts were developed and raced in their first season - the Audi R8R (open-cockpit 'roadster' prototype) and the Audi R8C (closed-cockpit 'coup' GT-prototype). The R8R scored a credible podium on its racing debut at Le Mans and was the concept which Audi continued to develop into the 2000 season due to favourable rules for open-cockpit prototypes.

However, most of the competitors (such as BMW, Toyota, Mercedes and Nissan) retired at the end of 1999.
The factory-supported Joest Racing team won at Le Mans three times in a row with the Audi R8 (20002002), as well as winning every race in the American Le Mans Series in its first year. Audi also sold the car to customer teams such as Champion Racing.

In 2003, two Bentley Speed 8s, with engines designed by Audi, and driven by Joest drivers loaned to the fellow Volkswagen Group company, competed in the GTP class, and finished the race in the top two positions, while the Champion Racing R8 finished third overall, and first in the LMP900 class. Audi returned to the winner's podium at the 2004 race, with the top three finishers all driving R8s: Audi Sport Japan Team Goh finished first, Audi Sport UK Veloqx second, and Champion Racing third.

At the 2005 24 Hours of Le Mans, Champion Racing entered two R8s, along with an R8 from the Audi PlayStation Team Oreca. The R8s (which were built to old LMP900 regulations) received a narrower air inlet restrictor, reducing power, and an additional 50 kg of weight compared to the newer LMP1 chassis. On average, the R8s were about 23 seconds off pace compared to the PescaroloJudd. But with a team of excellent drivers and experience, both Champion R8s were able to take first and third, while the Oreca team took fourth. The Champion team was also the first American team to win Le Mans since the Gulf Ford GTs in 1967. This also ends the long era of the R8; however, its replacement for 2006, called the Audi R10 TDI, was unveiled on 13 December 2005.

The R10 TDI employed many new and innovative features, the most notable being the twin-turbocharged direct injection diesel engine. It was first raced in the 2006 12 Hours of Sebring as a race-test in preparation for the 2006 24 Hours of Le Mans, which it later went on to win. Audi has been on the forefront of sports car racing, claiming a historic win in the first diesel sports car at 12 Hours of Sebring (the car was developed with a Diesel engine due to ACO regulations that favor diesel engines). As well as winning the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 2006 making history, the R10 TDI has also shown its capabilities by beating the Peugeot 908 HDi FAP in , and beating Peugeot again in , (however Peugeot won the 24h in 2009) and, in a podium clean-sweep by proving its reliability throughout the race (compared to all four 908 entries retired before the end of the race) while breaking a new distance record (set way back by the Porsche 917K of Martini Racing in ), in with the R15 TDI Plus. 

Audi's sports car racing success would continue with the Audi R18's victory at the 2011 24 Hours of Le Mans. Audi Sport Team Joest's Benot Trluyer earned Audi their first pole position in five years while the team's sister car locked out the front row. Early accidents eliminated two of Audi's three entries, but the sole remaining Audi R18 TDI of Trluyer, Marcel Fssler, and Andr Lotterer held off the trio of Peugeot 908s to claim victory by a margin of 13.8 seconds.

====Results====

 Car Year 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 
 1 Position 4 3 1 1 4 3 3 3 1 6 3 3 Ret 1 5 
 2 3 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 Ret 1 Ret 2 1 2 1 
 3 Ret 2 Ret 3 Ret 5 4 Ret 4 17 1 Ret 5 3 
 4 Ret Ret 7 2 3 
 

===American Le Mans Series===
Audi entered a factory racing team run by Joest Racing into the American Le Mans Series under the Audi Sport North America name in 2000. This was a successful operation with the team winning on its debut in the series at the 2000 12 Hours of Sebring. Factory backed Audi R8s were the dominant car in ALMS taking 25 victories between 2000 and the end of the 2002 season. In 2003 Audi sold customer cars to Champion Racing as well as continuing to race the factory Audi Sport North America team. Champion Racing won many races as a private team running Audi R8s and eventually replaced Team Joest as the Audi Sport North America between 2006 and 2008. Since 2009 Audi has not taken part in full American Le Mans Series Championships, but has competed in the series opening races at Sebring, using the 12 hour race as a test for Le Mans, and also as part of the 2012 FIA World Endurance Championship season calendar.

====Results====

 Year Manufacturer Chassis Team Rd1 Rd2 Rd3 Rd4 Rd5 Rd6 Rd7 Rd8 Rd9 Rd10 Rd11 Rd12 
 2000 Audi R8 
 Audi Sport North America 2 20 3 Ret 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 
 1 6 4 3 2 Ret 1 4 2 2 1 15 
 2001 Audi R8 Audi Sport North America 1 1 1 1 1 5 Ret 2 Ret Ret 
 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 4 1 1 
 2002 Audi R8 Audi Sport North America 5 14 1 2 3 2 Ret 1 1 6 
 1 2 1 2 1 1 4 3 1 
 2003 Audi R8 Audi Sport North America 1 2 2 1 1 7 1 2 3 
 Champion Racing 2 1 3 2 20 1 4 1 1 
 2004 Audi R8 Audi Sport UK 1 
 2 
 Champion Racing 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 
 2005 Audi R8 Champion Racing 1 1 18 1 3 Ret 3 2 7 4 
 2 3 3 2 1 1 1 3 1 2 
 2006 Audi R8 Audi Sport North America 1 3 1 
 R10 Ret 1 2 1 4 7 2 
 1 4 1 2 1 1 1 
 2007 Audi R10 Audi Sport North America 4 1 7 3 2 5 5 2 2 3 1 1 
 1 2 12 6 23 3 3 4 2 17 3 
 2008 Audi R10 Audi Sport North America 3 Ret 2 Ret 21 2 2 2 DSQ 1 2 
 6 1 1 7 4 1 1 1 Ret 3 1 
 2009 Audi R15 Audi Sport North America 5 
 4 
 2010 Audi R15 Audi Sport North America 1 
 3 
 2012 Audi R18 Audi Sport Team Joest 16 
 1 
 2 
 2013 Audi R18 Audi Sport Team Joest 1 
 2 
 

===European Le Mans Series===
Audi participated in the 2003 1000km of Le Mans which was a one-off sports car race in preparation for the 2004 European Le Mans Series. The factory team Audi Sport UK won races and the championship in the 2004 season but Audi was unable to match their sweeping success of Audi Sport North America in the American Le Mans Series, partly due to the arrival of a factory competitor in LMP1, Peugeot. The French manufacturer's 908 HDi FAP became the car to beat in the series from 2008 onwards with 20 LMP wins. However, Audi were able to secure the championship in 2008 even though Peugeot scored more race victories in the season. http://www.autoblog.com/2008/09/16/audi-wins-everything-add-european-le-mans-to-the-list/ 

====Results====

 Year Manufacturer Chassis Team Rd1 Rd2 Rd3 Rd4 Rd5 
 2003 Audi R8 Audi Sport Japan 1 
 2004 Audi R8 Audi Sport UK 2 1 1 Ret 
 1 2 3 1 
 Audi Sport Japan 3 4 2 2 
 2005 Audi R8 Team Oreca Ret 1 2 2 
 2008 Audi R10 Audi Sport Team Joest 5 6 4 4 1 
 2 2 2 3 4 
 2010 Audi R15 Audi Sport Team Joest 1 3 Ret 
 5 3 
 12 
 

===World Endurance Championship===

====2012====
In 2012, the FIA sanctioned a World Endurance Championship which would be organised by the ACO as a continuation of the ILMC. Audi competed won the first WEC race at Sebring and followed this up with a further three successive wins, including the 2012 24 hours of Le Mans. Audi scored a final 5th victory in the 2012 WEC in Bahrain and were able to win the inaugural WEC Manufacturers' Championship.

====2013====
As defending champions, Audi once again entered the Audi R18 e-tron quattro chassis into the 2013 WEC and the team won the first five consecutive races, including the 2013 24 hours of le Mans. The victory at Round 5, Circuit of the Americas, was of particular significance as it marked the 100th win for Audi in Le Mans prototypes. https://www.audi-mediaservices.com/publish/ms/content/en/public/pressemitteilungen/2013/09/22/audi_celebrates_100th.html Audi secured their second consecutive WEC Manufacturers' Championship at Round 6 after taking second place and half points in the red-flagged Fuji race. 

====2014====
For the 2014 season Audi entered a redesigned and upgraded R18 e-tron quattro which featured a 2 MJ energy recovery system. As defending champions, Audi would once again face a challenge in LMP1 from Toyota, and additionally from Porsche who returned to endurance racing after a 16 year absence. The season opening 6hrs of Silverstone was a disaster for Audi who saw both cars retire from the race, marking the first time that an Audi car has failed to score a podium in a World Endurance Championship race.

====Results====

 Year Manufacturer Chassis SEB SPA LMS SIL SO BHR FUJ SHA 
 2012 Audi R18 e-tron quattro 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 173 (209) 1st 
 

 Year Manufacturer Chassis SIL SPA LMS SO COA FUJ SHA BHR Totalpoints 
 2013 Audi R18 e-tron quattro 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 207 (207) 1st 
 

 Year Manufacturer Chassis Car SIL SPA LMS COA FUJ SHA BHR SU 
 2014 Audi R18 e-tron quattro 1 Ret 2 28 3rd* 
 
 2 Ret 5 
 

* Season in progress.

===Formula E===

Audi will provide factory support to a Formula E team in partnership with DTM team Abt Sportsline. This team will be called Audi Sport Abt Formula E Team in the inaugural 2014/15 Formula E season. In the 13th February 2014 the team announced that it's driver line up as Daniel Abt and World Endurance Championship driver Lucas di Grassi. http://www.fiaformulae.com/news/abt-reveal-drivers-line-up 

 Team Chassis Driver CHI MAL HKG URU ARG LOS MIA MON GER GBR Totalpoints 
 Audi Sport Abt Formula E Team TBC Daniel Abt 2014 2015 
 Lucas di Grassi 2014 2015 

==Marketing==

===Branding===
The old logo used by Audi (19852009)
The Audi emblem is four overlapping rings that represent the four marques of Auto Union. The Audi emblem symbolises the amalgamation of Audi with DKW, Horch and Wanderer: the first ring from the left represents Audi, the second represents DKW, third is Horch, and the fourth and last ring Wanderer. 
Its similarity to the Olympic rings caused the International Olympic Committee to sue Audi in International Trademark Court in 1995, to which they lost. 

As part of Audi's centennial celebration in 2009, the company updated the logo, changing the font to left-aligned Audi Type, and altering the shading for the overlapping rings. The revised logo was designed by Rayan Abdullah. 

Audi developed a Corporate Sound concept, with Audi Sound Studio designed for producing the Corporate Sound. Audi Corporate Sound The Corporate Sound project began with sound agency Klangerfinder GmbH & Co KG and s12 GmbH. Audio samples were created in Klangerfinder's sound studio in Stuttgart, becoming part of Audi Sound Studio collection. Other Audi Sound Studio components include The Brand Music Pool, The Brand Voice. Luxurious sound from the Audi brand Audi also developed Sound Branding Toolkit including certain instruments, sound themes, rhythm and car sounds which all are supposed to reflect the AUDI sound character. Benchmark case: new AUDI Sound Branding 

Audi started using a beating heart sound trademark beginning in 1996. An updated heartbeat sound logo, developed by agencies KLANGERFINDER GmbH & Co KG of Stuttgart and S12 GmbH of Munich, was first used in 2010 in an Audi A8 commercial with the slogan The Art of Progress. Audi Sound Studio Corporate Sound Guideline As at: 05/2010 

====Slogans====
Audi's corporate tagline is Vorsprung durch Technik, meaning "Progress through Technology". The German-language tagline is used in many European countries, including the United Kingdom, and in other markets, such as Latin America, Oceania and parts of Asia including Japan. A few years ago, the North American tagline was "Innovation through technology", but in Canada the German tagline Vorsprung durch Technik was used in advertising. More recently, however, Audi has updated the tagline to "Truth in Engineering" in the U.S. Lavrinc, Damon. Audi planning TT and R8 lightweight "Sport" models. Autoblog. Retrieved 24 April 2010. 

====Typography====
Audi Sans (based on Univers Extended) was originally created in 1997 by Ole Schfer for MetaDesign. MetaDesign was later commissioned for a new corporate typeface called Audi Type, designed by Paul van der Laan and Pieter van Rosmalen of Bold Monday. The font began to appear in Audi's 2009 products and marketing materials. 

===Sponsorships===
Audi sponsors Bundesliga club Bayern Munich
Audi is a strong partner of different kinds of sports. In football, long partnerships exist between Audi and domestic clubs including FC Bayern Munich, Hamburger SV, 1. FC Nuremberg, Hertha Berlin, and Borussia Mnchengladbach and international clubs including Chelsea FC, Real Madrid CF, FC Barcelona, AC Milan, Ajax Amsterdam, Queens Park Rangers F.C. and Perspolis F.C.. Audi also sponsors winter sports: The Audi FIS Alpine Ski World Cup is named after the company. Additionally, Audi supports the German Ski Association (DSV) as well as the alpine skiing national teams of Switzerland, Sweden, Finland, France, Liechtenstein, Italy, Austria and the US. For almost two decades Audi fosters golf sport: for example with the Audi quattro Cup and the HypoVereinsbank Ladies German Open presented by Audi. In sailing, Audi is engaged in the Medcup regatta and supports the team Luna Rossa during the Louis Vuitton Pacific Series and also is the primary sponsor of the Melges 20 sailboat. Further, Audi sponsors the regional teams ERC Ingolstadt (hockey) and FC Ingolstadt 04 (soccer). 
In 2009, the year of Audis 100th anniversary, the company organises the Audi Cup for the first time. Audi also sponsor the New York Yankees as well. In October 2010 they agreed to a three sponsorship year-deal with Everton. Audi also sponsors the England Polo Team and holds the Audi Polo Awards. 

===Multitronic campaign===
Audi Centre Sydney, Zetland, New South Wales, Australia

In 2001, Audi promoted the new multitronic continuously variable transmission with television commercials throughout Europe, featuring an impersonator of musician and actor Elvis Presley. A prototypical dashboard figure  later named "Wackel-Elvis" ("Wobble Elvis" or "Wobbly Elvis")  appeared in the commercials to demonstrate the smooth ride in an Audi equipped with the multitronic transmission. The dashboard figure was originally intended for use in the commercials only, but after they aired the demand for Wackel-Elvis fans grew among fans and the figure was mass-produced in China and marketed by Audi in their factory outlet store. 

===Audi TDI===
As part of Audi's attempt to promote its Diesel technology in 2009, the company began Audi Mileage Marathon. The driving tour featured a fleet of 23 Audi TDI vehicles from 4 models (Audi Q7 3.0 TDI, Audi Q5 3.0 TDI, Audi A4 3.0 TDI, Audi A3 Sportback 2.0 TDI with S tronic transmission) travelling across the American continent from New York to Los Angeles, passing major cities like Chicago, Dallas and Las Vegas during the 13 daily stages, as well as natural wonders including the Rocky Mountains, Death Valley and the Grand Canyon. 

As part of 2014 model year Audi TDI vehicles launch in the US, 3 television commercials ("The Station", "Future", "Range") were produced. In the 60-second 'The Station' ad, a woman at a fueling station reaches for the diesel pump to fill up her Audi A6. In a dramatic fashion, unsuspecting onlookers race towards her and they can't imagine the luxury vehicle is in fact a diesel. The spot ends with the tagline "It's time to rethink diesel  join the club." "The Station" appeared on primetime network and cable 2013 fall programming including Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D, Modern Family, The Big Bang Theory, Hostages, Sons of Anarchy and NBC NFL Sunday Night Football. The 15-second "Range" ad demonstrates the potential to drive from New York to Chicago on a single tank of gas, covering a range of approximately 790 miles. In the 15-second "Future" ad, viewers see the potential for clean diesel as today's leading alternative fuel solution and an intelligent choice for those on the leading-edge. Audi TDI provides drivers with 30% better fuel economy and range without compromises on performance and design. In addition to the three new television spots, Audi also tried to dispel the most common myths of diesel  gas station availability, the smell and perception associated with an older generation of diesel vehicles, weak performance  in a series of four online video shorts that would roll out over the next two months on the Audi YouTube channel (http://www.youtube.com/audiusa). The spots also will appear on The Washington Post and Slate.com in a custom user-generated content hub through 2013-10-31. In addition to standard and high-impact ads, the content hub features custom videos, articles and infographics, along with relevant social conversations. The Audi TDI clean diesel campaign also features print ads that reinforce the message "the future of fuel is here now." Print ads would roll out in select automotive buff books in fall 2013. Audi launches 2014 TDI models with hilarious spot Audi reinforces the future of fuel is here today in new campaign introducing the all-new 2014 TDI clean diesel model lineup 'The Station' ad was premiered in Canada in September 2013. Lady! That's Diesel! New Audi "The Station" Finally Airs In Canada 'The Station' (also called 'The Moment of Truth') ad was produced by Venables Bell & Partners, Biscuit Filmworks, Final Cut. Hey Lady! That's Diesel! - Audi TDI "The Station" noam murro - audi "moment of truth" Wanda Productions - Director - noam Murro 

As part of 2014 model year Audi TDI vehicles launch in the US, the 'Truth in 48' driving challenge took place from Audi Pacific dealership at Los Angeles to New York in 48 hours or less, began at 9 a.m. PDT on 2013-09-07. The Coast-to-coast attempt used 2014 Audi A6 TDI and Audi A7 TDI and a 2014 Audi Q5 TDI crossover as the support vehicle, with teams of eight noted hypermilers and four journalists. Audi TDI Truth in 48 drives us from LA to NYC in mpg efficiency run Newest Audi TDI models powering Truth in 48 challenge to drive from L.A. to N.Y. in 48 hours on four tanks of clean diesel fuel 

===Audi e-tron===
The next phase of technology Audi is developing is the e-tron electric drive powertrain system. They have shown several concept cars , each with different levels of size and performance. The original e-tron concept shown at the 2009 Frankfurt motor show is based on the platform of the R8 and has been scheduled for limited production. Power is provided by electric motors at all four wheels. The second concept was shown at the 2010 Detroit Motor Show. Power is provided by two electric motors at the rear axle. This concept is also considered to be the direction for a future mid-engined gas-powered 2-seat performance coupe. The Audi A1 e-tron concept, based on the Audi A1 production model, is a hybrid vehicle with a range extending Wankel rotary engine to provide power after the initial charge of the battery is depleted. It is the only concept of the three to have range extending capability. The car is powered through the front wheels, always using electric power.
It is all set to be displayed at the Auto Expo 2012 in New Delhi, India, from 5 January. Powered by a 1.4 litre engine, and can cover a distance up to 54 km s on a single charge. The e-tron was also shown in the 2013 blockbuster film Iron Man 3 and was driven by Tony Stark (Iron Man).

===In video games===
 Audi R8
In PlayStation Home, the PlayStation 3's online community-based service, Audi has supported Home by releasing a dedicated Home space in the European version of Home. Audi is the first carmaker to develop a space for Home. On 17 December 2009, Audi released the Audi Space as two spaces; the Audi Home Terminal and the Audi Vertical Run. The Audi Home Terminal features an Audi TV channel delivering video content, an Internet Browser feature, and a view of a city. The Audi Vertical Run is where users can access the mini-game Vertical Run, a futuristic mini-game featuring Audi's e-tron concept. Players collect energy and race for the highest possible speeds and the fastest players earn a place in the Audi apartments located in a large tower in the centre of the Audi Space. In both the Home Terminal and Vertical Run spaces, there are teleports where users can teleport back and forth between the two spaces. Audi has stated that additional content will be added in 2010. 

==See also==

*Wanderer (car)
*DKW
*Horch

==References==

* 

==External links==
* Global corporate portal

 



[[Aircraft]]

A Qantas Airbus A380, the world's largest passenger airliner
The Mil Mi-8 is the most-produced helicopter in history

An aircraft is a machine that is able to fly by gaining support from the air, or, in general, the atmosphere of a planet. It counters the force of gravity by using either static lift or by using the dynamic lift of an airfoil, dictionary.com definition of aircraft or in a few cases the downward thrust from jet engines.

The human activity that surrounds aircraft is called aviation. Crewed aircraft are flown by an onboard pilot, but unmanned aerial vehicles may be remotely controlled or self-controlled by onboard computers. Aircraft may be classified by different criteria, such as lift type, propulsion, usage and others.

==History==

Flying model craft and stories of manned flight go back many centuries, however the first manned ascent  and safe descent  in modern times took place by hot-air balloon in the 18th century. Each of the two World Wars led to great technical advances. Consequently the history of aircraft can be divided into five eras:
*Pioneers of flight, from the earliest experiments to 1914.
*First World War, 1914 to 1918.
*Aviation between the World Wars, 1918 to 1939.
*Second World War, 1939 to 1945.
*Postwar era, also called the jet age, 1945 to the present day.

==Methods of lift==

===Lighter than air  aerostats===
A hot air balloon in flight

Aerostats use buoyancy to float in the air in much the same way that ships float on the water. They are characterized by one or more large gasbags or canopies, filled with a relatively low-density gas such as helium, hydrogen, or hot air, which is less dense than the surrounding air. When the weight of this is added to the weight of the aircraft structure, it adds up to the same weight as the air that the craft displaces.

Small hot-air balloons called sky lanterns date back to the 3rd century BC, and were only the second type of aircraft to fly, the first being kites.

A balloon was originally any aerostat, while the term airship was used for large, powered aircraft designs  usually fixed-wing  though none had yet been built. The advent of powered balloons, called dirigible balloons, and later of rigid hulls allowing a great increase in size, began to change the way these words were used. Huge powered aerostats, characterized by a rigid outer framework and separate aerodynamic skin surrounding the gas bags, were produced, the Zeppelins being the largest and most famous. There were still no fixed-wing aircraft or non-rigid balloons large enough to be called airships, so "airship" came to be synonymous with these aircraft. Then several accidents, such as the Hindenburg disaster in 1937, led to the demise of these airships. Nowadays a "balloon" is an unpowered aerostat and an "airship" is a powered one.

A powered, steerable aerostat is called a dirigible. Sometimes this term is applied only to non-rigid balloons, and sometimes dirigible balloon is regarded as the definition of an airship (which may then be rigid or non-rigid). Non-rigid dirigibles are characterized by a moderately aerodynamic gasbag with stabilizing fins at the back. These soon became known as blimps. During the Second World War, this shape was widely adopted for tethered balloons; in windy weather, this both reduces the strain on the tether and stabilizes the balloon. The nickname blimp was adopted along with the shape. In modern times, any small dirigible or airship is called a blimp, though a blimp may be unpowered as well as powered.

===Heavier-than-air  aerodynes===

Heavier-than-air aircraft, such as airplanes, must find some way to push air or gas downwards, so that a reaction occurs (by Newton's laws of motion) to push the aircraft upwards. This dynamic movement through the air is the origin of the term aerodyne. There are two ways to produce dynamic upthrust: aerodynamic lift, and powered lift in the form of engine thrust.

Aerodynamic lift involving wings is the most common, with fixed-wing aircraft being kept in the air by the forward movement of wings, and rotorcraft by spinning wing-shaped rotors sometimes called rotary wings. A wing is a flat, horizontal surface, usually shaped in cross-section as an aerofoil. To fly, air must flow over the wing and generate lift. A flexible wing is a wing made of fabric or thin sheet material, often stretched over a rigid frame. A kite is tethered to the ground and relies on the speed of the wind over its wings, which may be flexible or rigid, fixed, or rotary.

With powered lift, the aircraft directs its engine thrust vertically downward. V/STOL aircraft, such as the Harrier Jump Jet and F-35B take off and land vertically using powered lift and transfer to aerodynamic lift in steady flight.

A pure rocket is not usually regarded as an aerodyne, because it does not depend on the air for its lift (and can even fly into space); however, many aerodynamic lift vehicles have been powered or assisted by rocket motors. Rocket-powered missiles that obtain aerodynamic lift at very high speed due to airflow over their bodies are a marginal case.

====Fixed-wing====
NASA test aircraft
Comparison between four of the largest aircraft:
 "Spruce Goose" (aircraft with greatest wingspan)
 (aircraft with the greatest payload)
 (largest airliner)
 (longest passenger aircraft)

The forerunner of the fixed-wing aircraft is the kite. Whereas a fixed-wing aircraft relies on its forward speed to create airflow over the wings, a kite is tethered to the ground and relies on the wind blowing over its wings to provide lift. Kites were the first kind of aircraft to fly, and were invented in China around 500 BC. Much aerodynamic research was done with kites before test aircraft, wind tunnels, and computer modelling programs became available.

The first heavier-than-air craft capable of controlled free-flight were gliders. A glider designed by Cayley carried out the first true manned, controlled flight in 1853.

Practical, powered, fixed-wing aircraft (the aeroplane or airplane) were invented by Wilbur and Orville Wright. Besides the method of propulsion, fixed-wing aircraft are in general characterized by their wing configuration. The most important wing characteristics are:
*Number of wings  Monoplane, biplane, etc.
*Wing support  Braced or cantilever, rigid, or flexible.
*Wing planform  including aspect ratio, angle of sweep, and any variations along the span (including the important class of delta wings).
*Location of the horizontal stabilizer, if any.
*Dihedral angle  positive, zero, or negative (anhedral).

A variable geometry aircraft can change its wing configuration during flight.

A flying wing has no fuselage, though it may have small blisters or pods. The opposite of this is a lifting body, which has no wings, though it may have small stabilizing and control surfaces.

Wing-in-ground-effect vehicles may be considered as fixed-wing aircraft. They "fly" efficiently close to the surface of the ground or water, like conventional aircraft during takeoff. An example is the Russian ekranoplan (nicknamed the "Caspian Sea Monster"). Man-powered aircraft also rely on ground effect to remain airborne with a minimal pilot power, but this is only because they are so underpowered  in fact, the airframe is capable of flying higher.

====Rotorcraft====
An autogyro

Rotorcraft, or rotary-wing aircraft, use a spinning rotor with aerofoil section blades (a rotary wing) to provide lift. Types include helicopters, autogyros, and various hybrids such as gyrodynes and compound rotorcraft.

Helicopters have a rotor turned by an engine-driven shaft. The rotor pushes air downward to create lift. By tilting the rotor forward, the downward flow is tilted backward, producing thrust for forward flight. Some helicopters have more than one rotor and a few have rotors turned by gas jets at the tips.

Autogyros have unpowered rotors, with a separate power plant to provide thrust. The rotor is tilted backward. As the autogyro moves forward, air blows upward across the rotor, making it spin. This spinning increases the speed of airflow over the rotor, to provide lift. Rotor kites are unpowered autogyros, which are towed to give them forward speed or tethered to a static anchor in high-wind for kited flight.

Cyclogyros rotate their wings about a horizontal axis.

Compound rotorcraft have wings that provide some or all of the lift in forward flight. They are nowadays classified as powered lift types and not as rotorcraft. Tiltrotor aircraft (such as the V-22 Osprey), tiltwing, tailsitter, and coleopter aircraft have their rotors/propellers horizontal for vertical flight and vertical for forward flight.

====Other methods of lift====
X-24B lifting body, specialized glider

*A lifting body is an aircraft body shaped to produce lift. If there are any wings, they are too small to provide significant lift and are used only for stability and control. Lifting bodies are not efficient: they suffer from high drag, and must also travel at high speed to generate enough lift to fly. Many of the research prototypes, such as the Martin-Marietta X-24, which led up to the Space Shuttle, were lifting bodies (though the shuttle itself is not), and some supersonic missiles obtain lift from the airflow over a tubular body.
*Powered lift types rely on engine-derived lift for vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL). Most types transition to fixed-wing lift for horizontal flight. Classes of powered lift types include VTOL jet aircraft (such as the Harrier jump-jet) and tiltrotors (such as the V-22 Osprey), among others.
*The Flettner airplane uses a rotating cylinder in place of a fixed wing, obtaining lift from the magnus effect.

==Propulsion==

===Unpowered aircraft===

Gliders are heavier-than-air aircraft that do not employ propulsion once airborne. Take-off may be by launching forward and downward from a high location, or by pulling into the air on a tow-line, either by a ground-based winch or vehicle, or by a powered "tug" aircraft. For a glider to maintain its forward air speed and lift, it must descend in relation to the air (but not necessarily in relation to the ground). Many gliders can 'soar'  gain height from updrafts such as thermal currents. The first practical, controllable example was designed and built by the British scientist and pioneer George Cayley, whom many recognise as the first aeronautical engineer. Common examples of gliders are sailplanes, hang gliders and paragliders.

Balloons drift with the wind, though normally the pilot can control the altitude, either by heating the air or by releasing ballast, giving some directional control (since the wind direction changes with altitude). A wing-shaped hybrid balloon can glide directionally when rising or falling; but a spherically shaped balloon does not have such directional control.

Kites are aircraft NASA's Beginners Guide to Aeronautics that are tethered to the ground or other object (fixed or mobile) that maintains tension in the tether or kite line; they rely on virtual or real wind blowing over and under them to generate lift and drag. Kytoons are balloon-kite hybrids that are shaped and tethered to obtain kiting deflections, and can be lighter-than-air, neutrally buoyant, or heavier-than-air.

===Powered aircraft===

Powered aircraft have one or more onboard sources of mechanical power, typically aircraft engines although rubber and manpower have also been used. Most aircraft engines are either lightweight piston engines or gas turbines. Engine fuel is stored in tanks, usually in the wings but larger aircraft also have additional fuel tanks in the fuselage.

====Propeller aircraft====
A turboprop-engined DeHavilland Twin Otter adapted as a floatplane

Propeller aircraft use one or more propellers (airscrews) to create thrust in a forward direction. The propeller is usually mounted in front of the power source in tractor configuration but can be mounted behind in pusher configuration. Variations of propeller layout include contra-rotating propellers and ducted fans.

Many kinds of power plant have been used to drive propellers. Early airships used man power or steam engines. The more practical internal combustion piston engine was used for virtually all fixed-wing aircraft until World War II and is still used in many smaller aircraft. Some types use turbine engines to drive a propeller in the form of a turboprop or propfan. Human-powered flight has been achieved, but has not become a practical means of transport. Unmanned aircraft and models have also used power sources such as electric motors and rubber bands.

====Jet aircraft====
Lockheed Martin F-22A Raptor

Jet aircraft use airbreathing jet engines, which take in air, burn fuel with it in a combustion chamber, and accelerate the exhaust rearwards to provide thrust.

Turbojet and turbofan engines use a spinning turbine to drive one or more fans, which provide additional thrust. An afterburner may be used to inject extra fuel into the hot exhaust, especially on military "fast jets". Use of a turbine is not absolutely necessary: other designs include the pulse jet and ramjet. These mechanically simple designs cannot work when stationary, so the aircraft must be launched to flying speed by some other method. Other variants have also been used, including the motorjet and hybrids such as the Pratt & Whitney J58, which can convert between turbojet and ramjet operation.

Compared to propellers, jet engines can provide much higher thrust, higher speeds and, above about 40000 ft, greater efficiency. They are also much more fuel-efficient than rockets. As a consequence nearly all large, high-speed or high-altitude aircraft use jet engines.

====Rotorcraft====
Some rotorcraft, such as helicopters, have a powered rotary wing or rotor, where the rotor disc can be angled slightly forward so that a proportion of its lift is directed forwards. The rotor may, like a propeller, be powered by a variety of methods such as a piston engine or turbine. Experiments have also used jet nozzles at the rotor blade tips.

====Other types of powered aircraft====
*Rocket-powered aircraft have occasionally been experimented with, and the Messerschmitt Komet fighter even saw action in the Second World War. Since then, they have been restricted to research aircraft, such as the North American X-15, which traveled up into space where air-breathing engines cannot work (rockets carry their own oxidant). Rockets have more often been used as a supplement to the main power plant, typically for the rocket-assisted take off of heavily loaded aircraft, but also to provide high-speed dash capability in some hybrid designs such as the Saunders-Roe SR.53.
*The ornithopter obtains thrust by flapping its wings. It has found practical use in a model hawk used to freeze prey animals into stillness so that they can be captured, and in toy birds.

==Design and construction==
Aircraft are designed according to many factors such as customer and manufacturer demand, safety protocols and physical and economic constraints. For many types of aircraft the design process is regulated by national airworthiness authorities.

The key parts of an aircraft are generally divided into three categories:
*The structure comprises the main load-bearing elements and associated equipment.
*The propulsion system (if it is powered) comprises the power source and associated equipment, as described above.
*The avionics comprise the control, navigation and communication systems, usually electrical in nature.

===Structure===
The approach to structural design varies widely between different types of aircraft. Some, such as paragliders, comprise only flexible materials that act in tension and rely on aerodynamic pressure to hold their shape. A balloon similarly relies on internal gas pressure but may have a rigid basket or gondola slung below it to carry its payload. Early aircraft, including airships, often employed flexible doped aircraft fabric covering to give a reasonably smooth aeroshell stretched over a rigid frame. Later aircraft employed semi-monocoque techniques, where the skin of the aircraft is stiff enough to share much of the flight loads. In a true monocoque design there is no internal structure left.

The key structural parts of an aircraft depend on what type it is.

====Aerostats====
Lighter-than-air types are characterised by one or more gasbags, typically with a supporting structure of flexible cables or a rigid framework called its hull. Other elements such as engines or a gondola may also be attached to the supporting structure.

====Aerodynes====
Airframe diagram for an AgustaWestland AW101 helicopter
Heavier-than-air types are characterised by one or more wings and a central fuselage. The fuselage typically also carries a tail or empennage for stability and control, and an undercarriage for takeoff and landing. Engines may be located on the fuselage or wings. On a fixed-wing aircraft the wings are rigidly attached to the fuselage, while on a rotorcraft the wings are attached to a rotating vertical shaft. Smaller designs sometimes use flexible materials for part or all of the structure, held in place either by a rigid frame or by air pressure. The fixed parts of the structure comprise the airframe.

===Avionics===

The avionics comprise the flight control systems and related equipment, including the cockpit instrumentation, navigation, radar, monitoring, and communication systems.

==Flight characteristics==

===Flight envelope===

The flight envelope of an aircraft refers to its capabilities in terms of airspeed and load factor or altitude. 23.333 Flight envelope Flight envelope  diagram The term can also refer to other measurements such as maneuverability. When a craft is pushed, for instance by diving it at high speeds, it is said to be flown "outside the envelope", something considered unsafe.

===Range===
The Boeing 777-200LR is the longest-range airliner, capable of flights of more than halfway around the world.

The range is the distance an aircraft can fly between takeoff and landing, as limited by the time it can remain airborne.

For a powered aircraft the time limit is determined by the fuel load and rate of consumption.

For an unpowered aircraft, the maximum flight time is limited by factors such as weather conditions and pilot endurance. Many aircraft types are restricted to daylight hours, while balloons are limited by their supply of lifting gas. The range can be seen as the average ground speed multiplied by the maximum time in the air.

===Flight dynamics===

200px
Flight dynamics is the science of air vehicle orientation and control in three dimensions. The three critical flight dynamics parameters are the angles of rotation around three axes about the vehicle's center of mass, known as pitch, roll, and yaw (quite different from their use as Tait-Bryan angles).

*Roll is a rotation about the longitudinal axis (equivalent to the rolling or heeling of a ship) giving an up-down movement of the wing tips measured by the roll or bank angle.

*Pitch is a rotation about the sideways horizontal axis giving an up-down movement of the aircraft nose measured by the angle of attack.

*Yaw is a rotation about the vertical axis giving a side-to-side movement of the nose known as sideslip.

Flight dynamics is concerned with the stability and control of an aircraft's rotation about each of these axes.

====Stability====
The empennage of a Boeing 747200

An aircraft that is unstable tends to diverge from its current flight path and so is difficult to fly. An aircraft which is very stable tends to stay on its current flight path and is difficult to manoeuvre. So it is important for any design to achieve the desired degree of stability. Since the widespread use of digital computers, it is becoming increasingly common for designs to be inherently unstable and to rely on computerised control systems to provide artificial stability.

A fixed wing is typically unstable in pitch, roll and yaw. Pitch and yaw stabilities of conventional fixed wing designs need horizontal and vertical stabilisers, Crane, Dale: Dictionary of Aeronautical Terms, third edition, page 194. Aviation Supplies & Academics, 1997. ISBN 1-56027-287-2 Aviation Publishers Co. Limited, From the Ground Up, page 10 (27th revised edition) ISBN 0-9690054-9-0 which act in a similar way to the feathers on an arrow. http://www.airlines.org/ATAResources/Handbook/Pages/AirlineHandbookChapter5HowAircraftFly.aspx ATA Airline Handbook Chapter 5: How Aircraft Fly These stabilizing surfaces allow equilibrium of aerodynamic forces and to stabilise the flight dynamics of pitch and yaw. They are usually mounted on the tail section (empennage), although in the canard layout, the main aft wing replaces the canard foreplane as pitch stabilizer. tandem and Tailless aircraft rely on the same general rule to achieve stability, the aft surface being the stabilising one.

A rotary wing is typically unstable in yaw, requiring a vertical stabiliser.

A balloon is typically very stable in pitch and roll due to the way the payload is hung underneath.

====Control====
Flight control surfaces enable the pilot to control an aircraft's flight attitude and are usually part of the wing or mounted on, or integral with, the associated stabilizing surface. Their development was a critical advance in the history of aircraft, which had until that point been uncontrollable in flight.

Aerospace engineers develop control systems for a vehicle's orientation (attitude) about its center of mass. The control systems include actuators, which exert forces in various directions, and generate rotational forces or moments about the aerodynamic center of the aircraft, and thus rotate the aircraft in pitch, roll, or yaw. For example, a pitching moment is a vertical force applied at a distance forward or aft from the aerodynamic center of the aircraft, causing the aircraft to pitch up or down. Control systems are also sometimes used to increase or decrease drag, for example to slow the aircraft to a safe speed for landing.

The two main aerodynamic forces acting on any aircraft are lift supporting it in the air and drag opposing its motion. Control surfaces or other techniques may also be used to affect these forces directly, without inducing any rotation.

==Impacts of aircraft use==

Aircraft permit long distance, high speed travel and may be the more fuel efficient mode of transportation in some circumstances. Aircraft have environmental and climate impacts beyond fuel efficiency considerations, however. They are also relatively noisy compared to other forms of travel and high altitude aircraft generate contrails, which experimental evidence suggests may alter weather patterns.

==Uses for aircraft==
Aircraft are produced in several different types optimized for various uses; military aircraft, which includes not just combat types but many types of supporting aircraft, and civil aircraft, which include all non-military types, experimental and model.

===Military===
Boeing B-17E in flight

A military aircraft is any aircraft that is operated by a legal or insurrectionary armed service of any type. Military aircraft can be either combat or non-combat:
* Combat aircraft are aircraft designed to destroy enemy equipment using its own armament. Combat aircraft divide broadly into fighters and bombers, with several in-between types such as fighter-bombers and ground-attack aircraft (including attack helicopters).
* Non-combat aircraft are not designed for combat as their primary function, but may carry weapons for self-defense. Non-combat roles include search and rescue, reconnaissance, observation, transport, training, and aerial refueling. These aircraft are often variants of civil aircraft.

Most military aircraft are powered heavier-than-air types. Other types such as gliders and balloons have also been used as military aircraft; for example, balloons were used for observation during the American Civil War and World War I, and military gliders were used during World War II to land troops.

===Civil===
Agusta A109 helicopter of the Swiss air rescue service

Civil aircraft divide into commercial and general types, however there are some overlaps.

Commercial aircraft include types designed for scheduled and charter airline flights, carrying passengers, mail and other cargo. The larger passenger-carrying types are the airliners, the largest of which are wide-body aircraft. Some of the smaller types are also used in general aviation, and some of the larger types are used as VIP aircraft.

General aviation is a catch-all covering other kinds of private (where the pilot is not paid for time or expenses) and commercial use, and involving a wide range of aircraft types such as business jets (bizjets), trainers, homebuilt, gliders, warbirds and hot air balloons to name a few. The vast majority of aircraft today are general aviation types.

===Experimental===

An experimental aircraft is one that has not been fully proven in flight, or one that carries an FAA airworthiness certificate in the "Experimental" category. Often, this implies that new aerospace technologies are being tested on the aircraft, although the term also refers to amateur- and kit-built aircraft; many of which are based on proven designs.
A model aircraft, weighing six grams

===Model===

A model aircraft is a small unmanned type made to fly for fun, for static display, for aerodynamic research or for other purposes. A scale model is a replica of some larger design.

==See also==

===Lists===
*List of aircraft
*List of aircraft by category
**List of civil aircraft
**List of early flying machines
**List of fighter aircraft
**List of large aircraft

*List of aircraft by date and usage category
*List of altitude records reached by different aircraft types
*List of aviation, aerospace and aeronautical terms

===Topics===

 *Aircraft spotting *Air traffic control *Airport *Flying car/roadable aircraft *Personal air vehicle *Powered parachute *Rocket *Spacecraft *Spaceplane *Steam aircraft 

==References==

*

==External links==

History
*Prehistory of Powered Flight
*The Channel Crossing
*The Evolution of Modern Aircraft (NASA)
*Virtual Museum
*Smithsonian Air and Space Museum  Online collection with a particular focus on history of aircraft and spacecraft
*New Scientist's History of Aviation
*Amazing Early Flying Machines slideshow by Life magazine

;
Information
*Airliners.net
*Aviation Dictionary Free aviation terms, phrases and jargons
*New Scientist's Aviation page

 

[[Alfred Nobel]]

Alfred Bernhard Nobel ( ; 21 October 1833  10 December 1896) was a Swedish chemist, engineer, innovator, and armaments manufacturer.

He was the inventor of dynamite. Nobel also owned Bofors, which he had redirected from its previous role as primarily an iron and steel producer to a major manufacturer of cannon and other armaments. Nobel held 350 different patents, dynamite being the most famous. His fortune was used posthumously to institute the Nobel Prizes. The synthetic element nobelium was named after him. His name also survives in modern-day companies such as Dynamit Nobel and AkzoNobel, which are descendants of or mergers with companies Nobel himself established.

==Life and career==
Born in Stockholm, Alfred Nobel was the fourth son of Immanuel Nobel (18011872), an inventor and engineer, and Karolina Andriette (Ahlsell) Nobel (18051889). The couple married in 1827 and had eight children. The family was impoverished, and only Alfred and his three brothers survived past childhood. Encyclopedia of Modern Europe: Europe 17891914: Encyclopedia of the Age of Industry and Empire, "Alfred Nobel", 2006 Thomson Gale. Through his father, Alfred Nobel was a descendant of the Swedish scientist Olaus Rudbeck (16301702), Schck, Henrik, Ragnar Sohlman, Anders sterling, Carl Gustaf Bernhard, the Nobel Foundation, and Wilhelm Odelberg, eds. Nobel: The Man and His Prizes. 1950. 3rd ed. Coordinating Ed., Wilhelm Odelberg. New York: American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc., 1972, p. 14. ISBN 0-444-00117-4, ISBN 978-0-444-00117-7. (Originally published in Swedish as Nobelprisen 50 r: forskare, diktare, fredskmpar.) and in his turn the boy was interested in engineering, particularly explosives, learning the basic principles from his father at a young age. Alfred Nobel's interest in technology was inherited from his father, an alumnus of Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. http://www.svantelindqvist.com/anobel_inventor.pdf 
Portrait of Nobel by Gsta Florman (18311900)

Following various business failures, Nobel's father moved to Saint Petersburg in 1837 and grew successful there as a manufacturer of machine tools and explosives. He invented modern plywood and started work on the "torpedo". In 1842, the family joined him in the city. Now prosperous, his parents were able to send Nobel to private tutors and the boy excelled in his studies, particularly in chemistry and languages, achieving fluency in English, French, German, and Russian. For 18 months, from 1841 to 1842, Nobel went to the only school he ever attended as a child, the Jacobs Apologistic School in Stockholm. 
Alfred Nobel's death mask, at Bjorkborn, Nobel's residence in Karlskoga, Sweden.
As a young man, Nobel studied with chemist Nikolai Zinin; then, in 1850, went to Paris to further the work; and, at 18, he went to the United States for four years to study chemistry, collaborating for a short period under inventor John Ericsson, who designed the American Civil War ironclad USS Monitor. Nobel filed his first patent, for a gas meter, in 1857. Carlisle, Rodney (2004). Scientific American Inventions and Discoveries, p. 256. John Wiley & Songs, Inc., New Jersey. ISBN 0-471-24410-4. 

The family factory produced armaments for the Crimean War (18531856); but, had difficulty switching back to regular domestic production when the fighting ended and they filed for bankruptcy. In 1859, Nobel's father left his factory in the care of the second son, Ludvig Nobel (18311888), who greatly improved the business. Nobel and his parents returned to Sweden from Russia and Nobel devoted himself to the study of explosives, and especially to the safe manufacture and use of nitroglycerine (discovered in 1847 by Ascanio Sobrero, one of his fellow students under Thophile-Jules Pelouze at the University of Turin). Nobel invented a detonator in 1863; and, in 1865, he designed the blasting cap.

On 3 September 1864, a shed, used for the preparation of nitroglycerin, exploded at the factory in Heleneborg Stockholm, killing five people, including Nobel's younger brother Emil. Dogged by more minor accidents but unfazed, Nobel went on to build further factories, focusing on improving the stability of the explosives he was developing. Nobel invented dynamite in 1867, a substance easier and safer to handle than the more unstable nitroglycerin. Dynamite was patented in the US and the UK and was used extensively in mining and the building of transport networks internationally. In 1875 Nobel invented gelignite, more stable and powerful than dynamite, and in 1887 patented ballistite, a forerunner of cordite.

Nobel was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1884, the same institution that would later select laureates for two of the Nobel prizes, and he received an honorary doctorate from Uppsala University in 1893.

Nobel's brothers Ludvig and Robert exploited oilfields along the Caspian Sea and became hugely rich in their own right. Nobel invested in these and amassed great wealth through the development of these new oil regions. During his life Nobel issued 350 patents internationally and by his death had established 90 armaments factories, despite his belief in pacifism.
Alfred Nobel Medal 1975 by Richard Renninger

In 1888, the death of his brother Ludvig caused several newspapers to publish obituaries of Alfred in error. A French obituary stated "Le marchand de la mort est mort" ("The merchant of death is dead"). 

In 1891, following the death of his mother and his brother Ludvig and the end of a longstanding relationship, Nobel moved from Paris to San Remo, Italy. Suffering from angina, Nobel died at home, of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1896. Unbeknownst to his family, friends or colleagues, he had left most of his wealth in trust, in order to fund the awards that would become known as the Nobel Prizes. He is buried in Norra begravningsplatsen in Stockholm.

==Personal life==

Through baptism and confirmation Alfred Nobel was Lutheran and during his Paris years he frequented regularly the Church of Sweden Abroad led by pastor Nathan Sderblom who would in 1930 also be the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. 

Nobel travelled for much of his business life, maintaining companies in various countries in Europe and North America and keeping a permanent home in Paris from 1873 to 1891. He remained a solitary character, given to periods of depression. Though Nobel remained unmarried, his biographers note that he had at least three loves. Nobel's first love was in Russia with a girl named Alexandra, who rejected his proposal. In 1876 Austro-Bohemian Countess Bertha Kinsky became Alfred Nobel's secretary. But after only a brief stay she left him to marry her previous lover, Baron Arthur Gundaccar von Suttner. Though her personal contact with Alfred Nobel had been brief, she corresponded with him until his death in 1896, and it is believed that she was a major influence in his decision to include a peace prize among those prizes provided in his will. Bertha von Suttner was awarded the 1905 Nobel Peace prize, 'for her sincere peace activities'.
The Bjrkborn manor house, Nobel's residence at the time of his death, on the property of the Bofors iron works.

Nobel's third and longest-lasting relationship was with Sofie Hess from Vienna, whom he met in 1876. The liaison lasted for 18 years. After his death, according to his biographers Evlanoff, Fluor, and Fant, Nobel's letters were locked within the Nobel Institute in Stockholm. They were released only in 1955, to be included with other biographical data.

Despite the lack of formal secondary and tertiary level education, Nobel gained proficiency in six languages: Swedish, French, Russian, English, German and Italian. He also developed sufficient literary skill to write poetry in English. His Nemesis, a prose tragedy in four acts about Beatrice Cenci, partly inspired by Percy Bysshe Shelley's The Cenci, was printed while he was dying. The entire stock except for three copies was destroyed immediately after his death, being regarded as scandalous and blasphemous. The first surviving edition (bilingual SwedishEsperanto) was published in Sweden in 2003. The play has been translated into Slovenian via the Esperanto version and into French. In 2010 it was published in Russia in another bilingual (RussianEsperanto) edition.

==Inventions==

Nobel found that when nitroglycerin was incorporated in an absorbent inert substance like kieselguhr (diatomaceous earth) it became safer and more convenient to handle, and this mixture he patented in 1867 as 'dynamite'. Nobel demonstrated his explosive for the first time that year, at a quarry in Redhill, Surrey, England. In order to help reestablish his name and improve the image of his business from the earlier controversies associated with the dangerous explosives, Nobel had also considered naming the highly powerful substance "Nobel's Safety Powder", but settled with Dynamite instead, referring to the Greek word for 'power'.

Nobel later on combined nitroglycerin with various nitrocellulose compounds, similar to collodion, but settled on a more efficient recipe combining another nitrate explosive, and obtained a transparent, jelly-like substance, which was a more powerful explosive than dynamite. 'Gelignite', or blasting gelatin, as it was named, was patented in 1876; and was followed by a host of similar combinations, modified by the addition of potassium nitrate and various other substances. Gelignite was more stable, transportable and conveniently formed to fit into bored holes, like those used in drilling and mining, than the previously used compounds and was adopted as the standard technology for mining in the Age of Engineering bringing Nobel a great amount of financial success, though at a significant cost to his health. An off-shoot of this research resulted in Nobel's invention of ballistite, the precursor of many modern smokeless powder explosives and still used as a rocket propellant.

==Nobel Prizes==

In 1888 Alfred's brother Ludvig died while visiting Cannes and a French newspaper erroneously published Alfred's obituary. It condemned him for his invention of dynamite and is said to have brought about his decision to leave a better legacy after his death. The obituary stated, ("The merchant of death is dead") and went on to say, "Dr. Alfred Nobel, who became rich by finding ways to kill more people faster than ever before, died yesterday." Alfred was disappointed with what he read and concerned with how he would be remembered.

On 27 November 1895, at the Swedish-Norwegian Club in Paris, Nobel signed his last will and testament and set aside the bulk of his estate to establish the Nobel Prizes, to be awarded annually without distinction of nationality. After taxes and bequests to individuals, Nobel's will allocated 94% of his total assets, 31,225,000 Swedish kronor, to establish the five Nobel Prizes. This converted to GBP 1,687,837 at the time. At exchange rate of 18.5:1 in SEK:GBP In 2012, the capital was worth around SEK 3.1 billion (USD 472 million, EUR 337 million), which is almost twice the amount of the initial capital, taking inflation into account. 

The first three of these prizes are awarded for eminence in physical science, in chemistry and in medical science or physiology; the fourth is for literary work "in an ideal direction" and the fifth prize is to be given to the person or society that renders the greatest service to the cause of international fraternity, in the suppression or reduction of standing armies, or in the establishment or furtherance of peace congresses.

The formulation for the literary prize being given for a work "in an ideal direction" ( in Swedish), is cryptic and has caused much confusion. For many years, the Swedish Academy interpreted "ideal" as "idealistic" () and used it as a reason not to give the prize to important but less Romantic authors, such as Henrik Ibsen and Leo Tolstoy. This interpretation has since been revised, and the prize has been awarded to, for example, Dario Fo and Jos Saramago, who do not belong to the camp of literary idealism.

There was room for interpretation by the bodies he had named for deciding on the physical sciences and chemistry prizes, given that he had not consulted them before making the will. In his one-page testament, he stipulated that the money go to discoveries or inventions in the physical sciences and to discoveries or improvements in chemistry. He had opened the door to technological awards, but had not left instructions on how to deal with the distinction between science and technology. Since the deciding bodies he had chosen were more concerned with the former, the prizes went to scientists more often than engineers, technicians or other inventors.

In 2001, Alfred Nobel's great-grandnephew, Peter Nobel (b. 1931), asked the Bank of Sweden to differentiate its award to economists given "in Alfred Nobel's memory" from the five other awards. This request added to the controversy over whether the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel is actually a "Nobel Prize". 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Nobel, Alfred Bernhard in the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica
* Schck, H, and Sohlman, R., (1929). The Life of Alfred Nobel. London: William Heineman Ltd.
* Alfred Nobel US Patent No 78,317, dated 26 May 1868
* Evlanoff, M. and Fluor, M. Alfred Nobel  The Loneliest Millionaire. Los Angeles, Ward Ritchie Press, 1969.
* Sohlman, R. The Legacy of Alfred Nobel, transl. Schubert E. London: The Bodley Head, 1983 (Swedish original, Ett Testamente, published in 1950).
* Jorpes, J.E. Alfred Nobel. British Medical Journal, Jan.3, 1959, 1(5113): 16.
* Sri Kantha, S. Alfred Nobel's unusual creativity; an analysis. Medical Hypotheses, April 1999; 53(4): 338344.
* Sri Kantha, S. Could nitroglycerine poisoning be the cause of Alfred Nobel's anginal pains and premature death? Medical Hypotheses, 1997; 49: 303306.

==External links==

*
* Alfred Nobel  Man behind the Prizes
* Biography at the Norwegian Nobel Institute
* Nobelprize.org
* "The Nobels in Baku" in Azerbaijan International, Vol 10.2 (Summer 2002), 5659.
* The Nobel Prize in Postage Stamps
* A German branch or followup (German)



[[Alexander Graham Bell]]

Alexander Graham Bell (March 3, 1847  August 2, 1922) "The Bell Family". Bell Homestead National Historic Site, 2013. Retrieved: September 27, 2013. was an eminent scientist, inventor, engineer and innovator who is credited with inventing the first practical telephone.

Bell's father, grandfather, and brother had all been associated with work on elocution and speech, and both his mother and wife were deaf, profoundly influencing Bell's life's work. Bruce 1990, p. 419. His research on hearing and speech further led him to experiment with hearing devices which eventually culminated in Bell being awarded the first US patent for the telephone in 1876. In retrospect, Bell considered his most famous invention an intrusion on his real work as a scientist and refused to have a telephone in his study. MacLeod 1999, p. 19. 

Many other inventions marked Bell's later life, including groundbreaking work in optical telecommunications, hydrofoils and aeronautics. In 1888, Bell became one of the founding members of the National Geographic Society. "National Geographic Mission." nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. 

==Early life==
Alexander Bell was born in Edinburgh, Scotland on March 3, 1847. Petrie 1975, p. 4. The family home was at 16 South Charlotte Street, and has a stone inscription, marking it as Alexander Graham Bell's birthplace. He had two brothers: Melville James Bell (184570) and Edward Charles Bell (184867). Both of his brothers died of tuberculosis. "Time Line of Alexander Graham Bell." memory.loc.goiv. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. His father was Professor Alexander Melville Bell, and his mother was Eliza Grace (ne Symonds). Although he was born "Alexander", at age 10, he made a plea to his father to have a middle name like his two brothers. "Call me Alexander Graham Bell." fi.edu. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. For his 11th birthday, his father acquiesced and allowed him to adopt the middle name "Graham", chosen out of admiration for Alexander Graham, a Canadian being treated by his father and boarder who had become a family friend. Groundwater 2005, p. 23. To close relatives and friends he remained "Aleck" which his father continued to call him into later life. Bruce 1990, pp. 1719. 

===First invention===
As a child, young Alexander displayed a natural curiosity about his world, resulting in gathering botanical specimens as well as experimenting even at an early age. His best friend was Ben Herdman, a neighbor whose family operated a flour mill, the scene of many forays. Young Aleck asked what needed to be done at the mill. He was told wheat had to be dehusked through a laborious process and at the age of 12, Bell built a homemade device that combined rotating paddles with sets of nail brushes, creating a simple dehusking machine that was put into operation and used steadily for a number of years. Bruce 1990, p. 16. In return, John Herdman gave both boys the run of a small workshop in which to "invent". 

From his early years, Bell showed a sensitive nature and a talent for art, poetry and music that was encouraged by his mother. With no formal training, he mastered the piano and became the family's pianist. Gray 2006, p. 8. Despite being normally quiet and introspective, he reveled in mimicry and "voice tricks" akin to ventriloquism that continually entertained family guests during their occasional visits. Bell was also deeply affected by his mother's gradual deafness, (she began to lose her hearing when he was 12) and learned a manual finger language so he could sit at her side and tap out silently the conversations swirling around the family parlour. Gray 2006, p. 9. He also developed a technique of speaking in clear, modulated tones directly into his mother's forehead wherein she would hear him with reasonable clarity. Mackay 1997, p. 25. Bell's preoccupation with his mother's deafness led him to study acoustics.

His family was long associated with the teaching of elocution: his grandfather, Alexander Bell, in London, his uncle in Dublin, and his father, in Edinburgh, were all elocutionists. His father published a variety of works on the subject, several of which are still well known, especially his The Standard Elocutionist (1860), which appeared in Edinburgh in 1868. The Standard Elocutionist appeared in 168 British editions and sold over a quarter of a million copies in the United States alone. In this treatise, his father explains his methods of how to instruct deaf-mutes (as they were then known) to articulate words and read other people's lip movements to decipher meaning. Aleck's father taught him and his brothers not only to write Visible Speech but to identify any symbol and its accompanying sound. Petrie 1975, p. 7. Aleck became so proficient that he became a part of his father's public demonstrations and astounded audiences with his abilities. He could decipher Visible Speech representing virtually every language, including Latin, Scottish Gaelic and even Sanskrit, accurately reciting written tracts without any prior knowledge of their pronunciation. 

===Education===
As a young child, Bell, like his brothers, received his early schooling at home from his father. At an early age, however, he was enrolled at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, Scotland, which he left at age 15, completing only the first four forms. Mackay 1997, p. 31. His school record was undistinguished, marked by absenteeism and lacklustre grades. His main interest remained in the sciences, especially biology, while he treated other school subjects with indifference, to the dismay of his demanding father. Gray 2006, p. 11. Upon leaving school, Bell travelled to London to live with his grandfather, Alexander Bell. During the year he spent with his grandfather, a love of learning was born, with long hours spent in serious discussion and study. The elder Bell took great efforts to have his young pupil learn to speak clearly and with conviction, the attributes that his pupil would need to become a teacher himself. Town 1988, p. 7. At age 16, Bell secured a position as a "pupil-teacher" of elocution and music, in Weston House Academy, at Elgin, Moray, Scotland. Although he was enrolled as a student in Latin and Greek, he instructed classes himself in return for board and 10 per session. Bruce 1990, p. 37. The following year, he attended the University of Edinburgh; joining his older brother Melville who had enrolled there the previous year. In 1868, not long before he departed for Canada with his family, Aleck completed his matriculation exams and was accepted for admission to the University of London. Shulman 2008, p. 49. 

===First experiments with sound===
Bell's father encouraged Aleck's interest in speech and, in 1863, took his sons to see a unique automaton, developed by Sir Charles Wheatstone based on the earlier work of Baron Wolfgang von Kempelen. Groundwater 2005, p. 25. The rudimentary "mechanical man" simulated a human voice. Aleck was fascinated by the machine and after he obtained a copy of von Kempelen's book, published in German, and had laboriously translated it, he and his older brother Melville built their own automaton head. Their father, highly interested in their project, offered to pay for any supplies and spurred the boys on with the enticement of a "big prize" if they were successful. While his brother constructed the throat and larynx, Aleck tackled the more difficult task of recreating a realistic skull. His efforts resulted in a remarkably lifelike head that could "speak", albeit only a few words. The boys would carefully adjust the "lips" and when a bellows forced air through the windpipe, a very recognizable "Mama" ensued, to the delight of neighbors who came to see the Bell invention. Petrie 1975, pp. 79. 

Intrigued by the results of the automaton, Bell continued to experiment with a live subject, the family's Skye Terrier, "Trouve". Petrie 1975, p. 9. After he taught it to growl continuously, Aleck would reach into its mouth and manipulate the dog's lips and vocal cords to produce a crude-sounding "Ow ah oo ga ma ma". With little convincing, visitors believed his dog could articulate "How are you grandma?" More indicative of his playful nature, his experiments convinced onlookers that they saw a "talking dog". Groundwater 2005, p. 30. However, these initial forays into experimentation with sound led Bell to undertake his first serious work on the transmission of sound, using tuning forks to explore resonance.

At the age of 19, he wrote a report on his work and sent it to philologist Alexander Ellis, a colleague of his father (who would later be portrayed as Professor Henry Higgins in Pygmalion). Groundwater 2005, p. 30. Ellis immediately wrote back indicating that the experiments were similar to existing work in Germany, and also lent Aleck a copy of Hermann von Helmholtz's work, The Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music. Shulman 2008, p. 46. 

Dismayed to find that groundbreaking work had already been undertaken by Helmholtz who had conveyed vowel sounds by means of a similar tuning fork "contraption", he pored over the German scientist's book. Working from his own errant mistranslation of a French edition, Aleck fortuitously then made a deduction that would be the underpinning of all his future work on transmitting sound, reporting: "Without knowing much about the subject, it seemed to me that if vowel sounds could be produced by electrical means, so could consonants, so could articulate speech." He also later remarked: "I thought that Helmholtz had done it ... and that my failure was due only to my ignorance of electricity. It was a valuable blunder ... If I had been able to read German in those days, I might never have commenced my experiments!" MacKenzie 2003, p. 41. Groundwater 2005, p. 31. Shulman 2008, pp. 4648. 

===Family tragedy===
In 1865, when the Bell family moved to London, Micklos 2006, p. 8. Bell returned to Weston House as an assistant master and, in his spare hours, continued experiments on sound using a minimum of laboratory equipment. Bell concentrated on experimenting with electricity to convey sound and later installed a telegraph wire from his room in Somerset College to that of a friend. Bruce 1990, p. 45. Throughout late 1867, his health faltered mainly through exhaustion. His younger brother, Edward "Ted," was similarly bed-ridden, suffering from tuberculosis. While Bell recovered (by then referring to himself in correspondence as "A.G. Bell") and served the next year as an instructor at Somerset College, Bath, England, his brother's condition deteriorated. Edward would never recover. Upon his brother's death, Bell returned home in 1867. His older brother Melville had married and moved out. With aspirations to obtain a degree at the University College London, Bell considered his next years as preparation for the degree examinations, devoting his spare time at his family's residence to studying.

Helping his father in Visible Speech demonstrations and lectures brought Bell to Susanna E. Hull's private school for the deaf in South Kensington, London. His first two pupils were "deaf mute" girls who made remarkable progress under his tutelage. While his older brother seemed to achieve success on many fronts including opening his own elocution school, applying for a patent on an invention, and starting a family, Bell continued as a teacher. However, in May 1870, Melville died from complications due to tuberculosis, causing a family crisis. His father had also suffered a debilitating illness earlier in life and had been restored to health by a convalescence in Newfoundland. Bell's parents embarked upon a long-planned move when they realized that their remaining son was also sickly. Acting decisively, Alexander Melville Bell asked Bell to arrange for the sale of all the family property, Bruce 1990, pp. 6768. conclude all of his brother's affairs (Bell took over his last student, curing a pronounced lisp), Bruce 1990, p. 68. and join his father and mother in setting out for the "New World". Groundwater 2005, p. 33. Reluctantly, Bell also had to conclude a relationship with Marie Eccleston, who, he had surmised, was not prepared to leave England with him. 

==Canada==

Melville House, the Bells' first home in North America, now a National Historic Site of Canada.

In 1870, at age 23, Bell, his brother's widow, Caroline (Margaret Ottaway), Mackay 1997, p. 50. and his parents travelled on the SS Nestorian to Canada. Petrie 1975, p. 10. After landing at Quebec City the Bells transferred to another steamer to Montreal and then boarded a train to Paris, Ontario, Gray 2006, p. 21. to stay with the Reverend Thomas Henderson, a family friend. After a brief stay with the Hendersons, the Bell family purchased a farm of 10.5 acre at Tutelo Heights (now called Tutela Heights), near Brantford, Ontario. The property consisted of an orchard, large farm house, stable, pigsty, hen-house and a carriage house, which bordered the Grand River. Mackay 1997, p. 61. 

At the homestead, Bell set up his own workshop in the converted carriage house near to what he called his "dreaming place", a large hollow nestled in trees at the back of the property above the river. Groundwater 2005, p. 34. Despite his frail condition upon arriving in Canada, Bell found the climate and environs to his liking, and rapidly improved. Mackay 1997, p. 62. He continued his interest in the study of the human voice and when he discovered the Six Nations Reserve across the river at Onondaga, he learned the Mohawk language and translated its unwritten vocabulary into Visible Speech symbols. For his work, Bell was awarded the title of Honorary Chief and participated in a ceremony where he donned a Mohawk headdress and danced traditional dances. Groundwater 2005, p. 35. 

After setting up his workshop, Bell continued experiments based on Helmholtz's work with electricity and sound. Wing 1980, p. 10. He also modified a melodeon (a type of pump organ) so that it could transmit its music electrically over a distance. Waldie, Jean H. "Historic Melodeon Is Given To Bell Museum", likely published either by the London Free Press or by the Brantford Expositor, date unknown. Once the family was settled in, both Bell and his father made plans to establish a teaching practice and in 1871, he accompanied his father to Montreal, where Melville was offered a position to teach his System of Visible Speech.

==Work with the deaf==
Bell, top right, providing pedagogical instruction to teachers at the Boston School for Deaf Mutes, 1871. Throughout his life he referred to himself as "a teacher of the deaf".

Bell's father was invited by Sarah Fuller, principal of the Boston School for Deaf Mutes (which continues today as the public Horace Mann School for the Deaf), Bruce 1990, p. 74. in Boston, Massachusetts, to introduce the Visible Speech System by providing training for Fuller's instructors, but he declined the post, in favor of his son. Traveling to Boston in April 1871, Bell proved successful in training the school's instructors. Town 1988, p. 12. He was subsequently asked to repeat the program at the American Asylum for Deaf-mutes in Hartford, Connecticut, and the Clarke School for the Deaf in Northampton, Massachusetts.

Returning home to Brantford after six months abroad, Bell continued his experiments with his "harmonic telegraph". Alexander Graham Bell 1979, p. 8. The basic concept behind his device was that messages could be sent through a single wire if each message was transmitted at a different pitch, but work on both the transmitter and receiver was needed. Unsure of his future, he first contemplated returning to London to complete his studies, but decided to return to Boston as a teacher. Petrina 1975, p. 14. His father helped him set up his private practice by contacting Gardiner Greene Hubbard, the president of the Clarke School for the Deaf for a recommendation. Teaching his father's system, in October 1872 Alexander Bell opened his "School of Vocal Physiology and Mechanics of Speech" in Boston, which attracted a large number of deaf pupils with his first class numbering 30 students. Petrel 1975, p. 15. Town 1988, pp. 1213. While he was working as a private tutor, one of his most famous pupils was Helen Keller, who came to him as a young child unable to see, hear, or speak. She was later to say that Bell dedicated his life to the penetration of that "inhuman silence which separates and estranges." Petrie 1975, p. 17. In 1893 Keller performed the sod-breaking ceremony for the construction of the new Bell's new Volta Bureau, dedicated to "the increase and diffusion of knowledge relating to the deaf". Schoenherr, Steven. Recording Technology History: Charles Sumner Tainter and the Graphophone, originally published at the History Department of, University of San Diego, revised July 6, 2005. Retrieved from University of San Diego History Department website December 19, 2009. Document transferred to a personal website upon Professor Schoenherr's retirement. Retrieved again from homepage.mac. com/oldtownman website July 21, 2010. Encyclopdia Britannica. "Alexander Graham Bell", Encyclopdia Britannica. 2009. Retrieved from Encyclopdia Britannica Online, December 21, 2009. 

Several influential people of the time, including Bell, viewed deafness as something that ought to be eradicated, and also believed that with resources and effort they could teach the deaf to speak and avoid the use of sign language, thus enabling their integration within the wider society from which many were often being excluded. Miller and Branson 2002, pp. 3031, 152153. However in several schools children were mistreated, for example by having their hands tied behind their backs so they could not communicate by signingthe only language they knewin order to force them to attempt oral communication. Due to his efforts to suppress the teaching of sign language, Bell is often viewed negatively by those embracing deaf culture. Ayers et al. 2009, pp. 194195. 

==Continuing experimentation==
In the following year, Bell became professor of Vocal Physiology and Elocution at the Boston University School of Oratory. During this period, he alternated between Boston and Brantford, spending summers in his Canadian home. At Boston University, Bell was "swept up" by the excitement engendered by the many scientists and inventors residing in the city. He continued his research in sound and endeavored to find a way to transmit musical notes and articulate speech, but although absorbed by his experiments, he found it difficult to devote enough time to experimentation. While days and evenings were occupied by his teaching and private classes, Bell began to stay awake late into the night, running experiment after experiment in rented facilities at his boarding house. Keeping up "night owl" hours, he worried that his work would be discovered and took great pains to lock up his notebooks and laboratory equipment. Bell had a specially made table where he could place his notes and equipment inside a locking cover. Town 1988, p. 15. Worse still, his health deteriorated as he suffered severe headaches. Groundwater 2005, p. 39. Returning to Boston in fall 1873, Bell made a fateful decision to concentrate on his experiments in sound.

Deciding to give up his lucrative private Boston practice, Bell only retained two students, six-year old "Georgie" Sanders, deaf from birth and 15-year old Mabel Hubbard. Each pupil would serve to play an important role in the next developments. George's father, Thomas Sanders, a wealthy businessman, offered Bell a place to stay at nearby Salem with Georgie's grandmother, complete with a room to "experiment". Although the offer was made by George's mother and followed the year-long arrangement in 1872 where her son and his nurse had moved to quarters next to Bell's boarding house, it was clear that Mr. Sanders was backing the proposal. The arrangement was for teacher and student to continue their work together with free room and board thrown in. Town 1988, p. 16. Mabel was a bright, attractive girl who was ten years his junior but became the object of Bell's affection. Losing her hearing after a near-fatal bout of scarlet fever close to her fifth birthday, Toward 1984, p. 1. Eber 1991, p. 43. she had learned to read lips but her father, Gardiner Greene Hubbard, Bell's benefactor and personal friend, wanted her to work directly with her teacher. Dunn 1990, p. 20. 

==Telephone==

By 1874, Bell's initial work on the harmonic telegraph had entered a formative stage with progress it made both at his new Boston "laboratory" (a rented facility) as well as at his family home in Canada a big success.
While working that summer in Brantford, Bell experimented with a "phonautograph", a pen-like machine that could draw shapes of sound waves on smoked glass by tracing their vibrations. Bell thought it might be possible to generate undulating electrical currents that corresponded to sound waves. Matthews 1999, pp. 1921. Bell also thought that multiple metal reeds tuned to different frequencies like a harp would be able to convert the undulating currents back into sound. But he had no working model to demonstrate the feasibility of these ideas. Matthews 1999, p. 21. 

In 1874, telegraph message traffic was rapidly expanding and in the words of Western Union President William Orton, had become "the nervous system of commerce". Orton had contracted with inventors Thomas Edison and Elisha Gray to find a way to send multiple telegraph messages on each telegraph line to avoid the great cost of constructing new lines. "A History of Electrical Engineering." ieee.cincinnati.fuse.net. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. When Bell mentioned to Gardiner Hubbard and Thomas Sanders that he was working on a method of sending multiple tones on a telegraph wire using a multi-reed device, the two wealthy patrons began to financially support Bell's experiments. Town 1988, p. 17. Patent matters would be handled by Hubbard's patent attorney, Anthony Pollok. Evenson 2000, pp. 1825. 

In March 1875, Bell and Pollok visited the famous scientist Joseph Henry, who was then director of the Smithsonian Institution, and asked Henry's advice on the electrical multi-reed apparatus that Bell hoped would transmit the human voice by telegraph. Henry replied that Bell had "the germ of a great invention". When Bell said that he did not have the necessary knowledge, Henry replied, "Get it!" That declaration greatly encouraged Bell to keep trying, even though he did not have the equipment needed to continue his experiments, nor the ability to create a working model of his ideas. However, a chance meeting in 1874 between Bell and Thomas A. Watson, an experienced electrical designer and mechanic at the electrical machine shop of Charles Williams, changed all that.

With financial support from Sanders and Hubbard, Bell hired Thomas Watson as his assistant, and the two of them experimented with acoustic telegraphy. On June 2, 1875, Watson accidentally plucked one of the reeds and Bell, at the receiving end of the wire, heard the overtones of the reed; overtones that would be necessary for transmitting speech. That demonstrated to Bell that only one reed or armature was necessary, not multiple reeds. This led to the "gallows" sound-powered telephone, which could transmit indistinct, voice-like sounds, but not clear speech.

===The race to the patent office===

In 1875, Bell developed an acoustic telegraph and drew up a patent application for it. Since he had agreed to share U.S. profits with his investors Gardiner Hubbard and Thomas Sanders, Bell requested that an associate in Ontario, George Brown, attempt to patent it in Britain, instructing his lawyers to apply for a patent in the U.S. only after they received word from Britain (Britain would issue patents only for discoveries not previously patented elsewhere). Bruce 1990, pp. 158159. 

Alexander Graham Bell's telephone patent drawing, March 7, 1876.

Meanwhile, Elisha Gray was also experimenting with acoustic telegraphy and thought of a way to transmit speech using a water transmitter. On February 14, 1876, Gray filed a caveat with the U.S. Patent Office for a telephone design that used a water transmitter. That same morning, Bell's lawyer filed Bell's application with the patent office. There is considerable debate about who arrived first and Gray later challenged the primacy of Bell's patent. Bell was in Boston on February 14 and did not arrive in Washington until February 26.

Bell's patent 174,465, was issued to Bell on March 7, 1876, by the U.S. Patent Office. Bell's patent covered "the method of, and apparatus for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically ... by causing electrical undulations, similar in form to the vibrations of the air accompanying the said vocal or other sound" MacLeod 1999, pp. 1213. Bell returned to Boston the same day and the next day resumed work, drawing in his notebook a diagram similar to that in Gray's patent caveat.

On March 10, 1876, three days after his patent was issued, Bell succeeded in getting his telephone to work, using a liquid transmitter similar to Gray's design. Vibration of the diaphragm caused a needle to vibrate in the water, varying the electrical resistance in the circuit. When Bell spoke the famous sentence "Mr. WatsonCome hereI want to see you" into the liquid transmitter, "Bell's Lab notebook I, pp. 4041 (image 22)." loc.gov. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. Watson, listening at the receiving end in an adjoining room, heard the words clearly. MacLeod 1999, p. 12. 

Although Bell was, and still is, accused of stealing the telephone from Gray, Shulman 2008, p. 211. Bell used Gray's water transmitter design only after Bell's patent was granted and only as a proof of concept scientific experiment Evenson 2000, p. 99. to prove to his own satisfaction that intelligible "articulate speech" (Bell's words) could be electrically transmitted. Evenson 2000, p. 98. After March 1876, Bell focused on improving the electromagnetic telephone and never used Gray's liquid transmitter in public demonstrations or commercial use. Evenson 2000, p. 100. 

The question of priority for the variable resistance feature of the telephone was raised by the Examiner before he approved Bell's patent application. He told Bell that his claim for the variable resistance feature was also described in Gray's caveat. Bell pointed to a variable resistance device in Bell's previous application in which Bell described a cup of mercury, not water. Bell had filed the mercury application at the patent office a year earlier on February 25, 1875, long before Elisha Gray described the water device. In addition, Gray abandoned his caveat, and because Gray did not contest Bell's priority, the Examiner approved Bell's patent on March 3, 1876. Gray had reinvented the variable resistance telephone, but Bell was the first to write down the idea and the first to test it in a telephone. Evenson 2000, pp. 8182. 

The patent examiner, Zenas Fisk Wilber, later stated in an affidavit that he was an alcoholic who was much in debt to Bell's lawyer, Marcellus Bailey, with whom he had served in the Civil War. He claimed he showed Gray's patent caveat to Bailey. Wilber also claimed (after Bell arrived in Washington D.C. from Boston) that he showed Gray's caveat to Bell and that Bell paid him $100. Bell claimed they discussed the patent only in general terms, although in a letter to Gray, Bell admitted that he learned some of the technical details. Bell denied in an affidavit that he ever gave Wilber any money. "Mr. Wilbur confesses." The Washington Post, May 22, 1886, p. 1. 

===Later developments===
Continuing his experiments in Brantford, Bell brought home a working model of his telephone. On August 3, 1876, from the telegraph office in Mount Pleasant five miles (8 km) away from Brantford, Bell sent a tentative telegram indicating that he was ready. With curious onlookers packed into the office as witnesses, faint voices were heard replying. The following night, he amazed guests as well as his family when a message was received at the Bell home from Brantford, four miles (six km) distant along an improvised wire strung up along telegraph lines and fences, and laid through a tunnel. This time, guests at the household distinctly heard people in Brantford reading and singing. These experiments clearly proved that the telephone could work over long distances. MacLeod 1999, p. 14. 
Bell at the opening of the long-distance line from New York to Chicago in 1892.
Bell and his partners, Hubbard and Sanders, offered to sell the patent outright to Western Union for $100,000. The president of Western Union balked, countering that the telephone was nothing but a toy. Two years later, he told colleagues that if he could get the patent for $25 million he would consider it a bargain. By then, the Bell company no longer wanted to sell the patent. Fenster, Julie M. AmericanHeritage.com, American Heritage, 2006. Bell's investors would become millionaires while he fared well from residuals and at one point had assets of nearly one million dollars. Winfield 1987, p. 21. 

Bell began a series of public demonstrations and lectures to introduce the new invention to the scientific community as well as the general public. A short time later, his demonstration of an early telephone prototype at the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia brought the telephone to international attention. Webb 1991, p. 15. Influential visitors to the exhibition included Emperor Pedro II of Brazil. Later Bell had the opportunity to demonstrate the invention personally to Sir William Thomson (later, Lord Kelvin), a renowned Scottish scientist, as well as to Queen Victoria who had requested a private audience at Osborne House, her Isle of Wight home. She called the demonstration "most extraordinary". The enthusiasm surrounding Bell's public displays laid the groundwork for universal acceptance of the revolutionary device. Ross 1995, pp. 2122. 

The Bell Telephone Company was created in 1877, and by 1886, more than 150,000 people in the U.S. owned telephones. Bell company engineers made numerous other improvements to the telephone, which emerged as one of the most successful products ever. In 1879, the Bell company acquired Edison's patents for the carbon microphone from Western Union. This made the telephone practical for longer distances and it was no longer necessary to shout to be heard at the receiving telephone.

In January 1915, Bell made the first ceremonial transcontinental telephone call. Calling from the AT&T head office at 15 Dey Street in New York City, Bell was heard by Thomas Watson at 333 Grant Avenue in San Francisco. The New York Times reported:

===Competitors===

As is sometimes common in scientific discoveries, simultaneous developments can occur, as evidenced by a number of inventors who were at work on the telephone. Over a period of 18 years, the Bell Telephone Company faced 587 court challenges to its patents, including five that went to the U.S. Supreme Court, Australasian Telephone Collecting Society. "Who Really Invented The Telephone?" ATCS, Moorebank, NSW, Australia. Retrieved from telephonecollecting.org on April 22, 2011. but none was successful in establishing priority over the original Bell patent Black 1997, p. 19. and the Bell Telephone Company never lost a case that had proceeded to a final trial stage. Bell's laboratory notes and family letters were the key to establishing a long lineage to his experiments. Groundwater 2005, p. 95. The Bell company lawyers successfully fought off myriad lawsuits generated initially around the challenges by Elisha Gray and Amos Dolbear. In personal correspondence to Bell, both Gray and Dolbear had acknowledged his prior work, which considerably weakened their later claims. Mackay 1997, p. 179. 

On January 13, 1887, the U,S. Government moved to annul the patent issued to Bell on the grounds of fraud and misrepresentation. After a series of decisions and reversals, the Bell company won a decision in the Supreme Court, though a couple of the original claims from the lower court cases were left undecided. "U.S. Supreme Court: U S v. AMERICAN BELL TEL CO, 167 U.S. 224 (1897)." caselaw.lp. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. "United States V. American Bell Telephone Co., 128 U.S. 315 (1888)." supreme.justia.com. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. By the time that the trial wound its way through nine years of legal battles, the U.S. prosecuting attorney had died and the two Bell patents (No. 174,465 and dated March 7, 1876 and No. 186,787 dated January 30, 1877) were no longer in effect, although the presiding judges agreed to continue the proceedings due to the case's importance as a "precedent". With a change in administration and charges of conflict of interest (on both sides) arising from the original trial, the US Attorney General dropped the lawsuit on November 30, 1897 leaving several issues undecided on the merits. Basilio Catania 2002 "The United States Government vs. Alexander Graham Bell. An important acknowledgment for Antonio Meucci." Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 22, 2002, pp. 426442. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. 

During a deposition filed for the 1887 trial, Italian inventor Antonio Meucci also claimed to have created the first working model of a telephone in Italy in 1834. In 1886, in the first of three cases in which he was involved, Meucci took the stand as a witness in the hopes of establishing his invention's priority. Meucci's evidence in this case was disputed due to a lack of material evidence for his inventions as his working models were purportedly lost at the laboratory of American District Telegraph (ADT) of New York, which was later incorporated as a subsidiary of Western Union in 1901. Catania, Basilio "Antonio Meucci  Questions and Answers: What did Meucci to bring his invention to the public?" Chezbasilio.org. Retrieved: July 8, 2009. "History of ADT Security." ADT.com website. Retrieved: July 8, 2009. Meucci's work, like many other inventors of the period, was based on earlier acoustic principles and despite evidence of earlier experiments, the final case involving Meucci was eventually dropped upon Meucci's death. Bruce 1990, pp. 271272. However, due to the efforts of Congressman Vito Fossella, the U.S. House of Representatives on June 11, 2002 stated that Meucci's "work in the invention of the telephone should be acknowledged", even though this did not put an end to a still contentious issue. "H.RES.269: Resolution 269." thomas.loc.gov. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. "Congressional Record on Meucci." esanet.it. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. "Meucci Story." Italian Historical Society. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. Some modern scholars do not agree with the claims that Bell's work on the telephone was influenced by Meucci's inventions. "Antonio Meucci." inventors.about.com. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. 

The value of the Bell patent was acknowledged throughout the world, and patent applications were made in most major countries, but when Bell had delayed the German patent application, the electrical firm of Siemens & Halske (S&H) managed to set up a rival manufacturer of Bell telephones under their own patent. The Siemens company produced near-identical copies of the Bell telephone without having to pay royalties. Mackay 1997, p. 178. The establishment of the International Bell Telephone Company in Brussels, Belgium in 1880, as well as a series of agreements in other countries eventually consolidated a global telephone operation. The strain put on Bell by his constant appearances in court, necessitated by the legal battles, eventually resulted in his resignation from the company. Parker 1995, p. 23. 

==Family life==
Alexander Graham Bell, his wife Mabel Gardiner Hubbard, and their daughters Elsie (left) and Marian ca. 1885

The Brodhead-Bell mansion, the Bell family residence in Washington, D.C., from 1882 to 1889. Bruce 1990, pp. 297299. 

On July 11, 1877, a few days after the Bell Telephone Company was established, Bell married Mabel Hubbard (18571923) at the Hubbard estate in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His wedding present to his bride was to turn over 1,487 of his 1,497 shares in the newly formed Bell Telephone Company. Eber 1982, p. 44. Shortly thereafter, the newlyweds embarked on a year-long honeymoon in Europe. During that excursion, Alec took a handmade model of his telephone with him, making it a "working holiday". The courtship had begun years earlier; however, Alexander waited until he was more financially secure before marrying. Although the telephone appeared to be an "instant" success, it was not initially a profitable venture and Bell's main sources of income were from lectures until after 1897. Dunn 1990, p. 28. One unusual request exacted by his fiance was that he use "Alec" rather than the family's earlier familiar name of "Aleck". From 1876, he would sign his name "Alec Bell". Mackay 1997, p. 120. They had four children: Elsie May Bell (18781964) who married Gilbert Grosvenor of National Geographic fame, Marian Hubbard Bell (18801962) who was referred to as "Daisy", and two sons who died in infancy (Edward in 1881 and Robert in 1883). The Bell family home was in Cambridge, Massachusetts, until 1880 when Bell's father-in-law bought a house in Washington, D.C., and later in 1882 bought a home in the same city for Bell's family, so that they could be with him while he attended to the numerous court cases involving patent disputes. Gray 2006, pp. 202205. 

Bell was a British subject throughout his early life in Scotland and later in Canada until 1882, when he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. In 1915, he characterized his status as: "I am not one of those hyphenated Americans who claim allegiance to two countries." Bruce 1990, p. 90. Despite this declaration, Bell has been proudly claimed as a "native son" by all three countries he resided in: the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. Bruce 1990, pp. 471472. 

By 1885, a new summer retreat was contemplated. That summer, the Bells had a vacation on Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, spending time at the small village of Baddeck. Bethune 2009, p. 2. Returning in 1886, Bell started building an estate on a point across from Baddeck, overlooking Bras d'Or Lake. Bethune 2009, p. 92. By 1889, a large house, christened The Lodge was completed and two years later, a larger complex of buildings, including a new laboratory, were begun that the Bells would name Beinn Bhreagh (Gaelic: beautiful mountain) after Alec's ancestral Scottish highlands. Tulloch 2006, pp. 2527. Bell also built the Bell Boatyard on the estate, employing up to 40 people building experimental craft as well as wartime lifeboats and workboats for the Royal Canadian Navy and pleasure craft for the Bell family. An enthusiastic boater, Bell and his family sailed a rowed a long series of vessels on Bras d'Or Lake, ordering additional vessels from the H.W. Embree and Sons boatyard in Port Hawkesbury, Nova Scotia. In his final, and some of his most productive years, Bell split his residency between Washington, D.C., where he and his family initially resided for most of the year, and at Beinn Bhreagh where they spent increasing amounts of time. MacLeod 1999, p. 22. 

Until the end of his life, Bell and his family would alternate between the two homes, but Beinn Bhreagh would, over the next 30 years, become more than a summer home as Bell became so absorbed in his experiments that his annual stays lengthened. Both Mabel and Alec became immersed in the Baddeck community and were accepted by the villagers as "their own". The Bells were still in residence at Beinn Bhreagh when the Halifax Explosion occurred on December 6, 1917. Mabel and Alec mobilized the community to help victims in Halifax. Tulloch 2006, p. 42. 

==Later inventions==
Alexander Graham Bell in his later years.

Although Alexander Graham Bell is most often associated with the invention of the telephone, his interests were extremely varied. According to one of his biographers, Charlotte Gray, Bell's work ranged "unfettered across the scientific landscape" and he often went to bed voraciously reading the Encyclopdia Britannica, scouring it for new areas of interest. Gray 2006, p. 219. The range of Bell's inventive genius is represented only in part by the 18 patents granted in his name alone and the 12 he shared with his collaborators. These included 14 for the telephone and telegraph, four for the photophone, one for the phonograph, five for aerial vehicles, four for "hydroairplanes" and two for selenium cells. Bell's inventions spanned a wide range of interests and included a metal jacket to assist in breathing, the audiometer to detect minor hearing problems, a device to locate icebergs, investigations on how to separate salt from seawater, and work on finding alternative fuels.

Bell worked extensively in medical research and invented techniques for teaching speech to the deaf. During his Volta Laboratory period, Bell and his associates considered impressing a magnetic field on a record as a means of reproducing sound. Although the trio briefly experimented with the concept, they could not develop a workable prototype. They abandoned the idea, never realizing they had glimpsed a basic principle which would one day find its application in the tape recorder, the hard disc and floppy disc drive and other magnetic media.

Bell's own home used a primitive form of air conditioning, in which fans blew currents of air across great blocks of ice. He also anticipated modern concerns with fuel shortages and industrial pollution. Methane gas, he reasoned, could be produced from the waste of farms and factories. At his Canadian estate in Nova Scotia, he experimented with composting toilets and devices to capture water from the atmosphere. In a magazine interview published shortly before his death, he reflected on the possibility of using solar panels to heat houses.

===Photophone===

Photophone receiver, one half of Bell's wireless optical communication system, ca. 1880

Bell and his assistant Charles Sumner Tainter jointly invented a wireless telephone, named a photophone, which allowed for the transmission of both sounds and normal human conversations on a beam of light. Bruce 1990, p. 336. Jones, Newell. "First 'Radio' Built by San Diego Resident Partner of Inventor of Telephone: Keeps Notebook of Experiences With Bell." San Diego Evening Tribune, July 31, 1937. Retrieved from the University of San Diego History Department website, November 26, 2009. Both men later became full associates in the Volta Laboratory Association.

On June 21, 1880, Bell's assistant transmitted a wireless voice telephone message a considerable distance, from the roof of the Franklin School in Washington, D.C., to Bell at the window of his laboratory, some 213 m away, 19 years before the first voice radio transmissions. Carson 2007, pp. 7678. Bruce 1990, p. 338. Groth, Mike. "Photophones Revisted." Amateur Radio magazine, Wireless Institute of Australia, Melbourne, April 1987, pp. 1217 and May 1987, pp. 1317. Mims 1982, p. 11. 

Bell believed the photophone's principles were his life's "greatest achievement", telling a reporter shortly before his death that the photophone was "the greatest invention have ever made, greater than the telephone". Phillipson, Donald J.C., and Laura Neilson. "Bell, Alexander Graham." The Canadian Encyclopedia online. Retrieved: August 6, 2009. The photophone was a precursor to the fiber-optic communication systems which achieved popular worldwide usage in the 1980s. Morgan, Tim J. "The Fiber Optic Backbone". University of North Texas, 2011. Miller, Stewart E. "Lightwaves and Telecommunication". American Scientist, Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society, Vol. 72, No. 1, JanuaryFebruary 1984, pp. 66-71. Its master patent was issued in December 1880, many decades before the photophone's principles came into popular use.

===Metal detector===
Bell's voice, from a Volta Laboratory recording in 1885. Restored by the Smithsonian in 2013.

Bell is also credited with the invention of the metal detector in 1881. The device was quickly put together in an attempt to find the bullet in the body of U.S. President James Garfield. According to some accounts, the metal detector worked flawlessly in tests but did not find the assassin's bullet partly because the metal bed frame on which the President was lying disturbed the instrument, resulting in static. Grosvenor and Wesson 1997, p. 107. The president's surgeons, who were skeptical of the device, ignored Bell's requests to move the president to a bed not fitted with metal springs. Alternatively, although Bell had detected a slight sound on his first test, the bullet may have been lodged too deeply to be detected by the crude apparatus. 

Bell's own detailed account, presented to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1882, differs in several particulars from most of the many and varied versions now in circulation, most notably by concluding that extraneous metal was not to blame for failure to locate the bullet. Perplexed by the peculiar results he had obtained during an examination of Garfield, Bell "...proceeded to the Executive Mansion the next morning...to ascertain from the surgeons whether they were perfectly sure that all metal had been removed from the neighborhood of the bed. It was then recollected that underneath the horse-hair mattress on which the President lay was another mattress composed of steel wires. Upon obtaining a duplicate, the mattress was found to consist of a sort of net of woven steel wires, with large meshes. The extent of the that produced a response from the detector having been so small, as compared with the area of the bed, it seemed reasonable to conclude that the steel mattress had produced no detrimental effect." In a footnote, Bell adds that "The death of President Garfield and the subsequent post-mortem examination, however, proved that the bullet was at too great a distance from the surface to have affected our apparatus." Bell, A. 1882. "Upon the electrical experiments to determine the location of the bullet in the body of the late President Garfield; and upon a successful form of induction balance for the painless detection of metallic masses in the human body." (Available at archive.org). Private printing of "A paper read before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, at the Montreal meeting, August 1882." See page 33. Retrieved 29 April 2013. 

===Hydrofoils===

Bell HD-4 on a test run ca. 1919

The March 1906 Scientific American article by American pioneer William E. Meacham explained the basic principle of hydrofoils and hydroplanes. Bell considered the invention of the hydroplane as a very significant achievement. Based on information gained from that article he began to sketch concepts of what is now called a hydrofoil boat. Bell and assistant Frederick W. "Casey" Baldwin began hydrofoil experimentation in the summer of 1908 as a possible aid to airplane takeoff from water. Baldwin studied the work of the Italian inventor Enrico Forlanini and began testing models. This led him and Bell to the development of practical hydrofoil watercraft.

During his world tour of 191011, Bell and Baldwin met with Forlanini in France. They had rides in the Forlanini hydrofoil boat over Lake Maggiore. Baldwin described it as being as smooth as flying. On returning to Baddeck, a number of initial concepts were built as experimental models, including the Dhonnas Beag, the first self-propelled Bell-Baldwin hydrofoil. Boileau 2004, p. 18. The experimental boats were essentially proof-of-concept prototypes that culminated in the more substantial HD-4, powered by Renault engines. A top speed of 54 mph was achieved, with the hydrofoil exhibiting rapid acceleration, good stability and steering along with the ability to take waves without difficulty. Boileau 2004, pp. 2830. In 1913, Dr. Bell hired Walter Pinaud, a Sydney yacht designer and builder as well as the proprietor of Pinaud's Yacht Yard in Westmount, Nova Scotia to work on the pontoons of the HD-4. Pinaud soon took over the boatyard at Bell Laboratories on Beinn Bhreagh, Bell's estate near Baddeck, Nova Scotia. Pinaud's experience in boat-building enabled him to make useful design changes to the HD-4. After the First World War, work began again on the HD-4. Bell's report to the U.S. Navy permitted him to obtain two 350 hp engines in July 1919. On September 9, 1919, the HD-4 set a world marine speed record of 70.86 mph, Boileau 2004, p. 30. a record which stood for ten years.

===Aeronautics===

AEA Silver Dart ca. 1909

In 1891, Bell had begun experiments to develop motor-powered heavier-than-air aircraft. The AEA was first formed as Bell shared the vision to fly with his wife, who advised him to seek "young" help as Alexander was at the graceful age of 60.

In 1898, Bell experimented with tetrahedral box kites and wings constructed of multiple compound tetrahedral kites covered in maroon silk. The tetrahedral wings were named Cygnet I, II and III, and were flown both unmanned and manned (Cygnet I crashed during a flight carrying Selfridge) in the period from 19071912. Some of Bell's kites are on display at the Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site. "Nova Scotia's Electric Scrapbook." ns1763.ca. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. 

Bell was a supporter of aerospace engineering research through the Aerial Experiment Association (AEA), officially formed at Baddeck, Nova Scotia, in October 1907 at the suggestion of his wife Mabel and with her financial support after the sale of some of her real estate. Gillis, Rannie. "Mabel Bell Was A Focal Figure In The First Flight of the Silver Dart." Cape Breton Post, September 29, 2008. Retrieved from "First Airplane Flight In Canada." ns1763.ca, April 2, 2010. Retrieved: June 12, 2010. The AEA was headed by Bell and the founding members were four young men: American Glenn H. Curtiss, a motorcycle manufacturer at the time and who held the title "world's fastest man", having ridden his self-constructed motor bicycle around in the shortest time, and who was later awarded the Scientific American Trophy for the first official one-kilometre flight in the Western hemisphere, and who later became a world-renowned airplane manufacturer; Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge, an official observer from the U.S. Federal government and the only person in the army who believed aviation was the future; Frederick W. Baldwin, the first Canadian and first British subject to pilot a public flight in Hammondsport, New York, and J.A.D. McCurdy Baldwin and McCurdy being new engineering graduates from the University of Toronto. 

The AEA's work progressed to heavier-than-air machines, applying their knowledge of kites to gliders. Moving to Hammondsport, the group then designed and built the Red Wing, framed in bamboo and covered in red silk and powered by a small air-cooled engine. Phillips 1977, p. 95. On March 12, 1908, over Keuka Lake, the biplane lifted off on the first public flight in North America. The innovations that were incorporated into this design included a cockpit enclosure and tail rudder (later variations on the original design would add ailerons as a means of control). One of the AEA's inventions, a practical wingtip form of the aileron, was to become a standard component on all aircraft. The White Wing and June Bug were to follow and by the end of 1908, over 150 flights without mishap had been accomplished. However, the AEA had depleted its initial reserves and only a $15,000 grant from Mrs. Bell allowed it to continue with experiments. Phillips 1977, p. 96. 

Their final aircraft design, the Silver Dart embodied all of the advancements found in the earlier machines. On February 23, 1909, Bell was present as the Silver Dart flown by J.A.D. McCurdy from the frozen ice of Bras d'Or, made the first aircraft flight in Canada. Bell had worried that the flight was too dangerous and had arranged for a doctor to be on hand. With the successful flight, the AEA disbanded and the Silver Dart would revert to Baldwin and McCurdy who began the Canadian Aerodrome Company and would later demonstrate the aircraft to the Canadian Army. Phillips 1977, pp. 9697. 

==Eugenics==

Bell was connected with the eugenics movement in the United States. In his lecture Memoir upon the formation of a deaf variety of the human race presented to the National Academy of Sciences on November 13, 1883 he noted that congenitally deaf parents were more likely to produce deaf children and tentatively suggested that couples where both parties were deaf should not marry. Bell, Alexander Graham. "Memoir upon the formation of a deaf variety of the human race." Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1883. However, it was his hobby of livestock breeding which led to his appointment to biologist David Starr Jordan's Committee on Eugenics, under the auspices of the American Breeders Association. The committee unequivocally extended the principle to man. Bruce 1990, pp. 410417. From 1912 until 1918 he was the chairman of the board of scientific advisers to the Eugenics Record Office associated with Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, and regularly attended meetings. In 1921, he was the honorary president of the Second International Congress of Eugenics held under the auspices of the American Museum of Natural History in New York. Organisations such as these advocated passing laws (with success in some states) that established the compulsory sterilization of people deemed to be, as Bell called them, a "defective variety of the human race". By the late 1930s, about half the states in the U.S. had eugenics laws, and California's compulsory sterilization law was used as a model for that of Nazi Germany. Lusane 2003, p. 124. 

==Legacy and honors==

Bell statue by A.E. Cleeve Horne, similar in style to the Lincoln Memorial, in the front portico of the Bell Telephone Building of Brantford, Ontario, The Telephone City. (Courtesy: Brantford Heritage Inventory, City of Brantford, Ontario, Canada)

Honors and tributes flowed to Bell in increasing numbers as his most famous invention became ubiquitous and his personal fame grew. Bell received numerous honorary degrees from colleges and universities, to the point that the requests almost became burdensome. "Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers." Library of Congress. During his life he also received dozens of major awards, medals and other tributes. These included statuary monuments to both him and the new form of communication his telephone created, notably the Bell Telephone Memorial erected in his honor in Alexander Graham Bell Gardens in Brantford, Ontario, in 1917. Osborne, Harold S. "Biographical Memoir of Alexander Gramam Bell." National Academy of Sciences: Biographical Memoirs, Vol. XXIII, 18471922, presented to the Academy at its 1943 annual meeting. 

A large number of Bell's writings, personal correspondence, notebooks, papers and other documents "Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers: Home." Memory.loc.gov. Retrieved: February 14, 2012. reside at both the United States Library of Congress Manuscript Division (as the Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers), and at the Alexander Graham Bell Institute, Cape Breton University, Nova Scotia; major portions of which are available for online viewing.

A number of historic sites and other marks commemorate Bell in North America and Europe, including the first telephone companies of the United States and Canada. Among the major sites are:
* The Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site, maintained by Parks Canada, which incorporates the Alexander Graham Bell Museum, in Baddeck, Nova Scotia, close to the Bell estate Beinn Bhreagh "Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site." Parks Canada. Retrieved: February 14, 2012. 
* The Bell Homestead National Historic Site, includes the Bell family home, "Melville House", and farm overlooking Brantford, Ontario and the Grand River. It was their first home in North America;
* Canada's first telephone company building, the "Henderson Home" of the late 1870s, a predecessor of the Bell Telephone Company of Canada (officially chartered in 1880). In 1969 the building was carefully moved to the historic Bell Homestead National Historic Site in Brantford, Ontario and was refurbished to become a telephone museum. The Bell Homestead, the Henderson Home telephone museum, and the National Historic Site's reception centre are all maintained by the Bell Homestead Society; "Bell Homestead", Bell Homestead Society. Retrieved: February 14, 2012. 
* The Alexander Graham Bell Memorial Park, which features a broad neoclassical monument built in 1917 by public subscription. The monument graphically depicts mankind's ability to span the globe through telecommunications; "Alexander Graham Bell Memorial Park." maps.google.com. Retrieved: February 14, 2012. 
* The Alexander Graham Bell Museum (opened in 1956), part of the Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site which was completed in 1978 in Baddeck, Nova Scotia. Many of the museum's artifacts were donated by Bell's daughters;The Bell Museum, Cape Breton, part of the Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site.

In 1880, Bell received the Volta Prize with a purse of 50,000 francs (approximately US$ in today's dollars) for the invention of the telephone from the Acadmie franaise, representing the French government. Among the luminaries who judged were Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas. The Volta Prize was conceived by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1801, and named in honor of Alessandro Volta, with Bell receiving the third grand prize in its history. Crosland, Maurice P. "Science Under Control: The French Academy of Sciences, 17951914". Cambridge University Press, 1992. As cited by James Love in "KEI Issues Report on Selected Innovation Prizes and Reward Programs: The Volta Prize For Electricity." Knowledge Ecology International, March 20, 2008, p. 16. Retrieved: January 5, 2010. Davis. John L. "Artisans and savants: The Role of the Academy of Sciences in the Process of Electrical Innovation in France, 18501880." Annals of Science, Volume 55, Issue 3, July 1998, p. 301. Retrieved from InformaWorld.com, January 5, 2010. "Honors to Professor Bell." Boston Daily Evening Traveller, September 1, 1880, Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. "Volta Prize of the French Academy Awarded to Prof. Alexander Graham Bell, September 1, 1880." Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. "Telegram from Grossman to Alexander Graham Bell, August 2, 1880." Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. "Telegram from Alexander Graham Bell to Count du Moncel, 1880." Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. "Letter from Frederick T. Frelinghuysen to Alexander Graham Bell, January 7, 1882." Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. Since Bell was becoming increasingly affluent, he used his prize money to create endowment funds (the 'Volta Fund') and institutions in and around the United States capital of Washington, D.C.. These included the prestigious 'Volta Laboratory Association' (1880), also known as the Volta Laboratory and as the 'Alexander Graham Bell Laboratory', and which eventually led to the Volta Bureau (1887) as a center for studies on deafness which is still in operation in Georgetown, Washington, D.C. The Volta Laboratory became an experimental facility devoted to scientific discovery, and the very next year it improved Edison's phonograph by substituting wax for tinfoil as the recording medium and incising the recording rather than indenting it, key upgrades that Edison himself later adopted. "Letter from Mabel Hubbard Bell, February 27, 1880." Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers. Retrieved: April 5, 2009. Note (N.B.): The last line of the typed note refers to the future disposition of award funds: "... and thus the matter lay till the paper turned up. He intends putting the full amount into his Laboratory and Library". The laboratory was also the site where he and his associate invented his "proudest achievement", "the photophone", the "optical telephone" which presaged fibre optical telecommunications, while the Volta Bureau would later evolve into the Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (the AG Bell), a leading center for the research and pedagogy of deafness.

In partnership with Gardiner Hubbard, Bell helped establish the publication Science during the early 1880s. In 1888, Bell was one of the founding members of the National Geographic Society and became its second president (18971904), and also became a Regent of the Smithsonian Institution (18981922). The French government conferred on him the decoration of the Lgion d'honneur (Legion of Honor); the Royal Society of Arts in London awarded him the Albert Medal in 1902; the University of Wrzburg, Bavaria, granted him a PhD, and he was awarded the Franklin Institute's Elliott Cresson Medal in 1912. He was one of the founders of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1884, and served as its president from 189192. Bell was later awarded the AIEE's Edison Medal in 1914 "For meritorious achievement in the invention of the telephone". "Alexander Graham Bell." IEEE Global History Network. Retrieved: August 8, 2011. 

The bel (B) and the smaller decibel (dB) are units of measurement of sound intensity invented by Bell Labs and named after him. "Decibel." sfu.ca. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. "Definition: 'bel'." freedictionary.com, American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language by Houghton Mifflin Company, Fourth Edition, 2000. Retrieved: September 2, 2009. Since 1976 the IEEE's Alexander Graham Bell Medal has been awarded to honor outstanding contributions in the field of telecommunications.
~ A.G. Bell issue of 1940 ~

In 1936 the US Patent Office declared Bell first on its list of the country's greatest inventors, Beauchamp, Christopher. Who Invented the Telephone?: Lawyers, Patents, and the Judgments of History, Technology and Culture, Vol. 51, No. 4, October 2010, p. 878 (of pp. 854878), . leading to the US Post Office issuing a commemorative stamp honoring Bell in 1940 as part of its 'Famous Americans Series'. The First Day of Issue ceremony was held on October 28 in Boston, Massachusetts, the city where Bell spent considerable time on research and working with the deaf. The Bell stamp became very popular and sold out in little time. The stamp became, and remains to this day, the most valuable one of the series. Scott's United States Stamp catalogue. 

The 150th anniversary of Bell's birth in 1997 was marked by a special issue of commemorative 1 banknotes from the Royal Bank of Scotland. The illustrations on the reverse of the note include Bell's face in profile, his signature, and objects from Bell's life and career: users of the telephone over the ages; an audio wave signal; a diagram of a telephone receiver; geometric shapes from engineering structures; representations of sign language and the phonetic alphabet; the geese which helped him to understand flight; and the sheep which he studied to understand genetics. "Royal Bank Commemorative Notes." Rampant Scotland. Retrieved: October 14, 2008. Additionally, the Government of Canada honored Bell in 1997 with a C$100 gold coin, in tribute also to the 150th anniversary of his birth, and with a silver dollar coin in 2009 to honor of the 100th anniversary of flight in Canada. That first flight was made by an airplane designed under Dr. Bell's tutelage, named the Silver Dart. "100th Anniversary of Flight in Canada." Royal Canadian Mint. Retrieved: June 12, 2010. Bell's image, and also those of his many inventions have graced paper money, coinage and postal stamps in numerous countries worldwide for many dozens of years.

Alexander Graham Bell was ranked 57th among the 100 Greatest Britons (2002) in an official BBC nationwide poll, and among the Top Ten Greatest Canadians (2004), and the 100 Greatest Americans (2005). "100 great British heroes." BBC News World Edition, August 21, 2002. Retrieved: April 5, 2010. "Beatlelinks: The Greatest Britons of All Times." news.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved: December 29, 2009. In 2006 Bell was also named as one of the 10 greatest Scottish scientists in history after having been listed in the National Library of Scotland's 'Scottish Science Hall of Fame'. Bell's name is still widely known and used as part of the names of dozens of educational institutes, corporate namesakes, street and place names around the world.

Bell, an alumnus of the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, receiving an honorary Doctor of Laws degree (LL.D.) at the university in 1906.

===Honorary degrees===
Alexander Graham Bell, who could not complete the university program of his youth, received numerous Honorary Degrees from academic institutions, including:
*Gallaudet College in Washington, D.C. (PhD) in 1880 "Honorary Degree Recipients." Provost.gallaudet.edu. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. 
*Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts (LL.D) in 1896
*University of Wrzburg in Wrzburg, Bavaria (PhD) in 1902
*University of Edinburgh in Edinburgh, Scotland (LL.D) in April 1906 "Overview, Graduations, Registry." Registry.ed.ac.uk, July 12, 2010. Retrieved: July 28, 2010. 
*Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario in 1909
*Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire (LL.D) on June 25, 1913 "Dartmouth graduates." The New York Times. Retrieved: July 30, 2009. 

==Death==
Bell died of complications arising from diabetes on August 2, 1922, at his private estate, Beinn Bhreagh, Nova Scotia, at age 75. Gray 2006, p. 419. Bell had also been afflicted with pernicious anemia. Gray 2006, p. 418. His last view of the land he had inhabited was by moonlight on his mountain estate at 2:00 A.M. Bethune, 2009, p. 119. While tending to him after his long illness, Mabel, his wife, whispered, "Don't leave me." By way of reply, Bell traced the sign for "no" in the air and then he died. "Obituary: Dr. Bell, Inventor of Telephone, Dies: Sudden End, Due to Anemia, Comes in Seventy-Sixth Year at His Nova Scotia Home: Notables Pay Him Tribute." The New York Times, August 3, 1922. Retrieved: March 3, 2009. Bruce 1990, p. 491. 

On learning of Bell's death, the Canadian Prime Minister, Mackenzie King, cabled Mrs. Bell, saying:
Government expresses to you our sense of the world's loss in the death of your distinguished husband. It will ever be a source of pride to our country that the great invention, with which his name is immortally associated, is a part of its history. On the behalf of the citizens of Canada, may I extend to you an expression of our combined gratitude and sympathy. 

Bell's coffin was constructed of Beinn Bhreagh pine by his laboratory staff, lined with the same red silk fabric used in his tetrahedral kite experiments. To help celebrate his life, his wife asked guests not to wear black (the traditional funeral color) while attending his service, during which soloist Jean MacDonald sang a verse of Robert Louis Stevenson's "Requiem": Bethune 2009, pp. 119120. 
Under a wide and starry sky,
Dig the grave and let me lie.
Glad did I live and gladly die
And I lay me down with a will.

Upon the conclusion of Bell's funeral, "every phone on the continent of North America was silenced in honor of the man who had given to mankind the means for direct communication at a distance". Osborne, Harold S. "Biographical Memoir of Alexander Graham Bell, 18471922." National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Bibliographical Memoirs, Volume XXIII, First Memoir. Annual Meeting presentation, 1943, pp. 1819. 

Dr. Alexander Graham Bell was buried atop Beinn Bhreagh mountain, on his estate where he had resided increasingly for the last 35 years of his life, overlooking Bras d'Or Lake. He was survived by his wife Mabel, his two daughters, Elsie May and Marian, and nine of his grandchildren. "Dr. Bell, Inventor of Telephone, Dies." The New York Times, August 3, 1922. Retrieved: July 21, 2007. Quote: Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone, died at 2 o'clock this morning at Beinn Breagh, his estate near Baddeck. "Descendants of Alexander Melville Bell - Three Generations". Bell Telephone Company of Canada Historical Collection and Company Library (undated), from the Brant Historical Society, June 2012. 

==Quotations==

* In scientific researches, there are no unsuccessful experiments; every experiment contains a lesson. If we dont get the results anticipated and stop right there, it is the man that is unsuccessful, not the experiment. 
Bell, Alexander Graham, Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online, 19211930 (Volume XV), University of Toronto and Universit Laval, 2000. Retrieved March 1, 2013. 
* We are all too much inclined, I think, to walk through life with our eyes closed... We should not keep forever on the public road, going only where others have gone; we should leave the beaten track occasionally and enter the woods. Every time you do that you will be certain to find something that you have never seen before.... Follow it up, explore all around it; one discovery will lead to another, and before you know it you will have something worth thinking about to occupy your mind, for all really big discoveries are the results of thought. 
* God has strewn our paths with wonders, and we shall certainly not go through Life with our eyes shut. (1872) 
* To ask the value of speech is like asking the value of life. Through Deaf Eyes: Signing, Alexander Graham Bell and the NAD, PBS.org website. 
* The inventor is a man who looks around upon the world and is not contented with things as they are. He wants to improve whatever he sees, he wants to benefit the world; he is haunted by an idea. The spirit of invention possesses him, seeking materialization. (1891) 
* I have always considered myself as an Agnostic, but I have now discovered that I am a Unitarian Agnostic. (1901) 
* "The day will come when the man at the telephone will be able to see the distant person to whom he is speaking" (c.1906) Far-Off Speakers Seen As Well As Heard Here In A Test Of Television, New York Times, April 8, 1927, pg.20. 
* will not be long until a man can take dinner in New York and breakfast the next morning in Liverpool (1907). The nation that secures control of the air will ultimately rule the world (1908). 
* Every town or city has a vast expanse of roof exposed to the sun. There is no reason why we should not use the roofs of our houses to install solar apparatus to catch and store the heat received from the sun. Solar heat be used.... to heat a liquid and store the liquid in an insulated tank... applying even the Thermos bottle principle of a partial vacuum around the tank. (1914) Grosvenor and Wesson 1997, p. 269. 
* Coal and oil are......strictly limited in quantity. We can take coal out of a mine but we can never put it back. What shall we do when we have no more coal or oil? Grosvenor and Wesson 1997, p. 274. unchecked burning of fossil fuels would have a sort of greenhouse effect. The net result is the greenhouse becomes a sort of hot-house.(1917). 
* Self-education is a lifelong affair. There cannot be mental atrophy in any person who continues to observe, to remember what he observes, and to seek answers for his unceasing hows and whys about things. Grosvenor and Wesson 1997, p. 275. 

==See also==

*Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
*Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site
*Bell Boatyard
*Bell Homestead National Historic Site
*Bell Telephone Memorial
*Berliner, Emile
*Bourseul, Charles
*Canadian Parliamentary Motion on Alexander Graham Bell
*IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal
*Manzetti, Innocenzo
*Meucci, Antonio
*Oriental Telephone Company
*Reis, Philipp
*Pioneers, a Volunteer Network
*The Telephone Cases
*Volta Laboratory and Bureau

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

===Bibliography===

* Alexander Graham Bell (booklet). Halifax, Nova Scotia: Maritime Telegraph & Telephone Limited, 1979.
* Ayers, William C., Therese Quinn and David Stovall, eds. The Handbook of Social Justice in Education. London: Routledge, 2009. ISBN 978-0-80585-928-7.
* , also published as: 
* Bell, Alexander Graham. The Question of Sign-Language and The Utility of Signs in the Instruction of the DeafTwo papers. Washington, D.C.: Sanders Printing Office, 1898.
* Bethune, Jocelyn. Historic Baddeck (Images of our Past series). Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada: Nimbus Publishing, 2009. ISBN 978-1-55109-706-0.
* Bruce, Robert V. Bell: Alexander Bell and the Conquest of Solitude. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1990. ISBN 0-8014-9691-8.
* Black, Harry. Canadian Scientists and Inventors: Biographies of People who made a Difference. Markham, Ontario, Canada: Pembroke Publishers Limited, 1997. ISBN 1-55138-081-1.
* Boileau, John. Fastest in the World: The Saga of Canada's Revolutionary Hydrofoils. Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada: Formac Publishing Company Limited, 2004. ISBN 0-88780-621-X.
* Dunn, Andrew. Alexander Graham Bell (Pioneers of Science series). East Sussex, UK: Wayland (Publishers) Limited, 1990. ISBN 1-85210-958-0.
* Eber, Dorothy Harley. Genius at Work: Images of Alexander Graham Bell. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: McClelland and Stewart, 1982. ISBN 0-7710-3036-3.
* Evenson, A. Edward. The Telephone Patent Conspiracy of 1876: The Elisha Gray  Alexander Bell Controversy. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland Publishing, 2000. ISBN 0-7864-0138-9.
* Gray, Charlotte. Reluctant Genius: Alexander Graham Bell and the Passion for Invention. New York: Arcade Publishing, 2006. ISBN 1-55970-809-3.
* Grosvenor, Edwin S. and Morgan Wesson. Alexander Graham Bell: The Life and Times of the Man Who Invented the Telephone. New York: Harry N. Abrahms, Inc., 1997. ISBN 0-8109-4005-1.
* Groundwater, Jennifer. Alexander Graham Bell: The Spirit of Invention. Calgary, Alberta, Canada: Altitude Publishing, 2005. ISBN 1-55439-006-0.
* Lusane, Clarence. Hitler's Black Victims: The Historical Experiences of Afro-Germans, European Blacks, Africans, and African Americans in the Nazi Era. Hove, East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press, 2003. ISBN 978-0-415932-950.
* Mackay, James. Sounds Out of Silence: A life of Alexander Graham Bell. Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing Company, 1997. ISBN 1-85158-833-7.
* MacKenzie, Catherine. Alexander Graham Bell. Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger Publishing, 2003. ISBN 978-0-7661-4385-2.
* MacLeod, Elizabeth. Alexander Graham Bell: An Inventive Life. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Kids Can Press, 1999. ISBN 1-55074-456-9.
* Matthews, Tom L. Always Inventing: A Photobiography of Alexander Graham Bell. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society, 1999. ISBN 0-7922-7391-5.
* Micklos, John Jr. Alexander Graham Bell: Inventor of the Telephone. New York: Harper Collins Publishers Ltd., 2006. ISBN 978-0-06-057618-9.
* Miller, Don and Jan Branson. Damned For Their Difference: The Cultural Construction Of Deaf People as Disabled: A Sociological History. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-1-56368-121-9.
* Mims III, Forest M. "The First Century of Lightwave Communications." Fiber Optics Weekly Update(Information Gatekeepers), February 1026, 1982, pp. 623.
* Mullett, Mary B. The Story of A Famous Inventor. New York: Rogers and Fowle, 1921.
* Parker, Steve. Alexander Graham Bell and the Telephone(Science Discoveries series). New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1995. ISBN 0-7910-3004-0.
* Petrie, A. Roy. Alexander Graham Bell. Don Mills, Ontario: Fitzhenry & Whiteside Limited, 1975. ISBN 0-88902-209-7.
* Phillips, Allan. Into the 20th Century: 1900/1910 (Canada's Illustrated Heritage). Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Natural Science of Canada Limited, 1977. ISBN 0-919644-22-8.
* Ross, Stewart. Alexander Graham Bell (Scientists who Made History series). New York: Raintree Steck-Vaughn Publishers, 2001. ISBN 0-7398-4415-6.
* Shulman, Seth. The Telephone Gambit: Chasing Alexander Bell's Secret. New York: Norton & Company, 2008. ISBN 978-0-393-06206-9.
* Toward, Lilias M. Mabel Bell: Alexander's Silent Partner. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Methuen, 1984. ISBN 0-458-98090-0, ISBN 978-0-458-98090-1.
* Town, Florida. Alexander Graham Bell. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Grolier Limited, 1988. ISBN 0-7172-1950-X.
* Tulloch, Judith. The Bell Family in Baddeck: Alexander Graham Bell and Mabel Bell in Cape Breton. Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada: Formac Publishing Company Limited, 2006. ISBN 978-0-88780-713-8.
* Walters, Eric. The Hydrofoil Mystery. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Puffin Books, 1999. ISBN 0-14-130220-8.
* Webb, Michael, ed. Alexander Graham Bell: Inventor of the Telephone. Mississauga, Ontario, Canada: Copp Clark Pitman Ltd., 1991. ISBN 0-7730-5049-3.
* Winfield, Richard. Never the Twain Shall Meet: Bell, Gallaudet, and the Communications Debate. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University Press, 1987. ISBN 0-913580-99-6.
* Wing, Chris. Alexander Graham Bell at Baddeck. Baddeck, Nova Scotia, Canada: Christopher King, 1980.
* Winzer, Margret A. The History Of Special Education: From Isolation To Integration. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet University Press, 1993. ISBN 978-1-56368-018-2.

==External links==

* Alexander Graham Bell Institute at Cape Breton University
* Bell Telephone Memorial, Brantford, Ontario
* Bell Homestead National Historic Site, Brantford, Ontario
* Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site of Canada, Baddeck, Nova Scotia
* Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers at the Library of Congress
* 
* Biography at the Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online
* Science.ca profile: Alexander Graham Bell
* 
* 
* 

===Patents===
U.S. patent images in TIFF format
* Improvement in Transmitters and Receivers for Electric Telegraphs, filed March 1875, issued April 1875 (multiplexing signals on a single wire)
* Improvement in Telegraphy, filed February 14, 1876, issued March 7, 1876 (Bell's first telephone patent)
* Improvement in Telephonic Telegraph Receivers, filed April 1876, issued June 1876
* Improvement in Generating Electric Currents (using rotating permanent magnets), filed August 1876, issued August 1876
* Electric Telegraphy (permanent magnet receiver), filed January 15, 1877, issued January 30, 1877
* Apparatus for Signalling and Communicating, called Photophone, filed August 1880, issued December 1880
* Aerial Vehicle, filed June 1903, issued April 1904

===Multimedia===
* Alexander Graham Bell at The Biography Channel
* 
* 
* 
* 

 
 

 



[[Anatolia]]

The location of Turkey (within the rectangle) in reference to the European continent. Anatolia roughly corresponds to the Asian part of Turkey.

Anatolia (from Greek ,  "east" or "(sun)rise"; in modern ), in geography known as Asia Minor (from  "small Asia"), Asian Turkey, Anatolian peninsula, or Anatolian plateau, denotes the westernmost protrusion of Asia, which makes up the majority of the Republic of Turkey. "Anatolia comprises more than 95 percent of Turkey's total land area." The region is bounded by the Black Sea to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and the Aegean Sea to the west. The Sea of Marmara forms a connection between the Black and Aegean Seas through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits and separates Anatolia from Thrace on the European mainland. Traditionally, Anatolia is considered to extend in the east to a line between the Gulf of skenderun and the Black Sea, approximately corresponding to the western two-thirds of the Asian part of Turkey. However, since Anatolia is now often considered to be synonymous with Asian Turkey, its eastern and southeastern borders are widely taken to be the Turkish borders with the neighboring countries, which are Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, and Syria, in clockwise direction.

==Definition==
traditional definition of Anatolia within modern Turkey Stephen Mitchell, Anatolia: Land, Men, and Gods in Asia Minor. The Celts in Anatolia and the impact of Roman rule. Clarendon Press, Aug 24, 1995 - 296 pages. ISBN 978-0198150299 [http://books.google.com/books?id=pUYtwuve40kC&dq=anatolia&hl=en&sa=X&ei=1OC3T-CDDoGsiAL4q7X-Bg&ved=0CDoQ6AEwAQ ]]
The Anatolian peninsula, also called Asia Minor, is bounded by the Black Sea to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, the Aegean Sea to the west, and the Sea of Marmara to the northwest, which separates Anatolia from Thrace in Europe.

Traditionally, Anatolia is considered to extend in the east to an indefinite line running from the Gulf of skenderun to the Black Sea, coterminous with the Anatolian Plateau. This traditional geographical definition is used, for example, in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary, as well as the archeological community. Under this definition, Anatolia is bounded to the East by the Armenian Highland, and the Euphrates before that river bends to the southeast to enter Mesopotamia. To the southeast, it is bounded by the ranges that separate it from the Orontes valley in Syria (region) and the Mesopotamian plain. 

However, following the establishment of the Republic of Turkey, Anatolia was defined by the Turkish government as being effectively co-terminous with Asian Turkey. Turkey's First Geography Congress in 1941 created two regions to the east of the Gulf of Iskenderun-Black Sea line named the Eastern Anatolia Region and the Southeastern Anatolia Region, Ali Yiit, "Gemiten Gnmze Trkiye'yi Blgelere Ayran almalar ve Yaplmas Gerekenler", Ankara niversitesi Trkiye Corafyas Aratrma ve Uygulama Merkezi, IV. Ulural Corafya Sempozyumu, "Avrupa Birlii Srecindeki Trkiye'de Blgesel Farkllklar", pp. 34-35. the former largely corresponding to the western part of the Armenian Highland, the latter to the northern part of the Mesopotamian plain. This wider definition of Anatolia has gained widespread currency outside of Turkey and has, for instance, been adopted by Encyclopdia Britannica and other encyclopedic and general reference publications. 

==Etymology==
The oldest known reference to Anatolia  as Land of the Hatti  was found on Mesopotamian cuneiform tablets from the period of the Akkadian Empire (23502150 BC). The first name the Greeks used for the Anatolian peninsula was  (Asa), Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, , A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus presumably after the name of the Assuwa league in western Anatolia. As the name of Asia came to be extended to other areas east of the Mediterranean, the name for Anatolia was specified as   (Mikr Asa) or Asia Minor, meaning Lesser Asia, in Late Antiquity.

The name Anatolia derives from the Greek () meaning the East or more literally sunrise, comparable to the Latin derived terms levant and orient. Online Etymology Dictionary The precise reference of this term has varied over time, perhaps originally referring to the Aeolian, Ionian and Dorian colonies on the west coast of Asia Minor. In the Byzantine Empire, the Anatolic Theme (A ) was a theme covering the western and central parts of Turkeys present-day Central Anatolia Region. On the First Thema, called Anatolikn. This theme is called Anatolikn or Theme of the Anatolics, not because it is above and in the direction of the east where the sun rises, but because it lies to the East of Byzantium and Europe. Constantine VII Porphyogenitus, De Thematibus, ed. A. Pertusi. Vatican: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 1952, pp. 5961. John Haldon, Byzantium, a History, 2002. Page 32 The modern Turkish form of Anatolia is Anadolu, which again derives from the Greek name A (Anatol). The Russian male name Anatoly and the French Anatole share the same linguistic origin.

In English the name of Turkey for ancient Anatolia first appeared c. 1369. It is derived from the Medieval Latin Turchia (meaning Land of the Turks, Turkish Trkiye), which was originally used by the Europeans to define the Seljuk controlled parts of Anatolia after the Battle of Manzikert.

==History==

===Prehistory and antiquity===
Mural of aurochs, a deer, and humans in atalhyk, which is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. It was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2012. 

Human habitation in Anatolia dates back to the Paleolithic. Neolithic Anatolia has been also proposed as the homeland of the Indo-European language family, although linguists tend to favour a later origin in the steppes north of the Black Sea. However, it is clear that the Indo-European Anatolian languages had been present in Anatolia since at least the 19th century BC.

Eastern Anatolia contains the oldest monumental structures in the world. For example, the monumental structures at Gbekli Tepe were built by hunters and gatherers a thousand years before the development of agriculture. Eastern Anatolia, alongside Mesopotamia and the Levant, is a heart region for the Neolithic Revolution, one of the earliest areas in which humans domesticated plants and animals. Neolithic sites such as atalhyk, ayn, Neval ori and Hacilar represent the world's oldest known agricultural towns.

The earliest historical records of Anatolia stem from the southeast of the region and are from the Mesopotamia-based Akkadian Empire during the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 24th century BC. Scholars generally believe the earliest indigenous populations of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians. The Hattians spoke a language of unclear affiliation, and the Hurrian language belongs to a small family called Hurro-Urartian, all these languages now being extinct; relationships with indigenous languages of the Caucasus have been proposed Bryce 2005:12 but are not generally accepted. The region was famous for exporting raw materials, and areas of Hattian- and Hurrian-populated southeast Anatolia were colonised by the Akkadians. 

The Lion Gate at Hattusa, capital of the Hittite Empire. The city's history dates to before 2000 BC.
After the fall of the Akkadian empire in the mid-21st century BC, the Assyrians, who were the northern branch of the Akkadian people, colonised parts of the region between the 21st and mid-18th centuries BC and claimed the resources, notably silver. One of the numerous cuneiform records dated circa 20th century BC, found in Anatolia at the Assyrian colony of Kanesh, uses an advanced system of trading computations and credit lines. 

Unlike the Semitic Akkadians and their descendants, the Assyrians, whose Anatolian possessions were peripheral to their core lands in Mesopotamia, the Hittites were centred at Hattusa in north-central Anatolia by 2000 BC. They were speakers of an Indo-European language known as the "language of Nesa". Originating from Nesa, they conquered Hattusa in the 18th century BC, imposing themselves over Hattian- and Hurrian-speaking populations.

The Hittites adopted the cuneiform written script, invented in Mesopotamia. During the Late Bronze Age circa 2000 BC, they created an empire, the Hittite New Kingdom, which reached its height in the 14th century BC, controlling much of Asia Minor. The empire included a large part of Anatolia, northwestern Syria and northwest upper Mesopotamia. They failed to reach the Anatolian coasts of the Black Sea, however, as another non-Indo-European people, the Kaskians, had established a kingdom there in the 17th century BC, displacing earlier Palaic speaking Indo-Europeans. Carruba, O. Das Palaische. Texte, Grammatik, Lexikon. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970. StBoT 10 Much of the history of the Hittite Empire was concerned with warring with the rival empires of Egypt, Assyria and the Mitanni. Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq 

Lycian rock cut tombs of Kaunos (Dalyan)
The Mitanni Empire was also an Indo-European (and Hurrian)-speaking and Anatolian-based empire. The Mitanni appeared in the 17th century BC and spoke an Indo-Aryan language related to the Indo-European languages eventually to be found in India. Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq, p. 229. Penguin Books, 1966. 

The Egyptians eventually withdrew from the region after failing to gain the upper hand over the Hittites and becoming wary of the power of Assyria, which had destroyed the Mitanni Empire. The Assyrians and Hittites were then left in the field to battle over control over eastern and southern Anatolia and colonial territories in Syria. The Assyrians had better success than the Egyptians, annexing much Hittite (and Hurrian) territories in these regions. Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books, 1966. 

After 1180 BC, the Hittite empire disintegrated into several independent "Neo-Hittite" states, subsequent to losing much territory to the Middle Assyrian Empire and being finally overrun by the Phrygians, another Indo-European people who are believed to have migrated from the Balkans. The Phrygian expansion into southeast Anatolia was eventually halted by the Assyrians, who controlled that region. 

Ancient regions of Anatolia (500 BC)
Ancient Anatolia is subdivided by modern scholars into regions named after the Indo-European (and largely Hittite, Luwian or Greek speaking) peoples that occupied them, such as Lydia, Lycia, Caria, Mysia, Bithynia, Phrygia, Galatia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, Paphlagonia, Cilicia, and Cappadocia.

Semitic Arameans encroached over the borders of south central Anatolia in the century or so after the fall of the Hittite empire, and some of the Neo-Hittite states in this region became an amalgam of Hittites and Arameans. These became known as Syro-Hittite states.

In central and western Anatolia, another Indo-European people, the Luwians, came to the fore, circa 2000 BC. Their language was closely related to Hittite. Melchert 2003 The general consensus amongst scholars is that Luwian was spokento a greater or lesser degreeacross a large area of western Anatolia, including (possibly) Wilusa (Troy), the Seha River Land (to be identified with the Hermos and/or Kaikos valley), and the kingdom of Mira-Kuwaliya with its core territory of the Maeander valley. Watkins 1994; id. 1995:14451; Starke 1997; Melchert 2003; for the geography Hawkins 1998 From the 9th century BC, Luwian regions coalesced into a number of states such as Lydia, Caria and Lycia, all of which had Hellenic influence.

The north western coasts of Anatolia were inhabited by Greeks of the Achaean/Mycenaean culture from the 20th century BC, related to the Greeks of south eastern Europe and the Aegean. Carl Roebuck, The World of Ancient Times 

The temple of Athena (funded by Alexander the Great) in the Greek city of Priene
Beginning with the Bronze Age collapse at the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the west coast of Anatolia was settled by Ionian Greeks, usurping the area of the related but earlier Mycenaean Greeks. Over several centuries, numerous Ancient Greek city-states were established on the coasts of Anatolia. Greeks started Western philosophy on the western coast of Anatolia (Pre-Socratic philosophy). 

Hurrian kingdoms, such as Nairi and the powerful state of Urartu arose in northeastern Anatolia from the 10th century BC, before eventually falling to the Assyrians. During the same period the Georgian states of Colchis and Tabal arose around the Black Sea and central Anatolia respectively.

From the late 8th century BC, a new wave of Indo-European-speaking raiders entered northern and northeast Anatolia: the Cimmerians and Scythians. The Cimmerians overran Phrygia and the Scythians threatened to do the same to Urartu and Lydia, before both were finally checked by the Assyrians.

From the 10th to late 7th centuries BC, much of Anatolia (particularly the east, central, southwestern and southeastern regions) fell to the Neo Assyrian Empire, including all of the Neo-Hittite and Syro-Hittite states, Phrygia, Urartu, Nairi, Tabal, Cilicia, Commagene, Caria, Lydia, the Cimmerians and Scythians and swathes of Cappadocia.

The Assyrian empire collapsed due to a bitter series of civil wars followed by a combined attack by Medes, Persians, Scythians and their own Babylonian relations. The last Assyrian city to fall was Harran in southeast Anatolia. This city was the birthplace of the last king of Babylon, the Assyrian Nabonidus and his son and regent Belshazzar. Much of the region then fell to the short-lived Iran-based Median Empire, with the Babylonians and Scythians briefly appropriating some territory.

The Dying Gaul c. 230 BC, a Roman copy of a Greek statue commemorating the victory over the Celtic Galatians in Anatolia
Anatolia is known as the birthplace of minted coinage (as opposed to unminted coinage, which first appears in Mesopotamia at a much earlier date) as a medium of exchange, some time in the 7th century BC in Lydia. The use of minted coins continued to flourish during the Greek and Roman eras. Asia Minor Coins - an index of Greek and Roman coins from Asia Minor (ancient Anatolia) 

During the 6th century BC, most of Anatolia was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire, the Persians having usurped the Medes as the dominant dynasty in Iran. Also in the 6th century BC, the Indo-European Armenians founded the Orontid Dynasty in Urartu. In 499 BC, the Ionian city-states on the west coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule. The Ionian Revolt, as it became known, initiated the Greco-Persian Wars, which ended in a Greek victory in 449 BC, and the Ionian cities regained their independence.

In 334 BC, the Macedonian Greek king Alexander the Great conquered the peninsula. Alexander's conquest opened up the interior of Asia Minor to Greek settlement and influence. Following the death of Alexander and the breakup of his empire, Anatolia was ruled by a series of Hellenistic kingdoms, such as the Attalids of Pergamum and the Seleucids, the latter controlling most of Anatolia. A period of peaceful Hellenization followed, such that the local Anatolian languages had been supplanted by Greek by the 1st century BC. In 133 BC the last Attalid king bequeathed his kingdom to the Roman Republic, and western and central Anatolia came under Roman control, but Hellenistic culture remained predominant. During the 1st century BC the Armenians established the powerful Armenian kingdom under Tigran who reigned throughout much of eastern Anatolia between the Caspian, Black, and Mediterranean seas. Areas of the southeast such as Harran and the Hakkari mountains continued to be inhabited by remnants of the Assyrians, but these regions remained under Parthian and then Sassanid Persian rule.

===Medieval and Renaissance periods===
Byzantine Anatolia and the Byzantine-Arab frontier zone in the mid-9th century
Beyliks and other states around Anatolia, c. 1300.

After the division of the Roman Empire, Anatolia became part of the East Roman, or Byzantine Empire. Anatolia was one of the first places where Christianity spread, so that by the 4th century AD, western and central Anatolia were overwhelmingly Christian and Greek-speaking. For the next 600 years, while Imperial possessions in Europe were subjected to barbarian invasions, Anatolia would be the center of the Hellenic world. Byzantine control was challenged by Arab raids starting in the 8th century (see ByzantineArab Wars), but in the 9th and 10th century a resurgent Byzantine Empire regained its lost territories and even expanded beyond its traditional borders, into Armenia and Syria (ancient Aram). In the 10 years following the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, the Seljuk Turks from Central Asia established themselves over large areas of Anatolia, with particular concentrations around the north western rim. The Turkish language and the Islamic religion were gradually introduced as a result of the Seljuk conquest, and this period marks the start of Anatolia's slow transition from predominantly Christian and Greek-speaking, to predominantly Muslim and Turkish-speaking (although some ethnic groups such as Armenians, Greeks, Assyrians remained numerous and retained Christianity and their native languages). In the following century, the Byzantines managed to reassert their control in western and northern Anatolia. Control of Anatolia was then split between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljuk Sultanate of Rm, with the Byzantine holdings gradually being reduced. In 1255, the Mongols swept through eastern and central Anatolia, and would remain until 1335. The Ilkhanate garrison was stationed near Ankara. H. M. Balyuzi Muammad and the course of Islm, p.342 John Freely Storm on Horseback: The Seljuk Warriors of Turkey, p.83 

By the end of the 14th century, most of Anatolia was controlled by various Anatolian beyliks. Smyrna fell in 1330, and the last Byzantine stronghold in Anatolia, Philadelphia, fell in 1390. The Turkmen Beyliks were under the control of the Mongols, at least nominally, through declining Seljuk Sultans. Mehmet Fuat Kprl, Gary Leiser-The origins of the Ottoman empire, p.33 Peter Partner God of battles: holy wars of Christianity and Islam, p.122 The Beyliks did not mint coins in the names of their own leaders while they remained under the suzerainty of the Mongol Ilkhanids. Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire, p.13 The Osmanli ruler Osman I was the first Turkish ruler who minted coins in his own name in 1320s, for it bears the legend "Minted by Osman son of Ertugul". Artuk - Osmanli Beyliginin Kurucusu, 27f Since the minting of coins was a prerogative accorded in Islamic practice only to a sovereign, it can be considered that Osmanli became formally independent from the Mongol Khans. Pamuk - A Monetary History, p.30-31 

After the decline of the Ilkhanate from 13351353, the Mongol Empire's legacy in the region was the Uyghur Eretna Dynasty that was overthrown by Kadi Burhan al-Din in 1381. Clifford Edmund Bosworth-The new Islamic dynasties: a chronological and genealogical manual, p.234 Among the Turkmen leaders the Ottomans emerged as great power under Osman and his son Orhan I. The Anatolian beyliks were in turn absorbed into the rising Ottoman Empire during the 15th century. The Ottomans completed the conquest of the peninsula in 1517 with the taking of Halicarnassus (modern Bodrum) from the Knights of Saint John.

===Modern times===
Ethnographic map of Anatolia from 1911.

With the beginning of the slow decline of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century, and as a result of the expansionist policies of Czarist Russia in the Caucasus, many Muslim nations and groups in that region, mainly Circassians, Tatars, Azeris, Lezgis, Chechens and several Turkic groups left their ancestral homelands and settled in Anatolia. As the Ottoman Empire further shrank in the Balkan regions and then fragmented during the Balkan Wars, much of the non-Christian populations of its former possessions, mainly Balkan Muslims (Bosnians, Albanians, Turks, Muslim Bulgarians and Greek Muslims such as the Vallahades from Greek Macedonia, Bulgaria, Northern Macedonia), were resettled in various parts of Anatolia, mostly in formerly Christian villages throughout Anatolia. Justin McCarthy, Death and Exile: The Ethnic Cleansing of Ottoman Muslims, 1821-1922, 1996, ISBN 0-87850-094-4 

A continuous reverse migration occurred since the early 19th century, when Greeks from Anatolia, Constantinopole and Pontus area migrated toward the newly independent Kingdom of Greece, and also towards the United States, southern part of the Russian Empire, Latin America and rest of Europe. Following the Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) and the incorporation of the Eastern Armenia into the Russian Empire, another reverse migration involved the large Armenian population of Anatolia, which recorded significant migration rates from Western Armenia (Eastern Anatolia) toward the Russian Empire, especially toward the newly established Armenian provinces of the empire.

Anatolia remained multi-ethnic until the early 20th century (see the rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire). During World War I, the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide (especially in Pontus), and the Assyrian Genocide almost entirely removed the ancient indigenous communities of Armenian and Assyrian populations in Anatolia, as well as a large part of its ethnic Greek population. Following the Greco-Turkish War of 1919-1922, all remaining ethnic Anatolian Greeks were forced out during the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey. Since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, Anatolia has become Turkey, its inhabitants being mainly Turks and Kurds (see demographics of Turkey and history of Turkey).

==Geography==

===Geology===

Anatolia's terrain is structurally complex. A central massif composed of uplifted blocks and downfolded troughs, covered by recent deposits and giving the appearance of a plateau with rough terrain, is wedged between two folded mountain ranges that converge in the east. True lowland is confined to a few narrow coastal strips along the Aegean, Mediterranean, and Black Sea coasts. Flat or gently sloping land is rare and largely confined to the deltas of the Kzl River, the coastal plains of ukurova and the valley floors of the Gediz River and the Byk Menderes River as well as some interior high plains in Anatolia, mainly around Lake Tuz (Salt Lake) and the Konya Basin (Konya Ovasi).

===Climate===

image:Klima_ankara.png|Ankara (central Anatolia)
image:Klima_antalya.png|Antalya (southern Anatolia)
image:Klima_van.png|Van (eastern Anatolia)

Anatolia has a varied range of climates. The central plateau is characterized by a continental climate, with hot summers and cold snowy winters. The south and west coasts enjoy a typical Mediterranean climate, with mild rainy winters, and warm dry summers. The Black Sea and Marmara coasts have temperate oceanic climate, with cool foggy summers and much rainfall throughout the year.

===Ecoregions===
There is a diverse number of plant and animal communities.

The mountains and coastal plain of northern Anatolia experiences humid and mild climate. There are temperate broadleaf, mixed and coniferous forests. The central and eastern plateau, with its drier continental climate, has deciduous forests and forest steppes. Western and southern Anatolia, which have a Mediterranean climate, contain Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions.
* Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests: These temperate broadleaf and mixed forests extend across northern Anatolia, lying between the mountains of northern Anatolia and the Black Sea. They include the enclaves of temperate rainforest lying along the southeastern coast of the Black Sea in eastern Turkey and Georgia. 
* Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests: These forests occupy the mountains of northern Anatolia, running east and west between the coastal Euxine-Colchic forests and the drier, continental climate forests of central and eastern Anatolia. 
* Central Anatolian deciduous forests: These forests of deciduous oaks and evergreen pines cover the plateau of central Anatolia. 
* Central Anatolian steppe: These dry grasslands cover the drier valleys and surround the saline lakes of central Anatolia, and include halophytic (salt tolerant) plant communities. 
* Eastern Anatolian deciduous forests: This ecoregion occupies the plateau of eastern Anatolia. The drier and more continental climate is beneficial for steppe-forests dominated by deciduous oaks, with areas of shrubland, montane forest, and valley forest. 
* Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests: These forests occupy the western, Mediterranean-climate portion of the Anatolian plateau. Pine forests and mixed pine and oak woodlands and shrublands are predominant. 
* Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests: These Mediterranean-climate forests occupy the coastal lowlands and valleys of western Anatolia bordering the Aegean Sea. The ecoregion has forests of Turkish pine (Pinus brutia), oak forests and woodlands, and maquis shrubland of Turkish pine and evergreen sclerophyllous trees and shrubs, including Olive (Olea europaea), Strawberry Tree (Arbutus unedo), Arbutus andrachne, Kermes Oak (Quercus coccifera), and Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis). 
* Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests: These mountain forests occupy the Mediterranean-climate Taurus Mountains of southern Anatolia. Conifer forests are predominant, chiefly Anatolian black pine (Pinus nigra), Cedar of Lebanon (Cedrus libani), Taurus fir (Abies cilicica), and juniper (Juniperus foetidissima and J. excelsa). Broadleaf trees include oaks, hornbeam, and maples. 
* Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests: This ecoregion occupies the coastal strip of southern Anatolia between the Taurus Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea. Plant communities include broadleaf sclerophyllous maquis shrublands, forests of Aleppo Pine (Pinus halepensis) and Turkish Pine (Pinus brutia), and dry oak (Quercus spp.) woodlands and steppes. 

==Demographics==

Almost 80% of the people currently residing in Anatolia are Turks. Kurds constitute a major community in southeastern Anatolia, and are the largest ethnic minority. Abkhazians, Albanians, Arabs, Arameans, Armenians, Assyrians, Azerbaijanis, Bosniaks, Circassians, Gagauz, Georgians, Serbs, Greeks, Hemshin, Jews, Laz, Levantines, Pomaks, Zazas and a number of other ethnic groups also live in Anatolia in smaller numbers.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* 

 



[[Apple Inc.]]

Apple Inc. is an American multinational corporation headquartered in Cupertino, California, that designs, develops, and sells consumer electronics, computer software, online services, and personal computers. Its best-known hardware products are the Mac line of computers, the iPod media player, the iPhone smartphone, and the iPad tablet computer. Its online services include iCloud, iTunes Store, and App Store. Its consumer software includes the OS X and iOS operating systems, the iTunes media browser, the Safari web browser, and the iLife and iWork creativity and productivity suites.

Apple was founded by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne on April 1, 1976, to develop and sell personal computers. It was incorporated as Apple Computer, Inc. on January 3, 1977, and was renamed as Apple Inc. on January 9, 2007, to reflect its shifted focus towards consumer electronics.

Apple is the world's second-largest information technology company by revenue after Samsung Electronics, and the world's third-largest mobile phone maker after Samsung and Nokia. Fortune magazine named Apple the most admired company in the United States in 2008, and in the world from 2008 to 2012. On September 30, 2013, Apple surpassed Coca-Cola to become the world's most valuable brand in the Omnicom Group's "Best Global Brands" report. However, the company has received criticism for its contractors' labor practices, as well as for its own environmental and business practices.

As of June 2014, Apple maintains 425 retail stores in fourteen countries, http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2013/07/23Apple-Reports-Third-Quarter-Results.html as well as the online Apple Store and iTunes Store, US Apple Store. Retrieved July 8, 2013. the latter of which is the world's largest music retailer. Apple is the largest publicly traded corporation in the world by market capitalization, with an estimated market capitalization of $446 billion by January, 2014. As of September 29, 2012, the company had 72,800 permanent full-time employees and 3,300 temporary full-time employees worldwide. Its worldwide annual revenue in 2013 totalled $170 billion. As of Q1 2014, Apple's five-year growth average is 39% for top line growth and 45% for bottom line growth. In May 2013, Apple entered the top ten of the Fortune 500 list of companies for the first time, rising 11 places above its 2012 ranking to take the sixth position. 

==History==

===197680: Founding and incorporation===
The Apple I, Apple's first product, was sold as an assembled circuit board and lacked basic features such as a keyboard, monitor, and case. The owner of this unit added a keyboard and a wooden case.
Apple was established on April 1, 1976, by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak and Ronald Wayne to sell the Apple I personal computer kit, a computer single handedly designed by Wozniak. The kits were hand-built by Wozniak "A Chat with Computing Pioneer Steve Wozniak", National Public Radio, September 29, 2006. and first shown to the public at the Homebrew Computer Club. Wozniak, Stephen. "Homebrew and How the Apple Came to Be", Digital Deli. Retrieved March 2, 2007. The Apple I was sold as a motherboard (with CPU, RAM, and basic textual-video chips), which is less than what is today considered a complete personal computer. Kahney, Leander. Rebuilding an Apple From the Past, Wired, November 19, 2002. The Apple I went on sale in July 1976 and was market-priced at $666.66 ($ in dollars, adjusted for inflation). Game Makers (TV Show): Apple II. Originally aired January 6, 2005. Wozniak, Steven. "iWoz", p. 180. W. W. Norton, 2006. ISBN 978-0-393-06143-7 

Apple was incorporated January 3, 1977, Apple Investor Relations FAQ, Apple inc. Retrieved March 2, 2007. without Wayne, who sold his share of the company back to Jobs and Wozniak for $800. Multi-millionaire Mike Markkula provided essential business expertise and funding of $250,000 during the incorporation of Apple. 

During the first five years of operations, revenues doubled every four months, an average growth rate of 700%.

The Apple II, also invented by Wozniak, was introduced on April 16, 1977, at the first West Coast Computer Faire. It differed from its major rivals, the TRS-80 and Commodore PET, due to its character cell-based color graphics and an open architecture. While early models used ordinary cassette tapes as storage devices, they were superseded by the introduction of a 5 1/4 inch floppy disk drive and interface, the Disk II. 

The Apple II was chosen to be the desktop platform for the first "killer app" of the business world, VisiCalc, a spreadsheet program. Hormby, Thomas. VisiCalc and the rise of the Apple II, Low End Mac, September 22, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. VisiCalc created a business market for the Apple II and gave home users compatibility with the office, an additional reason to buy an Apple II. Apple was a distant third place to Commodore and Tandy until VisiCalc came along. Personal Computer Market Share: 19752004 The figures show Mac higher, but that is not a single model. 

By the end of the 1970s, Apple had a staff of computer designers and a production line. The company introduced the Apple III in May 1980 in an attempt to compete with IBM and Microsoft in the business and corporate computing market. Coventry, Joshua. "Apple III Chaos: What Happened When Apple Tried to Enter the Business Market". Low End Mac. September 1, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. 

Jobs and several Apple employees, including Jef Raskin, visited Xerox PARC in December 1979 to see the Xerox Alto. Xerox granted Apple engineers three days of access to the PARC facilities in return for the option to buy 100,000 shares (800,000 split-adjusted shares) of Apple at the pre-IPO price of $10 a share. Jobs was immediately convinced that all future computers would use a graphical user interface (GUI), and development of a GUI began for the Apple Lisa. 

On December 12, 1980, Apple went public at $22 per share, generating more capital than any IPO since Ford Motor Company in 1956 and instantly creating more millionaires (about 300) than any company in history. Malone, Michale S. Infinite Loop. ISBN 978-1-85410-638-4 

===198189: Success with Macintosh===

Apple's "1984" television ad, set in a dystopian future modeled after the George Orwell novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, set the tone for the introduction of the Macintosh.
Apple began working on the Apple Lisa in 1978. In 1982, Jobs was pushed from the Lisa team due to infighting. Jobs took over Jef Raskin's low-cost-computer project, the Macintosh. A race broke out between the Lisa team and the Macintosh team over which product would ship first. Lisa won the race in 1983 and became the first personal computer sold to the public with a GUI, but was a commercial failure due to its high price tag and limited software titles. Hormby, Thomas. A history of Apple's Lisa, 19791986, Low End Mac, October 6, 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2007. 

The first Macintosh, released in 1984
In 1984, Apple next launched the Macintosh. Its debut was announced by the now famous $1.5 million television commercial "1984". It was directed by Ridley Scott and was aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22, 1984. It is now hailed as a watershed event for Apple's success and a "masterpiece". 

The Macintosh initially sold well, but follow-up sales were not strong Hormby, Thomas. Good-bye Woz and Jobs: How the first Apple era ended in 1985, Low End Mac, October 2, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. due to its high price and limited range of software titles. The Macintosh was the first personal computer to be sold without a programming language at all. Brian Harvey (1994): Is Programing Obsolete?, Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, accessed, and archived June 14, 2013 by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/6HMvs40Qe 

The machine's fortunes changed with the introduction of the LaserWriter, the first PostScript laser printer to be sold at a reasonable price, and PageMaker, an early desktop publishing package. It has been suggested that the combination of these three products was responsible for the creation of the desktop publishing market. The Mac was particularly powerful in the desktop publishing market due to its advanced graphics capabilities, which had necessarily been built in to create the intuitive Macintosh GUI.

In 1985 a power struggle developed between Jobs and CEO John Sculley, who had been hired two years earlier. Hormby, Thomas. Growing Apple with the Macintosh: The Sculley years, Low End Mac, February 22, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. The Apple board of directors instructed Sculley to "contain" Jobs and limit his ability to launch expensive forays into untested products. Rather than submit to Sculley's direction, Jobs attempted to oust him from his leadership role at Apple. Sculley found out that Jobs had been attempting to organize a coup and called a board meeting at which Apple's board of directors sided with Sculley and removed Jobs from his managerial duties. Jobs resigned from Apple and founded NeXT Inc. the same year. 

The Macintosh Portable was Apple's first "portable" Macintosh computer, released in 1989.
The Macintosh Portable was introduced in 1989 and was designed to be just as powerful as a desktop Macintosh, but weighed a bulky 7.5 kg with a 12-hour battery life. After the Macintosh Portable, Apple introduced the PowerBook in 1991. The same year, Apple introduced System 7, a major upgrade to the operating system which added color to the interface and introduced new networking capabilities. It remained the architectural basis for Mac OS until 2001.

The success of the PowerBook and other products brought increasing revenue. For some time, Apple was doing incredibly well, introducing fresh new products and generating increasing profits in the process. The magazine MacAddict named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the "first golden age" of the Macintosh.

Following the success of the Macintosh LC, Apple introduced the Centris line, a low-end Quadra, and the ill-fated Performa line that was sold with an overwhelming number of configurations and software bundles to avoid competing with the various consumer outlets such as Sears, Price Club, and Wal-Mart (the primary dealers for these models). Consumers ended up confused and did not understand the difference between models. 

===199099: Decline and restructuring===

During this time Apple experimented with a number of other failed consumer targeted products including digital cameras, portable CD audio players, speakers, video consoles, and TV appliances. Enormous resources were also invested in the problem-plagued Newton division based on John Sculley's unrealistic market forecasts. Ultimately, none of these products helped, as Apple's market share and stock prices continued to slide.

Apple saw the Apple II series as too expensive to produce, while taking away sales from the low-end Macintosh. In 1990, Apple released the Macintosh LC with a single expansion slot for the Apple IIe Card to migrate Apple II users to the Macintosh platform. Apple stopped selling the Apple IIe in 1993.

Microsoft continued to gain market share with Windows focusing on delivering software to cheap commodity personal computers while Apple was delivering a richly engineered, but expensive, experience. Apple relied on high profit margins and never developed a clear response. Instead, they sued Microsoft for using a graphical user interface similar to the Apple Lisa in Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corporation. Hormby, Thomas. The Apple vs. Microsoft GUI lawsuit, Low End Mac, August 25, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. The lawsuit dragged on for years before it was finally dismissed. At the same time, a series of major product flops and missed deadlines sullied Apple's reputation, and Sculley was replaced as CEO by Michael Spindler. 

The Newton was Apple's first foray into the PDA markets, as well as one of the first in the industry. Despite being a financial flop at the time of its release, it helped pave the way for the Palm Pilot and Apple's own iPhone and iPad in the future.
By the early 1990s, Apple was developing alternative platforms to the Macintosh, such as the A/UX. Apple had also begun to experiment in providing a Mac-only online portal which they called eWorld, developed in collaboration with America Online and designed as a Mac-friendly alternative to other online services such as CompuServe. The Macintosh platform was itself becoming outdated because it was not built for multitasking, and several important software routines were programmed directly into the hardware. In addition, Apple was facing competition from OS/2 and UNIX vendors such as Sun Microsystems. The Macintosh would need to be replaced by a new platform, or reworked to run on more powerful hardware. 

In 1994, Apple allied with IBM and Motorola in the AIM alliance. The goal was to create a new computing platform (the PowerPC Reference Platform), which would use IBM and Motorola hardware coupled with Apple's software. The AIM alliance hoped that PReP's performance and Apple's software would leave the PC far behind, thus countering Microsoft. The same year, Apple introduced the Power Macintosh, the first of many Apple computers to use Motorola's PowerPC processor. 

In 1996, Michael Spindler was replaced by Gil Amelio as CEO. Gil Amelio made many changes at Apple, including extensive layoffs. Chaffin, Bryan. "Former Apple CEO Gil Amelio Lands A New CEO Job | The Mac Observer", The Mac Observer, February 6, 2001. Retrieved August 15, 2008. After numerous failed attempts to improve Mac OS, first with the Taligent project, then later with Copland and Gershwin, Amelio chose to purchase NeXT and its NeXTSTEP operating system, bringing Steve Jobs back to Apple as an advisor. On July 9, 1997, Amelio was ousted by the board of directors after overseeing a three-year record-low stock price and crippling financial losses. Jobs acted as the interim CEO and began restructuring the company's product line; it was during this period that Jobs identified Jonathan Ive's design talent and the pair worked collaboratively to rebuild Apple's status. 

At the 1997 Macworld Expo, Jobs announced that Apple would join Microsoft to release new versions of Microsoft Office for the Macintosh, and that Microsoft had made a $150 million investment in non-voting Apple stock. Microsoft and Apple Affirm Commitment to Build Next Generation Software for Macintosh Microsoft Corp., August 6, 1997. On November 10, 1997, Apple introduced the Apple Online Store, tied to a new build-to-order manufacturing strategy. Harreld, Heather. "Apple gains tech, agency customers in Next deal", Federal Computer Week, January 5, 1997. Retrieved August 15, 2008. 

On August 15, 1998, Apple introduced a new all-in-one computer reminiscent of the Macintosh 128K: the iMac. The iMac design team was led by Ive, who would later design the iPod and the iPhone. Grossman, Lev. The Apple Of Your Ear, Time, January 12, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2007. Wilson, Greg. Private iCreator is genius behind Apple's polish, New York Daily News, January 14, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2007. The iMac featured modern technology and a unique design, and sold almost 800,000 units in its first five months. 

Through this period, Apple purchased several companies to create a portfolio of professional and consumer-oriented digital production software. In 1998, Apple announced the purchase of Macromedia's Final Cut software, signaling its expansion into the digital video editing market. Sarkar, Pia. "Friends and Foes/ Despite squabbles, Apple and Adobe have benefited from one another" SFGate, February 25, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2008. The following year, Apple released two video editing products: iMovie for consumers and, for professionals, Final Cut Pro, which has gone on to be a significant video-editing program, with 800,000 registered users in early 2007. In 2002, Apple purchased Nothing Real for their advanced digital compositing application Shake, Chaffin, Bryan. "Apple Shake: Apple Buys Nothing Real, A High End Compositing Software Maker", The Mac Observer, February 7, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2008. as well as Emagic for their music productivity application Logic, which led to the development of their consumer-level GarageBand application. Apple Acquires Emagic, Apple, July 1, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2008. Deitrich, Andy. Garage Band: Part 1, ars technica, February 2, 2004. Retrieved August 15, 2008. iPhoto's release the same year completed the iLife suite. Apple Introduces iPhoto, Apple Inc., January 7, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2008. 

===200006: Return to profitability===

Apple retail stores allow potential customers to use floor models without making a purchase.(Apple Store, North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois in 2005)

Mac OS X, based on NeXT's OPENSTEP and BSD Unix, was released on March 24, 2001 after several years of development. Aimed at consumers and professionals alike, Mac OS X aimed to combine the stability, reliability and security of Unix with the ease of use afforded by an overhauled user interface. To aid users in migrating from Mac OS 9, the new operating system allowed the use of OS 9 applications within Mac OS X as the Classic environment, which meant that users were able to continue running their old applications. 

On May 19, 2001, Apple opened the first official Apple Retail Stores in Virginia and California. On July 9, they bought Spruce Technologies, a DVD authoring company. On October 23 of the same year, Apple announced the iPod portable digital audio player, and started selling it on November 10. The product was phenomenally successful  over 100 million units were sold within six years. Apple enjoys ongoing iPod demand, BBC News, January 18, 2006. Retrieved April 27, 2007. Cantrell, Amanda. Apple's remarkable comeback story, CNN, March 29, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. In 2003, Apple's iTunes Store was introduced, offering online music downloads for $0.99 a song and integration with the iPod. The service quickly became the market leader in online music services, with over 5 billion downloads by June 19, 2008. iTunes Store Tops Five Billion Songs, Apple Inc., June 19, 2008. Retrieved September 3, 2008. 

Since 2001, Apple's design team has progressively abandoned the use of translucent colored plastics first used in the iMac G3. This began with the PowerBook, made with titanium, and was followed by the iBook's white polycarbonate structure and the flat-panel iMac. "Apple revamps iBook. Network World (May, 2001)", Network World, May 2, 2001. Retrieved August 19, 2008. Magee, Mike. "iMac "All-in-One" is a trinity", The Inquirer, January 26, 2002. Retrieved August 19, 2008. 

The MacBook Pro, Apple's first laptop with an Intel microprocessor, announced in January 2006.
At the Worldwide Developers Conference keynote address on June 6, 2005, Jobs announced that Apple would begin producing Intel-based Mac computers in 2006. Apple to Use Intel Microprocessors Beginning in 2006, Apple Inc., June 6, 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2007. On January 10, 2006, the new MacBook Pro and iMac became the first Apple computers to use Intel's Core Duo CPU. By August 7, 2006, Apple made the transition to Intel chips for the entire Mac product lineover one year sooner than announced. The Power Mac, iBook and PowerBook brands were retired during the transition; the Mac Pro, MacBook, and MacBook Pro became their respective successors. On April 29, 2009, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple was building its own team of engineers to design microchips. Apple also introduced Boot Camp in 2006 to help users install Windows XP or Windows Vista on their Intel Macs alongside Mac OS X. 

Apple's success during this period was evident in its stock price. Between early 2003 and 2006, the price of Apple's stock increased more than tenfold, from around $6 per share (split-adjusted) to over $80. In January 2006, Apple's market cap surpassed that of Dell. Gamet, Jeff. Apple Passes Dell's Market Cap, MacObserver, January 16, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Nine years prior, Dell's CEO Michael Dell said that if he ran Apple he would "shut it down and give the money back to the shareholders." Singh, Jal. Dell: Apple should close shop, CNET News, October 6, 1997. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Although Apple's market share in computers had grown, it remained far behind competitors using Microsoft Windows, accounting for about 8% of desktops and laptops in the US.

===200710: Success with mobile devices===
Apple achieved widespread success with its iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad products, which introduced innovations in mobile phones, portable music players and personal computers respectively. In addition, the implementation of a store for the purchase of software applications represented a new business model. Touch screens had been invented and seen in mobile devices before, but Apple was the first to achieve mass market adoption of such a user interface that included particular pre-programmed touch gestures.

Delivering his keynote speech at the Macworld Expo on January 9, 2007, Jobs announced that Apple Computer, Inc. would from that point on be known as Apple Inc., because computers were no longer the main focus of the company, which had shifted its emphasis to mobile electronic devices. The event also saw the announcement of the iPhone and the Apple TV. 
The following day, Apple shares hit $97.80, an all-time high at that point. In May, Apple's share price passed the $100 mark. AAPL surges past $100, target at $140, MacNN, April 26, 2007. Retrieved July 10, 2007. 

In an article posted on Apple's website on February 6, 2007, Jobs wrote that Apple would be willing to sell music on the iTunes Store without digital rights management (DRM), thereby allowing tracks to be played on third-party players, if record labels would agree to drop the technology. On April 2, 2007, Apple and EMI jointly announced the removal of DRM technology from EMI's catalog in the iTunes Store, effective in May 2007. Other record labels eventually followed suit and Apple published a press release in January 2009 to announce the corresponding changes to the iTunes Store. 

In July 2008, Apple launched the App Store to sell third-party applications for the iPhone and iPod Touch. Flandez, Raymund. "Programmers Jockey for iPhone Users at Apple Site", The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 16, 2008. Within a month, the store sold 60 million applications and registered an average daily revenue of $1 million, with Jobs speculating in August 2008 that the App Store could become a billion-dollar business for Apple. McLaughlin, Kevin. "Apple's Jobs Gushes Over App Store Success  The Channel Wire  IT Channel News And Views by CRN and VARBusiness", ChannelWeb, August 11, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2008. An October 2008 announcement by Jobs identified Apple as the third-largest mobile handset supplier in the world due to the popularity of the iPhone. 

On December 16, 2008, Apple announced that 2009 would be the last year the corporation would be attending the Macworld Expo, after more than 20 years of attendance. The announcement also explained that senior vice president of Worldwide Product Marketing Philip Schiller would deliver the 2009 keynote address in lieu of the expected Jobs. The official press release explained that Apple was "scaling back" on trade shows generally, with Macworld Tokyo and Apple Expo in Paris, France two other events that the corporation had ceased attendance at. The enormous success of the Apple Retail Stores and website had rendered trade shows into a minor promotional channel and was cited as the primary reason for the change. 

On January 14, 2009, an internal memo from Jobs announced that he would be taking a six-month medical leave of absence from Apple until the end of June 2009, during which time he would focus on his health. In the email, Jobs also stated that he realized "the curiosity over my personal health continues to be a distraction not only for me and my family, but everyone else at Apple as well," further explaining that the break would allow the company "to focus on delivering extraordinary products." Despite Jobs's absence, Apple recorded its best non-holiday quarter (Q1 FY 2009) during the recession with a revenue of $8.16 billion and a profit of $1.21 billion. 

After years of speculation and multiple rumored "leaks", Apple announced a large screen, tablet-like media device known as the iPad on January 27, 2010. The iPad runs the same touch based operating system that the iPhone uses and many of the same iPhone apps are compatible with the iPad. This gave the iPad a large app catalog on launch even with very little development time before the release. Later that year on April 3, 2010, the iPad was launched in the US and sold more than 300,000 units on that day, reaching 500,000 by the end of the first week. In May of the same year, Apple's market cap exceeded that of competitor Microsoft for the first time since 1989. 

Apple released the iPhone 4, which introduced video calling, multitasking, and a new uninsulated stainless steel design, which acts as the phone's antenna. Because of this antenna implementation, some iPhone 4 users reported a reduction in signal strength when the phone is held in specific ways. After a large amount of media coverage including mainstream news organizations, Apple held a press conference where they offered buyers a free rubber 'bumper' case, which had been proven to eliminate the signal reduction issue. Later that year Apple again refreshed its iPod line of MP3 players which introduced a multi-touch iPod Nano, iPod Touch with FaceTime, and iPod Shuffle with buttons which brought back the buttons of earlier generations. 

In October 2010, Apple shares hit an all-time high, eclipsing $300. Additionally, on October 20, Apple updated their MacBook Air laptop, iLife suite of applications, and unveiled Mac OS X Lion, the last version with the name Mac OS X. On January 6, 2011, the company opened their Mac App Store, a digital software distribution platform, similar to the existing iOS App Store. Apple was featured in the documentary Something Ventured which premiered in 2011.

===201112: Steve Jobs's death===
Apple store in Yonkers, New York
On January 17, 2011, Jobs announced in an internal Apple memo that he would take another medical leave of absence, for an indefinite period, to allow him to focus on his health. Chief operating officer Tim Cook assumed Jobs's day-to-day operations at Apple, although Jobs would still remain "involved in major strategic decisions for the company." Apple became the most valuable consumer-facing brand in the world. In June 2011, Steve Jobs surprisingly took the stage and unveiled iCloud, an online storage and syncing service for music, photos, files and software which replaced MobileMe, Apple's previous attempt at content syncing. Helft, Miguel. "Apple Unveils Cloud Music and Storage Service". The New York Times. June 6, 2011. Retrieved June 7, 2011. 

This would be the last product launch Jobs would attend before his death. It has been argued that Apple has achieved such efficiency in its supply chain that the company operates as a monopsony (one buyer, many sellers), in that it can dictate terms to its suppliers. In July 2011, due to the American debt-ceiling crisis, Apple's financial reserves were briefly larger than those of the U.S. Government. 

On August 24, 2011, Jobs resigned his position as CEO of Apple. He was replaced by Tim Cook and Jobs became Apple's chairman. Prior to this, Apple did not have a chairman and instead had two co-lead directors, Andrea Jung and Arthur D. Levinson, who continued with those titles until Levinson became Chairman of the Board in November. 

On October 4, 2011, Apple announced the iPhone 4S, which included an improved camera with 1080p video recording, a dual core A5 chip capable of 7 times faster graphics than the A4, an "intelligent software assistant" named Siri, and cloud-sourced data with iCloud. (The iPhone 4S was officially released on October 14, 2011.)

On October 5, 2011, Apple announced that Jobs had died, marking the end of an era for Apple Inc. 

On October 29, 2011, Apple purchased C3 Technologies, a mapping company, for $240 million, becoming the third mapping company Apple has purchased. On January 10, 2012, Apple paid $500 million to acquire Anobit, an Israeli hardware company that developed and supplies a proprietary memory signal processing technology that improves the performance of flash-memory used in iPhones and iPads. "Apple buys Israeli technology firm Anobit". Reuters. January 11, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2013. 

On January 19, 2012, Apple's Phil Schiller introduced iBooks Textbooks for iOS and iBook Author for Mac OS X in New York City. This was the first major announcement by Apple since the passing of Steve Jobs, who stated in his biography that he wanted to reinvent the textbook and education. The third-generation iPad was announced on March 7, 2012. It includes a Retina display, a new CPU, a five megapixel camera, and 1080p video recording. 

On July 24, 2012, during a conference call with investors, Tim Cook said that he loved India, but that Apple was going to expect larger opportunities outside of India, citing the reason as the 30% sourcing requirement from India. Apple CEO Tim Cook: "I love India, but...", NDTV Gadgets, July 25, 2012. "We love India, just not enough: Apple CEO Tim Cook", Firstpost.com 

On August 20, 2012, Apple's rising stock rose the company's value to a world-record $624 billion. This beat the non-inflation-adjusted record for market capitalization set by Microsoft in 1999. On August 24, 2012, a US jury ruled that Samsung should pay Apple $1.05 billion (665m) in damages in an intellectual property lawsuit. Samsung said they will appeal the court ruling. Samsung subsequently prevailed on its motion to vacate this damages award, which the Court reduced by $450 million. The Court further granted Samsung's request for a new trial. 

On September 12, 2012, Apple unveiled the iPhone 5, featuring an enlarged screen, more powerful processors, and running iOS 6. The latter includes a new mapping application (replacing Google Maps) that has attracted some criticism. It was made available on September 21, 2012, and became Apple's biggest iPhone launch, with over 2 million pre-orders pushing back the delivery date to late October. 

On October 23, 2012, Apple unveiled the iPad Mini, which features a 7.9-inch screen in contrast to the iPad's 9.7-inch screen. Apple also released a third-generation 13-inch MacBook Pro with a Retina display; the fourth-generation iPad, featuring a faster processor and a Lightning dock connector; and new iMac and Mac Mini computers. After the launch of Apple's iPad Mini and fourth generation iPad on November 3, 2012, Apple announced that they had sold 3 million iPads in three days of the launch, but it did not mention the sales figures of specific iPad models. "Apple Sells Three Million iPads in Three Days". Apple.com. November 5, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2013. 

On November 10, 2012, Apple confirmed a global settlement that would dismiss all lawsuits between Apple and HTC up to that date, in favor of a ten-year license agreement for current and future patents between the two companies. "HTC and Apple Settle Patent Dispute". Apple.com. November 10, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2013. It is predicted that Apple will make $280 million a year from this deal with HTC. "Apple predicted to generate up to $280 million a year in HTC deal". CNET. November 12, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2013. 

In December 2012, in a TV interview for NBC's Rock Center and also aired on the Today morning show, Apple CEO Tim Cook said that in 2013 the company will produce one of its existing lines of Mac computers in the United States. "Apple to produce line of Macs in the US next year". The Record (Bergen County, New Jersey). December 6, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2013. In January 2013, Cook stated that he expected China to overtake the US as Apple's biggest market.

===2013present: Acquisitions and expansion===

In March 2013, Apple announced a patent for an augmented reality (AR) system that can identify objects in a live video stream and present information corresponding to these objects through a computer-generated information layer overlaid on top of the real-world image. 

At the Worldwide Developer's Conference on June 10, 2013, Apple announced the seventh iOS operating system alongside OS X Mavericks, the tenth version of Mac OS X, and a new Internet radio service called iTunes Radio. iTunes Radio, iOS 7 and OS X Mavericks were released fall 2013. The radio service features more than 200 stations according to company's statement. 

On July 2, 2013, Apple announced the recruitment of Paul Deneve, Belgian President and CEO of Yves Saint Laurent, to Apple's top ranks. A spokesperson for the company stated, "We're thrilled to welcome Paul Deneve to Apple. He'll be working on special projects as a vice president reporting directly to Tim Cook." 

Alongside Google vice-president Vint Cerf and AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson, Cook attended a closed-door summit held by President Obama on August 8, 2013 in regard to government surveillance and the Internet in the wake of the Edward Snowden NSA incident. 

A report on August 22, 2013 confirmed that Apple acquired Embark Inc., a small Silicon Valley-based mapping company. Embark builds free transit apps to help smartphone users navigate public transportation in U.S. cities such as New York, San Francisco and Chicago. Following the confirmation of the acquisition, an Apple spokesperson explained, "Apple buys smaller technology companies from time to time, and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans." In November 2012, Embark claimed that over 500,000 people used its apps. 

An anonymous Apple employee revealed to the Bloomberg media publication that the opening of a Tokyo, Japan store is planned for 2014. The construction of the store will be completed in February 2014, but as of August 29, 2013, Takashi Takebayashi, a Tokyo-based spokesman for Apple, has not made any comment to the media. A Japanese analyst has stated, "For Apple, the Japanese market is appealing in terms of quantity and price. There is room to expand tablet sales and a possibility the Japanese market expands if Apples mobile carrier partners increase. 

On October 1, 2013, Apple India executives unveiled a plan to expand further into the Indian market, following Cook's acknowledgment of the country in July 2013 when sales results showed that iPhone sales in India grew 400% during the second quarter of 2013. In attendance at the confidential meeting were 20 CEOs and senior executives from telecom and electronic retail companies. 

A mid-October 2013 announcement revealed that Burberry executive Angela Ahrendts will commence as a senior vice president at Apple in mid-2014. Ahrendts oversaw Burberry's digital strategy for almost eight years and, during her tenure, sales increased to about US$3.2 billion (2 billion pounds) and shares gained more than threefold. In a company wide memo sent on the morning of October 15, 2013, Cook explained the decision to hire Ahrendts:

She shares our values and our focus on innovation. She places the same strong emphasis as we do on the customer experience. She cares deeply about people and embraces our view that our most important resource and our soul is our people. She believes in enriching the lives of others and she is wicked smart. 

On November 24, 2013, Apple Inc. confirmed the purchase of PrimeSense, an Israeli 3D sensing company based in Tel Aviv. In the following month, Apple Inc. purchased social analytics firm Topsy, one of a small number of firms with real-time access to the messages that appear on Twitter (every tweet published since 2006 is within its scope). Debra Aho Williamson, an analyst with EMarketer Inc., explained: A key point is they are one of the few companies that has access to the Twitter fire hose and can do real-time analysis of the trends and discussions happening on Twitter. While an exact amount is unknown, the deal was apparently worth more than US$200 million, according to people with knowledge of the secret deal, and Apple spokespeople refused to disclose a purpose at the time of the acquisition. 

On December 6, 2013, Apple Inc. launched iBeacon technology across its 254 U.S. retail stores. Using Bluetooth wireless technology, iBeacon senses the user's exact location within the Apple store and sends the user messages about products, events and other information, tailored to the user's location. iBeacon works as long as the user has downloaded the Apple Store app and has expressly permitted Apple to track them. By Barbara Ortutay, The Associated Press."/ APPLE GUIDES SHOPPERS INSIDE STORES WITH IBEACON."December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2013. 

On February 4, 2014, Cook met with Abdullah Gl, the President of Turkey, in Ankara to discuss the company's involvement in the Fatih project. Cook also confirmed that Turkey's first Apple Retail Store would be opened in Istanbul in April 2014. 

During the proceedings of the Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. lawsuits, a previously confidential email, written by Jobs a year before his death, was presented and its content became publicly available in early April 2014. With a subject line that reads "Top 100  A," the email was sent only to the company's 100 most senior employees and outlines Jobs's vision of Apple Inc.'s future under 10 subheadings, including a "2011 Strategy." Notably, Jobs declares a "Holy War with Google" for 2011 and schedules a "new campus" for 2015. 

On May 28, 2014, Apple confirmed its intent to acquire Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine's audio company Beats Electronicsproducer of the Beats by Dr. Dre line of headphones and speaker products, and operator of the music streaming service Beats Musicfor $3 billion. Iovine felt that Beats had always "belonged" with Apple, as the company modeled itself after Apple's "unmatched ability to marry culture and technology." In regards to the deal, Tim Cook stated that "Music is such an important part of all of our lives and holds a special place within our hearts at Apple. That's why we have kept investing in music and are bringing together these extraordinary teams so we can continue to create the most innovative music products and services in the world." As a result of the acquisition, Apple plans to offer Beats' products through its retail outlets and resellers, but the company has not made any further indications about how Beats will be integrated into Apple's product line. 

==Products==

===Mac===
MacBook Air

*MacBook Air: Consumer ultra-thin, ultra-portable notebook, introduced in 2008.
*MacBook Pro: Professional notebook, introduced in 2006.
*Mac Mini: Consumer sub-desktop computer and server, introduced in 2005.
*iMac: Consumer all-in one desktop computer, introduced in 1998.
*Mac Pro: Workstation desktop computer, introduced in 2006.

Apple sells a variety of computer accessories for Macs, including Thunderbolt Display, Magic Mouse, Magic Trackpad, Wireless Keyboard, Battery Charger, the AirPort wireless networking products, and Time Capsule.

===iPad===

On January 27, 2010, Apple introduced their much-anticipated media tablet, the iPad, running a modified version of iOS. It offers multi-touch interaction with multimedia formats including newspapers, magazines, ebooks, textbooks, photos, movies, videos of TV shows, music, word processing documents, spreadsheets, videogames, and most existing iPhone apps. It also includes a mobile version of Safari for web browsing, as well as access to the App Store, iTunes Library, iBookstore, contacts, and notepad. Content is downloadable via Wi-Fi and optional 3G service or synced through the user's computer. AT&T was initially the sole US provider of 3G wireless access for the iPad. 

On March 2, 2011, Apple introduced the iPad 2, which had a faster processor and a camera on the front and back. It also added support for optional 3G service provided by Verizon in addition to the existing offering by AT&T. However, the availability of the iPad 2 has been limited as a result of the devastating earthquake and ensuing tsunami in Japan in March 2011. 

On March 7, 2012, Apple introduced the third-generation iPad, marketed as "the new iPad". It added LTE service from AT&T or Verizon, the upgraded A5X processor, and the Retina display (2048 by 1536 resolution), originally implemented on the iPhone 4 and iPhone 4S. The dimensions and form factor remained relatively unchanged, with the new iPad being a fraction thicker and heavier than the previous version, and minor positioning changes. The new iPad - View all the technical specifications. Apple Inc. Retrieved February 7, 2013. 

On October 23, 2012, Apple's fourth-generation iPad came out, marketed as the "iPad with Retina display". It added the upgraded A6X processor and replaced the traditional 30-pin dock connector with the all-digital Lightning connector. iPad - Features. Apple Inc. Retrieved February 7, 2013. The iPad Mini was also introduced, with a reduced 7.9-inch display and featuring much of the same internal specifications as the iPad 2. iPad Mini - Features. Apple Inc. Retrieved February 7, 2013. 

On October 22, 2013, Apple introduced the iPad Air. It added the new 64 bit Apple-A7 processor. The iPad mini with Retina Display was also introduced, featuring the Apple-A7 processor as well. 

Since its launch, iPad The iPad's Uncontested Enterprise Run Is Over. Forbes. March 18, 2013. Retrieved April 5, 2013. users have downloaded three billion apps, while the total number of App Store downloads is over 25 billion. Choney, Suzanne. "iPad users download 3 billion apps". MSNBC. January 4, 2012. 

===iPod===

The 2012 iPod Shuffle, iPod Nano, iPod Classic, and iPod Touch.
On October 23, 2001, Apple introduced the iPod digital music player. Several updated models have since been introduced, and the iPod brand is now the market leader in portable music players by a significant margin, with more than 350 million units shipped . Apple has partnered with Nike to offer the Nike+iPod Sports Kit, enabling runners to synchronize and monitor their runs with iTunes and the Nike+ website.

Apple currently sells four variants of the iPod:
* iPod Shuffle: Ultra-portable digital audio player, currently available in a 2 GB model, introduced in 2005.
* iPod Nano: Portable media player, currently available in a 16 GB model, introduced in 2005. Earlier models featured the traditional iPod click wheel, though the current generation features a multi-touch interface and includes an FM radio and a pedometer.
* iPod Touch: Portable media player than runs iOS, currently available in 16, 32 and 64 GB models, introduced in 2007. The current generation, which released on September 12, 2012 features the Apple A5 processor, a Retina display, and dual cameras on the front (1.2 megapixel sensor) and back (5 megapixel iSight), the latter of which supports HD video recording at 1080p and Siri. 
* iPod Classic: Portable media player, currently available in a 160 GB model, first introduced in 2001. 

===iPhone===
The first-generation iPhone, 3G, 4, 5, 5C and 5S to scale.

At the Macworld Conference & Expo in January 2007, Steve Jobs introduced the long-anticipated Apple's Chief in the Risky Land of the Handhelds The New York Times iPhone, a convergence of an Internet-enabled smartphone and iPod. The first-generation iPhone was released on June 29, 2007 for $499 (4 GB) and $599 (8 GB) with an AT&T contract. On February 5, 2008, it was updated to have 16 GB of memory, in addition to the 8 GB and 4 GB models. It combined a 2.5G quad band GSM and EDGE cellular phone with features found in handheld devices, running scaled-down versions of Apple's Mac OS X (dubbed iPhone OS, later renamed iOS), with various Mac OS X applications such as Safari and Mail. It also includes web-based and Dashboard apps such as Google Maps and Weather. The iPhone features a 3.5 in touchscreen display, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi (both "b" and "g"). 

At Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) on June 9, 2008, Apple announced the iPhone 3G. It was released on July 11, 2008, with a reduced price of $199 for the 8 GB version, and $299 for the 16 GB version. This version added support for 3G networking and assisted-GPS navigation. The flat silver back and large antenna square of the original model were eliminated in favor of a curved glossy black or white back. Software capabilities were improved with the release of the App Store, providing applications for download that were compatible with the iPhone. On April 24, 2009, the App Store Apples Game Changer, Downloading Now. The New York Times, December 5, 2009. Retrieved April 5, 2013. surpassed one billion downloads. At WWDC on June 8, 2009, Apple announced the iPhone 3GS. It provided an incremental update to the device, including faster internal components, support for faster 3G speeds, video recording capability, and voice control.

At WWDC on June 7, 2010, Apple announced the redesigned iPhone 4. It features a 960x640 display, the Apple A4 processor also used in the iPad, a gyroscope for enhanced gaming, 5MP camera with LED flash, front-facing VGA camera and FaceTime video calling. Shortly after its release, reception issues were discovered by consumers, due to the stainless steel band around the edge of the device, which also serves as the phone's cellular signal and Wi-Fi antenna. The issue was corrected by a "Bumper Case" distributed by Apple for free to all owners for a few months. In June 2011, Apple overtook Nokia to become the world's biggest smartphone maker by volume. 

On October 4, 2011, Apple unveiled the iPhone 4S, which was first released on October 14, 2011. It features the Apple A5 processor, and is the first model offered by Sprint (joining AT&T and Verizon Wireless as the United States carriers offering iPhone models). On October 19, 2011, Apple announced an agreement with C Spire Wireless to sell the iPhone 4S with that carrier in the near future, marking the first time the iPhone was officially supported on a regional carrier's network. Another notable feature of the iPhone 4S was Siri voice assistant technology, which Apple had acquired in 2010, as well as other features, including an updated 8MP camera with new optics. Apple sold 4 million iPhone 4S phones in the first three days of availability. 

On September 12, 2012, Apple introduced the iPhone 5. Statistics and Facts about the iPhone. Statista, April 2013. It added a 4-inch display, 4G LTE connectivity, and the upgraded Apple A6 chip, among several other improvements. Two million iPhones were sold in the first twenty-four hours of pre-ordering and over five million handsets were sold in the first three days of its launch. 

A patent filed in July 2013 revealed the development of a new iPhone battery system that uses location data in combination with data on the user's habits to moderate the handsets power settings accordingly. Apple is working towards a power management system that will provide features such as the ability of the iPhone to estimate the length of time a user will be away from a power source to modify energy usage and a detection function that adjusts the charging rate to best suit the type of power source that is being used. 

In March 2013, one of the largest cellular phone companies in the United States, T-Mobile, announced that it would begin selling the iPhone 5 on April 12. The announcement of the iPhone came with the announcement that the company would begin implementing 4G cellular service for its users. 

Upon the launch of the iPhone 5S and iPhone 5C, Apple sold over nine million devices in the first three days of its launch, which sets a new record for first-weekend smartphone sales. This was the first time that Apple has simultaneously launched two models and the inclusion of China in the list of markets contributed to the record sales result. 

On October 15, 2013, U.S. Cellular, the United States fifth largest cell phone provider, announced that it would in fact begin to carry the iPhone. It is the last of the five major carriers, including AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, and T-Mobile to acquire the phone. The phone went on sale on November 8 at U.S. Cellular stores around the country. The finalization of a deal between Apple and China Mobile, the world's largest mobile network, was announced in late December 2013. The multi-year agreement provides iPhone access to over 760 million China Mobile subscribers. 

In a March 2014 interview, Ive used the iPhone as an example of Apple's ethos of creating high-quality, life-changing products, explaining that they are comparatively expensive due to the intensive effort that is used to make them:

We dont take so long and make the way we make for fiscal reasons ... Quite the reverse. The body is made from a single piece of machined aluminium ... The whole thing is polished first to a mirror finish and then is very finely textured, except for the Apple logo. The chamfers edges are cut with diamond-tipped cutters. The cutters dont usually last very long, so we had to figure out a way of mass-manufacturing long-lasting ones. The camera cover is sapphire crystal. Look at the details around the sim-card slot. Its extraordinary! 

===Apple TV===

The current generation Apple TV.
At the 2007 Macworld conference, Jobs demonstrated the Apple TV, (previously known as the iTV), a set-top video device intended to bridge the sale of content from iTunes with high-definition televisions. The device links up to a user's TV and syncs, either via Wi-Fi or a wired network, with one computer's iTunes library and streams from an additional four. The Apple TV originally incorporated a 40 GB hard drive for storage, includes outputs for HDMI and component video, and plays video at a maximum resolution of 720p. On May 31, 2007 a 160 GB drive was released alongside the existing 40 GB model and on January 15, 2008 a software update was released, which allowed media to be purchased directly from the Apple TV. 

In September 2009, Apple discontinued the original 40 GB Apple TV and now continues to produce and sell the 160 GB Apple TV. On September 1, 2010, alongside the release of the new line of iPod devices for the year, Apple released a completely redesigned Apple TV. The new device is 1/4 the size, runs quieter, and replaces the need for a hard drive with media streaming from any iTunes library on the network along with 8 GB of flash memory to cache media downloaded. Apple with the Apple TV has added another device to its portfolio that runs on its A4 processor along with the iPad and the iPhone. The memory included in the device is the half of the iPhone 4 at 256 MB; the same as the iPad, iPhone 3GS, third and fourth-generation iPod Touch. 

It has HDMI out as the only video out source. Features include access to the iTunes Store to rent movies and TV shows (purchasing has been discontinued), streaming from internet video sources, including YouTube and Netflix, and media streaming from an iTunes library. Apple also reduced the price of the device to $99. A third generation of the device was introduced at an Apple event on March 7, 2012, with new features such as higher resolution (1080p) and a new user interface.

===Software===

Apple develops its own operating system to run on Macs, OS X, the latest version being OS X Mavericks (version 10.9). Apple also independently develops computer software titles for its OS X operating system. Much of the software Apple develops is bundled with its computers. An example of this is the consumer-oriented iLife software package that bundles iMovie, iPhoto and GarageBand. For presentation, page layout and word processing, iWork is available, which includes Keynote, Pages, and Numbers. iTunes, QuickTime media player, and Software Update are available as free downloads for both OS X and Windows.

Apple also offers a range of professional software titles. Their range of server software includes the operating system OS X Server; Apple Remote Desktop, a remote systems management application; and Xsan, a Storage Area Network file system. For the professional creative market, there is Aperture for professional RAW-format photo processing; Final Cut Pro, a video production suite; Logic Pro, a comprehensive music toolkit; and Motion, an advanced effects composition program.

Apple also offers online services with iCloud, which provides cloud storage and syncing for a wide range of data, including email, contacts, calendars, photos and documents. It also offers iOS device backup, and is able to integrate directly with third-party apps for even greater functionality. iCloud is the fourth generation of online services provided by Apple, and was preceded by MobileMe, .Mac and iTools, all which met varying degrees of success.

==Corporate identity==

===Logo===

According to Steve Jobs, Apple was so named because Jobs was coming back from an apple farm, and he was on a fruitarian diet. He thought the name was "fun, spirited and not intimidating". 

Apple's first logo, designed by Ron Wayne, depicts Sir Isaac Newton sitting under an apple tree. It was almost immediately replaced by Rob Janoff's "rainbow Apple", the now-familiar rainbow-colored silhouette of an apple with a bite taken out of it. Janoff presented Jobs with several different monochromatic themes for the "bitten" logo, and Jobs immediately took a liking to it. While Jobs liked the logo, he insisted it be in color to humanize the company. The logo was designed with a bite so that it would not be confused with a cherry. The colored stripes were conceived to make the logo more accessible, and to represent the fact the Apple II could generate graphics in color. This logo is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing, with the bite mark a reference to his method of suicide. Both Janoff and Apple deny any homage to Turing in the design of the logo. 

On August 27, 1999 (the following year after the iMac G3 was introduced), Apple officially dropped the rainbow scheme and began to use monochromatic themes, nearly identical in shape to its previous rainbow incarnation, on various products, packaging and advertising. An Aqua-themed version of the monochrome logo was used from 1999 to 2003, and a Glass-themed version was used from 2007 to 2013. With the release of iOS 7 and OS X Mavericks in fall of 2013, the logo appears flat and white with no glossy effects.

Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak were Beatles fans, but Apple Inc. had trademark issues with Apple Corps Ltd., a multimedia company started by the Beatles in 1967, involving their name and logo. This resulted in a series of lawsuits and tension between the two companies. These issues ended with settling of their most recent lawsuit in 2007.

===Advertising===

Apple's first slogan, "Byte into an Apple", was coined in the late 1970s. From 1997 to 2002, the slogan "Think Different" was used in advertising campaigns, and is still closely associated with Apple. Apple also has slogans for specific product lines  for example, "iThink, therefore iMac" was used in 1998 to promote the iMac, and "Say hello to iPhone" has been used in iPhone advertisements. "Hello" was also used to introduce the original Macintosh, Newton, iMac ("hello (again)"), and iPod. IMac: What's in a Design, Anyway?. Wired Magazine. Retrieved February 15, 2010. 

Since the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984 with the 1984 Super Bowl commercial to the more modern 'Get a Mac' adverts, Apple has been recognized in the past for its efforts towards effective advertising and marketing for its products, though its advertising was criticized for the claims made by some later campaigns, particularly the 2005 Power Mac ads and iPhone ads in Britain.

Apple's product commercials gained fame for launching musicians into stardom as a result of their eye-popping graphics and catchy tunes. Farber, Jim. Apple ad creates recognition for Yael Naim, New York Daily News, March 11, 2008. First, the company popularized Canadian singer Feist's "1234" song in its ad campaign. Later, Apple used the song "New Soul" by French-Israeli singer-songwriter Yael Nam to promote the MacBook Air. The debut single shot to the top of the charts and sold hundreds of thousands of copies in a span of weeks. 

===Brand loyalty===

Apple aficionados wait in line around the Apple Store on Fifth Avenue in New York City in anticipation of a new product.

Apple's brand loyalty is considered unusual for any product. At one time, Apple evangelists were actively engaged by the company, but this was after the phenomenon was already firmly established. Apple evangelist Guy Kawasaki has called the brand fanaticism "something that was stumbled upon," while Ive explained in 2014 that "People have an incredibly personal relationship" with Apple's products. 

Apple supports the continuing existence of a network of Mac User Groups in many areas where Mac computers are available. Mac users previously meet at the European Apple Expo and the San Francisco Macworld Conference & Expo trade shows, where Apple traditionally introduced new products each year, to both the industry and public, until Apple pulled out of both eventsthe conferences continue, but Apple is not officially represented at either event. Mac developers, in turn, continue to gather at the annual Apple Worldwide Developers Conference.

Apple Store openings can draw crowds of thousands, with some waiting in line as much as a day before the opening or flying in from other countries for the event. The New York City Fifth Avenue "Cube" store had a line as long as half a mile; a few Mac fans took the opportunity of the setting to propose marriage. The Ginza opening in Tokyo was estimated in the thousands with a line exceeding eight city blocks. 

John Sculley told The Guardian newspaper in 1997: "People talk about technology, but Apple was a marketing company. It was the marketing company of the decade." Research in 2002 by NetRatings indicate that the average Apple consumer was usually more affluent and better educated than other PC company consumers. The research indicated that this correlation could stem from the fact that on average Apple Inc. products are more expensive than other PC products. Fried, Ian. Are Mac users smarter?, news.com, July 12, 2002. Retrieved April 24, 2006. 

In response to a query about the devotion of loyal Apple consumers, Ive responded:

What people are responding to is much bigger than the object. They are responding to something rare  a group of people who do more than simply make something work, they make the very best products they possibly can. Its a demonstration against thoughtlessness and carelessness. 

==Corporate affairs==

During the Mac's early history Apple generally refused to adopt prevailing industry standards for hardware, instead creating their own. This trend was largely reversed in the late 1990s beginning with Apple's adoption of the PCI bus in the 7500/8500/9500 Power Macs. Apple has since adopted USB, AGP, HyperTransport, Wi-Fi, and other industry standards in its computers and was in some cases a leader in the adoption of standards such as USB. FireWire is an Apple-originated standard that has seen widespread industry adoption after it was standardized as IEEE 1394. 

Ever since the first Apple Store opened, Apple has sold third-party accessories. For instance, at one point Nikon and Canon digital cameras were sold inside the store. Adobe, one of Apple's oldest software partners, also sells its Mac-compatible software, as does Microsoft, who sells Microsoft Office for the Mac. Books from John Wiley & Sons, who publishes the For Dummies series of instructional books, are a notable exception, however. The publisher's line of books were banned from Apple Stores in 2005 because Steve Jobs disagreed with their decision to publish an unauthorized Jobs biography, iCon. Hafner, Katie: Steve Jobs's Review of His Biography: Ban It, The New York Times, April 30, 2005. After the launch of the iBookstore, Apple stopped selling physical books, both online and at the Apple Retail Stores.

===Headquarters===

Apple Inc.'s world corporate headquarters are located in the middle of Silicon Valley, at 16 Infinite Loop, Cupertino, California. This Apple campus has six buildings that total 850000 ft2 and was built in 1993 by Sobrato Development Cos. 

In 2006, Apple announced its intention to build a second campus on 50 acre assembled from various contiguous plots (east of N Wolfe Road between Pruneridge Avenue and Vallco Parkway). Later acquisitions increased this to 175 acres. The new campus, also in Cupertino, will be about 1 mi east of the current campus. The new campus building will be designed by Norman Foster. 

On October 15, 2013 it was announced that the Cupertino City Council has approved the proposed "spaceship" design campus. On June 7, 2011, Steve Jobs gave a presentation to Cupertino City Council, detailing the architectural design of the new building and its environs. The new campus is planned to house up to 13,000 employees in one central four-storied circular building (with a caf for 3,000 sitting people integrated) surrounded by extensive landscape (with parking mainly underground and the rest centralized in a parking structure). The new campus will be built on the former HP headquarters, next to Interstate 280. The morning of the announcement, Apple CEO Tim Cook tweeted "Our home for innovation and creativity for decades to come. Cupertino City Council Gives Unanimous Approval for Apple's New Campus." The 2.8 million square foot facility, which will include Steve Jobs's original designs for a fitness center and corporate auditorium will be able to house 14,000 employees and will have enough parking to accommodate almost all of them. 

Apple's headquarters for Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) are located in Cork in the south of Ireland. The facility, which opened in 1980, was Apple's first location outside of the United States. Apple Sales International, which deals with all of Apple's international sales outside of the USA, is located at Apple's campus in Cork along with Apple Distribution International, which similarly deals with Apple's international distribution network. 

On April 20, 2012, Apple announced the addition of 500 new jobs to its European headquarters. This will bring the total workforce from around 2,800 to 3,300 employees. The company will build a new office block on its Hollyhill Campus to accommodate the additional staff. 

===Corporate culture===
Apple was one of several highly successful companies founded in the 1970s that bucked the traditional notions of what a corporate culture should look like in organizational hierarchy (flat versus tall, casual versus formal attire, etc.). Other highly successful firms with similar cultural aspects from the same period include Southwest Airlines and Microsoft. Originally, the company stood in opposition to staid competitors like IBM by default, thanks to the influence of its founders; Steve Jobs often walked around the office barefoot even after Apple was a Fortune 500 company. By the time of the "1984" TV ad, this trait had become a key way the company attempted to differentiate itself from its competitors. According to a 2011 report in Fortune, this has resulted in a corporate culture more akin to a startup rather than a multinational corporation. 

As the company has grown and been led by a series of chief executives, each with his own idea of what Apple should be, some of its original character has arguably been lost, but Apple still has a reputation for fostering individuality and excellence that reliably draws talented people into its employ. This was especially after Jobs's return. To recognize the best of its employees, Apple created the Apple Fellows program, awarding individuals who made extraordinary technical or leadership contributions to personal computing while at the company. The Apple Fellowship has so far been awarded to a few individuals including Bill Atkinson, Hertzfeld, Andy. Credit Where Due,Folklore.org, January 1983. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Steve Capps, Rod Holt, Alan Kay, Eisenhart, Mary. Fighting Back For Mac, MicroTimes, 1997. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Hertzfeld, Andy. Leave of Absence,Folklore.org, March 1984. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Guy Kawasaki, Kawakami, John. Apple Taps Guy Kawasaki For Apple Fellows Program, MacTech, September 1995. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Al Alcorn, Don Norman, Rich Page, and Steve Wozniak. 

Apple is also known for strictly enforcing accountability. Each project has a "directly responsible individual," or "DRI" in Apple jargon. As an example, when iOS senior vice president Scott Forstall refused to sign Apple's official apology for numerous errors in the redesigned Maps app, he was forced to resign. 

Numerous employees of Apple have cited that projects without Jobs's involvement often took longer than projects with his involvement. 

At Apple, employees are specialists who are not exposed to functions outside their area of expertise. Jobs saw this as a means of having best-in-class employees in every role. For instance, Ron Johnson who was Senior Vice President of Retail Operations until November 1, 2011, was responsible for site selection, in-store service, and store layout, yet he had no control of the inventory in his stores (which is done company wide by then-COO and now CEO Tim Cook who has a background in supply-chain management). This is the opposite of General Electric's corporate culture which has created well-rounded managers. 

Under the leadership of Tim Cook who joined the company in 1998 and ascended to his present position as CEO, Apple has developed an extremely efficient and effective supply chain which has been ranked as the world's best for the four years 20072010. The company's manufacturing, procurement and logistics enables it to execute massive product launches without having to maintain large, profit-sapping inventories; Apple's profit margins have been 40 percent compared with 1020 percent for most other hardware companies in 2011. Cook's catchphrase to describe his focus on the company's operational edge is Nobody wants to buy sour milk. 

The company previously advertised its products as being made in America up to the late 1990s, however as a result of outsourcing initiatives in the 2000s almost all of its manufacturing is now done abroad. According to a report by the New York Times, Apple insiders "believe the vast scale of overseas factories as well as the flexibility, diligence and industrial skills of foreign workers have so outpaced their American counterparts that Made in the U.S.A. is no longer a viable option for most Apple products". 

Unlike other major US companies, Apple has a relatively simple compensation policy for executives, which does not include perks that other CEOs enjoy such as country club fees and private use of company aircraft. The company usually grants stock options to executives every other year. 

A media article published in July 2013 provided details about Apple's "At-Home Apple Advisors" customer support program that serves as the corporation's call center. The advisors are employed within the U.S. and work remotely after undergoing a four-week training program that also serves as a testing period. The advisors earn between US$9 and $12 per hour, and receive intensive management to ensure a high quality of customer support. 

===Litigation===

Apple has been a participant in various legal proceedings and claims since it began operation and, like its competitors and peers, engages in litigation (trying legal cases before the courts) in its normal course of business for a variety of reasons. In particular, Apple is known for and promotes itself as actively and aggressively enforcing its intellectual property interests.

Some examples include Apple v. Samsung, Apple v. Microsoft, Motorola v. Apple, Apple Corps v. Apple Computer.

===Finance===
In its fiscal year ending in September 2011, Apple Inc. reported a total of $108 billion in annual revenues  a significant increase from its 2010 revenues of $65 billion  and nearly $82 billion in cash reserves. Apple achieved these results while losing market share in certain product categories. On March 19, 2012, Apple announced plans for a $2.65-per-share dividend beginning in fourth quarter of 2012, per approval by their board of directors. 

On September 2012, Apple reached a record share price of more than $705 and closed at above 700. With 936,596,000 outstanding shares (as of June 30, 2012), Apple Q3 Financial Report (PDF). Shareholder.com. July 25, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2013. it had a market capitalization of about $660 billion. At the time, this was the highest nominal market capitalization ever reached by a publicly traded company, surpassing a record set by Microsoft in 1999.

===Environmental record===

====Climate change and clean energy====
On April 21, 2011, Greenpeace released a report highlighting the fact that data centers consumed up to 2% of all global electricity and this amount was projected to increase. Phil Radford of Greenpeace said we are concerned that this new explosion in electricity use could lock us into old, polluting energy sources instead of the clean energy available today. On April 17, 2012, following a Greenpeace protest of Apple, Apple Inc. released a statement committing to ending its use of coal and shifting to 100% clean energy. In 2013 Apple announced it was using 100% renewable energy to power their data centers, and overall 75% of its power comes from renewable sources. 

In 2010, Climate Counts, a nonprofit organization dedicated to directing consumers toward the greenest companies, gave Apple a score of 52 points out of a possible 100, which puts Apple in their top category "Striding". This was an increase from May 2008, when Climate Counts only gave Apple 11 points out of 100, which placed the company last among electronics companies, at which time Climate Counts also labeled Apple with a "stuck icon", adding that Apple at the time was "a choice to avoid for the climate conscious consumer". 

====Toxics====
Greenpeace has campaigned against Apple because of various environmental issues, including a global end-of-life take-back plan, non-recyclable hardware components and toxins within iPhone hardware. Since 2003 Greenpeace has campaigned against Apple's use of particular chemicals in its products, more specifically, the inclusion of PVC and BFRs in their devices. On May 2, 2007, Steve Jobs released a report announcing plans to eliminate PVC and BFRs by the end of 2008. Tasty news from Apple!. Greenpeace International. Retrieved August 12, 2008. Apple has since eliminated PVC and BFRs from its product range, becoming the first laptop manufacturer to do so. 

In the first edition of the Greenpeace 'Green Electronics Guide', released in August 2006, Apple only scored 2.7/10. 

The Environmental Protection Agency rates Apple highest amongst producers of notebooks, and fairly well compared to producers of desktop computers and LCD displays. EPA Gives Apple Silver Rating on Environment The Mac Observer. EPA information should make GreenPeace red-faced over Apple targeting, Ars Technica. Retrieved January 8, 2007. 

In June 2007, Apple upgraded the MacBook Pro, replacing cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) backlit LCD displays with mercury-free LED backlit LCD displays and arsenic-free glass, and has since done this for all notebooks. Apple has also left out BFRs and PVCs in various internal components. Apple offers information about emissions, materials, and electrical usage concerning each product. 

In June 2009, Apple's iPhone 3GS was free of PVC, arsenic, BFRs and had an efficient power adapter. 

In October 2009, Apple upgraded the iMac and MacBook, replacing the cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) backlit LCD displays with mercury-free LED backlit LCD displays and arsenic-free glass. This means all Apple computers have mercury free LED backlit displays, arsenic-free glass and are without PVC cables. All Apple computers also have EPEAT Gold status. 

In October 2011, Chinese authorities ordered an Apple supplier to close part of its plant in Suzhou after residents living nearby raised significant environmental concerns. 

In November 2011, Apple featured in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics, which ranks electronics manufacturers on sustainability, climate and energy policy, and how "green" their products are. The company ranked fourth of fifteen electronics companies (moving up five places from the previous year) with a score of 4.6/10 down from 4.9. Greenpeace praises Apple's sustainability, noting that the company exceeded its 70% global recycling goal in 2010. It continues to score well on the products rating with all Apple products now being free of PVC vinyl plastic and brominated flame retardants. However, the guide criticizes Apple on the Energy criteria for not seeking external verification of its greenhouse gas emissions data and for not setting out any targets to reduce emissions. In January 2012, Apple announced plans and requested that their cable maker Volex begin producing halogen-free USB and power cables. 

In June 2012, Apple Inc. withdrew its products from the Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) certification system, but reversed this decision in July. 

===Labor practices===

In 2006, the Mail on Sunday reported on the working conditions that existed at factories in China where the contract manufacturers Foxconn and Inventec produced the iPod. The article stated that one complex of factories that assembles the iPod (among other items) had over 200,000 workers that lived and worked in the factory, with employees regularly working more than 60 hours per week. The article also reported that workers made around $100 per month and were required to live pay for rent and food from the company, which generally amounted to a little over half of workers' earnings. 

Apple immediately launched an investigation and worked with their manufacturers to ensure acceptable working conditions. In 2007, Apple started yearly audits of all its suppliers regarding worker's rights, slowly raising standards and pruning suppliers that did not comply. Yearly progress reports have been published since 2008. In 2010, workers in China planned to sue iPhone contractors over poisoning by a cleaner used to clean LCD screens. One worker claimed that he and his coworkers had not been informed of possible occupational illnesses. After a spate of suicides in a Foxconn facility in China making iPads and iPhones, albeit at a lower rate than in China as a whole, workers were forced to sign a legally binding document guaranteeing that they would not kill themselves. 

In 2011, Apple admitted that its suppliers' child labor practices in China had worsened. 

Workers in factories producing Apple products have also been exposed to n-hexane, a neurotoxin that is a cheaper alternative than alcohol for cleaning the products. Workers poisoned while making iPhones ABC News, October 25, 2010 Dirty Secrets ABC Foreign Correspondent, 2010-Oct-26 Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for n-Hexane, OSHA.gov 

In 2013, China Labor Watch said it found violations of the law and of Apple's pledges about working conditions at facilities operated by Pegatron, including discrimination against ethnic minorities and women, withholding employees' pay, excessive work hours, poor living conditions, health and safety problems and pollution. Apple Supplier Accused Of Labor Abuses By China Watchdog (VIDEO) The Huffington Post. Retrieved July 29, 2013. 

=== Tax practices ===

 Global taxes paid by ASI, 2009-2011 2011 2010 2009 Total 
 Pre-tax earnings US$ 22 billion US$ 12 billion US$ 4 billion US$ 38 billion 
 Global tax US$ 10 million US$ 7 million US$ 4 million US$ 21 million 
 Tax rate 0.05% 0.06% 0.1% 0.06% 

Apple created subsidiaries in low-tax places such as the Republic of Ireland, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and the British Virgin Islands to cut the taxes it pays around the world. According to the New York Times, in the 1980s Apple was among the first tech companies to designate overseas salespeople in high-tax countries in a manner that allowed the company to sell on behalf of low-tax subsidiaries on other continents, sidestepping income taxes. In the late 1980s Apple was a pioneer of an accounting technique known as the "Double Irish With a Dutch Sandwich," which reduces taxes by routing profits through Irish subsidiaries and the Netherlands and then to the Caribbean. Duhigg, Charles (April 29, 2012)[ "How Apple Sidesteps Billions in Taxes."] New York Times. (Retrieved 4-20-12.) 

British Conservative Party Member of Parliament Charlie Elphicke published research on October 30, 2012, which showed that some multinational companies, including Apple Inc., were making billions of pounds of profit in the UK, but were paying an effective tax rate to the UK Treasury of only 3 percent, well below standard corporation tax. He followed this research by calling on the Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to force these multinationals, which also included Google and The Coca-Cola Company, to state the effective rate of tax they pay on their UK revenues. Elphicke also said that government contracts should be withheld from multinationals who do not pay their fair share of UK tax. 

In June 2014 the European Commissioner for Competition launched an investigation of Apple's tax practices in Ireland, as part of a wider probe of multi-national companies' tax arrangements in various European countries. 

===Charitable causes===
As of 2012, Apple is listed as a partner of the Product RED campaign, together with other brands such as Nike, Girl, American Express and Converse. The campaign's mission is to prevent the transmission of HIV from mother to child by 2015 (its byline is "Fighting For An AIDS Free Generation"). 

In November 2012, Apple donated $2.5 million to the American Red Cross to aid relief efforts after Hurricane Sandy. 

==See also==

* Apple Campus
* Apple media events
* Apple Inc. litigation
* iReview
* Pixar

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* Gil Amelio, William L. Simon (1999), On the Firing Line: My 500 Days at Apple ISBN 978-0-88730-919-9
* Jim Carlton, Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania and Business Blunders ISBN 978-0-88730-965-6
* Alan Deutschman (2000), The Second Coming of Steve Jobs, Broadway, ISBN 978-0-7679-0432-2
* Andy Hertzfeld (2004), Revolution in the Valley, O'Reilly Books ISBN 978-0-596-00719-5
* Paul Kunkel, AppleDesign: The Work of the Apple Industrial Design Group ISBN 978-1-888001-25-9
* Steven Levy (1994), Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed Everything ISBN 978-0-14-029177-3
* Owen Linzmayer (2004), Apple Confidential 2.0, No Starch Press ISBN 978-1-59327-010-0
* Michael S. Malone (1999), Infinite Loop ISBN 978-0-385-48684-2
* Frank Rose (1990), West of Eden: The End of Innocence at Apple Computer, Penguin Books ISBN 978-0-14-009372-8
* John Sculley, John A. Byrne (1987) Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple, HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-06-015780-7
* Steve Wozniak, Gina Smith (2006), iWoz: From Computer Geek to Cult Icon: How I Invented the Personal Computer, Co-Founded Apple, and Had Fun Doing It, W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 978-0-393-06143-7
* Jeffrey S. Young (1988). Steve Jobs, The Journey is the Reward, Lynx Books, ISBN 978-1-55802-378-9
* Jeffrey S. Young, William L. Simon (2005), , John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-72083-6

==External links==

* 

* 

 



[[Aberdeenshire]]

Blaeu  Atlas of Scotland 1654  ABERDONIA & BANFIA
Topographic map of Aberdeenshire and Moray
Aberdeenshire () is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland, and a lieutenancy area.

The Aberdeenshire council area does not include the City of Aberdeen, a separate council area, from which its name derives. Together, the modern council area and the city form historic Aberdeenshire, one of the counties of Scotland formerly used for local government and still used as a registration county. Land Register Counties & Operational Dates 

Aberdeenshire Council is headquartered at Woodhill House, in Aberdeen, making it the only Scottish council whose headquarters are based outwith its jurisdiction. Aberdeenshire borders Angus and Perth and Kinross to the south, and Highland and Moray to the west.

Traditionally, it has been economically dependent upon the primary sector (agriculture, fishing, and forestry) and related
processing industries. Over the last 40 years, the development of the oil and gas industry and associated service sector has broadened Aberdeenshire's economic base, and contributed to a rapid population growth of some 50%. since 1975, while the land covered represents 8% of Scotland's overall territory. It covers an area of 6313 sqkm. 

==History==
Aberdeenshire has a rich prehistoric and historic heritage. It is the locus of a large number of Neolithic and Bronze Age archaeological sites, including Longman Hill, Kempstone Hill, Catto Long Barrow and Cairn Lee. The area was settled in the Bronze Age by the Beaker culture, who arrived from the south around 2000-1800 BC. Stone circles and cairns are predominantly from this era. In the Iron Age, hill forts were built. Around the 1st century AD, the Taexali people, which have left little history were believed to have resided along the coast. The Picts were the next documented inhabitants of the area, and were no later than 800-900 AD. The Romans also were in the area during this period, as they left signs at Kintore. Christianity influenced the inhabitants early on, and there were Celtic monasteries at Old Deer and Monymusk. Since medieval times there have been a number of crossings of the Mounth (a spur of mountainous land that extends from the higher inland range to the North Sea slightly north of Stonehaven) through present day Aberdeenshire from the Scottish Lowlands to the Highlands. Some of the most well known and historically important trackways are the Causey Mounth and Elsick Mounth. W. Douglas Simpson, "The Early Castles of Mar", Proceedings of the Society, 102, 10 December 1928 

Aberdeenshire played an important role in the fighting between the Scottish clans. Clan MacBeth and Clan Canmore were 2 of the larger clans. Lumphanan saw Macbeth fall in 1057. During the Anglo-Norman penetration, other families arrives such as House of Balliol, Clan Bruce, and Clan Cumming (Comyn). When the fighting amongst these newcomers resulted in the Scottish Wars of Independence, the English king Edward I traveled across the area twice, in 1296 and 1303. In 1307, Robert the Bruce was victorious near Inverurie. Along with his victory came new families, namely the Forbeses and the Gordons. These new families set the stage for the upcoming rivalries during the 14th and 15th centuries. This rivalry grew worse when religion became a focal point, as the Gordon family adhered to Catholicism and the Forbes to Protestantism. Three universities were founded in the area prior to the 17th century, King's College in Old Aberdeen (1494), Marischal College in Aberdeen (1593), and the University of Fraserburgh (1597). 

After the end of the Revolution of 1688, there was a peaceful period, interrupted by minor events such as the Rising of 1715 and the Rising of 1745, which in turn lead to the end of the ascendancy of Episcopalianism, and the feudal power of landowners and in turn lead to the era of increased agricultural and industrial progress. During the 17th century, Aberdeenshire was the location of more fighting, centered around the Marquess of Montrose and the English Civil Wars. This period also saw increased wealth due to the increase in trade with Germany, Poland, and the Low Countries. 

The present council area is named after the historic county of Aberdeen, which had different boundaries and was abolished in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. It was replaced by Grampian Regional Council and five district councils: Banff and Buchan, Gordon, Kincardine and Deeside, Moray and the City of Aberdeen. The current Aberdeenshire consists of all of former Aberdeenshire, former Kincardineshire and the northeast portions of Banffshire. Local government functions were shared between the two levels. In 1996, under the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994, the Banff and Buchan district, Gordon district and Kincardine and Deeside district were merged to form the present Aberdeenshire council area, with the other two districts becoming autonomous council areas.

==Demographics==
The population of the council area has risen over 50% since 1971 to approximately 247,600, representing 4.7% of Scotland's total. Aberdeenshire's population has increased by 9.1% since 2001, while Scotland's total population grew by only 3.8%.
The census lists a relatively high proportion of under 16s and slightly less people of working-age compared with the Scottish average. The twelve biggest settlements in Aberdeenshire (with 2011 population estimates) are:

*Peterhead (17,790) 
*Fraserburgh (12,540) 
*Inverurie (11,529) 
*Westhill (11,220) 
*Stonehaven (10,820) 
*Ellon (9,910) 
*Portlethen (7,327) 
*Banchory (7,111) 
*Turriff (4,804) 
*Huntly (4,461) 
*Banff (3,931) 
*Macduff (3,711) 

==Economy==
Aberdeenshire's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is estimated at 3,496m (2011), representing 5.2% of the Scottish total. Aberdeenshire's economy is closely linked to Aberdeen City's (GDP 7,906m) and in 2011 the region as a whole was calculated to contribute 16.8% of Scotland's GDP. Between 2012 and 2014 the combined Aberdeenshire and Aberdeen City economic forecast GDP growth rate is 6.8%, the highest growth rate of any local council area and above the Scottish rate of 4.8%. 

A significant proportion of Aberdeenshire's working residents commute to Aberdeen City for work, varying from 11.5% from Fraserburgh to 65% from Westhill.

Average Gross Weekly Earnings (for full-time employees employed in work places in Aberdeenshire in 2011) are 570.60. This is lower than the Scottish average by 4.10 and a fall of 2.6% on the 2010 figure. The average gross weekly pay of people resident in Aberdeenshire is much higher, at 641.90, as many people commute out
of Aberdeenshire, principally into Aberdeen City. 

Total employment (excluding farm data) in Aberdeenshire is estimated at 93,700 employees (Business Register and
Employment Survey 2009). The majority of employees work within the service sector, predominantly in public administration, education and health. Almost 19% of employment is within the public sector. Aberdeenshire's economy remains closely linked to Aberdeen City's and the North Sea oil industry, with many employees in oil related jobs.

The average monthly unemployment (claimant count) rate for Aberdeenshire in 2011 was 1.5%. This is lower than the average rates for Aberdeen City (2.3%), Scotland (4.2%) and the UK (3.8%). 

==Major Industries==
* Energy  There is significant energy related infrastructure, presence and expertise in Aberdeenshire. Peterhead is an important centre for the energy industry. Peterhead Port, which includes an extensive new quay with adjacent lay down area at Smith Quay, is a major support location for North Sea oil and gas exploration and production and the fast growing global sub-sea sector. The Gas Terminal at St Fergus handles around 15% of the UK's natural gas requirements and the Peterhead power station is looking to host the UK's first carbon capture and storage power generation project. 

* Fishing  Aberdeenshire is Scotland's foremost fishing area. In 2010, catches landed at Aberdeenshire's ports accounted for over half the total fish landings of Scotland, and almost 45% in the UK. Peterhead and Fraserburgh ports, alongside Aberdeen City, provide much of the employment in these sectors. 

* Agriculture  Aberdeenshire is rich in arable land, with an estimated 9,000 people employed in the sector, and is best known for rearing livestock. Sheep are important in the higher ground. 

* Tourism  this sector continues to grow, with a range of sights to be seen in the area. From the lively Cairngorm Mountain range, to the bustling fishing ports on the North-east coast, Aberdeenshire samples a bit of everything. Aberdeenshire also has rugged coastline to complete many sandy beaches, and is a hot spot for tourist activity throughout the year. Almost 1.3 million tourists visited the region in 2011  up 3% on the previous year. 

* Whiskey-distilling is still a practiced art in the area. 

==Governance and politics==
The council has 68 councillors, elected in 19 multi-member wards by Single Transferable Vote. The 2012 elections resulted in the following representation: 

 Ward Members Representation 
 1. Banff and District 3 2 SNP, 1 Con 
 2. Troup 3 1 SNP, 1 Con, 1 Ind 
 3. Fraserburgh and District 4 2 SNP, 2 Ind 
 4. Central Buchan 4 2 SNP, 1 Ind, 1 Con 
 5. Peterhead North and Rattray 4 2 SNP, 2 Ind 
 6. Peterhead South and Cruden 3 2 SNP, 1 Ind 
 7. Turriff and District 3 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP, 1 Ind 
 8. Mid Formartine 4 2 SNP, 1 Ind, 1 Con 
 9. Ellon and District 4 2 SNP, 1 Lib Dem, 1 Con 
 10. West Garioch 3 1 SNP, 1 Lib Dem, 1 Con 
 11. Inverurie and District 4 2 SNP, 1 Lib Dem, 1 Con 
 12. East Garioch 3 1 SNP, 1 Lib Dem, 1 Green 
 13. Westhill and District 4 2 SNP, 1 Con, 1 Lib Dem 
 14. Huntly, Strathbogie and Howe of Alford 4 1 Con, 1 Ind, 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP 
 15. Aboyne, Upper Deeside and Donside 3 1 Con, 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP 
 16. Banchory and Mid Deeside 3 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP, 1 Con 
 17. North Kincardine 4 1 Con, 1 Lab, 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP 
 18. Stonehaven and Lower Deeside 4 1 Con, 1 Lab, 1 Lib Dem, 1 SNP 
 19. Mearns 4 1 Con, 1 Lib Dem, 1 Ind, 1 SNP 

Ythan Estuary nature reserve, with tern colonies and dunes in background.

The overall political composition of the council, following subsequent defections Scottish Lib Dems: Aberdeenshire Councillor joins Scottish Liberal Democrats and by-elections, is as follows: 

 Party Councillors 
 Scottish National Party 27 
 Conservative 14 
 Liberal Democrat 13 
 Independent 11 
 Labour Party 2 
 Green Party 1 

The Council's Revenue Budget for 2012/13 totals approx 548 million. The Education, Learning and Leisure Service takes the largest share of budget (52.3%), followed by Housing and Social Work (24.3%), Infrastructure Services (15.9%), Joint Boards (such as Fire and Police) and Misc services (7.9%) and Trading Activities (0.4%).

21.5% of the revenue is raised locally through the Council Tax. Average Band D Council Tax is 1,141 (2012/13), no change on the previous year.
The current chief executive of the Council is Colin D Mackenzie and the elected Council Leader is Jim Gifford. Aberdeenshire also has a Provost, who is Councillor Jill Webster.

The council has devolved power to six area committees: Banff and Buchan; Buchan; Formartine; Garioch; Marr; and Kincardine and Mearns. Each area committee takes decisions on local issues such as planning applications, and the split is meant to reflect the diverse circumstances of each area. (Boundary map)

==Notable features==
The B976 road near Gairnshiel
An old lime kiln at Badenyon

The following significant structures or places are within Aberdeenshire:
*Badenyon
*Balmoral Castle, Scottish Highland residence of the British royal family. 
*Bennachie
*Burn O'Vat
*Cairness House
*Cairngorms National Park
*Corgarff Castle
*Crathes Castle
*Causey Mounth, an ancient road
*Drum Castle
*Dunnottar Castle
*Fetteresso Castle
*Fowlsheugh Nature Reserve
*Haddo House
*Herscha Hill
*Huntly Castle
*Kildrummy Castle
*Loch of Strathbeg
*Lochnagar
*Monboddo House
*Muchalls Castle
*Pitfour estate
*Portlethen Moss
*Raedykes Roman Camp
*River Dee
*River Don
*Sands of Forvie Nature Reserve
*Slains Castle
*Stonehaven Tolbooth
*Ythan Estuary Nature Reserve

==Hydrology and climate==
There are numerous rivers and burns in Aberdeenshire, including Cowie Water, Carron Water, Burn of Muchalls, River Dee, River Don, River Ury, River Ythan, Water of Feugh, Burn of Myrehouse, Laeca Burn and Luther Water. Numerous bays and estuaries are found along the seacoast of Aberdeenshire, including Banff Bay, Ythan Estuary, Stonehaven Bay and Thornyhive Bay. Aberdeenshire is in the rain shadow of the Grampians, therefore it is a generally dry climate, with portions of the coast, receiving 25 in of moisture annually. Summers are mild and winters are typically cold in Aberdeenshire; Coastal temperatures are moderated by the North Sea such that coastal areas are typically cooler in the summer and warmer in winter than inland locations. Coastal areas are also subject to haar, or coastal fog.

==Notable residents==

*John Skinner, (17211807) author, poet and ecclesiastic. Penned the famous verse, Tullochgorum.
*Hugh Mercer, (17261777), born in the manse of Pitsligo Kirk, near Rosehearty, brigadier general of the Continental Army during the American Revolution. 
*Alexander Garden, (17301791), born in Birse, noted naturalist and physician. He moved to North America in 1754, and discovered two species of lizards. He was a Loyalist during the American Revolutionary War, which led to the confiscation of his property and his banishment in 1782. The gardenia flower is named in his honour. 
*John Kemp, (17631812), born in Auchlossan, was a noted educator at Columbia University who is said to have influenced DeWitt Clinton's opinions and policies. 
*Dame Evelyn Glennie, DBE, born and raised in Ellon on 19 July 1965, is a virtuoso percussionist, and the first full-time solo percussionist in 20th-century western society. She is very highly regarded in the Scottish musical community, and has proven that her profound deafness does not inhibit her musical talent or day-to-day life.
*Peter Nicol, MBE, born in Inverurie on 5 April 1973, is a former professional squash player who represented first Scotland and then England in international squash.
*Gordon Duthie (born 1987), alternative music artist whose upbringing in Aberdeenshire was a key inspiration for his debut album Shire and City.

==References==

==External links==

*Aberdeenshire Council
*Aberdeenshire Libraries Service
*Aberdeenshire Museums Service
*Peterhead and Buchan Tourism Web Site
*Aberdeenshire Arts
*Aberdeenshire Sports Council
*

Aberdeenshire

[[Aztlan Underground]]

Aztlan Underground is a fusion band from Los Angeles. Since early 1989, Aztlan Underground has played Rapcore. Indigenous drums, flutes, and rattles are commonplace in its musical compositions.

This unique sound is the backdrop for the band's message of dignity for indigenous people, all of humanity, and Earth. Aztlan Underground has been cultivating a grass roots audience across the country, which has become a large and loyal underground following. Their music includes spoken word pieces and elements of punk, hip hop, rock, funk, jazz, and indigenous music, among others.

The artists are Chenek "DJ Bean" (turntables, samples and percussion), Yaotl (vocals, indigenous percussion), Joe "Peps" (bass, rattles), Alonzo Beas (guitars, synth), Caxo (drums, indigenous percussion), and Bulldog (vocals, flute).

Aztlan Underground appeared on television on Culture Clash on Fox in 1993, was part of Breaking Out, a concert on pay per view in 1998, and was featured in the independent films Algun Dia and Frontierlandia.

The band has been mentioned or featured in various newspapers and magazines: the Vancouver Sun, Northshore News (Vancouver, Canada newspaper), New Times (Los Angeles weekly entertainment newspaper), BLU Magazine (underground hip hop magazine), BAM Magazine (Southern California), La Banda Elastica Magazine, and the Los Angeles Times Calendar section. It is also the subject of a chapter in It's Not About A Salary, by Brian Cross. They also opened for Rage Against the Machine in Mexico City.

It was nominated in the New Times 1998 "Best Latin Influenced" category, the BAM Magazine 1999 "Best Rock en Espaol" category, and the LA Weekly 1999 "Best Hip Hop" category.

Aztlan Underground were signed to a Basque record label in 1999 which enabled them to tour Spain extensively and perform in France and Portugal.

Other parts of the world that Aztlan Underground have performed include Canada, Australia, and Venezuela.

The band completed their third album and released it exclusively digital on August 29, 2009. The band is set to begin writing a new record this year.

Aztlan Underground were nominated for four Native American Music Award categories for the Nammys 2010. See Nammys.com

==Discography==
===Decolonize===

Year:1995

# Teteu Innan
# Killing Season
# Lost Souls
# My Blood Is Red
# Natural Enemy
# Sacred Circle
# Blood On Your Hands
# Interlude
# Aug 2 The 9
# Indigena
# Lyrical Drive By

===Sub-Verses===
Year:1998

# Permiso
# They Move In Silence
# No Soy Animal
# Killing Season
# Blood On Your Hands
# Reality Check
# Lemon Pledge
# Revolution
# Preachers Of The Blind State
# Lyrical Drive-By
# Nahui Ollin
# How To Catch A Bullet
# Ik Otik
# Obsolete Man
# Decolonize
# War Flowers

===Aztlan Underground===
Year:2009

==See also==
*Chicano Rap
*Native American hip hop
*Rapcore
*Chicano rock

==External links==

* Xicano Records and Film
* Myspace link



[[American Civil War]]

The American Civil War, also known as the War Between the States or simply the Civil War, was a civil war fought from 1861 to 1865, after seven Southern slave states declared their secession and formed the Confederate States of America (the "Confederacy" or the "South", which grew to include eleven states). The states that remained in the Union were known as the "Union" or the "North". The war had its origin in the fractious issue of slavery, especially the extension of slavery into the western territories. Foreign powers did not intervene. After four years of bloody combat that left over 600,000 Union and Confederate soldiers dead and destroyed much of the South's infrastructure, the Confederacy collapsed, slavery was abolished, and the difficult Reconstruction process of restoring national unity and guaranteeing civil rights to the freed slaves began.

In the 1860 presidential election, Republicans, led by Abraham Lincoln, opposed the expansion of slavery into US territories. Lincoln won, but before his inauguration on March 4, 1861, seven slave states with cotton-based economies formed the Confederacy. The first six to secede had the highest proportions of slaves in their populations, a total of 48.8% for the six. "Date of Secession Related to 1860 Black Population", America's Civil War Outgoing Democratic President James Buchanan and the incoming Republicans rejected secession as illegal. Lincoln's inaugural address declared his administration would not initiate civil war. Eight remaining slave states continued to reject calls for secession. Confederate forces seized numerous federal forts within territory claimed by the Confederacy. A peace conference failed to find a compromise, and both sides prepared for war. The Confederates assumed that European countries were so dependent on "King Cotton" that they would intervene; none did and none recognized the new Confederate States of America.

Hostilities began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces fired upon Fort Sumter, a key fort held by Union troops in South Carolina. Lincoln called for each state to provide troops to retake the fort; consequently, four more slave states joined the Confederacy, bringing their total to eleven. The Union soon controlled the border states and established a naval blockade that crippled the southern economy. The Eastern Theater was inconclusive in 186162. The autumn 1862 Confederate campaign into Maryland (a Union state) ended with Confederate retreat at the Battle of Antietam, dissuading British intervention. Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which made ending slavery a war goal. To the west, by summer 1862 the Union destroyed the Confederate river navy, then much of their western armies, and the Union siege of Vicksburg split the Confederacy in two at the Mississippi River. In 1863, Robert E. Lee's Confederate incursion north ended at the Battle of Gettysburg. Western successes led to Ulysses S. Grant's command of all Union armies in 1864. In the Western Theater, William T. Sherman drove east to capture Atlanta and marched to the sea, destroying Confederate infrastructure along the way. The Union marshaled the resources and manpower to attack the Confederacy from all directions, and could afford to fight battles of attrition through the Overland Campaign towards Richmond, the Confederate capital. The defending Confederate army failed, leading to Lee's surrender to Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865. All Confederate generals surrendered by that summer.

The American Civil War was one of the earliest true industrial wars. Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, and mass-produced weapons were employed extensively. The mobilization of civilian factories, mines, shipyards, banks, transportation and food supplies all foreshadowed World War I. It remains the deadliest war in American history, resulting in the deaths of an estimated 750,000 soldiers and an undetermined number of civilian casualties. One estimate of the death toll is that ten percent of all Northern males 2045 years old, and 30 percent of all Southern white males aged 1840 perished.

==Causes of secession==

The causes of the Civil War were complex and have been controversial since the war began. The issue has been further complicated by historical revisionists, who have tried to offer a variety of reasons for the war. James C. Bradford, A companion to American military history (2010) vol. 1, p. 101 Slavery was the central source of escalating political tension in the 1850s. The Republican Party was determined to prevent any spread of slavery, and many Southern leaders had threatened secession if the Republican candidate, Lincoln, won the 1860 election. After Lincoln had won without carrying a single Southern state, many Southern whites felt that disunion had become their only option, because they felt as if they were losing representation, which hampered their ability to promote pro-slavery acts and policies. See sections below this introduction, including citations in these four: Freehling, William W., The Road to Disunion: Secessionists Triumphant 18541861, pp. 924, and Martis, Kenneth C., "The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in the United States Congress, 17891989", ISBN 0-02-920170-5, p. 111115, and Foner, Eric. Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War, Oxford U. Press, 1980 ISBN 0-19-502781-7, p. 1820, 2124, and Eskridge, Larry (Jan 29, 2011). "After 150 years, we still ask: Why 'this cruel war'?.". Canton Daily Ledger (Canton, Illinois). Retrieved 2011-01-29. 

===Slavery===

The slavery issue was primarily about whether the system of slavery was an anachronistic evil that was incompatible with Republicanism in the United States, or a state-based property system protected by the Constitution. The strategy of the anti-slavery forces was containmentto stop the expansion and thus put slavery on a path to gradual extinction. To slave holding interests in the South, this strategy was perceived as infringing upon their Constitutional rights. Slavery was being phased out of existence in the North and was fading in the border states and urban areas, but was expanding in highly profitable cotton districts of the south.

A 1863 photo of a whipped slave Gordon, distributed in the North during the war.
Despite compromises in 1820 and 1850, the slavery issues exploded in the 1850s. Causes include controversy over admitting Missouri as a slave state in 1820, the acquisition of Texas as a slave state in 1845 and the status of slavery in western territories won as a result of the MexicanAmerican War and the resulting Compromise of 1850. Gienapp, William E., "The Crisis of American Democracy: The Political System and the Coming of the Civil War." in Boritt ed. Why the Civil War Came 79123. See also Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the Civil War (2nd ed. 1995), pp. 31112. Following the U.S. victory over Mexico, Northerners attempted to exclude slavery from conquered territories in the Wilmot Proviso; although it passed the House, it failed in the Senate. Northern (and British) readers recoiled in anger at the horrors of slavery as described in the novel and play Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852) by abolitionist Harriet Beecher Stowe. In Gerson, Harriet Beecher Stowe, p. 68; See also Stowe, Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin (1953), p. 39. Irreconcilable disagreements over slavery ended the Whig and Know Nothing political parties, and later split the Democratic Party between North and South, while the new Republican Party angered slavery interests by demanding an end to its expansion. Most observers believed that without expansion slavery would eventually die out; Lincoln argued this in 1845 and 1858.

Meanwhile, the South of the 1850s saw an increasing number of slaves leave the border states through sale, manumission and escape. During this same period, slave-holding border states had more free African-Americans and European immigrants than the lower South, which increased Southern fears that slavery was threatened with rapid extinction in this area. William W. Freehling, The Road to Disunion: Secessionists Triumphant 18541861, pp. 924. Such fears greatly increased Southern efforts to make Kansas a slave state. By 1860, the number of white border state families owning slaves plunged to only 16 percent of the total. Slaves sold to lower South states were owned by a smaller number of wealthy slave owners as the price of slaves increased. With tobacco and cotton wearing out the soil, the South believed it needed to expand slavery. Eugene D. Genovese, The Political Economy of Slavery: Studies in the Economy and Society of the Slave South (Wesleyan U.P,. 1988). p. 244 Some advocates for the Southern states argued in favor of reopening the international slave trade to populate territory that was to be newly opened to slavery. Manisha Sinha, The Counterrevolution of Slavery: Politics and Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina (2000), pp. 1278. Failing that, their 1854 Ostend Manifesto was an unsuccessful attempt to annex of Cuba#The 19th century: years of upheaval|Cuba] as a slave state. See Potter, David. The Impending Crisis, pp. 201204. Southern demands for a slave code to ensure slavery in the territories repeatedly split the Democratic Party between North and South by widening margins.

To settle the dispute over slavery expansion, Abolitionists and proslavery elements sent their partisans into Kansas, both using ballots and bullets. In the 1850s, a miniature civil war in Bleeding Kansas led pro-South Presidents Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan to attempt a forced admission of Kansas as a slave state through vote fraud. Vote fraud in Kansas The 1857 Congressional rejection of the pro-slavery Lecompton Constitution was the first multi-party solid-North vote, and that solid vote was anti-slavery to support the democratic majority voting in the Kansas Territory. Violence on behalf of Southern honor reached the floor of the Senate in 1856 when a Southern Congressman, Preston Brooks, physically assaulted Republican Senator Charles Sumner when he ridiculed prominent slaveholders as pimps for slavery. See Williamjames Hoffer, The Caning of Charles Sumner: Honor, Idealism, and the Origins of the Civil War (2010), pp. 62, 13133. 

The earlier political party structure failed to make accommodation among sectional differences. Disagreements over slavery caused the Whig and "Know-Nothing" parties to collapse. In 1860, the last national political party, the Democratic Party, split along sectional lines. Anti-slavery Northerners mobilized in 1860 behind moderate Abraham Lincoln because he was most likely to carry the doubtful western states. In 1857, the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision ended the Congressional compromise for Popular Sovereignty in Kansas. According to the court, slavery in the territories was a property right of any settler, regardless of the majority there. Chief Justice Taney's decision said that slaves were, "... so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect." The decision overturned the Missouri Compromise, which banned slavery in territory north of the 3630' parallel.

Members of slave-owning planter aristocracy dominated society and politics in the South.
Republicans denounced the Dred Scott decision and promised to overturn it; Abraham Lincoln warned that the next Dred Scott decision could threaten the Northern states with slavery. The Republican party platform called slavery "a national evil", and Lincoln believed it would die a natural death if it were contained. The Democrat Stephen A. Douglas developed the Freeport Doctrine to appeal to North and South. Douglas argued, Congress could not decide either for or against slavery before a territory was settled. Nonetheless, the anti-slavery majority in Kansas could stop slavery with its own local laws if their police laws did not protect slavery introduction. Foner, Eric. 'Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the Civil War (2nd ed. 1995), pp. 31112. Most 1850 political battles followed the arguments of Lincoln and Douglas, focusing on the issue of slavery expansion in the territories.

But political debate was cut short throughout the South with Northern abolitionist John Brown's 1859 raid at Harpers Ferry Armory in an attempt to incite slave insurrections. The Southern political defense of slavery transformed into widespread expansion of local militias for armed defense of their "peculiar" domestic institution. Lincoln's assessment of the political issue for the 1860 elections was that, "This question of Slavery was more important than any other; indeed, so much more important has it become that no other national question can even get a hearing just at present." The Republicans gained majorities in both House and Senate for the first time since the 1856 elections, they were to be seated in numbers that Lincoln might use to govern, a national parliamentary majority even before pro-slavery House and Senate seats were vacated. Martis, Kenneth C., "The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in the United States Congress, 17891989", ISBN 0-02-920170-5, p. 111115. Though elected in November by the Electoral College with a plurality of popular votes, he was certified Constitutionally elected President by Congress in December before the Republican majorities were seated. Both Lincoln and the Republican Platform guaranteed no interference with slavery where it existed, and in his Inaugural Address he supported the proposed Corwin Amendment to Constitutionally restate it. But secessionists claimed that such guarantees were meaningless. They feared that Republicans would use patronage to incite slaves and antislavery Southern whites such as Hinton Rowan Helper. Then they feared slavery in the lower South, like a "scorpion encircled by fire, would sting itself to death." See Freehling, William W., The Road to Disunion: Secessionists Triumphant 18541861, pp. 924. Besides the loss of Kansas to free soil Northerners, secessionists feared that the loss of slaves in the border states would lead to emancipation, and that upper South slave states might be the next dominoes to fall. Meanwhile, Southern Vice President, Alexander Stephens, in the Cornerstone Speech, declared the new confederate "Constitution has put at rest forever all the agitating questions relating to our peculiar institutionsAfrican slavery as it exists among usthe proper status of the negro in our form of civilization. This was the immediate cause of the late rupture and present revolution." The Republican administration enacted the Confiscation Acts that set conditions for emancipation of slaves prior to the official proclamation of emancipation. http://jacobinmag.com/2012/08/the-war-of-northern-aggression/ Likewise, Lincoln had previously condemned slavery and called for its "extinction." http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1989/jan/19/the-war-of-southern-aggression/ 

Considering the relative weight given to causes of the Civil War by contemporary actors, historians such as Chandra Manning argue that both Union and Confederate fighting soldiers believed that slavery caused the Civil War. Union men mainly believed the war was to emancipate the slaves. Confederates fought to protect southern society, and slavery as an integral part of it. "The power of the federal government to affect the institution of slavery, specifically limiting it in newly added territories." was the primary political debate in Southern states over secession, rather than states' rights in general. Addressing the causes, Eric Foner would relate a historical context with multidimensional political, social and economic variables. The several causes united in the moment by a consolidating nationalism. A social movement that was individualist, egalitarian and perfectionist grew to a political democratic majority attacking slavery, and slavery's defense in the Southern pre-industrial traditional society brought the two sides to war.

===States' rights===

alt=Men lined up along a tree line are shot by men on horseback.

Everyone agreed that states had certain rightsbut did those rights carry over when a citizen left that state? The Southern position was that citizens of every state had the right to take their property anywhere in the U.S. and not have it taken awayspecifically they could bring their slaves anywhere and they would remain slaves. Northerners rejected this "right" because it would violate the right of a free state to outlaw slavery within its borders. Republicans committed to ending the expansion of slavery were among those opposed to any such right to bring slaves and slavery into the free states and territories. The Dred Scott Supreme Court decision of 1857 bolstered the Southern case within territories, and angered the North. 

Secondly, the South argued that each state had the right to secedeleave the Unionat any time, that the Constitution was a "compact" or agreement among the states. Northerners (including President Buchanan) rejected that notion as opposed to the will of the Founding Fathers who said they were setting up a "perpetual union". Historian James McPherson writes concerning states' rights and other non-slavery explanations:

===Sectionalism===
alt=Map of U.S. showing two kinds of Union states, two phases of secession and territories.
Sectionalism refers to the different economies, social structure, customs and political values of the North and South. It increased steadily between 1800 and 1860 as the North, which phased slavery out of existence, industrialized, urbanized and built prosperous farms, while the deep South concentrated on plantation agriculture based on slave labor, together with subsistence farming for the poor whites. The South expanded into rich new lands in the Southwest (from Alabama to Texas). 

However, slavery declined in the border states and could barely survive in cities and industrial areas (it was fading out in cities such as Baltimore, Louisville, and St. Louis), so a South based on slavery was rural and non-industrial. On the other hand, as the demand for cotton grew, the price of slaves soared. Historians have debated whether economic differences between the industrial Northeast and the agricultural South helped cause the war. Most historians now disagree with the economic determinism of historian Charles Beard in the 1920s and emphasize that Northern and Southern economies were largely complementary. 

Fears of slave revolts and abolitionist propaganda made the South militantly hostile to abolitionism. Southerners complained that it was the North that was changing, and was prone to new "isms", while the South remained true to historic republican values of the Founding Fathers (many of whom owned slaves, including Washington, Jefferson, and Madison). Lincoln said that Republicans were following the tradition of the framers of the Constitution (including the Northwest Ordinance and the Missouri Compromise) by preventing expansion of slavery. 

In the 1840s and 50s, the issue of accepting slavery (in the guise of rejecting slave-owning bishops and missionaries) split the nation's largest religious denominations (the Methodist, Baptist and Presbyterian churches) into separate Northern and Southern denominations. Industrialization meant that seven European immigrants out of eight settled in the North. The movement of twice as many whites leaving the South for the North as vice versa contributed to the South's defensive-aggressive political behavior. 

====Protectionism====

New Orleans the largest cotton exporting port for New England and Great Britain textile mills, shipping Mississippi River Valley goods from North, South and Border states.

Historically, southern slave-holding states, because of their low cost manual labor, had little perceived need for mechanization, and supported having the right to sell cotton and purchase manufactured goods from any nation. Northern states, which had heavily invested in their still-nascent manufacturing, could not compete with the full-fledged industries of Europe in offering high prices for cotton imported from the South and low prices for manufactured exports in return. For this reason, northern manufacturing interests supported tariffs and protectionism while southern planters demanded free trade.

The Democrats in Congress, controlled by Southerners, wrote the tariff laws in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s, and kept reducing rates so that the 1857 rates were the lowest since 1816. The South had no complaints but the low rates angered Northern industrialists and factory workers, especially in Pennsylvania, who demanded protection for their growing iron industry. The Whigs and Republicans complained because they favored high tariffs to stimulate industrial growth, and Republicans called for an increase in tariffs in the 1860 election. The increases were finally enacted in 1861 after Southerners resigned their seats in Congress. 

Historians in the 1920s emphasized the tariff issue but since the 1950s they have minimized it, noting that few Southerners in 186061 said it was of central importance to them. Some secessionist documents do mention the tariff issue, though not nearly as often as the preservation of slavery.

==== Slave power and free soil ====

"A Ride for Liberty" (1862). An unassisted family of fugitive slaves charges for the safety of Union lines.

Antislavery forces in the North identified the "Slave Power" as a direct threat to republican values. They argued that rich slave owners were using political power to take control of the Presidency, Congress and the Supreme Court, thus threatening the rights of the citizens of the North.

"Free soil" was a Northern demand that the new lands opening up in the west be available to independent yeoman farmers and not be bought out by rich slave owners who would buy up the best land and work it with slaves, forcing the white farmers onto marginal lands. This was the basis of the Free Soil Party of 1848, and a main theme of the Republican Party. Free Soilers and Republicans demanded a homestead law that would give government land to settlers; it was defeated by Southerners who feared it would attract to the west European immigrants and poor Southern whites.

===Territorial crisis===

Between 1803 and 1854, the United States achieved a vast expansion of territory through purchase, negotiation, and conquest. Of the states carved out of these territories by 1845, all had entered the union as slave states: Louisiana, Missouri, Arkansas, Florida and Texas, as well as the southern portions of Alabama and Mississippi. And with the conquest of northern Mexico, including California, in 1848, slaveholding interests looked forward to the institution flourishing in these lands as well. Southerners also anticipated garnering slaves and slave states in Cuba and Central America. Northern free soil interests vigorously sought to curtail any further expansion of slave soil. It was these territorial disputes that the proslavery and antislavery forces collided over.

The existence of slavery in the southern states was far less politically polarizing than the explosive question of the territorial expansion of the institution westward. Moreover, Americans were informed by two well-established readings of the Constitution regarding human bondage: first, that the slave states had complete autonomy over the institution within their boundaries, and second, that the domestic slave trade  trade among the states  was immune to federal interference. The only feasible strategy available to attack slavery was to restrict its expansion into the new territories. Slaveholding interests fully grasped the danger that this strategy posed to them. Both the South and the North drew the same conclusion: "The power to decide the question of slavery for the territories was the power to determine the future of slavery itself."

By 1860, four doctrines had emerged to answer the question of federal control in the territories, and they all claimed they were sanctioned by the Constitution, implicitly or explicitly. Two of the "conservative" doctrines emphasized the written text and historical precedents of the founding document (specifically, the Northwest Ordinance and the Missouri Compromise), while the other two doctrines developed arguments that transcended the Constitution.

The first of these "conservative" theories, represented by the Constitutional Union Party, argued that the historical designation of free and slave apportionments in territories (as done in the Missouri Compromise) should become a Constitutional mandate. The Crittenden Compromise of 1860 was an expression of this view.

The second doctrine of Congressional preeminence, championed by Abraham Lincoln and the Republican Party, insisted that the Constitution did not bind legislators to a policy of balance  that slavery could be excluded altogether (as done in the Northwest Ordinance) in a territory at the discretion of Congress  with one caveat: the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment must apply. In other words, Congress could restrict human bondage, but never establish it. The Wilmot Proviso announced this position in 1846.

Of the two doctrines that rejected federal authority, one was articulated by northern Democrat of Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas, and the other by southern Democratic Senator Jefferson Davis of Mississippi and Vice-President John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky.

Douglas proclaimed the doctrine of territorial or "popular" sovereignty, which declared that the settlers in a territory had the same rights as states in the Union to establish or disestablish slavery  a purely local matter. Congress, having created the territory, was barred, according to Douglas, from exercising any authority in domestic matters. To do so would violate historic traditions of self-government, implicit in the US Constitution. The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 legislated this doctrine.

The fourth in this quartet is the theory of state sovereignty ("states' rights"), also known as the "Calhoun doctrine", named after the South Carolinian political theorist and statesman John C. Calhoun. Rejecting the arguments for federal authority or self-government, state sovereignty would empower states to promote the expansion of slavery as part of the Federal Union under the US Constitution  and not merely as an argument for secession. The basic premise was that all authority regarding matters of slavery in the territories resided in each state. The role of the federal government was merely to enable the implementation of state laws when residents of the states entered the territories. The Calhoun doctrine asserted that the federal government in the territories was only the agent of the several sovereign states, and hence incapable of forbidding the bringing into any territory of anything that was legal property in any state. State sovereignty, in other words, gave the laws of the slaveholding states extra-jurisdictional effect.

"States' rights" was an ideology formulated and applied as a means of advancing slave state interests through federal authority. As historian Thomas L. Krannawitter points out, the "Southern demand for federal slave protection represented a demand for an unprecedented expansion of federal power." Gara, 1964, p. 190 

By 1860, these four doctrines comprised the major ideologies presented to the American public on the matters of slavery, the territories and the US Constitution.

===National elections===
Beginning in the American Revolution and accelerating after the War of 1812, the people of the United States grew in their sense of country as an important example to the world of a national republic of political liberty and personal rights. Previous regional independence movements such as the Greek revolt in the Ottoman Empire, division and redivision in the Latin American political map, and the British-French Crimean triumph leading to an interest in redrawing Europe along cultural differences, all conspired to make for a time of upheaval and uncertainty about the basis of the nation-state. In the world of 19th century self-made Americans, growing in prosperity, population and expanding westward, "freedom" could mean personal liberty or property rights. The unresolved difference would cause failurefirst in their political institutions, then in their civil life together.

====Nationalism and honor====
alt=Middle-aged man in a beard posed sitting in a suit, vest and bowtie.
Nationalism was a powerful force in the early 19th century, with famous spokesmen such as Andrew Jackson and Daniel Webster. While practically all Northerners supported the Union, Southerners were split between those loyal to the entire United States (called "unionists") and those loyal primarily to the southern region and then the Confederacy. C. Vann Woodward said of the latter group, "A great slave society ... had grown up and miraculously flourished in the heart of a thoroughly bourgeois and partly puritanical republic. It had renounced its bourgeois origins and elaborated and painfully rationalized its institutional, legal, metaphysical, and religious defenses ... When the crisis came it chose to fight. It proved to be the death struggle of a society, which went down in ruins." Perceived insults to Southern collective honor included the enormous popularity of Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852) and the actions of abolitionist John Brown in trying to incite a slave rebellion in 1859. 

While the South moved toward a Southern nationalism, leaders in the North were also becoming more nationally minded, and rejected any notion of splitting the Union. The Republican national electoral platform of 1860 warned that Republicans regarded disunion as treason and would not tolerate it: "We denounce those threats of disunion ... as denying the vital principles of a free government, and as an avowal of contemplated treason, which it is the imperative duty of an indignant people sternly to rebuke and forever silence." The South ignored the warnings: Southerners did not realize how ardently the North would fight to hold the Union together. 

====Lincoln's election====

The election of Lincoln in November 1860 was the final trigger for secession. Efforts at compromise, including the "Corwin Amendment" and the "Crittenden Compromise", failed.
Southern leaders feared that Lincoln would stop the expansion of slavery and put it on a course toward extinction. The slave states, which had already become a minority in the House of Representatives, were now facing a future as a perpetual minority in the Senate and Electoral College against an increasingly powerful North. Before Lincoln took office in March 1861, seven slave states had declared their secession and joined to form the Confederacy.

==Secession and war begins==
===Resolves and developments===
====Secession of South Carolina====

South Carolina did more to advance nullification and secession than any other Southern state. South Carolina adopted the "Declaration of the Immediate Causes Which Induce and Justify the Secession of South Carolina from the Federal Union" on December 24, 1860. It argued for states' rights for slave owners in the South, but contained a complaint about states' rights in the North in the form of opposition to the Fugitive Slave Act, claiming that Northern states were not fulfilling their federal obligations under the Constitution.

====Secession winter====
Before Lincoln took office, seven states had declared their secession from the Union. They established a Southern government, the Confederate States of America on February 4, 1861. They took control of federal forts and other properties within their boundaries with little resistance from outgoing President James Buchanan, whose term ended on March 4, 1861. Buchanan said that the Dred Scott decision was proof that the South had no reason for secession, and that the Union "... was intended to be perpetual," but that, "The power by force of arms to compel a State to remain in the Union," was not among the "... enumerated powers granted to Congress." One quarter of the U.S. Armythe entire garrison in Texaswas surrendered in February 1861 to state forces by its commanding general, David E. Twiggs, who then joined the Confederacy.

As Southerners resigned their seats in the Senate and the House, Republicans were able to pass bills for projects that had been blocked by Southern Senators before the war, including the Morrill Tariff, land grant colleges (the Morill Act), a Homestead Act, a transcontinental railroad (the Pacific Railway Acts), 
the National Banking Act and the authorization of United States Notes by the Legal Tender Act of 1862. The Revenue Act of 1861 introduced the income tax to help finance the war.

===States align===
====Confederate states====

alt=Middle-aged man in a goatee posed standing in a suit, vest and bowtie

Seven Deep South cotton states seceded by February 1861, starting with South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. These seven states formed the Confederate States of America (February 4, 1861), with Jefferson Davis as president, and a governmental structure closely modeled on the U.S. Constitution.

Following the attack on Fort Sumter, President Lincoln called for a volunteer army from each state. Within two months, an additional four Southern slave states declared their secession and joined the Confederacy: Virginia, Arkansas, North Carolina and Tennessee. The northwestern portion of Virginia subsequently seceded from Virginia, joining the Union as the new state of West Virginia on June 20, 1863. By the end of 1861, Missouri and Kentucky were effectively under Union control, with Confederate state governments in exile.

Among the ordinances of secession passed by the individual states, those of three  Texas, Alabama, and Virginia  specifically mentioned the plight of the 'slaveholding states' at the hands of northern abolitionists. The rest make no mention of the slavery issue, and are often brief announcements of the dissolution of ties by the legislatures. Ordinances of Secession by State. Retrieved 2012-11-28. 
However, at least four states  South Carolina, The text of the Declaration of the Immediate Causes Which Induce and Justify the Secession of South Carolina from the Federal Union. 
Mississippi, The text of A Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce and Justify the Secession of the State of Mississippi from the Federal Union. Retrieved 2012-11-28. 
Georgia, The text of Georgia's secession declaration. Retrieved 2012-11-28. 
and Texas The text of A Declaration of the Causes which Impel the State of Texas to Secede from the Federal Union. Retrieved 2012-11-28. 
 also passed lengthy and detailed explanations of their causes for secession, all of which laid the blame squarely on the influence over the northern states of the movement to abolish slavery, something regarded as a Constitutional right by the slaveholding states. Declaration of Causes of Secession. Retrieved 2012-11-28. 

====Union states====

Twenty-three states remained loyal to the Union: California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Wisconsin. During the war, Nevada and West Virginia joined as new states of the Union. Tennessee and Louisiana were returned to Union military control early in the war.

The territories of Colorado, Dakota, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington fought on the Union side. Several slave-holding Native American tribes supported the Confederacy, giving the Indian Territory (now Oklahoma) a small, bloody civil war. 

====Border states====

The border states in the Union were West Virginia (which separated from Virginia and became a new state), and four of the five northernmost slave states (Maryland, Delaware, Missouri, and Kentucky).

Maryland had numerous pro-Confederate officials who tolerated anti-Union rioting in Baltimore and the burning of bridges. Lincoln responded with martial law and sent in militia units from the North. Before the Confederate government realized what was happening, Lincoln had seized firm control of Maryland and the District of Columbia, by arresting all the prominent secessionists and holding them without trial (they were later released).

alt=Map of U.S. showing three new states, with two kinds of Confederate territorial control.

In Missouri, an elected convention on secession voted decisively to remain within the Union. When pro-Confederate Governor Claiborne F. Jackson called out the state militia, it was attacked by federal forces under General Nathaniel Lyon, who chased the governor and the rest of the State Guard to the southwestern corner of the state. (See also: Missouri secession). In the resulting vacuum, the convention on secession reconvened and took power as the Unionist provisional government of Missouri. 

Kentucky did not secede; for a time, it declared itself neutral. When Confederate forces entered the state in September 1861, neutrality ended and the state reaffirmed its Union status, while trying to maintain slavery. During a brief invasion by Confederate forces, Confederate sympathizers organized a secession convention, inaugurated a governor, and gained recognition from the Confederacy. The rebel government soon went into exile and never controlled Kentucky. 

After Virginia's secession, a Unionist government in Wheeling asked 48 counties to vote on an ordinance to create a new state on October 24, 1861. A voter turnout of 34% approved the statehood bill (96% approving). The inclusion of 24 secessionist counties in the state and the ensuing guerrilla war engaged about 40,000 Federal troops for much of the war. Congress admitted West Virginia to the Union on June 20, 1863. West Virginia provided about 20,00022,000 soldiers to both the Confederacy and the Union. 

A Unionist secession attempt occurred in East Tennessee, but was suppressed by the Confederacy, which arrested over 3,000 men suspected of being loyal to the Union. They were held without trial.

===Beginning the war===

Lincoln's victory in the presidential election of 1860 triggered South Carolina's declaration of secession from the Union in December, and six more states did so by February 1861. A pre-war February Peace Conference of 1861 met in Washington, Lincoln sneaking into town to stay in the Conference's hotel its last three days. The attempt failed at resolving the crisis, but the remaining eight slave states rejected pleas to join the Confederacy following a two-to-one no-vote in Virginia's First Secessionist Convention on April 4, 1861.

====Lincoln's policy====
Since December, secessionists with and without state forces had seized Federal Court Houses, U.S. Treasury mints and post offices. Southern governors ordered militia mobilization, seized most of the federal forts and cannon within their boundaries and U.S. armories of infantry weapons. The governors in big-state Republican strongholds of Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania quietly began buying weapons and training militia units themselves. President Buchanan protested seizure of Federal property, but made no military response apart from a failed attempt on January 9, 1861 to resupply Fort Sumter using the ship Star of the West, which was fired upon by South Carolina forces and turned back before it reached the fort.

alt=Merchant steamer, Ft. Sumter center horizon, Confederate battery smoke left and right.

On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln was sworn in as President. In his inaugural address, he argued that the Constitution was a more perfect union than the earlier Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, that it was a binding contract, and called any secession "legally void". He had no intent to invade Southern states, nor did he intend to end slavery where it existed, but said that he would use force to maintain possession of federal property. The government would make no move to recover post offices, and if resisted, mail delivery would end at state lines. Where popular conditions did not allow peaceful enforcement of Federal law, U.S. Marshals and Judges would be withdrawn. No mention was made of bullion lost from U.S. mints in Louisiana, Georgia and North Carolina. In Lincoln's Inaugural, U.S. policy would only collect import duties at its ports, there could be no serious injury to justify revolution in the politics of four years. His speech closed with a plea for restoration of the bonds of union. 

The South sent delegations to Washington and offered to pay for the federal properties and enter into a peace treaty with the United States. Lincoln rejected any negotiations with Confederate agents because he claimed the Confederacy was not a legitimate government, and that making any treaty with it would be tantamount to recognition of it as a sovereign government. Secretary of State William Seward who at that time saw himself as the real governor or "prime minister" behind the throne of the inexperienced Lincoln, engaged in unauthorized and indirect negotiations that failed. President Lincoln was determined to hold all remaining Union-occupied forts in the Confederacy, Fort Monroe in Virginia, in Florida, Fort Pickens, Fort Jefferson, and Fort Taylor, and in the cockpit of secession, Charleston, South Carolina's Fort Sumter.

====Battle of Fort Sumter====

alt=Crowd surrounding an equestrian statue toped by a huge U.S. flag.

Ft. Sumter was located in the middle of the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, where the U.S. forts garrison had withdrawn to avoid incidents with local militias in the streets of the city. Unlike Buchanan who allowed commanders to relinquish possession to avoid bloodshed, Lincoln required Maj. Anderson to hold on until fired upon. Jefferson Davis ordered the surrender of the fort. Anderson gave a conditional reply that the Confederate government rejected, and Davis ordered P. G. T. Beauregard to attack the fort before a relief expedition could arrive. Troops under Beauregard bombarded Fort Sumter on April 1213, forcing its capitulation. On April 15, Lincoln's Secretary of War then called on Governors for 75,000 volunteers to recapture the fort and other federal property. 

Northerners rallied behind Lincoln's call for all the states to send troops to recapture the forts and to preserve the Union, citing presidential powers given by the Militia Acts of 1792. With the scale of the rebellion apparently small so far, Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers for 90 days. Several Northern governors began to move forces the next day, and Secessionists seized Liberty Arsenal in Liberty, Missouri the next week. Two weeks later, on May 3, 1861, Lincoln called for an additional 42,034 volunteers for a period of three years. 

Four states in the middle and upper South had repeatedly rejected Confederate overtures, but now Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, and North Carolina refused to send forces against their neighbors, declared their secession, and joined the Confederacy. To reward Virginia, the Confederate capital was moved to Richmond. 

==The War==

The Civil War was a contest marked by the ferocity and frequency of battle. Over four years, 237 named battles were fought, and many more minor actions and skirmishes. In the scales of world military history, both sides fighting were characterized by their bitter intensity and high casualties. "The American Civil War was to prove one of the most ferocious wars ever fought". Without geographic objectives, the only target for each side was the enemy's soldier. Keegan, "The American Civil War", p.73. Over 10,000 military engagements took place during the war, 40% of them in Virginia and Tennessee. See Gabor Boritt, ed. War Comes Again (1995), p. 247. 

===Mobilization===
As the first seven states began organizing a Confederacy in Montgomery, the entire US army numbered 16,000. However, Northern governors had begun to mobilize their militias. "With an actual strength of 1,080 officers and 14,926 enlisted men on June 30, 1860, the Regular Army ..." Civil War Extracts p. 199221, American Military History. The Confederate Congress authorized the new nation up to 100,000 troops sent by governors as early as February. After Fort Sumter, Lincoln called out 75,000 three-month volunteers, by May Jefferson Davis was pushing for 100,000 men under arms for one year or the duration, and that was answered in kind by the U.S. Congress. E. Merton Coulter, Confederate States of America (1950) p.308. Accounts of historians differ as to the date and the agency of the Confederate 100,000-man call. See also , "Secession, Sumter, and Standing to Arms", "... on March 6 the new Confederate Executive, Jefferson Davis, called for a 100,000-man volunteer force to serve for twelve months ..." . See also Civil War extracts, American Military History Online. Retrieved 2012-11-28. and Nicolay, J.G. and Hay, John. Abraham Lincoln: a history, vol. 4, p.264. Retrieved 2012-11-28. "Since the organization of the Montgomery government in February, some four different calls for Southern volunteers had been made ... In his message of April 29 to the rebel Congress, Jefferson Davis proposed to organize for instant action an army of 100,000 ..." Coulter reports that Alexander Stephens took this to mean Davis wanted unilateral control of a standing army, and from that moment on became an implacable opponent. 

In the first year of the war, both sides had far more volunteers than they could effectively train and equip. After the initial enthusiasm faded, reliance on the cohort of young men who came of age every year and wanted to join was not enough. Both sides used a draft lawconscriptionas a device to encourage or force volunteering; relatively few were actually drafted and served. The Confederacy passed a draft law in April 1862 for young men aged 18 to 35; overseers of slaves, government officials, and clergymen were exempt. The U.S. Congress followed in July, authorizing a militia draft within a state when it could not meet its quota with volunteers. European immigrants joined the Union Army in large numbers, including 177,000 born in Germany and 144,000 born in Ireland. Albert Bernhardt Faust, The German Element in the United States (1909) v. 1, p. 523 online. The railroads and banks grew rapidly. See Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson. , pp. 378430. See also Oberholtzer, A History of the United States Since the Civil War (1926) 3:69122. 

When the Emancipation Proclamation went into effect in January 1863, ex-slaves were energetically recruited by the states, and used to meet the state quotas. States and local communities offered higher and higher cash bonuses for white volunteers. Congress tightened the law in March 1863. Men selected in the draft could provide substitutes or, until mid-1864, pay commutation money. Many eligibles pooled their money to cover the cost of anyone drafted. Families used the substitute provision to select which man should go into the army and which should stay home. There was much evasion and overt resistance to the draft, especially in Catholic areas. The great draft riot in New York City in July 1863 involved Irish immigrants who had been signed up as citizens to swell the vote of the city's Democratic political machine, not realizing it made them liable for the draft. Of the 168,649 men procured for the Union through the draft, 117,986 were substitutes, leaving only 50,663 who had their personal services conscripted. 

North and South, the draft laws were highly unpopular. An estimated 120,000 men evaded conscription in the North, many of them fleeing to Canada, and another 280,000 Northern soldiers deserted during the war, along with at least 100,000 Southerners, or about 10% all together. However, desertion was a very common event in the 19th century; in the peacetime Army about 15% of the soldiers deserted every year. In the South, many men deserted temporarily to take care of their families, then returned to their units. In the North, "bounty jumpers" enlisted to get the generous bonus, deserted, then went back to a second recruiting station under a different name to sign up again for a second bonus; 141 were caught and executed. 
Rioters attacking a building during the New York anti-draft riots of 1863

From a tiny frontier force in 1860, in a few years the Union and Confederates armies had grown into the "largest and most efficient armies in the world." European observers at the time dismissed them as amateur and unprofessional, but British historian John Keegan's assessment is that each outmatched the French, Prussian and Russian armies of the time, and but for the Atlantic, would have threatened any of them with defeat.

====Motivation====
Perman and Taylor (2010) say that historians are of two minds on why millions of men seemed so eager to fight, suffer and die over four years:
:"Some historians emphasize that Civil War soldiers were driven by political ideology, holding firm beliefs about the importance of liberty, Union, or state rights, or about the need to protect or to destroy slavery. Others point to less overtly political reasons to fight, such as the defense of one's home and family, or the honor and brotherhood to be preserved when fighting alongside other men. Most historians agree that no matter what a soldier thought about when he went into the war, the experience of combat affected him profoundly and sometimes altered his reasons for continuing the fight."

====Prisoners====

At the start of the civil war a system of paroles operated. Captives agreed not to fight until they were officially exchanged. Meanwhile they were held in camps run by their own army where they were paid but not allowed to perform any military duties. The system of exchanges collapsed in 1863 when the Confederacy refused to exchange black prisoners. After that about 56,000 of the 409,000 POWs died in prisons during the War, accounting for nearly 10% of the conflict's fatalities. 

===Naval war===
The small U.S. Navy of 1861 was rapidly enlarged to 6,000 officers and 45,000 men in 1865, with 671 vessels, having a tonnage of 510,396. Its mission was to blockade Confederate ports, take control of the river system, defend against Confederate raiders on the high seas, and be ready for a possible war with the British Royal Navy. Meanwhile, the main riverine war was fought in the West, where a series of major rivers gave access to the Confederate heartland, if the U.S. Navy could take control. In the East, the Navy supplied and moved army forces about, and occasionally shelled Confederate installations.

====Union blockade====

alt=A cartoon map of the South surrounded by a snake.
By early 1861, General Winfield Scott had devised the Anaconda Plan to win the war with as little bloodshed as possible. Scott argued that a Union blockade of the main ports would weaken the Confederate economy. Lincoln adopted parts of the plan, but he overruled Scott's caution about 90-day volunteers. Public opinion however demanded an immediate attack by the army to capture Richmond.

In April 1861, Lincoln announced the Union blockade of all Southern ports; commercial ships could not get insurance and regular traffic ended. The South blundered in embargoing cotton exports in 1861 before the blockade was effective; by the time they realized the mistake it was too late. "King Cotton" was dead, as the South could export less than 10% of its cotton. The blockade shut down the ten Confederate seaports with railheads that moved almost all the cotton, especially New Orleans, Mobile, and Charleston. By June 1861, warships were stationed off the principal Southern ports, and a year later nearly 300 ships were in service.

=====Modern navy evolves=====
The Civil War prompted the industrial revolution and subsequently many naval innovations emerged during this time, most notably the advent of the ironclad warship. It began when the Confederacy, knowing they had to meet or match the Union's naval superiority, responded to the Union blockade by building or converting more than 130 vessels, including twenty-six ironclads and floating batteries. Only half of these saw active service. Many were equipped with ram bows, creating "ram fever" among Union squadrons wherever they threatened. But in the face of overwhelming Union superiority and the Union's own ironclad warships, they were unsuccessful.

The Confederacy experimented with a submarine, which did not work well, Gerald F. Teaster and Linda and James Treaster Ambrose, The Confederate Submarine H. L. Hunley (1989) and with building an ironclad ship, the CSS Virginia, which was based on rebuilding a sunken Union ship, the Merrimac. On its first foray on March 8, 1862, the Virginia decimated the Union's wooden fleet, but the next day the first Union ironclad, the USS Monitor, arrived to challenge it. The Battle of the Ironclads was a draw, but it marks the worldwide transition to ironclad warships.

The Confederacy lost the Virginia when the ship was scuttled to prevent capture, and the Union built many copies of the Monitor. Lacking the technology to build effective warships, the Confederacy attempted to obtain warships from Britain.

=====Blockade runners=====

British investors built small, very fast, steam-driven blockade runners that traded arms and luxuries brought in from Britain through Bermuda, Cuba, and the Bahamas in return for high-priced cotton. The ships were so small that only a small amount of cotton went out. When the Union Navy seized a blockade runner, the ship and cargo were condemned as a Prize of war and sold with the proceeds given to the Navy sailors; the captured crewmen were mostly British and they were simply released. Mark E. Neely, Jr. "The Perils of Running the Blockade: The Influence of International Law in an Era of Total War," Civil War History (1986) 32#2, pp. 101118 in Project MUSE The Southern economy nearly collapsed during the war. There were multiple reasons for this: the severe deterioration of food supplies, especially in cities, the failure of Southern railroads, the loss of control of the main rivers, foraging by Northern armies, and the seizure of animals and crops by Confederate armies. Historians agree that the blockade was a major factor in ruining the Confederate economy. However, Wise argues that they provided just enough of a lifeline to allow Lee to continue fighting for additional months, thanks to fresh supplies of 400,000 rifles, lead, blankets, and boots that the homefront economy could no longer supply. Stephen R. Wise, Lifeline of the Confederacy: Blockade Running during the Civil War (1991) 

Gunline of nine Union ironclads. South Atlantic Blockading Squadron off Charleston. Continuous blockade of all major ports was sustained by North's overwhelming war production

=====Economic impact=====
Surdam argues that the blockade was a powerful weapon that eventually ruined the Southern economy, at the cost of very few lives in combat. Practically, the entire Confederate cotton crop was useless (although was sold to Union traders), costing the Confederacy its main source of income. Critical imports were very scarce and the coastal trade was largely ended as well. David G. Surdam, "The Union Navy's blockade reconsidered," Naval War College Review (1998) 51#4, pp. 85107 The measure of the blockade's success was not the few ships that slipped through, but the thousands that never tried it. Merchant ships owned in Europe could not get insurance and were too slow to evade the blockade; they simply stopped calling at Confederate ports. David G. Surdam, Northern Naval Superiority and the Economics of the American Civil War (University of South Carolina Press, 2001) 

To fight an offensive war the Confederacy purchased ships from Britain, converted them to warships, and raided American merchants ships in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Insurance rates skyrocketed and the American flag virtually disappeared from international waters. However, the same ships were reflagged with European flags and continued unmolested. After the war, the U.S. demanded that Britain pay for the damage done, and Britain paid the U.S. $15 million in 1871.

====Rivers====
The 1862 Union strategy called for simultaneous advances along four axes. McClellan would lead the main thrust in Virginia towards Richmond. Ohio forces were to advance through Kentucky into Tennessee, the Missouri Department would drive south along the Mississippi River, and the westernmost attack would originate from Kansas.

Clashes on the rivers were melees of ironclads, cottonclads gunboats and rams, complicated by torpedoes and fire rafts

Ulysses Grant used river transport and Andrew Foote's gunboats of the Western Flotilla to threaten the Confederacy's "Gibraltar of the West" at Columbus, Kentucky. Grant was rebuffed at Belmont, but cut off Columbus. The Confederates, lacking their own gunboats, were forced to retreat and the Union took control of western Kentucky in March 1862. Robert D. Whitsell, "Military and Naval Activity between Cairo and Columbus," Register of the Kentucky Historical Society (1963) 62#2, pp. 107121 

In addition to ocean-going warships coming up the Mississippi, the Union Navy used timberclads, tinclads, and armored gunboats. Shipyards at Cairo, Illinois, and St. Louis built new boats or modified steamboats for action. Myron J. Smith, Tinclads in the Civil War: Union Light-Draught Gunboat Operations on Western Waters, 18621865 (2009) They took control of the Red, Tennessee, Cumberland, Mississippi, and Ohio rivers after victories at Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, and supplied Grant's forces as he moved into Tennessee. At Shiloh, (Pittsburg Landing) in Tennessee in April 1862, the Confederates made a surprise attack that pushed Union forces against the river as night fell. Overnight, the Navy landed additional reinforcements, and Grant counter-attacked. Grant and the Union won a decisive victory  the first battle with the high casualty rates that would repeat over and over. Memphis fell to Union forces and became a key base for further advances south along the Mississippi River. In April 1862, US Naval forces under Farragut ran past Confederate defenses south of New Orleans. Confederates abandoned the city, which gave the Union a critical anchor in the deep South.

Naval forces assisted Grant in his long, complex campaign that resulted in the surrender of Vicksburg in July 1863, and full Union control of the Mississippi soon after. Ronald Scott Mangum, "The Vicksburg Campaign: A Study In Joint Operations," Parameters: U.S. Army War College (1991) 21#3, pp. 7486 online 

===Eastern theater===

Because of the fierce resistance of a few initial Confederate forces at Manassas, Virginia, in July 1861, a march by Union troops under the command of Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell on the Confederate forces there was halted in the First Battle of Bull Run, or First Manassas. McDowell's troops were forced back to Washington, D.C., by the Confederates under the command of Generals Joseph E. Johnston and P. G. T. Beauregard. It was in this battle that Confederate General Thomas Jackson received the nickname of "Stonewall" because he stood like a stone wall against Union troops.

Alarmed at the loss, and in an attempt to prevent more slave states from leaving the Union, the U.S. Congress passed the Crittenden-Johnson Resolution on July 25 of that year, which stated that the war was being fought to preserve the Union and not to end slavery.

Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan took command of the Union Army of the Potomac on July 26 (he was briefly general-in-chief of all the Union armies, but was subsequently relieved of that post in favor of Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck), and the war began in earnest in 1862. Upon the strong urging of President Lincoln to begin offensive operations, McClellan attacked Virginia in the spring of 1862 by way of the peninsula between the York River and James River, southeast of Richmond. Although McClellan's army reached the gates of Richmond in the Peninsula Campaign, Johnston halted his advance at the Battle of Seven Pines, then General Robert E. Lee and top subordinates James Longstreet and Stonewall Jackson defeated McClellan in the Seven Days Battles and forced his retreat. The Northern Virginia Campaign, which included the Second Battle of Bull Run, ended in yet another victory for the South. McClellan resisted General-in-Chief Halleck's orders to send reinforcements to John Pope's Union Army of Virginia, which made it easier for Lee's Confederates to defeat twice the number of combined enemy troops.

Emboldened by Second Bull Run, the Confederacy made its first invasion of the North. General Lee led 45,000 men of the Army of Northern Virginia across the Potomac River into Maryland on September 5. Lincoln then restored Pope's troops to McClellan. McClellan and Lee fought at the Battle of Antietam near Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17, 1862, the bloodiest single day in United States military history. Lee's army, checked at last, returned to Virginia before McClellan could destroy it. Antietam is considered a Union victory because it halted Lee's invasion of the North and provided an opportunity for Lincoln to announce his Emancipation Proclamation.

When the cautious McClellan failed to follow up on Antietam, he was replaced by Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside. Burnside was soon defeated at the Battle of Fredericksburg on December 13, 1862, when over 12,000 Union soldiers were killed or wounded during repeated futile frontal assaults against Marye's Heights. After the battle, Burnside was replaced by Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker.

Hooker, too, proved unable to defeat Lee's army; despite outnumbering the Confederates by more than two to one, he was humiliated in the Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863. Gen. Stonewall Jackson was mortally wounded by his own men during the battle and subsequently died of complications. Gen. Hooker was replaced by Maj. Gen. George Meade during Lee's second invasion of the North, in June. Meade defeated Lee at the Battle of Gettysburg (July 1 to 3, 1863). This was the bloodiest battle of the war, and has been called the war's turning point. Pickett's Charge on July 3 is often considered the high-water mark of the Confederacy because it signaled the collapse of serious Confederate threats of victory. Lee's army suffered 28,000 casualties (versus Meade's 23,000). However, Lincoln was angry that Meade failed to intercept Lee's retreat, and after Meade's inconclusive fall campaign, Lincoln turned to the Western Theater for new leadership. At the same time, the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg surrendered, giving the Union control of the Mississippi River, permanently isolating the western Confederacy, and producing the new leader Lincoln needed, Ulysses S. Grant.

===Western theater===

While the Confederate forces had numerous successes in the Eastern Theater, they were defeated many times in the West. They were driven from Missouri early in the war as a result of the Battle of Pea Ridge. Leonidas Polk's invasion of Columbus, Kentucky ended Kentucky's policy of neutrality and turned that state against the Confederacy. Nashville and central Tennessee fell to the Union early in 1862, leading to attrition of local food supplies and livestock and a breakdown in social organization.

The Mississippi was opened to Union traffic to the southern border of Tennessee with the taking of Island No. 10 and New Madrid, Missouri, and then Memphis, Tennessee. In April 1862, the Union Navy captured New Orleans, which allowed Union forces to begin moving up the Mississippi. Only the fortress city of Vicksburg, Mississippi, prevented Union control of the entire river.

General Braxton Bragg's second Confederate invasion of Kentucky ended with a meaningless victory over Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell at the Battle of Perryville, although Bragg was forced to end his attempt at invading Kentucky and retreat due to lack of support for the Confederacy in that state. Bragg was narrowly defeated by Maj. Gen. William Rosecrans at the Battle of Stones River in Tennessee.

The one clear Confederate victory in the West was the Battle of Chickamauga. Bragg, reinforced by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet's corps (from Lee's army in the east), defeated Rosecrans, despite the heroic defensive stand of Maj. Gen. George Henry Thomas. Rosecrans retreated to Chattanooga, which Bragg then besieged.

The Union's key strategist and tactician in the West was Ulysses S. Grant, who won victories at Forts Henry and Donelson (by which the Union seized control of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers); the Battle of Shiloh; and the Battle of Vicksburg, which cemented Union control of the Mississippi River and is considered one of the turning points of the war. Grant marched to the relief of Rosecrans and defeated Bragg at the Third Battle of Chattanooga, driving Confederate forces out of Tennessee and opening a route to Atlanta and the heart of the Confederacy.

===Trans-Mississippi===

 
Extensive guerrilla warfare characterized the trans-Mississippi region, as the Confederacy lacked the troops and the logistics to support regular armies that could challenge Union control. James B. Martin, Third War: Irregular Warfare on the Western Border 18611865 (Combat Studies Institute Leavenworth Paper series, number 23, 2012). See also, Michael Fellman, Inside War: The Guerrilla Conflict in Missouri during the Civil War (1989). Missouri alone was the scene of over 1,000 engagements between regular units, and uncounted numbers of guerrilla attacks and raids by informal pro-Confederate bands, especially in the recently settled western counties. Roving Confederate bands such as Quantrill's Raiders terrorized the countryside, striking both military installations and civilian settlements. Sarah Bohl, "A War on Civilians: Order Number 11 and the Evacuation of Western Missouri," Prologue, (2004) 36#1, pp. 4451 The "Sons of Liberty" and "Order of the American Knights" attacked pro-Union people, elected officeholders, and unarmed uniformed soldiers. These partisans could not be entirely driven out of the state of Missouri until an entire regular Union infantry division was engaged.

By 1864, these violent activities harmed the nationwide anti-war movement organizing against the re-election of Lincoln. Missouri not only stayed in the Union, Lincoln took 70 percent of the vote for re-election.

Numerous small-scale military actions south and west of Missouri sought to control Indian Territory and New Mexico Territory for the Union. The Union repulsed Confederate incursions into New Mexico in 1862, and the exiled Arizona government withdrew into Texas. In the Indian Territory, civil war broke out inside the tribes. About 12,000 Indian warriors fought for the Confederacy, and smaller numbers for the Union. William H. Graves, "Indian Soldiers for the Gray Army: Confederate Recruitment in Indian Territory," Chronicles of Oklahoma (1991) 69#2, pp. 134145. The most prominent Cherokee was Brigadier General Stand Watie, the last Confederate general to surrender. J. Frederick Neet, Jr. "Stand Watie: Confederate General in the Cherokee Nation," Great Plains Journal (1996) 6#1 pp 3651. 

After the fall of Vicksburg in July 1863, General Kirby Smith in Texas was informed by Jefferson Davis that he could expect no further help from east of the Mississippi River. Although he lacked resources to beat Union armies, he built up a formidable arsenal at Tyler, along with his own Kirby Smithdom economy, a virtual "independent fiefdom" in Texas, including railroad construction and international smuggling. The Union in turn did not directly engage him. Its 1864 Red River Campaign to take Shreveport, Louisiana was a failure and Texas remained in Confederate hands throughout the war.

===End of war===
====Conquest of Virginia====
At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made Grant commander of all Union armies. Grant made his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac, and put Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman in command of most of the western armies. Grant understood the concept of total war and believed, along with Lincoln and Sherman, that only the utter defeat of Confederate forces and their economic base would end the war. This was total war not in terms of killing civilians but rather in terms of destroying homes, farms, and railroads. Grant devised a coordinated strategy that would strike at the entire Confederacy from multiple directions. Generals George Meade and Benjamin Butler were ordered to move against Lee near Richmond, General Franz Sigel (and later Philip Sheridan) were to attack the Shenandoah Valley, General Sherman was to capture Atlanta and march to the sea (the Atlantic Ocean), Generals George Crook and William W. Averell were to operate against railroad supply lines in West Virginia, and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks was to capture Mobile, Alabama.

Union forces in the East attempted to maneuver past Lee and fought several battles during that phase ("Grant's Overland Campaign") of the Eastern campaign. Grant's battles of attrition at the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, and Cold Harbor resulted in heavy Union losses, but forced Lee's Confederates to fall back repeatedly. An attempt to outflank Lee from the south failed under Butler, who was trapped inside the Bermuda Hundred river bend. Grant was tenacious and, despite astonishing losses (over 65,000 casualties in seven weeks), kept pressing Lee's Army of Northern Virginia back to Richmond. He pinned down the Confederate army in the Siege of Petersburg, where the two armies engaged in trench warfare for over nine months.

Grant finally found a commander, General Philip Sheridan, aggressive enough to prevail in the Valley Campaigns of 1864. Sheridan was initially repelled at the Battle of New Market by former U.S. Vice President and Confederate Gen. John C. Breckinridge. The Battle of New Market was the Confederacy's last major victory of the war. After redoubling his efforts, Sheridan defeated Maj. Gen. Jubal A. Early in a series of battles, including a final decisive defeat at the Battle of Cedar Creek. Sheridan then proceeded to destroy the agricultural base of the Shenandoah Valley, a strategy similar to the tactics Sherman later employed in Georgia.

Meanwhile, Sherman maneuvered from Chattanooga to Atlanta, defeating Confederate Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John Bell Hood along the way. The fall of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, guaranteed the reelection of Lincoln as president. Hood left the Atlanta area to swing around and menace Sherman's supply lines and invade Tennessee in the Franklin-Nashville Campaign. Union Maj. Gen. John Schofield defeated Hood at the Battle of Franklin, and George H. Thomas dealt Hood a massive defeat at the Battle of Nashville, effectively destroying Hood's army.

Leaving Atlanta, and his base of supplies, Sherman's army marched with an unknown destination, laying waste to about 20% of the farms in Georgia in his "March to the Sea". He reached the Atlantic Ocean at Savannah, Georgia in December 1864. Sherman's army was followed by thousands of freed slaves; there were no major battles along the March. Sherman turned north through South Carolina and North Carolina to approach the Confederate Virginia lines from the south, increasing the pressure on Lee's army.

Lee's army, thinned by desertion and casualties, was now much smaller than Grant's. Union forces won a decisive victory at the Battle of Five Forks on April 1, forcing Lee to evacuate Petersburg and Richmond. The Confederate capital fell to the Union XXV Corps, composed of black troops. The remaining Confederate units fled west and after a defeat at Sayler's Creek, it became clear to Robert E. Lee that continued fighting against the United States was both tactically and logistically impossible.

====Confederacy surrenders====
alt=A map of the U.S. South showing shrinking territory under rebel control.

Lee surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia on April 9, 1865, at the McLean House in the village of Appomattox Court House. 
In an untraditional gesture and as a sign of Grant's respect and anticipation of peacefully restoring Confederate states to the Union, Lee was permitted to keep his sword and his horse, Traveller. On April 14, 1865, President Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth, a Southern sympathizer. Lincoln died early the next morning, and Andrew Johnson became the president. Meanwhile, Confederate forces across the South surrendered as news of Lee's surrender reached them. President Johnson officially declared a virtual end to the insurrection on May 9, 1865, Confederate President Jefferson Davis was captured the following day. On June 23, 1865, Cherokee leader Stand Watie was the last Confederate General to surrender his forces. Morris, John Wesley, Ghost towns of Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press, 1977, pp. 6869, ISBN 0-8061-1420-7 

==Diplomacy==

Europe in the 1860s was more fragmented than it had been since before the American Revolution. France was in a weakened state while Britain was still shocked by its own poor performance in the Crimean War. France was unable or unwilling to support either side without Britain, where popular support remained with the Union though elite opinion was more varied. They were further distracted by Germany and Italy, who were experiencing unification troubles, and by Russia, who was almost unflinching in their support for the Union.

Though the Confederacy hoped that Britain and France would join them against the Union, this was never likely, and so they instead tried to bring Britain and France in as mediators. The Union, under Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward worked to block this, and threatened war if any country officially recognized the existence of the Confederate States of America. In 1861, Southerners voluntarily embargoed cotton shipments, hoping to start an economic depression in Europe that would force Britain to enter the war in order to get cotton, but this did not work. Worse, Europe developed other cotton suppliers, which they found superior, hindering the South's recovery after the war.
alt=A group of twenty-six sailors posing around a rifled naval cannon.
Cotton diplomacy proved a failure as Europe had a surplus of cotton, while the 186062 crop failures in Europe made the North's grain exports of critical importance. It also helped to turn European opinion further away from the Confederacy. It was said that "King Corn was more powerful than King Cotton", as U.S. grain went from a quarter of the British import trade to almost half. When Britain did face a cotton shortage, it was temporary, being replaced by increased cultivation in Egypt and India. Meanwhile, the war created employment for arms makers, ironworkers, and British ships to transport weapons. 

Charles Francis Adams proved particularly adept as minister to Britain for the U.S. and Britain was reluctant to boldly challenge the blockade. The Confederacy purchased several warships from commercial ship builders in Britain. The most famous, the CSS Alabama, did considerable damage and led to serious postwar disputes. However, public opinion against slavery created a political liability for European politicians, especially in Britain (which had abolished slavery in her its colonies in 1834). 

War loomed in late 1861 between the U.S. and Britain over the Trent Affair, involving the U.S. Navy's boarding of a British mail steamer to seize two Confederate diplomats. However, London and Washington were able to smooth over the problem after Lincoln released the two. In 1862, the British considered mediationthough even such an offer would have risked war with the U.S. Lord Palmerston reportedly read Uncle Tom's Cabin three times when deciding on this. 

The Union victory in the Battle of Antietam caused them to delay this decision. The Emancipation Proclamation over time would reinforce the political liability of supporting the Confederacy. Despite sympathy for the Confederacy, France's own seizure of Mexico ultimately deterred them from war with the Union. Confederate offers late in the war to end slavery in return for diplomatic recognition were not seriously considered by London or Paris. After 1863, the Polish revolt against Russia further distracted the European powers, and ensured that they would remain neutral.

==Victory and aftermath==
===Results===
The causes of the war, the reasons for its outcome, and even the name of the war itself are subjects of lingering contention today. The North and West grew rich while the once-rich South became poor for a century. The national political power of the slaveowners and rich southerners ended. Historians are less sure about the results of the postwar Reconstruction, especially regarding the second class citizenship of the Freedmen and their poverty. The Freedmen did indeed get their freedom, their citizenship, and control of their lives, their families and their churches.

Historians have debated whether the Confederacy could have won the war. Most scholars, such as James McPherson, argue that Confederate victory was at least possible. McPherson argues that the North's advantage in population and resources made Northern victory likely but not guaranteed. He also argues that if the Confederacy had fought using unconventional tactics, they would have more easily been able to hold out long enough to exhaust the Union. 

 Comparison of Union and CSA, 18601864 Year Union CSA 
 Population 1860 22,100,000 (71%) 9,100,000 (29%) 
 1864 28,800,000 (90%) 3,000,000 (10%) Martis, Kenneth C., \"The Historical Atlas of the Congresses of the Confederate States of America: 18611865\" Simon & Schuster (1994) ISBN 0-13-389115-1 pp.27. At the beginning of 1865, the Confederacy controlled one-third of its congressional districts, which were apportioned by population. The major slave-populations found in Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Alabama were effectively under Union control by the end of 1864. 
 Free 1860 21,700,000 (81%) 5,600,000 (19%) 
 Slave 1860 400,000 (11%) 3,500,000 (89%) 
 1864 negligible 1,900,000 
 Soldiers 186064 2,100,000 (67%) 1,064,000 (33%) 
 Railroad miles 1860 21,800 (71%) 8,800 (29%) 
 1864 29,100 (98%) Digital History Reader, U.S. Railroad Construction, 18601880 Virginia Tech, Retrieved 2012-08-21. \"Total Union railroad miles\" aggregates existing track reported 1860 @ 21800 plus new construction 18601864 @ 5000, plus southern railroads administered by USMRR @ 2300. negligible 
 Manufactures 1860 90% 10% 
 1864 98% negligible 
 Arms production 1860 97% 3% 
 1864 98% negligible 
 Cotton bales 1860 negligible 4,500,000 
 1864 300,000 negligible 
 Exports 1860 30% 70% 
 1864 98% negligible 

Confederates did not need to invade and hold enemy territory to win, but only needed to fight a defensive war to convince the North that the cost of winning was too high. The North needed to conquer and hold vast stretches of enemy territory and defeat Confederate armies to win. The Confederacy sought to win independence by out-lasting Lincoln; however, after Atlanta fell and Lincoln defeated McClellan in the election of 1864, all hope for a political victory for the South ended. At that point, Lincoln had secured the support of the Republicans, War Democrats, the border states, emancipated slaves, and the neutrality of Britain and France. By defeating the Democrats and McClellan, he also defeated the Copperheads and their peace platform.

Many scholars argue that the Union held an insurmountable long-term advantage over the Confederacy in terms of industrial strength and population. Confederate actions, they argue, only delayed defeat. Civil War historian Shelby Foote expressed this view succinctly: "I think that the North fought that war with one hand behind its back ... If there had been more Southern victories, and a lot more, the North simply would have brought that other hand out from behind its back. I don't think the South ever had a chance to win that War."

A minority view among historians is that the Confederacy lost because, as E. Merton Coulter put it,"people did not will hard enough and long enough to win." E. Merton Coulter, The Confederate States of America, 18611865 (1950) p. 566 Richard E. Beringer, Herman Hattaway, Archer Jones and William N. Still Jr., Why the South Lost the Civil War (1991) ch 1 The black Marxist historian Armstead Robinson agrees, pointing to a class conflict in the Confederates army between the slave owners and the larger number of non-owners. He argues that the non-owner soldiers grew embittered about fighting to preserve slavery, and fought less enthusiastically. He attributes the major Confederate defeats in 1863 at Vicksburg and Missionary Ridge to this class conflict. Armstead Robinson, Bitter Fruits of Bondage: The Demise of Slavery and the Collapse of the Confederacy, 18611865 (University of Virginia Press, 2004) However, most historians reject the argument. see Alan Farmer, History Review (2005) No. 52: 1520. James M. McPherson, after reading thousands of letters written by Confederate soldiers, found very strong patriotism that continued to the end; they truly believed they were fighting for freedom and liberty. Even as the Confederacy was visibly collapsing in 1864-5, he says most Confederate soldiers were fighting hard. Historian Gary Gallagher cites General Sherman who in early 1864 commented, "The devils seem to have a determination that cannot but be admired." Despite their loss of slaves and wealth, with starvation looming, Sherman continued, "yet I see no sign of let up  some few deserters  plenty tired of war, but the masses determined to fight it out."

Also important were Lincoln's eloquence in rationalizing the national purpose and his skill in keeping the border states committed to the Union cause. Although Lincoln's approach to emancipation was slow, the Emancipation Proclamation was an effective use of the President's war powers. The Confederate government failed in its attempt to get Europe involved in the war militarily, particularly Britain and France. Southern leaders needed to get European powers to help break up the blockade the Union had created around the Southern ports and cities.

Lincoln's naval blockade was 95% effective at stopping trade goods; as a result, imports and exports to the South declined significantly. The abundance of European cotton and Britain's hostility to the institution of slavery, along with Lincoln's Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico naval blockades, severely decreased any chance that either Britain or France would enter the war.

===Costs===
The war produced about 1,030,000 casualties (3% of the population), including about 620,000 soldier deathstwo-thirds by disease, and 50,000 civilians. Binghamton University historian J. David Hacker believes the number of soldier deaths was approximately 750,000, 20% higher than traditionally estimated, and possibly as high as 850,000. The war accounted for roughly as many American deaths as all American deaths in other U.S. wars combined.

Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6% in the North and 18% in the South. About 56,000 soldiers died in prison camps during the War. An estimated 60,000 men lost limbs in the war. 

Confederate death toll estimates vary considerably. Union army dead, amounting to 15% of the over two million who served, was broken down as follows: 
* 110,070 killed in action (67,000) or dead of wounds (43,000).
* 199,790 dead of disease (75% of which was due to the war, the remainder would have occurred in civilian life anyway)
* 24,866 dead in Confederate prison camps
* 9,058 killed by accidents or drowning
* 15,741 other/unknown deaths
* 359,528 total dead

Black troops accounted for 10% of the Union death toll, they amounted to 15% of disease deaths but less than 3% of those killed in battle. 

Losses can be viewed as high considering that the defeat of Mexico in 184648 resulted in fewer than 2,000 soldiers killed in battle. One reason for the high number of battle deaths during the war was the use of Napoleonic tactics, such as charging. With the advent of more accurate rifled barrels, Mini balls and (near the end of the war for the Union army) repeating firearms such as the Spencer Repeating Rifle and the Henry Repeating Rifle, soldiers were mowed down when standing in lines in the open. This led to the adoption of trench warfare, a style of fighting that defined the better part of World War I.

The wealth amassed in slaves and slavery for the Confederacy's 3.5 million blacks effectively ended when Union armies arrived; they were nearly all freed by the Emancipation Proclamation. Slaves in the border states and those located in some former Confederate territory occupied prior to the Emancipation Proclamation were freed by state action or (on December 18, 1865) by the Thirteenth Amendment.

The war destroyed much of the wealth that had existed in the South. All accumulated investment Confederate bonds was forfeit; most banks and railroads were bankrupt. Income per person in the South dropped to less than 40% of that of the North, a condition that lasted until well into the 20th century. Southern influence in the US federal government, previously considerable, was greatly diminished until the latter half of the 20th century. The full restoration of the Union was the work of a highly contentious postwar era known as Reconstruction.

===Emancipation===
====Issue of Slavery During the War====
While not all Southerners saw themselves as fighting to preserve slavery, most of the officers and over a third of the rank and file in Lee's army had close family ties to slavery. To Northerners, in contrast, the motivation was primarily to preserve the Union, not to abolish slavery. Abraham Lincoln consistently made preserving the Union the central goal of the war, though he increasingly saw slavery as a crucial issue and made ending it an additional goal. Lincoln's decision to issue the Emancipation Proclamation angered both Peace Democrats ("Copperheads") and War Democrats, but energized most Republicans. McPherson, pp. 5068 By warning that free blacks would flood the North, Democrats made gains in the 1862 elections, but they did not gain control of Congress. The Republicans' counterargument that slavery was the mainstay of the enemy steadily gained support, with the Democrats losing decisively in the 1863 elections in the northern state of Ohio when they tried to resurrect anti-black sentiment. McPherson. p. 686 

====Emancipation Proclamation====

The Emancipation Proclamation enabled African-Americans, both free blacks and escaped slaves, to join the Union Army. About 190,000 volunteered, further enhancing the numerical advantage the Union armies enjoyed over the Confederates, who did not dare emulate the equivalent manpower source for fear of fundamentally undermining the legitimacy of slavery.

During the Civil War, sentiment concerning slaves, enslavement and emancipation in the United States was divided. In 1861, Lincoln worried that premature attempts at emancipation would mean the loss of the border states, and that "to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game." Lincoln's letter to O. H. Browning, September 22, 1861. Sentiment among German Americans was largely anti-slavery especially among Forty-Eighters, resulting in hundreds of thousands of German Americans volunteering to fight for the Union. " ", Christian B. Keller, "Flying Dutchmen and Drunken Irishmen: The Myths and Realities of Ethnic Civil War Soldiers", Journal of Military History, Vol/ 73, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 117145; for primary sources see Walter D. Kamphoefner and Wolfgang Helbich, eds., Germans in the Civil War: The Letters They Wrote Home (2006). " On the other hand, many of the recent immigrants in the North viewed freed slaves as competition for scarce jobs, and as the reason why the Civil War was being fought. " Baker, Kevin (March 2003). "Violent City" American Heritage. Retrieved 2010-07-29. " Due in large part to this fierce competition with free blacks for labor opportunities, the poor and working class Irish Catholics generally opposed emancipation. When the draft began in the summer of 1863, they launched a major riot in New York City that was suppressed by the military, as well as much smaller protests in other cities. Barnet Schecter, The Devil's Own Work: The Civil War Draft Riots and the Fight to Reconstruct America (2007), ch 6. Many Catholics in the North had volunteered to fight in 1861, sending thousands of soldiers to the front and taking high casualties, especially at Fredericksburg; their volunteering fell off after 1862. Copperheads and some War Democrats opposed emancipation, although the latter eventually accepted it as part of total war needed to save the Union. Baker, Kevin (March 2003). "Violent City" American Heritage. Retrieved 2010-07-29. " 

At first, Lincoln reversed attempts at emancipation by Secretary of War Simon Cameron and Generals John C. Frmont (in Missouri) and David Hunter (in South Carolina, Georgia and Florida) to keep the loyalty of the border states and the War Democrats. Lincoln warned the border states that a more radical type of emancipation would happen if his gradual plan based on compensated emancipation and voluntary colonization was rejected. McPherson, James in Gabor S. Boritt, ed. Lincoln, the War President pp. 5254. But only the District of Columbia accepted Lincoln's gradual plan, which was enacted by Congress. When Lincoln told his cabinet about his proposed emancipation proclamation, Seward advised Lincoln to wait for a victory before issuing it, as to do otherwise would seem like "our last shriek on the retreat". Oates, Stephen B. Abraham Lincoln: The Man Behind the Myths, p. 106. Lincoln laid the groundwork for public support in an open letter published letter to abolitionist Horace Greeley's newspaper. "Lincoln Letter to Greeley, August 22, 1862 " 

In September 1862, the Battle of Antietam provided this opportunity, and the subsequent War Governors' Conference added support for the proclamation. Pulling, Sr. Anne Francis. "Images of America: Altoona, 2001, 10. Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation on September 22, 1862, and his final Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863. In his letter to Albert G. Hodges, Lincoln explained his belief that "If slavery is not wrong, nothing is wrong ... And yet I have never understood that the Presidency conferred upon me an unrestricted right to act officially upon this judgment and feeling ... I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me." Lincoln's Letter to A. G. Hodges, April 4, 1864. 

Lincoln's moderate approach succeeded in inducing border states, War Democrats and emancipated slaves to fight for the Union. The Union-controlled border states (Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland, Delaware and West Virginia) and Union controlled regions around New Orleans, Norfolk and elsewhere, were not covered by the Emancipation Proclamation. All abolished slavery on their own, except Kentucky and Delaware. 

Since the Emancipation Proclamation was based on the President's war powers, it only included territory held by Confederates at the time. However, the Proclamation became a symbol of the Union's growing commitment to add emancipation to the Union's definition of liberty. " James McPherson, The War that Never Goes Away" The Emancipation Proclamation greatly reduced the Confederacy's hope of getting aid from Britain or France. By late 1864, Lincoln was playing a leading role in getting Congress to vote for the Thirteenth Amendment, which made emancipation universal and permanent.

===Reconstruction===

Northern teachers traveled into the South to provide education and training for the newly freed population.
Reconstruction began during the war, with the Emancipation Proclamation of January 1, 1863 and continued to 1877. Hans L. Trefousse, Historical Dictionary of Reconstruction (Greenwood, 1991) covers all the main events and leaders. It comprised multiple complex methods to resolve the war, the most important of which were the three "Reconstruction Amendments" to the Constitution, which remain in effect to the present time: the 13th (1865), the 14th (1868) and the 15th (1870). From the Union perspective, the goals of Reconstruction were to guarantee the Union victory on the battlefield by reuniting the Union; to guarantee a "republican form of government for the ex-Confederate states; and to permanently end slaveryand prevent semi-slavery status. Eric Foner, A Short History of Reconstruction (1990) is a brief survey 

President Johnson took a lenient approach and saw the achievement of the main war goals as realized in 1865, when each ex-rebel state repudiated secession and ratified the Thirteenth Amendment. Radical Republicans demanded strong proof that Confederate nationalism was dead and the slaves were truly free. They came to the fore after the 1866 elections and undid much of Johnson's work. They used the Army to dissolve Southern state governments and hold new elections with Freedmen voting. The result was a Republican coalition that took power in ten states for varying lengths of time, staying in power with the help of U.S. Army units and black voters. Grant was elected president in 1868 and continued the Radical policies. Meanwhile the Freedmen's Bureau, started by Lincoln in 1865 to help the freed slaves, played a major role in helping the blacks and arranging work for them. In opposition paramilitary groups such as the first Ku Klux Klan used violence to thwart these efforts. Hans L Trefousse, Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century Egalitarian (2005) pp 161238 

The "Liberal Republicans" argued the war goals had been achieved and Reconstruction should end. They ran a ticket in 1872 but were decisively defeated as Grant was reelected. In 1874, Democrats took control of Congress and opposed any more reconstruction. The disputed 1876 elections were resolved by the Compromise of 1877, which put Republican Rutherford B. Hayes in the White House. He pulled out the last federal troops and the last Republican state governments in the South collapsed, marking the end of Civil War and Reconstruction. C. Vann Woodward, Reunion and Reaction: The Compromise of 1877 and the End of Reconstruction (2nd ed. 1991). 

==Memory and historiography==

The Civil War is one of the central events in America's collective memory. There are innumerable statues, commemorations, books and archival collections. The memory includes the home front, military affairs, the treatment of soldiers, both living and dead, in the war's aftermath, depictions of the war in literature and art, evaluations of heroes and villains, and considerations of the moral and political lessons of the war. The last theme includes moral evaluations of racism and slavery, heroism in combat and behind the lines, and the issues of democracy and minority rights, as well as the notion of an "Empire of Liberty" influencing the world. 

===Lost Cause=== 

Memory of the war in the white South crystallized in the myth of the "Lost Cause", which shaped regional identity and race relations for generations. Alan T. Nolan notes in his chapter The anatomy of the Myth, that the Lost Cause was expressly "a rationalization, a cover-up to vindicate the name and fame" of those in rebellion. Some claims revolve around the insignificance of slavery. Some appeals highlight cultural differences North and South. The military conflict by Confederate actors is idealized. In any case, secession was said to be lawful. Nolan, Alan T. in Gallagher, Gary W. and Alan T. Nolan, The Myth of the Lost Cause and Civil War history, (2000) ISBN 0-253-33822-0, p.12-19. The two important political legacies flowed from the adoption of the Lost Cause analysis were that it facilitated the reunification of the North and the South, and it excused the virulent racism of the 19th century, sacrificing African-American progress to a white mans reunification. But the Lost Cause legacy to history is a caricature of the truth. This caricature wholly misrepresents and distorts the facts of the matter in every instance. Nolan, Alan T., (2000) op. cit., p. 28-29. 

Beginning in 1961 the U.S. Post Office released Commemorative stamps for five famous battles, each issued on the 100th anniversary of the respective battle.

===Beardian historiography===
The most influential interpretation of the Civil War was the Beardian approach presented by Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard in The Rise of American Civilization (1927). It was highly influential among historians and the general public until the civil rights era of the 1950s. The Beards downplayed slavery, abolitionism, and issues of morality. They ignored constitutional issues of states' rights and even ignored American nationalism as the force that finally led to victory in the war. Indeed the ferocious combat itself was passed over as merely an ephemeral event. Much more important was the calculus of class conflict. The Beards announced that the Civil War was really a:
:Social cataclysm in which the capitalists, laborers, and farmers of the North and West drove from power in the national government the planting aristocracy of the South." Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard, The Rise of American Civilization (1927), 2:54 

The Beards themselves abandoned their interpretation by the 1940s and it became defunct among historians in the 1950s, when they shifted to an emphasis on slavery. However, Beardian themes still echo among Lost Cause writers. 

===Civil War commemoration===

 
The American Civil War has been commemorated in many capacities ranging from the reenactment of battles, to statues and memorial halls erected, to films being produced, to stamps and coins with Civil War themes being issued, all of which helped to shape public memory. This varied advent occurred in greater proportions on the 100th and 150th anniversary.
 
Hollywood's take on the war has been especially influential in shaping public memory, as seen in such film classics as Birth of a Nation (1915), Gone with the Wind (1939), and Lincoln (2012).

==See also==

General reference
* Battles of the American Civil War
* Bibliography of the American Civil War
* Corps badges of the American Civil War
* Naval bibliography of the American Civil War
* Uniforms of the Union
* Uniforms of the Confederacy
* Weapons in the American Civil War

Union
* United States
* Union Army
* Union Navy

Confederacy
* Confederate States
* Confederate Army
* Confederate Navy

Ethnic articles
* African Americans in the American Civil War
* German Americans in the American Civil War
* Hispanic Americans in the American Civil War
* Irish Americans in the American Civil War
* Italian Americans in the American Civil War
* Native Americans in the American Civil War

Topical articles
* Blockade runners of the American Civil War
* Blockade, Union  of the American Civil War
* Casualties in the American Civil War
* Commemoration of the American Civil War
* Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps
* Nursing in the American Civil War, Dorothea Dix
* Ships captured during the American Civil War
* Slaves and the American Civil War
* Spies in the American Civil War

National articles
* Foreign enlistment in the American Civil War
* Britain in the American Civil War
* Canada in the American Civil War

==References==
;Notes

;Citations

;Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* Beringer, Richard E., Archer Jones, and Herman Hattaway, Why the South Lost the Civil War (1986) influential analysis of factors; an abridged version is The Elements of Confederate Defeat: Nationalism, War Aims, and Religion (1988)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Gara, Larry. 1964. The Fugitive Slave Law: A Double Paradox in Essays on the Civil War and Reconstruction, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970. (originally published in Civil War History, X, No. 3, Sept 1964)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Nevins, Allan. Ordeal of the Union, an 8-volume set (19471971). the most detailed political, economic and military narrative; by Pulitzer Prize winner
** 1. Fruits of Manifest Destiny, 18471852; 2. A House Dividing, 18521857; 3. Douglas, Buchanan, and Party Chaos, 18571859; 4. Prologue to Civil War, 18591861; vol. 58 have the series title "War for the Union"; 5. The Improvised War, 18611862; 6. War Becomes Revolution, 18621863; 7. The Organized War, 18631864; 8. The Organized War to Victory, 18641865
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Gugliotta, Guy. New Estimate Raises Civil War Death Toll, The New York Times, April 3, 2012, pg. D1 (of the New York edition), and April 2, 2012 on NYTimes.com. Retrieved 2012-04-03 online.
* Bibliography of the American Civil War
* Bibliography of American Civil War naval history

==External links==

* 
* Civil War photos at the National Archives
* View images from the Civil War Photographs Collection at the Library of Congress
* Civil War Trust
* Civil War Era Digital Collection at Gettysburg College This collection contains digital images of political cartoons, personal papers, pamphlets, maps, paintings and photographs from the Civil War Era held in Special Collections at Gettysburg College.
* Civil War 150 Washington Post interactive website on 150th Anniversary of the American Civil War.
* Civil War in the American South  An Association of Southeastern Research Libraries (ASERL) portal with links to almost 9,000 digitized Civil War-era itemsbooks, pamphlets, broadsides, letters, maps, personal papers, and manuscriptsheld at ASERL member libraries
* The Civil War  site with 7,000 pages, including the complete run of Harper's Weekly newspapers from the Civil War
* 
* Civil War Living History Reenactments (videos)
* West Point Atlas of Civil War Battles

 

Civil War



[[Andy Warhol]]

Andy Warhol (; Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary: "Warhol" August 6, 1928  February 22, 1987) was an American artist who was a leading figure in the visual art movement known as pop art. His works explore the relationship between artistic expression, celebrity culture and advertisement that flourished by the 1960s. After a successful career as a commercial illustrator, Warhol became a renowned and sometimes controversial artist. The Andy Warhol Museum in his native city, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, holds an extensive permanent collection of art and archives. It is the largest museum in the United States dedicated to a single artist.

Warhol's art encompassed many forms of media, including hand drawing, painting, printmaking, photography, silk screening, sculpture, film, and music. He was also a pioneer in computer-generated art using Amiga computers that were introduced in 1984, two years before his death. He founded Interview Magazine and was the author of numerous books, including The Philosophy of Andy Warhol and . He is also notable as a gay man who lived openly as such before the gay liberation movement. His studio, The Factory, was a famous gathering place that brought together distinguished intellectuals, drag queens, playwrights, Bohemian street people, Hollywood celebrities, and wealthy patrons.

Warhol has been the subject of numerous retrospective exhibitions, books, and feature and documentary films. He coined the widely used expression "15 minutes of fame". Many of his creations are very collectible and highly valuable. The highest price ever paid for a Warhol painting is US$105 million for a 1963 canvas titled "Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster)". A 2009 article in The Economist described Warhol as the "bellwether of the art market". Warhol's works include some of the most expensive paintings ever sold.

==Early life (19281949)==
Warhol's childhood home. 3252 Dawson Street, South Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Andy Warhol (n Andrej Varhola, Jr.) was born on August 6, 1928 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was the fourth child of Andrej Varhola (Americanized as Andrew Warhola, Sr., 18891942) and Jlia (ne Zavack, 18921972), whose first child was born in their homeland and died before their move to the U.S. Andy had two older brothers, Paul (June 26, 1922 - January 30, 2014) and John Warhola (May 31, 1925  December 24, 2010).

His parents were working-class Lemko Paul Robert Magocsi, Ivan Pop, , University of Toronto Press, 2002 Jane Daggett Dillenberger, 22+biography&hl=en&ei=Hdg8TaXvF8WL4ga2g5nnCg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=4&ved=0CEEQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=Warhol%20%22Rusyn%22%20biography&f=false Religious Art of Andy Warhol, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2002, p.7 emigrants from Mik (now called Mikov), located in today's northeastern Slovakia, part of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire. Warhol's father immigrated to the United States in 1914, and his mother joined him in 1921, after the death of Warhol's grandparents. Warhol's father worked in a coal mine. The family lived at 55 Beelen Street and later at 3252 Dawson Street in the Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh. The family was Byzantine Catholic and attended St. John Chrysostom Byzantine Catholic Church. Andy Warhol had two older brothersPavol (Paul), the oldest, was born before the family emigrated; Jn was born in Pittsburgh. Pavol's son, James Warhola, became a successful children's book illustrator. About 1939, he started to collect autographed cards of film stars.

In third grade, Warhol had Sydenham's chorea (also known as St. Vitus' Dance), the nervous system disease that causes involuntary movements of the extremities, which is believed to be a complication of scarlet fever which causes skin pigmentation blotchiness. He became a hypochondriac, developing a fear of hospitals and doctors. Often bedridden as a child, he became an outcast at school and bonded with his mother. At times when he was confined to bed, he drew, listened to the radio and collected pictures of movie stars around his bed. Warhol later described this period as very important in the development of his personality, skill-set and preferences. When Warhol was 13, his father died in an accident. 

As a teenager, Warhol graduated from Schenley High School in 1945. After graduating from high school, his intentions were to study art education at the University of Pittsburgh in the hope of becoming an art teacher, but his plans changed and he enrolled in the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh, where he studied commercial art. Colacello, Bob (1990), p.19 In 1949, he moved to New York City and began a career in magazine illustration and advertising. In 1949, he earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts in pictorial design.

==1950s==
During the 1950s, Warhol gained fame for his whimsical ink drawings of shoe advertisements. These were done in a loose, blotted-ink style, and figured in some of his earliest showings at the Bodley Gallery in New York. With the concurrent rapid expansion of the record industry and the introduction of the vinyl record, Hi-Fi, and stereophonic recordings, RCA Records hired Warhol, along with another freelance artist, Sid Maurer, to design album covers and promotional materials. 

Warhol was an early adopter of the silk screen printmaking process as a technique for making paintings. His earliest silkscreening in painting involved hand-drawn images though this soon progressed to the use of photographically derived silkscreening in paintings. Prior to entering the field of fine art, Warhol's commercial art background also involved innovative techniques for image making that were somewhat related to printmaking techniques. When rendering commercial objects for advertising Warhol devised a technique that resulted in a characteristic image. His imagery used in advertising was often executed by means of applying ink to paper and then blotting the ink while still wet. This was akin to a printmaking process on the most rudimentary scale. "The blotted line, a primitive type of printingliterally a "press"was, when he devised it, a way for Andy ..."; Pop: The Genius of Andy Warhol By Tony Scherman, David Dalton 

Warhol's work both as a commercial artist and later a fine artist displays a casual approach to image making, in which chance plays a role and mistakes and unintentional marks are tolerated. The resulting imagery in both Warhol's commercial art and later in his fine art endeavors is often replete with imperfectionsmudges and smears can often be found. In his book "POPism" Warhol writes, "When you do something exactly wrong, you always turn up something." 

==1960s==
Warhol (left) and Tennessee Williams (right) talking on the SS France, 1967; in the background: Paul Morrissey.
He began exhibiting his work during the 1950s. He held exhibitions at the Hugo Gallery, Warhol biography, Gagosian Gallery Retrieved March 24, 2011 and the Bodley Gallery Bodley Gallery Warhol exhibition announcement Retrieved March 24, 2011 in New York City and in California his first West Coast gallery exhibition was on July 9, 1962, in the Ferus Gallery of Los Angeles. The exhibition marked his West Coast debut of pop art. 
Andy Warhol's first New York solo pop art exhibition was hosted at Eleanor Ward's Stable Gallery November 624, 1962. The exhibit included the works Marilyn Diptych, 100 Soup Cans, 100 Coke Bottles, and 100 Dollar Bills. At the Stable Gallery exhibit, the artist met for the first time poet John Giorno who would star in Warhol's first film, Sleep, in 1963. 

It was during the 1960s that Warhol began to make paintings of iconic American objects such as dollar bills, mushroom clouds, electric chairs, Campbell's Soup Cans, Coca-Cola bottles, celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Elvis Presley, Marlon Brando, Troy Donahue, Muhammad Ali, and Elizabeth Taylor, as well as newspaper headlines or photographs of police dogs attacking civil rights protesters. During these years, he founded his studio, "The Factory" and gathered about him a wide range of artists, writers, musicians, and underground celebrities. His work became popular and controversial. Warhol had this to say about Coca Cola:

New York's Museum of Modern Art hosted a Symposium on pop art in December 1962 during which artists like Warhol were attacked for "capitulating" to consumerism. Critics were scandalized by Warhol's open embrace of market culture. This symposium set the tone for Warhol's reception. Throughout the decade it became increasingly clear that there had been a profound change in the culture of the art world, and that Warhol was at the center of that shift.

A pivotal event was the 1964 exhibit The American Supermarket, a show held in Paul Bianchini's Upper East Side gallery. The show was presented as a typical U.S. small supermarket environment, except that everything in itfrom the produce, canned goods, meat, posters on the wall, etc.was created by six prominent pop artists of the time, among them the controversial (and like-minded) Billy Apple, Mary Inman, and Robert Watts. Warhol's painting of a can of Campbell's soup cost $1,500 while each autographed can sold for $6. The exhibit was one of the first mass events that directly confronted the general public with both pop art and the perennial question of what art is.Campbell's Soup I (1968)
As an advertisement illustrator in the 1950s, Warhol used assistants to increase his productivity. Collaboration would remain a defining (and controversial) aspect of his working methods throughout his career; this was particularly true in the 1960s. One of the most important collaborators during this period was Gerard Malanga. Malanga assisted the artist with the production of silkscreens, films, sculpture, and other works at "The Factory," Warhol's aluminum foil-and-silver-paint-lined studio on 47th Street (later moved to Broadway). Other members of Warhol's Factory crowd included Freddie Herko, Ondine, Ronald Tavel, Mary Woronov, Billy Name, and Brigid Berlin (from whom he apparently got the idea to tape-record his phone conversations). Colacello, Bob (1990), p.67 

During the 1960s, Warhol also groomed a retinue of bohemian and counterculture eccentrics upon whom he bestowed the designation "Superstars", including Nico, Joe Dallesandro, Edie Sedgwick, Viva, Ultra Violet, Holly Woodlawn, Jackie Curtis, and Candy Darling. These people all participated in the Factory films, and somelike Berlinremained friends with Warhol until his death. Important figures in the New York underground art/cinema world, such as writer John Giorno and film-maker Jack Smith, also appear in Warhol films of the 1960s, revealing Warhol's connections to a diverse range of artistic scenes during this time.

===Attempted murder (1968)===
On June 3, 1968, radical feminist writer Valerie Solanas shot Warhol and Mario Amaya, art critic and curator, at Warhol's studio. Before the shooting, Solanas had been a marginal figure in the Factory scene. She authored in 1967 the S.C.U.M. Manifesto, a separatist feminist tract that advocated the elimination of men; and appeared in the 1968 Warhol film I, a Man. Earlier on the day of the attack, Solanas had been turned away from the Factory after asking for the return of a script she had given to Warhol. The script had apparently been misplaced. Jobey, Liz, "Solanas and Son," The Guardian (Manchester, England) August 24, 1996: page T10 and following. 

Amaya received only minor injuries and was released from the hospital later the same day. Warhol was seriously wounded by the attack and barely survived: surgeons opened his chest and massaged his heart to help stimulate its movement again. He suffered physical effects for the rest of his life, including being required to wear a surgical corset. The shooting had a profound effect on Warhol's life and art. 

Solanas was arrested the day after the assault. By way of explanation, she said that Warhol "had too much control over my life." She was eventually sentenced to three years under the control of the Department of Corrections. After the shooting, the Factory scene became much more tightly controlled, and for many the "Factory 60s" ended. 

Warhol had this to say about the attack: "Before I was shot, I always thought that I was more half-there than all-thereI always suspected that I was watching TV instead of living life. People sometimes say that the way things happen in movies is unreal, but actually it's the way things happen in life that's unreal. The movies make emotions look so strong and real, whereas when things really do happen to you, it's like watching televisionyou don't feel anything. Right when I was being shot and ever since, I knew that I was watching television. The channels switch, but it's all television." 

==1970s==
Andy Warhol and Jimmy Carter in 1977

Compared to the success and scandal of Warhol's work in the 1960s, the 1970s were a much quieter decade, as he became more entrepreneurial. According to Bob Colacello, Warhol devoted much of his time to rounding up new, rich patrons for portrait commissionsincluding Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, his wife Empress Farah Pahlavi, his sister Princess Ashraf Pahlavi, Mick Jagger, Liza Minnelli, John Lennon, Diana Ross, and Brigitte Bardot. Warhol's famous portrait of Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong was created in 1973. He also founded, with Gerard Malanga, Interview magazine, and published The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (1975). An idea expressed in the book: "Making money is art, and working is art and good business is the best art." 

Warhol used to socialize at various nightspots in New York City, including Max's Kansas City; and, later in the 1970s, Studio 54. He was generally regarded as quiet, shy, and a meticulous observer. Art critic Robert Hughes called him "the white mole of Union Square." 

With his longtime friend Stuart Pivar, Warhol founded the New York Academy of Art in 1979. 

==1980s==
Warhol had a re-emergence of critical and financial success in the 1980s, partially due to his affiliation and friendships with a number of prolific younger artists, who were dominating the "bull market" of 1980s New York art: Jean-Michel Basquiat, Julian Schnabel, David Salle and other so-called Neo-Expressionists, as well as members of the Transavantgarde movement in Europe, including Francesco Clemente and Enzo Cucchi.

By this period, Warhol was being criticized for becoming merely a "business artist". In 1979, reviewers disliked his exhibits of portraits of 1970s personalities and celebrities, calling them superficial, facile and commercial, with no depth or indication of the significance of the subjects. They also criticized his 1980 exhibit of 10 portraits at the Jewish Museum in New York, entitled Jewish Geniuses, which Warholwho was uninterested in Judaism and Jewshad described in his diary as "They're going to sell." In hindsight, however, some critics have come to view Warhol's superficiality and commerciality as "the most brilliant mirror of our times," contending that "Warhol had captured something irresistible about the zeitgeist of American culture in the 1970s." 

Warhol also had an appreciation for intense Hollywood glamour. He once said: "I love Los Angeles. I love Hollywood. They're so beautiful. Everything's plastic, but I love plastic. I want to be plastic." 

==Death==
Warhol's grave at St. John the Baptist Byzantine Catholic Cemetery
left

Warhol died in New York City at 6:32 am on February 22, 1987. According to news reports, he had been making good recovery from a routine gallbladder surgery at New York Hospital before dying in his sleep from a sudden post-operative cardiac arrhythmia. Prior to his diagnosis and operation, Warhol delayed having his recurring gallbladder problems checked, as he was afraid to enter hospitals and see doctors. His family sued the hospital for inadequate care, saying that the arrhythmia was caused by improper care and water intoxication. The malpractice case was quickly settled out of court; Warhol's family received an undisclosed sum of money. 

Warhol's body was taken back to Pittsburgh by his brothers for burial. The wake was at Thomas P. Kunsak Funeral Home and was an open-coffin ceremony. The coffin was a solid bronze casket with gold plated rails and white upholstery. Warhol was dressed in a black cashmere suit, a paisley tie, a platinum wig, and sunglasses. He was posed holding a small prayer book and a red rose. The funeral liturgy was held at the Holy Ghost Byzantine Catholic Church on Pittsburgh's North Side. The eulogy was given by Monsignor Peter Tay. Yoko Ono and John Richardson were speakers. The coffin was covered with white roses and asparagus ferns. After the liturgy, the coffin was driven to St. John the Baptist Byzantine Catholic Cemetery in Bethel Park, a south suburb of Pittsburgh.

At the grave, the priest said a brief prayer and sprinkled holy water on the casket. Before the coffin was lowered, Paige Powell dropped a copy of Interview magazine, an Interview T-shirt, and a bottle of the Estee Lauder perfume "Beautiful" into the grave. Warhol was buried next to his mother and father. A memorial service was held in Manhattan for Warhol on April 1, 1987, at St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York.

==Foundation==

Warhol's will dictated that his entire estate  with the exception of a few modest legacies to family members  would go to create a foundation dedicated to the "advancement of the visual arts". Warhol had so many possessions that it took Sotheby's nine days to auction his estate after his death; the auction grossed more than US$20 million.

In 1987, in accordance with Warhol's will, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts began. The foundation serves as the estate of Andy Warhol, but also has a mission "to foster innovative artistic expression and the creative process" and is "focused primarily on supporting work of a challenging and often experimental nature." 

The Artists Rights Society is the U.S. copyright representative for the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts for all Warhol works with the exception of Warhol film stills. The U.S. copyright representative for Warhol film stills is the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh. Additionally, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts has agreements in place for its image archive. All digital images of Warhol are exclusively managed by Corbis, while all transparency images of Warhol are managed by Art Resource. 

The Andy Warhol Foundation released its 20th Anniversary Annual Report as a three-volume set in 2007: Vol. I, 19872007; Vol. II, Grants & Exhibitions; and Vol. III, Legacy Program. The Foundation remains one of the largest grant-giving organizations for the visual arts in the U.S. 

== Works ==

=== Paintings ===
By the beginning of the 1960s, Warhol had become a very successful commercial illustrator. His detailed and elegant drawings for I. Miller shoes were particularly popular. They consisted mainly of "blotted ink" drawings (or monoprints), a technique which he applied in much of his early art. Although many artists of this period worked in commercial art, most did so discreetly. Warhol was so successful, however, that his profile as an illustrator seemed to undermine his efforts to be taken seriously as an artist.

Pop art was an experimental form that several artists were independently adopting; some of these pioneers, such as Roy Lichtenstein, would later become synonymous with the movement. Warhol, who would become famous as the "Pope of Pop", turned to this new style, where popular subjects could be part of the artist's palette. His early paintings show images taken from cartoons and advertisements, hand-painted with paint drips. Marilyn Monroe was a pop art painting that Warhol had done and it was very popular. Those drips emulated the style of successful abstract expressionists (such as Willem de Kooning). Warhol's first pop art paintings were displayed in April 1961, serving as the backdrop for New York Department Store Bronwit Teller's window display. This was the same stage his Pop Art contemporaries Jasper Johns, James Rosenquist and Robert Rauschenberg had also once graced. Smith, Patrick S (1986). Andy Warhol's Art and Films. UMI Research Press. p.98. ISBN 0-8357-1733-X. Eventually, Warhol pared his image vocabulary down to the icon itselfto brand names, celebrities, dollar signsand removed all traces of the artist's "hand" in the production of his paintings.

To him, part of defining a niche was defining his subject matter. Cartoons were already being used by Lichtenstein, typography by Jasper Johns, and so on; Warhol wanted a distinguishing subject. His friends suggested he should paint the things he loved the most. It was the gallerist Muriel Latow who came up with the ideas for both the soup cans and Warhol's dollar paintings. On November 23, 1961 Warhol wrote Latow a check for $50 which, according to the 2009 Warhol biography, Pop, The Genius of Warhol, was payment for coming up with the idea of the soup cans as subject matter. 
For his first major exhibition Warhol painted his famous cans of Campbell's Soup, which he claimed to have had for lunch for most of his life. The work sold for $10,000 at an auction on November 17, 1971, at Sotheby's New York.

He loved celebrities, so he painted them as well. From these beginnings he developed his later style and subjects. Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the handmade from the artistic process. Warhol frequently used silk-screening; his later drawings were traced from slide projections. At the height of his fame as a painter, Warhol had several assistants who produced his silk-screen multiples, following his directions to make different versions and variations. Colacello, Bob (1990), p.28 

In 1979, Warhol was commissioned by BMW to paint a Group 4 race version of the then elite supercar BMW M1 for the fourth installment in the BMW Art Car Project. Unlike the three artists before him, Warhol declined the use of a small scale practice model, instead opting to immediately paint directly onto the full scale automobile. It was indicated that Warhol spent only a total of 23 minutes to paint the entire car. 
Warhol produced both comic and serious works; his subject could be a soup can or an electric chair. Warhol used the same techniquessilkscreens, reproduced serially, and often painted with bright colorswhether he painted celebrities, everyday objects, or images of suicide, car crashes, and disasters, as in the 19621963 Death and Disaster series. The Death and Disaster paintings included Red Car Crash, Purple Jumping Man, and Orange Disaster. One of these paintings, the diptych "Silver Car Crash", became the highest priced work of his when it sold at Sotheby's Contemporary Art Auction on Wednesday, November 13, 2013 for $105.4 million. 

Some of Warhol's work, as well as his own personality, has been described as being Keatonesque. Warhol has been described as playing dumb to the media. He sometimes refused to explain his work. He has suggested that all one needs to know about his work is "already there 'on the surface.'" 

His Rorschach inkblots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be. His cow wallpaper (literally, wallpaper with a cow motif) and his oxidation paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that was then oxidized with urine) are also noteworthy in this context. Equally noteworthy is the way these worksand their means of productionmirrored the atmosphere at Andy's New York "Factory". Biographer Bob Colacello provides some details on Andy's "piss paintings":

Warhol's first portrait of Basquiat (1982) is a black photosilkscreen over an oxidized copper "piss painting".

After many years of silkscreen, oxidation, photography, etc., Warhol returned to painting with a brush in hand in a series of over 50 large collaborative works done with Jean-Michel Basquiat between 1984 and 1986. Chiappini, Rudi (ed.) Jean-Michel Basquiat. Museo d'Arte Moderna /Skira, 2005. Fairbrother, Trevor. "Double FeatureCollaborative Paintings, Andy Warhol, Jean-Michel Basquiat," Art in America, September 1969. Despite negative criticism when these were first shown, Warhol called some of them "masterpieces," and they were influential for his later work. Fretz, Eric. Jean-Michel Basquiat: A Biography. Greenwood Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-313-38056-3. 

The influence of the large collaborations with Basquiat can be seen in Warhol's The Last Supper cycle, his last and possibly his largest series, seen by some as "arguably his greatest," but by others as "wishy-washy, religiose" and "spiritless." Anthony Haden-Guest, "Warhol's Last Supper" ArtNet 1999, http://www.artnet.com/magazine_pre2000/features/haden-guest/haden-guest8-3-99.asp It is also the largest series of religious-themed works by any U.S. artist. 

At the time of his death, Warhol was working on Cars, a series of paintings for Mercedes-Benz. 

A self-portrait by Andy Warhol (19631964), which sold in New York at the May Post-War and Contemporary evening sale in Christie's, fetched $38.4 million.

On May 9, 2012, his classic painting "Double Elvis (Ferus Type)" sold at auction at Sotheby's in New York for US$33 million. With commission, the sale price totaled US$37,042,500, short of the $50 million that Sotheby's had predicted the painting might bring. The piece (silkscreen ink and spray paint on canvas) shows Elvis Presley in a gunslinger pose. It was first exhibited in 1963 at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles. Warhol made 22 versions of the "Double Elvis," nine of which are held in museums. 

On Wednesday, November 13, 2013 his "Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster) diptych sold at Sotheby's Contemporary Art Auction for $105.4 million, a new record for the famed pop artist (pre-auction estimates at $80 million). Created in 1963, this work has only been seen in public once in the past 26 years. 

=== Films ===
Warhol worked across a wide range of mediapainting, photography, drawing, and sculpture. In addition, he was a highly prolific filmmaker. Between 1963 and 1968, he made more than 60 films, plus some 500 short black-and-white "screen test" portraits of Factory visitors. Schaffner (1999), p.73 One of his most famous films, Sleep, monitors poet John Giorno sleeping for six hours. The 35-minute film Blow Job is one continuous shot of the face of DeVeren Bookwalter supposedly receiving oral sex from filmmaker Willard Maas, although the camera never tilts down to see this. Another, Empire (1964), consists of eight hours of footage of the Empire State Building in New York City at dusk. The film Eat consists of a man eating a mushroom for 45 minutes. Warhol attended the 1962 premiere of the static composition by LaMonte Young called Trio for Strings and subsequently created his famous series of static films including Kiss, Eat, and Sleep (for which Young initially was commissioned to provide music). Uwe Husslein cites filmmaker Jonas Mekas, who accompanied Warhol to the Trio premiere, and who claims Warhol's static films were directly inspired by the performance. 

Batman Dracula is a 1964 film that was produced and directed by Warhol, without the permission of DC Comics. It was screened only at his art exhibits. A fan of the Batman series, Warhol's movie was an "homage" to the series, and is considered the first appearance of a blatantly campy Batman. The film was until recently thought to have been lost, until scenes from the picture were shown at some length in the 2006 documentary Jack Smith and the Destruction of Atlantis.

Warhol's 1965 film Vinyl is an adaptation of Anthony Burgess' popular dystopian novel A Clockwork Orange. Others record improvised encounters between Factory regulars such as Brigid Berlin, Viva, Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling, Holly Woodlawn, Ondine, Nico, and Jackie Curtis. Legendary underground artist Jack Smith appears in the film Camp.

His most popular and critically successful film was Chelsea Girls (1966). The film was highly innovative in that it consisted of two 16 mm-films being projected simultaneously, with two different stories being shown in tandem. From the projection booth, the sound would be raised for one film to elucidate that "story" while it was lowered for the other. The multiplication of images evoked Warhol's seminal silk-screen works of the early 1960s.

Other important films include Bike Boy, My Hustler, The Nude Restaurant, and Lonesome Cowboys, a raunchy pseudo-western. These and other titles document gay underground and camp culture, and continue to feature prominently in scholarship about sexuality and art. Blue Moviea film in which Warhol superstar Viva makes love and fools around in bed with a man for 33 minutes of the film's playing-timewas Warhol's last film as director. The film was at the time scandalous for its frank approach to a sexual encounter. For many years Viva refused to allow it to be screened. It was publicly screened in New York in 2005 for the first time in over thirty years.

After his June 3, 1968, shooting, a reclusive Warhol relinquished his personal involvement in filmmaking. His acolyte and assistant director, Paul Morrissey, took over the film-making chores for the Factory collective, steering Warhol-branded cinema towards more mainstream, narrative-based, B-movie exploitation fare with Flesh, Trash, and Heat. All of these films, including the later Andy Warhol's Dracula and Andy Warhol's Frankenstein, were far more mainstream than anything Warhol as a director had attempted. These latter "Warhol" films starred Joe Dallesandromore of a Morrissey star than a true Warhol superstar.

In the early 1970s, most of the films directed by Warhol were pulled out of circulation by Warhol and the people around him who ran his business. After Warhol's death, the films were slowly restored by the Whitney Museum and are occasionally projected at museums and film festivals. Few of the Warhol-directed films are available on video or DVD.

==== Filmography ====

=== Factory in New York ===

* Factory: 1342 Lexington Avenue (the first Factory)
* The Factory: 231 East 47th street 19631967 (the building no longer exists)
* Factory: 33 Union Square 19671973 (Decker Building)
* Factory: 860 Broadway (near 33 Union Square) 19731984 (the building has now been completely remodeled and was for a time (20002001) the headquarters of the dot-com consultancy Scient)
* Factory: 22 East 33rd Street 19841987 (the building no longer exists)
* Home: 1342 Lexington Avenue
* Home: 57 East 66th street (Warhol's last home)
* Last personal studio: 158 Madison Avenue

=== Music ===
In the mid-1960s, Warhol adopted the band the Velvet Underground, making them a crucial element of the Exploding Plastic Inevitable multimedia performance art show. Warhol, with Paul Morrissey, acted as the band's manager, introducing them to Nico (who would perform with the band at Warhol's request). In 1966 he "produced" their first album The Velvet Underground & Nico, as well as providing its album art. His actual participation in the album's production amounted to simply paying for the studio time. After the band's first album, Warhol and band leader Lou Reed started to disagree more about the direction the band should take, and their artistic friendship ended. In 1989, after Warhol's death, Reed and John Cale re-united for the first time since 1972 to write, perform, record and release the concept album Songs for Drella, a tribute to Warhol.

Warhol designed many album covers for various artists starting with the photographic cover of John Wallowitch's debut album, This Is John Wallowitch!!! (1964). He designed the cover art for the Rolling Stones albums Sticky Fingers (1971) and Love You Live (1977), and the John Cale albums The Academy in Peril (1972) and Honi Soit in 1981. One of Warhol's last works was a portrait of Aretha Franklin for the cover of her 1986 gold album Aretha, which was done in the style of the Reigning Queens series he had completed the year before. 

Warhol strongly influenced the new wave/punk rock band Devo, as well as David Bowie. Bowie recorded a song called "Andy Warhol" for his 1971 album Hunky Dory. Lou Reed wrote the song "Andy's Chest", about Valerie Solanas, the woman who shot Warhol, in 1968. He recorded it with the Velvet Underground, and this version was released on the VU album in 1985. Bowie would later play Warhol in the 1996 movie, Basquiat. Bowie recalled how meeting Warhol in real life helped him in the role, and recounted his early meetings with him:

=== Books and print ===
Beginning in the early 1950s, Warhol produced several unbound portfolios of his work.

The first of several bound self-published books by Warhol was 25 Cats Name Sam and One Blue Pussy, printed in 1954 by Seymour Berlin on Arches brand watermarked paper using his blotted line technique for the lithographs. The original edition was limited to 190 numbered, hand colored copies, using Dr. Martin's ink washes. Most of these were given by Warhol as gifts to clients and friends. Copy No. 4, inscribed "Jerry" on the front cover and given to Geraldine Stutz, was used for a facsimile printing in 1987 and the original was auctioned in May 2006 for US $35,000 by Doyle New York. May 3, 2006 auction at Doyle New York. Retrieved August 14, 2006. 

Other self-published books by Warhol include:
* A Gold Book
* Wild Raspberries
* Holy Cats

After gaining fame, Warhol "wrote" several books that were commercially published:
* a, A Novel (1968, ISBN 0-8021-3553-6) is a literal transcriptioncontaining spelling errors and phonetically written background noise and mumblingof audio recordings of Ondine and several of Andy Warhol's friends hanging out at the Factory, talking, going out.
* The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (From A to B & Back Again) (1975, ISBN 0-15-671720-4)according to Pat Hackett's introduction to The Andy Warhol Diaries, Pat Hackett did the transcriptions and text for the book based on daily phone conversations, sometimes (when Warhol was traveling) using audio cassettes that Andy Warhol gave her. Said cassettes contained conversations with Brigid Berlin (also known as Brigid Polk) and former Interview magazine editor Bob Colacello.
* (1980, ISBN 0-15-672960-1), authored by Warhol and Pat Hackett is a retrospective view of the 1960s and the role of pop art.
* The Andy Warhol Diaries (1989, ISBN 0-446-39138-7), edited by Pat Hackett, is a diary dictated by Warhol to Hackett in daily phone conversations. Warhol started the diary to keep track of his expenses after being audited, although it soon evolved to include his personal and cultural observations. Colacello, Bob (1990), p.183 

Warhol created the fashion magazine Interview that is still published today. The loopy title script on the cover is thought to be either his own handwriting or that of his mother, Julia Warhola, who would often do text work for his early commercial pieces. Colacello, Bob (1990), pp.2223 

=== Other media ===
Although Andy Warhol is most known for his paintings and films, he authored works in many different media.
* Drawing: Warhol started his career as a commercial illustrator, producing drawings in "blotted-ink" style for advertisements and magazine articles. Best known of these early works are his drawings of shoes. Some of his personal drawings were self-published in small booklets, such as Yum, Yum, Yum (about food), Ho, Ho, Ho (about Christmas) and (of course) Shoes, Shoes, Shoes. His most artistically acclaimed book of drawings is probably A Gold Book, compiled of sensitive drawings of young men. A Gold Book is so named because of the gold leaf that decorates its pages. In April 2012 a sketch of 1930s singer Rudy Vallee claimed to have been drawn by Andy Warhol was found at a Las Vegas garage sale. The image was said to have been drawn when Andy was 9 or 10. Various authorities have challenged the image's authenticity.
* Sculpture: Warhol's most famous sculpture is probably his Brillo Boxes, silkscreened ink on wood replicas of the large, branded cardboard boxes used to hold 24 packages of Brillo soap pads. The original Brillo design was by commercial artist James Harvey. Warhol's sculpture was part of a series of "grocery carton" works that also included Heinz ketchup and Campbell's tomato juice cases. Other famous works include the Silver Cloudshelium filled, silver mylar, pillow-shaped balloons. A Silver Cloud was included in the traveling exhibition Air Art (19681969) curated by Willoughby Sharp. Clouds was also adapted by Warhol for avant-garde choreographer Merce Cunningham's dance piece RainForest (1968). 
* Audio: At one point Warhol carried a portable recorder with him wherever he went, taping everything everybody said and did. He referred to this device as his "wife". Some of these tapes were the basis for his literary work. Another audio-work of Warhol's was his "Invisible Sculpture", a presentation in which burglar alarms would go off when entering the room. Warhol's cooperation with the musicians of The Velvet Underground was driven by an expressed desire to become a music producer.
* Time Capsules: In 1973, Warhol began saving ephemera from his daily lifecorrespondence, newspapers, souvenirs, childhood objects, even used plane tickets and foodwhich was sealed in plain cardboard boxes dubbed Time Capsules. By the time of his death, the collection grew to include 600, individually dated "capsules". The boxes are now housed at the Andy Warhol Museum. 
* Television: Andy Warhol dreamed of a television special about a favorite subject of hisNothingthat he would call The Nothing Special. Later in his career he did create two cable television shows, Andy Warhol's TV in 1982 and Andy Warhol's Fifteen Minutes (based on his famous "fifteen minutes of fame" quotation) for MTV in 1986. Besides his own shows he regularly made guest appearances on other programs, including The Love Boat wherein a Midwestern wife (Marion Ross) fears Andy Warhol will reveal to her husband (Tom Bosley, who starred alongside Ross in sitcom Happy Days) her secret past as a Warhol superstar named Marina del Rey. Warhol also produced a TV commercial for Schrafft's Restaurants in New York City, for an ice cream dessert appropriately titled the "Underground Sundae". 
* Fashion: Warhol is quoted for having said: "I'd rather buy a dress and put it up on the wall, than put a painting, wouldn't you?" One of his most well-known Superstars, Edie Sedgwick, aspired to be a fashion designer, and his good friend Halston was a famous one. Warhol's work in fashion includes silkscreened dresses, a short sub-career as a catwalk-model and books on fashion as well as paintings with fashion (shoes) as a subject. Warhol himself has been described as a modern dandy, whose authority "rested more on presence than on words". George Walden, Who's a Dandy?Dandyism and Beau Brummell, Gibson Square, London, 2002. ISBN 1-903933-18-8. Reviewed by Frances Wilson in Uncommon People, The Guardian, October 12, 2006. 
* Performance Art: Warhol and his friends staged theatrical multimedia happenings at parties and public venues, combining music, film, slide projections and even Gerard Malanga in an S&M outfit cracking a whip. The Exploding Plastic Inevitable in 1966 was the culmination of this area of his work. 
* Theater: Andy Warhol's Pork opened on May 5, 1971 at LaMama theater in New York for a two-week run and was brought to the Roundhouse in London for a longer run in August 1971. Pork was based on tape-recorded conversations between Brigid Berlin and Andy during which Brigid would play for Andy tapes she had made of phone conversations between herself and her mother, socialite Honey Berlin. The play featured Jayne County as "Vulva" and Cherry Vanilla as "Amanda Pork". In 1974, Andy Warhol also produced the stage musical Man on the Moon, which was written by John Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas.
* Photography: To produce his silkscreens, Warhol made photographs or had them made by his friends and assistants. These pictures were mostly taken with a specific model of Polaroid camera that Polaroid kept in production especially for Warhol. This photographic approach to painting and his snapshot method of taking pictures has had a great effect on artistic photography. Warhol was an accomplished photographer, and took an enormous amount of photographs of Factory visitors, friends.
* Computer: Warhol used Amiga computers to generate digital art, including You Are the One, which he helped design and build with Amiga, Inc. He also displayed the difference between slow fill and fast fill on live TV with Debbie Harry as a model. (video)

=== Producer and product ===
Warhol had assistance in producing his paintings. This is also true of his film-making and commercial enterprises.

He founded the gossip magazine Interview, a stage for celebrities he "endorsed" and a business staffed by his friends. He collaborated with others on all of his books (some of which were written with Pat Hackett.) He adopted the young painter Jean-Michel Basquiat, and the band The Velvet Underground, presenting them to the public as his latest interest, and collaborating with them. One might even say that he produced people (as in the Warholian "Superstar" and the Warholian portrait). He endorsed products, appeared in commercials, and made frequent celebrity guest appearances on television shows and in films (he appeared in everything from Love Boat to Saturday Night Live and the Richard Pryor movie, Dynamite Chicken).

In this respect Warhol was a fan of "Art Business" and "Business Art"he, in fact, wrote about his interest in thinking about art as business in The Philosophy of Andy Warhol from A to B and Back Again.

==Personal life==

===Sexuality===
Warhol was gay. See biographers such as Victor Bockris, Bob Colacello, and art historian Richard Meyer When interviewed in 1980, he indicated that he was still a virginbiographer Bob Colacello who was present at the interview felt it was probably true and that what little sex he had was probably "a mixture of voyeurism and masturbationto use his word abstract". Warhol's assertion of virginity would seem to be contradicted by an incident recounted by one biographer, his hospital treatment in 1960 for condylomata, a sexually transmitted disease. Scherman, Tony & Dalton, David, POP: The Genius of Andy Warhol, p. 49 HarperCollins, New York, N.Y. 2010 The fact that Warhol's homosexuality influenced his work and shaped his relationship to the art world is a major subject of scholarship on the artist and is an issue that Warhol himself addressed in interviews, in conversation with his contemporaries, and in his publications (e.g., Popism: The Warhol 1960s). Throughout his career, Warhol produced erotic photography and drawings of male nudes. Many of his most famous works (portraits of Liza Minnelli, Judy Garland, and Elizabeth Taylor, and films like Blow Job, My Hustler and Lonesome Cowboys) draw from gay underground culture and/or openly explore the complexity of sexuality and desire. As has been addressed by a range of scholars, many of his films premiered in gay porn theaters. Thomas Waugh, Hard to Imagine: Gay Male eroticism in Photography and Film from the Beginnings to Stonewall, Columbia University Press, New York, N.Y. 1996 

The first works that Warhol submitted to a fine art gallery, homoerotic drawings of male nudes, were rejected for being too openly gay. In Popism, furthermore, the artist recalls a conversation with the film maker Emile de Antonio about the difficulty Warhol had being accepted socially by the then more famous (but closeted) gay artists Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg. De Antonio explained that Warhol was "too swish and that upsets them." In response to this, Warhol writes, "There was nothing I could say to that. It was all too true. So I decided I just wasn't going to care, because those were all the things that I didn't want to change anyway, that I didn't think I 'should' want to change ... Other people could change their attitudes but not me". In exploring Warhol's biography, many turn to this periodthe late 1950s and early 1960sas a key moment in the development of his persona. Some have suggested that his frequent refusal to comment on his work, to speak about himself (confining himself in interviews to responses like "Um, no" and "Um, yes", and often allowing others to speak for him)and even the evolution of his pop stylecan be traced to the years when Warhol was first dismissed by the inner circles of the New York art world. 

===Religious beliefs===
Images of Jesus from The Last Supper cycle (1986). Warhol made almost 100 variations on the theme, which the Guggenheim felt "indicates an almost obsessive investment in the subject matter." 
Warhol was a practicing Ruthenian Catholic. He regularly volunteered at homeless shelters in New York, particularly during the busier times of the year, and described himself as a religious person. Many of Warhol's later works depicted religious subjects, including two series, Details of Renaissance Paintings (1984) and The Last Supper (1986). In addition, a body of religious-themed works was found posthumously in his estate. 

During his life, Warhol regularly attended Mass, and the priest at Warhol's church, Saint Vincent Ferrer, said that the artist went there almost daily, although he was not observed taking communion or going to confession and sat or knelt in the pews at the back. The priest thought he was afraid of being recognized; Warhol said he was self-conscious about being seen in a Roman Rite church crossing himself "in the Orthodox way" (right to left instead of the reverse). 

His art is noticeably influenced by the eastern Christian tradition which was so evident in his places of worship. 

Warhol's brother has described the artist as "really religious, but he didn't want people to know about that because was private". Despite the private nature of his faith, in Warhol's eulogy John Richardson depicted it as devout: "To my certain knowledge, he was responsible for at least one conversion. He took considerable pride in financing his nephew's studies for the priesthood". 

===Collections===
Warhol was an avid collector. His friends referred to his numerous collections, which filled not only his four-story townhouse, but also a nearby storage unit, as "Andy's Stuff." The true extent of his collections was not discovered until after his death, when the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh took in 641 boxes of his "Stuff."

Warhol's collections included airplane menus, unpaid invoices, pizza dough, pornographic pulp novels, newspapers, stamps, supermarket flyers, and cookie jars, among other eccentricities. One of his main collections was his wigs. Warhol owned over forty and felt very protective of his hairpieces which were sewn by a New York wig-maker from hair imported from Italy. In 1985 a girl snatched Warhol's wig off his head. It was later discovered in Warhol's diary entry for that day that he wrote "I don't know what held me back from pushing her over the balcony."

Another item found in Warhol's boxes at the museum in Pittsburgh was a mummified human foot from Ancient Egypt. The curator of anthropology at Carnegie Museum of Natural History felt that Warhol most likely found it at a flea market. 

== Movies about Warhol ==
Warhol (right) with director Ulli Lommel on the set of 1979's Cocaine Cowboys, in which Warhol appeared as himself

=== Dramatic portrayals ===

In 1979, Warhol appeared as himself in the film Cocaine Cowboys. Lommel, Ulli (director). Cocaine Cowboys 

After his death, Warhol was portrayed by Crispin Glover in Oliver Stone's film The Doors (1991), by David Bowie in Basquiat, a film by Julian Schnabel, and by Jared Harris in the film I Shot Andy Warhol directed by Mary Harron (1996). Warhol appears as a character in Michael Daugherty's 1997 opera Jackie O. Actor Mark Bringleson makes a brief cameo as Warhol in (1997).

Many films by avant-garde cineast Jonas Mekas have caught the moments of Warhol's life. Sean Gregory Sullivan depicted Warhol in the 1998 film 54. Guy Pearce portrayed Warhol in the 2007 film, Factory Girl, about Edie Sedgwick's life. Hickenlooper, George (director). Factory Girl Actor Greg Travis portrays Warhol in a brief scene from the 2009 film Watchmen. In the 2012 film Men in Black III Andy Warhol turns out to really be undercover MIB Agent W (played by Bill Hader). Warhol is throwing a party at The Factory in 1969, where he is looked up by MIB Agents K and J (J from the future). Agent W is desperate to end his undercover job ( "I'm so out of ideas I'm painting soup cans and bananas, for Christ sakes!" and "You gotta fake my death, okay? I can't listen to sitar music anymore.")

Gus Van Sant was planning a version of Warhol's life with River Phoenix in the lead role just before Phoenix's death in 1993. 

=== Documentaries ===
*The 2001 documentary, Absolut Warhola was produced by Polish director Stanislaw Mucha, featuring Warhol's parents' family and hometown in Slovakia. 
* is a reverential four-hour 2006 movie by Ric Burns. 
* Andy Warhol: Double Denied is a 52 minute movie by lan Yentob about the difficulties in authenticating Warhol's work. 
* Andy Warhol's People Factory, a three-part 2008 television documentary directed by Catherine Shorr, features interviews with several of Warhol's associates. 

==Honors==
In 2002, the U.S. Postal Service issued an 18-cent stamp commemorating Warhol. Designed by Richard Sheaff of Scottsdale, Arizona, the stamp was unveiled at a ceremony at the Andy Warhol Museum, and features Warhol's painting Self-Portrait, 1964. 

==See also==

* Race Riot
* Andy Warhol Art Authentication Board
* Painting the Century 101 Portrait Masterpieces 1900-2000
* Andy Warhol Bridge in Pittsburgh.
* Bodley Gallery
* 15 minutes of fame
* Moon Museum
* Joel Wachs, president of the Andy Warhol Foundation in New York City

==References==

==Further reading==

* "A symposium on Pop Art". Arts Magazine, April 1963, pp. 3645. The symposium was held in 1962, at The Museum of Modern Art, and published in this issue the following year.
* 
* Celant, Germano. Andy Warhal: A Fatory. Kunstmuseum Wolfsbug, 1999. isbn 3-7757-0073-5
* 
* 
* 
* Doyle, Jennifer, Jonathan Flatley, and Jos Esteban Muoz eds. (1996). Pop Out: Queer Warhol. Durham: Duke University Press.
* 
* 
* 
* James, James, "Andy Warhol: The Producer as Author", in Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the 1960s (1989), pp. 5884. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* 
* Krauss, Rosalind E. "Warhol's Abstract Spectacle". In Abstraction, Gesture, Ecriture: Paintings from the Daros Collection. New York: Scalo, 1999, pp. 12333.
* Lippard, Lucy R., Pop Art, Thames and Hudson, 1970 (1985 reprint), ISBN 0-500-20052-1
* 
* 
* Scherman, Tony & Dalton, David, POP: The Genius of Andy Warhol, HarperCollins, New York, N.Y. 2009
* Suarez, Juan Antonio (1996). Bike Boys, Drag Queens, & Superstars: Avant-Garde, Mass Culture, and Gay Identities in the 1960s Underground Cinema. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*Andy Warhol, (1928-1987) - The Carpathian Connection
* Warhol Foundation in New York City
* Andy Warhol Collection in Pittsburgh
* Time Capsules: the Andy Warhol Collection
* Documentation of recent exhibitions of work by Andy Warhol
* The work of Andy Warhol spoken about by David Cronenberg on UbuWeb
* 
* Warholstars: Andy Warhol Films, Art and Superstars
* Art Directors Club biography, portrait and images of work
* 
* The Andy Warhol Museum of Modern Artcity of origin
* 
* Warhol & The Computer
* Warhol in Parisslideshow by The First Post
* Andy Warhol makes a digital painting of Debbie Harry at the Commodore Amiga product launch press conference in 1985
* Andy Warhol: A Documentary film by Ric Burns for PBS
* Andy Warhol
* Designer Peter Jensen takes you on a tour of the early drawings of Andy Warhol. Video by Louisiana Channel, Denmark, 2013.
*Andy Warhol in the National Gallery of Australia's Kenneth Tyler Collection

 



[[Alp Arslan]]

Alp Arslan (Persian:  ; full name: Diya ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Adud ad-Dawlah Abu Shuja Muhammad Alp Arslan ibn Dawud) (20 January 1029  15 December 1072) was the second Sultan of the Seljuq Empire and great-grandson of Seljuq, the eponymous founder of the dynasty. His real name was Muhammad bin Dawud Chaghri, and for his military prowess, personal valour, and fighting skills he obtained the name Alp Arslan, which means "Heroic Lion" "Alp Arslan." Encyclopedia of World Biography. 2004. Encyclopedia.com. (September 5, 2011). http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3404700163.html in Turkish.

==Career==
Alp Arslan succeeded his father ar Bey as governor of Khorasan in 1059. His uncle Tughril died and was succeeded by Suleiman, Arslan's brother. Arslan and his uncle Kutalmish both contested this succession. Arslan defeated Kutalmish for the throne and succeeded on 27 April 1064 as sultan of Great Seljuq, thus becoming sole monarch of Persia from the river Oxus to the Tigris.

In consolidating his empire and subduing contending factions, Arslan was ably assisted by Nizam al-Mulk, his vizier, and one of the most eminent statesmen in early Muslim history. With peace and security established in his dominions, Arslan convoked an assembly of the states and declared his son Malik Shah I his heir and successor. With the hope of capturing Caesarea Mazaca, the capital of Cappadocia, he placed himself at the head of the Turkish cavalry, crossed the Euphrates, and entered and invaded the city. Along with Nizam al-Mulk, he then marched into Armenia and Georgia, which he conquered in 1064.

==Byzantine struggle==
Battle of Manzikert

En route to Syria in 1068, Alp Arslan Oush invaded the Byzantine Empire. The Emperor Romanos IV Diogenes, assuming command in person, met the invaders in Cilicia. In three arduous campaigns, the Turks were defeated in detail and driven across the Euphrates in 1070. The first two campaigns were conducted by the emperor himself, while the third was directed by Manuel Comnenos, great-uncle of Emperor Manuel Comnenos.

In 1071 Romanos again took the field and advanced into Armenia with possibly 30,000 men, including a contingent of Cuman Turks as well as contingents of Franks and Normans, under Ursel de Baieul. At Manzikert, on the Murat River, north of Lake Van, Diogenes was met by Alp Arslan. The sultan proposed terms of peace, which were rejected by the emperor, and the two forces waged the Battle of Manzikert. The Cuman mercenaries among the Byzantine forces immediately defected to the Turkish side. Seeing this, "the Western mercenaries rode off and took no part in the battle." To be exact, Romanos was betrayed by general Andronikos Doukas, son of the Caesar (Romanos's stepson), who pronounced him dead and rode off with a large part of the Byzantine forces at a critical moment. The Byzantines were totally routed.

Emperor Romanos IV was himself taken prisoner and conducted into the presence of Alp Arslan. After a ritual humiliation, Arslan treated him with generosity. After peace terms were agreed to, Arslan dismissed the Emperor, loaded with presents and respectfully attended by a military guard. The following conversation is said to have taken place after Romanos was brought as a prisoner before the Sultan: 

Alp Arslan humiliating Emperor Romanos IV after the Battle of Manzikert. From a 15th-century illustrated French translation of Boccacio's De Casibus Virorum Illustrium.

:Alp Arslan: "What would you do if I was brought before you as a prisoner?"
:Romanos: "Perhaps I'd kill you, or exhibit you in the streets of Constantinople."
:Alp Arslan: "My punishment is far heavier. I forgive you, and set you free."

Alp Arslan's victories changed the balance in near Asia completely in favour of the Seljuq Turks and Sunni Muslims. While the Byzantine Empire was to continue for nearly four more centuries, and the Crusades would contest the issue for some time, the victory at Manzikert signalled the beginning of Turkish ascendancy in Anatolia. Most historians, including Edward Gibbon, date the defeat at Manzikert as the beginning of the end of the Eastern Roman Empire. Certainly the entry of Turkic farmers following their horsemen ended the themes in Anatolia that had furnished the Empire with men and treasure.

==State organization==
Alp Arslan's strength lay in the military realm. Domestic affairs were handled by his able vizier, Nizam al-Mulk, the founder of the administrative organization that characterized and strengthened the sultanate during the reigns of Alp Arslan and his son, Malik Shah. Military fiefs, governed by Seljuq princes, were established to provide support for the soldiery and to accommodate the nomadic Turks to the established Anatolian agricultural scene. This type of military fiefdom enabled the nomadic Turks to draw on the resources of the sedentary Persians, Turks, and other established cultures within the Seljuq realm, and allowed Alp Arslan to field a huge standing army without depending on tribute from conquest to pay his soldiers. He not only had enough food from his subjects to maintain his military, but the taxes collected from traders and merchants added to his coffers sufficiently to fund his continuous wars.

According to the poet Saadi Shirazi: 

Arslan possessed a fort, which raised at the height of Alwand, from all were those within its walls, for its roads were a labyrinth, like the curls of a bride. From a learned traveler Arslan once inquired: "Didst thou ever, in thy wanderings, see a fort as strong as this?" "Splendid it is," was the travelers reply, "but methinks not it confers much strength. Before thee, did not other kings possess it for a while, then pass away? After thee, will not other kings assume control, and eat the fruits of the tree of thy hope?"

In the estimation of the wise, the world is a false gem that passes each moment from one hand to another. (the fort was sacked by the Mongols led by Hulagu).

Suleiman ibn Kutalmish was the son of the contender for Arslan's throne; he was appointed governor of the north-western provinces and assigned to completing the invasion of Anatolia. An explanation for this choice can only be conjectured from Ibn al-Athirs account of the battle between Alp-Arslan and Kutalmish, in which he writes that Alp-Arslan wept for the latter's death and greatly mourned the loss of his kinsman.

==Death==
After Manzikert, the dominion of Alp Arslan extended over much of western Asia. He soon prepared to march for the conquest of Turkestan, the original seat of his ancestors. With a powerful army he advanced to the banks of the Oxus. Before he could pass the river with safety, however, it was necessary to subdue certain fortresses, one of which was for several days vigorously defended by the governor, Yussuf el-Harezmi, a Khwarezmian. He was obliged to surrender, however, and was carried as a prisoner before the sultan, who condemned him to death. Yussuf, in desperation, drew his dagger and rushed upon the sultan. Alp Arslan, who took great pride in his reputation as the foremost archer of his time, motioned to his guards not to interfere. He drew his bow, but his foot slipped, the arrow glanced aside, and he received the assassin's dagger in his breast. Alp Arslan died from this wound four days later, on 25 November 1072, in his 42nd year, and he was taken to Merv to be buried next to his father, Chaghri Beg. Upon his tomb lies the following inscription:

:O those who saw the sky-high grandeur of Alp Arslan, behold! He is under the black soil now...

As he lay dying, Alp Arslan whispered to his son that his vanity had killed him. "Alas," he is recorded to have said, "surrounded by great warriors devoted to my cause, guarded night and day by them, I should have allowed them to do their job. I had been warned against trying to protect myself, and against letting my courage get in the way of my good sense. I forgot those warnings, and here I lie, dying in agony. Remember well the lessons learned, and do not allow your vanity to overreach your good sense..."

==Legacy==
Alp Arslan's conquest of Anatolia from the Byzantines is also seen as one of the pivotal precursors to the launch of the crusades.

From 2002 to July 2008 under Turkmen calendar reform, the month of August was named after Alp Arslan.

==References==

== Sources ==
* 



[[American Film Institute]]

The American Film Institute (AFI) is a film organization that educates filmmakers and honors the heritage of the moving picture arts. AFI is supported by private funding and public membership.

The institute is composed of leaders from the film, entertainment, business and academic communities. A Board of Trustees chaired by Sir Howard Stringer and a Board of Directors chaired by Robert Daly guide the organization, which is led by President and CEO Bob Gazzale. Prior leaders were founding director George Stevens, Jr. (from 1967 to 1980) and Jean Picker Firstenberg (from 1980 to 2007).

AFI educational and cultural programs include:
* AFI Catalog of Feature Films and AFI Archive  the written history of all feature films during the first 100 years of the art form  accessible free online;
* AFI Conservatory  a film school led by master filmmakers in a graduate level program;
* AFI Life Achievement Award  a tradition since 1973, a high honor for a career in film;
* AFI Awards, an honor celebrating the creative ensembles of the most outstanding motion picture and television programs of the year;
* AFI 100 Years... series  television events and movie reference lists;
* AFI's two film festivals  in Los Angeles, AFI Fest presented by Audi and in Silver Spring, Maryland, AFI Docs presented by Audi;
* AFI Silver Theatre and Cultural Center  an historic theater with year-round art house, first-run and classic film programming in Silver Spring, Maryland;
* American Film, an e-magazine that explores the art of new and historic film classics.

==History==
The American Film Institute was founded by a 1965 presidential mandate announced in the Rose Garden of the White House by Lyndon B. Johnson  to establish a national arts organization to preserve the legacy of American film heritage, educate the next generation of filmmakers and honor the artists and their work. Two years later, in 1967, AFI was established, supported by the National Endowment for the Arts, the Motion Picture Association of America and the Ford Foundation.

The original 22-member Board of Trustees included Chair Gregory Peck and Vice Chair Sidney Poitier as well as Francis Ford Coppola, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Jack Valenti and other representatives from the arts and academia.

The institute established a training program for filmmakers known then as the Center for Advanced Film Studies.Also created in the early years were a repertory film exhibition program at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and the AFI Catalog of Feature Films  a scholarly source for American film history.

The institute moved to its current eight-acre Hollywood campus in 1981. The film training program grew into the AFI Conservatory, an accredited graduate school.

AFI moved its presentation of first-run and auteur films from the Kennedy Center to the historic 1938 Art Deco AFI Silver Theatre and Cultural Center, which now hosts two major film festivals  AFI Fest and AFI Docs making AFI the largest nonprofit film exhibitor in the world.

AFI educates audiences and recognizes artistic excellence through its awards programs and 10 Top 10 Lists.

==AFI Conservatory==
In 1969, the institute established the Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone, the Doheny Mansion in Beverly Hills, California. The first class included filmmakers Terrence Malick, David Lynch, Caleb Deschanel and Paul Schrader. That program grew into the AFI Conservatory, an accredited graduate film school located in the hills above Hollywood, California, providing training in six filmmaking disciplines: cinematography, directing, editing, producing, production design and screenwriting. Mirroring a professional production environment, Fellows collaborate to make more films than any other graduate level program. Admission to AFI Conservatory is highly selective, with a maximum of 140 graduates per year.

In 2013, Emmy and Oscar-winning director, producer and screenwriter James L. Brooks (As Good as It Gets, Broadcast News, Terms of Endearment) joined AFI as Artistic Director of the AFI Conservatory where he provides leadership for the film program.

Brooks' artistic role at the AFI Conservatory has a rich legacy that includes Daniel Petrie, Jr., Robert Wise and Frank Pierson.Award-winning director Bob Mandel serves as Dean of the AFI Conservatory.

===Notable alumni===
AFI Conservatory's alumni have careers in film, television and on the web. They have been recognized with all of the major industry awards  Academy Awards, Emmy Awards, guild awards, and the Tony Award.

Among the alumni of AFI are Darren Aronofsky (Requiem for a Dream, Black Swan), Todd Cherniawsky (Oz the Great and Powerful, Avatar), Keith Cunningham (Bridesmaids), Janusz Kamiski (Lincoln, Schindler's List, Saving Private Ryan), Heidi Levitt (The Artist), Matthew Libatique (Noah, Black Swan), David Lynch (Mulholland Drive, Blue Velvet), Terrence Malick (Days of Heaven, The Thin Red Line, The Tree of Life), Wally Pfister (Memento, The Dark Knight, Inception), Robert Richardson (Platoon, JFK, Django Unchained) and many others.

==AFI programs==

===AFI Catalog of Feature Films===
The AFI Catalog, started in 1968, is a web-based filmographic database. A research tool for film historians, the catalog consists of entries on more than 60,000 feature films and 17,000 short films produced from 18932011, as well as AFI Awards Outstanding Movies of the Year from 2000 through 2010.

===AFI Life Achievement Award===

===AFI Awards===
Each year the AFI Awards honor the ten outstanding films and the ten outstanding television programs. The Awards are announced in December and a private luncheon for award honorees takes place the following January.

The AFI Awards were first announced in 2000.

===AFI 100 Years series===
The AFI 100 Years... series, which ran from 1998 to 2008 and created jury-selected lists of America's best movies in categories such as Musicals, Laughs and Thrills, prompted new generations to experience classic American films. The juries consisted of over 1,500 artists, scholars, critics and historians, with movies selected based on the film's popularity over time, historical significance and cultural impact. Citizen Kane was voted the greatest American film twice.

===AFI film festivals===
AFI operates two film festivals: AFI Fest in Los Angeles, and AFI Docs (formally known as Silverdocs) in Silver Spring, Maryland, and Washington, D.C.

====AFI Fest====
AFI Fest is the American Film Institute's annual celebration of artistic excellence. The festival is a showcase for the best festival films of the year and an opportunity for master filmmakers and emerging artists to come together with audiences in the movie capital of the world. AFI Fest is the only festival of its stature that is free to the public. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences recognizes AFI Fest as a qualifying festival for the Short Films category for the annual Academy Awards.

The festival has paid tribute to numerous influential filmmakers and artists over the years, including Agns Varda, Pedro Almodvar and David Lynch as Guest Artistic Directors, and has screened scores of films that have produced Oscar nominations and wins.

The American Film Market (AFM) is the market partner of AFI Fest. Audi is the festival's presenting sponsor. Additional sponsors include American Airlines and Stella Artois.

====AFI Docs====
Held annually in June, AFI Docs (formerly Silverdocs) is a documentary festival in Washington, D.C.. The festival attracts over 27,000 documentary enthusiasts.

===AFI Silver Theatre and Cultural Center===
The AFI Silver Theatre and Cultural Center is a moving image exhibition, education and cultural center located in Silver Spring, Maryland. Anchored by the restoration of noted architect John Eberson's historic 1938 Silver Theatre, it features 32,000 square feet of new construction housing two stadium theatres, office and meeting space, and reception and exhibit areas.

The AFI Silver Theatre and Cultural Center presents film and video programming, augmented by filmmaker interviews, panels, discussions,and musical performances.

===The AFI Directing Workshop for Women===
The Directing Workshop for Women is a training program committed to educating and mentoring participants in an effort to increase the number of women working professionally in screen directing. In this tuition-free program, each participant is required to complete a short film by the end of the year-long program. 

Alumnae of the program include Maya Angelou, Anne Bancroft, Dyan Cannon, Ellen Burstyn, Jennifer Getzinger, Lesli Linka Glatter and Nancy Malone.

==AFI Directors Series==
AFI released a set of hour-long programs reviewing the career of acclaimed directors. The Directors Series content was copyrighted in 1997 by Media Entertainment Inc and The American Film Institute, and the VHS and DVDs were released between 1999 and 2001 on Winstar TV and Video. "WinStar TV and Video (Firm)". WorldCat. 

Directors featured included:

* John McTiernan (WHE73067)
* Ron Howard (WHE73068)
* Sydney Pollack (WHE73071)
* Norman Jewison (WHE73076)
* Lawrence Kasdan (WHE73088)
* Terry Gilliam (WHE73089)
* Spike Lee (WHE73090)
* Barry Levinson (WHE73093)
* Milo Forman (WHE73094)
* Martin Scorsese (WHE73098)
* Barbra Streisand (WHE73099)
* David Cronenberg (WHE73101)
* Robert Zemeckis (WHE73131)
* Robert Altman
* John Frankenheimer
* Adrian Lyne
* Garry Marshall
* William Friedkin
* Clint Eastwood
* David Zucker, Jim Abrahams and Jerry Zucker
* Roger Corman
* Michael Mann
* James Cameron
* Rob Reiner
* Joel Schumacher
* Steven Spielberg
* Wes Craven

== See also ==

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 
* AFI Los Angeles Film Festival - history and information

*


[[Akira Kurosawa]]

 was a Japanese film director, screenwriter, producer, and editor. Regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers in the history of cinema, Kurosawa directed 30 films In 1946, Kurosawa co-directed, with Hideo Sekigawa and Kajiro Yamamoto, the feature Those Who Make Tomorrow (Asu o tsukuru hitobito); apparently, he was commanded to make this film by Toho studios, to which he was under contract at the time. (He claimed that the film was shot in only a week.) It was the only film he ever directed for which he did not receive sole credit and the only one that has never been released on home video in any form. The movie was later repudiated by Kurosawa and is often not counted with the 30 other films he made, though it is listed in some filmographies of the director. See Galbraith, pp. 6567, and Kurosawa's IMDb page. in a career spanning 57 years.

Kurosawa entered the Japanese film industry in 1936, following a brief stint as a painter. After years of working on numerous films as an assistant director and scriptwriter, he made his debut as a director in 1943, during World War II, with the popular action film Sanshiro Sugata (a.k.a. Judo Saga). After the war, the critically acclaimed Drunken Angel (1948), in which Kurosawa cast then-unknown actor Toshiro Mifune in a starring role, cemented the director's reputation as one of the most important young filmmakers in Japan. The two men would go on to collaborate on another 15 films. His wife Yko Yaguchi was also an actress in one of his films.

Rashomon, which premiered in Tokyo in August 1950, and which also starred Mifune, became, on September 10, 1951, the surprise winner of the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival and was subsequently released in Europe and North America. The commercial and critical success of this film opened up Western film markets for the first time to the products of the Japanese film industry, which in turn led to international recognition for other Japanese filmmakers. Throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, Kurosawa directed approximately a film a year, including a number of highly regarded films such as Ikiru (1952), Seven Samurai (1954) and Yojimbo (1961). After the mid-1960s, he became much less prolific, but his later workincluding his final two epics, Kagemusha (1980) and Ran (1985)continued to win awards, including the Palme d'Or for Kagemusha, though more often abroad than in Japan.

In 1990, he accepted the Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement. Posthumously, he was named "Asian of the Century" in the "Arts, Literature, and Culture" category by AsianWeek magazine and CNN, cited as "one of the people who contributed most to the betterment of Asia in the past 100 years". 

==Life and career==

===Childhood and youth (19101935)===
Kurosawa was born on 23 March 1910 in imachi in the mori district of Tokyo. His father Isamu, a member of a former samurai family from Akita Prefecture, worked as the director of the Army's Physical Education Institute's lower secondary school, while his mother Shima came from a merchant's family living in Osaka. Akira was the eighth and youngest child of the moderately wealthy family, with two of his siblings already grown up at the time of his birth and one deceased, leaving Kurosawa to grow up with three sisters and a brother. 

In addition to promoting physical exercise, Isamu Kurosawa was open to western traditions and considered theater and motion pictures to have educational merit. He encouraged his children to watch films; young Akira viewed his first movies at the age of six. An important formative influence was his elementary school teacher Mr Tachikawa, whose progressive educational practices ignited in his young pupil first a love of drawing and then an interest in education in general. During this time, the boy also studied calligraphy and Kendo swordsmanship. 

Another major childhood influence was Heigo Kurosawa, Akira's older brother by four years. In the aftermath of the Great Kant earthquake of 1923, which devastated Tokyo, Heigo took the 13-year-old Akira to view the devastation. When the younger brother wanted to look away from the human corpses and animal carcasses scattered everywhere, Heigo forbade him to do so, instead encouraging Akira to face his fears by confronting them directly. Some commentators have suggested that this incident would influence Kurosawa's later artistic career, as the director was seldom hesitant to confront unpleasant truths in his work. 

Heigo was academically gifted, but soon after failing to secure a place in Tokyo's foremost high school, he began to detach himself from the rest of the family, preferring to concentrate on his interest in foreign literature. In the late 1920s, Heigo became a benshi (silent film narrator) for Tokyo theaters showing foreign films, and quickly made a name for himself. Akira, who at this point planned to become a painter, moved in with him, and the two brothers became inseparable. Through Heigo, Akira devoured not only films but also theater and circus performances, while exhibiting his paintings and working for the left-wing Proletarian Artists' League. However, he was never able to make a living with his art, and, as he began to perceive most of the proletarian movement as "putting unfulfilled political ideals directly onto the canvas", he lost his enthusiasm for painting. 

With the increasing production of talking pictures in the early 1930s, film narrators like Heigo began to lose work, and Akira moved back in with his parents. In July 1933, Heigo committed suicide. Kurosawa has commented on the lasting sense of loss he felt at his brother's death and the chapter of his autobiography (Something Like an Autobiography) that describes itwritten nearly half a century after the eventis titled, "A Story I Don't Want to Tell." Only four months later, Kurosawa's eldest brother also died, leaving Akira, at age 23, the only one of the Kurosawa brothers still living, together with his three surviving sisters. 

===Director in training (19351941)===
In 1935, the new film studio Photo Chemical Laboratories, known as P.C.L. (which later became the major studio, Toho), advertised for assistant directors. Although he had demonstrated no previous interest in film as a profession, Kurosawa submitted the required essay, which asked applicants to discuss the fundamental deficiencies of Japanese films and find ways to overcome them. His half-mocking view was that if the deficiencies were fundamental, there was no way to correct them. Kurosawa's essay earned him a call to take the follow-up exams, and director Kajir Yamamoto, who was among the examiners, took a liking to Kurosawa and insisted that the studio hire him. The 25-year-old Kurosawa joined P.C.L. in February 1936. 

During his five years as an assistant director, Kurosawa worked under numerous directors, but by far the most important figure in his development was Kajiro Yamamoto. Of his 24 films as A.D., he worked on 17 under Yamamoto, many of them comedies featuring the popular actor Kenichi Enomoto, known as "Enoken." Yamamoto nurtured Kurosawa's talent, promoting him directly from third assistant director to chief assistant director after a year. Kurosawa's responsibilities increased, and he worked at tasks ranging from stage construction and film development to location scouting, script polishing, rehearsals, lighting, dubbing, editing and second-unit directing. In the last of Kurosawa's films as an assistant director, Horse (Uma, 1941), Kurosawa took over most of the production, as Yamamoto was occupied with the shooting of another film. 

One important piece of advice Yamamoto gave Kurosawa was that a good director needed to master screenwriting. Kurosawa soon realized that the potential earnings from his scripts were much higher than what he was paid as an assistant director. Kurosawa would later write or co-write all of his own films. He also frequently wrote screenplays for other directors such as for Satsuo Yamamoto's film, Tsubasa no gaika. This outside scriptwriting would serve Kurosawa as a lucrative sideline lasting well into the 1960s, long after he became world-famous. 

===Wartime films and marriage (19421945)===
In the two years following the release of Horse in 1941, Kurosawa searched for a story he could use to launch his directing career. Towards the end of 1942, about a year after the beginning of Japan's war with the United States, novelist Tsuneo Tomita published his Musashi Miyamoto inspired judo novel, Sanshiro Sugata, the advertisements for which intrigued Kurosawa. He bought the book on its publication day, devoured it in one sitting, and immediately asked Toho to secure the film rights. Kurosawa's initial instinct proved correct as, within a few days, three other major Japanese studios also offered to buy the rights. Toho prevailed, and Kurosawa began pre-production on his debut work as director. 

Shooting of Sanshiro Sugata began on location in Yokohama in December 1942. Production proceeded smoothly, but getting the completed film past the censors was an entirely different matter. The censorship considered the work too "British-American" (an accusation tantamount, at that time, to a charge of treason), and it was only through the intervention of director Yasujir Ozu, who championed the film, that Sanshiro Sugata was finally accepted for release on March 25, 1943. (Kurosawa had just turned 33.) The movie became both a critical and commercial success. Nevertheless, the censorship office would later decide to cut out some 18 minutes of footage, much of which is now considered lost. 

He next turned to the subject of wartime female factory workers in The Most Beautiful, a propaganda film which he shot in a semi-documentary style in early 1944. In order to coax realistic performances from his actresses, the director had them live in a real factory during the shoot, eat the factory food and call each other by their character names. He would use similar methods with his performers throughout his career. 

During production, the actress playing the leader of the factory workers, Yko Yaguchi, was chosen by her colleagues to present their demands to the director. She and Kurosawa were constantly at loggerheads, and it was through these arguments that the two, paradoxically, became close. They married on May 21, 1945, with Yaguchi two months pregnant (she never resumed her acting career), and the couple would remain together until her death in 1985. They would have two children: a son, Hisao, born December 20, 1945, who would serve as producer on some of his father's last projects, and Kazuko, born April 29, 1954, who would become a costume designer. 

Shortly before his marriage, Kurosawa was pressured by the studio against his will to direct a sequel to his debut film. The often blatantly propagandistic Sanshiro Sugata Part II, which premiered in May 1945, is generally considered one of his very weakest pictures. 

Kurosawa decided to write the script for a film that would be both censor-friendly and less expensive to produce. The Men Who Tread on the Tiger's Tail, based on the Kabuki play Kanjinch and starring the comedian Enoken, with whom Kurosawa had often worked during his assistant director days, was completed in September 1945. By this time, Japan had surrendered and the occupation of Japan had begun. The new American censors interpreted the values allegedly promoted in the picture as overly "feudal" and banned the work. (It would not be released until 1952, the year another Kurosawa film, Ikiru, was also released.) Ironically, while in production, the film had already been savaged by Japanese wartime censors as too Western and "democratic" (they particularly disliked the comic porter played by Enoken), so the movie most probably would not have seen the light of day even if the war had continued beyond its completion. 

===First postwar works (19461950)===
The war now ended, Kurosawa, absorbing the democratic ideals of the Occupation, sought to make films that would establish a new respect towards the individual and the self. The first such film, No Regrets for Our Youth (1946), inspired by both the 1933 Takigawa incident and the Hotsumi Ozaki wartime spy case, criticized Japan's prewar regime for its political oppression. Atypically for the director, the heroic central character is a woman, Yukie (Setsuko Hara), born into upper-middle-class privilege, who comes to question her values in a time of political crisis. The original script had to be extensively rewritten and, because of its controversial theme (and because the protagonist was a woman), the completed work divided critics, but it nevertheless managed to win the approval of audiences, who turned variations on the film's title ("No regrets for...") into something of a postwar catchphrase. 

His next film, One Wonderful Sunday premiered in July 1947 to mixed reviews. It is a relatively uncomplicated and sentimental love story dealing with an impoverished postwar couple trying to enjoy, within the devastation of postwar Tokyo, their one weekly day off. The movie bears the influence of Frank Capra, D. W. Griffith and F. W. Murnau. Another film released in 1947 with Kurosawa's involvement was the action-adventure thriller, Snow Trail, directed by Senkichi Taniguchi from Kurosawa's screenplay. It marked the debut of the intense young actor Toshiro Mifune. It was Kurosawa who, with his mentor Yamamoto, had intervened to persuade Toho to sign Mifune, during an audition in which the young man greatly impressed Kurosawa, but managed to alienate most of the other judges. 

alt=Photo of the very young Japanese actor, Toshiro Mifune in the late 1940s, facing left, his hair hanging over his forehead, with an intense and angry look on his face.
Drunken Angel is often considered the director's first major work. Although the script, like all of Kurosawa's occupation-era works, had to go through forced rewrites due to American censorship, Kurosawa felt that this was the first film in which he was able to express himself freely. A grittily realistic story of a doctor who tries to save a gangster (yakuza) with tuberculosis, it was also the director's first film with Toshiro Mifune, who would proceed to play either the main or a major character in all but one (Ikiru) of the director's next 16 films. While Mifune was not cast as the protagonist in Drunken Angel, his explosive performance as the gangster so dominates the drama that he shifted the focus from the title character, the alcoholic doctor played by Takashi Shimura, who had already appeared in several Kurosawa movies. However, Kurosawa did not want to smother the young actor's immense vitality, and Mifune's rebellious character electrified audiences in much the way that Marlon Brando's defiant stance would startle American film audiences a few years later. The film premiered in Tokyo in April 1948 to rave reviews and was chosen by the prestigious Kinema Junpo critics poll as the best film of its year, the first of three Kurosawa movies to be so honored. 

Kurosawa, with producer Sjir Motoki and fellow directors and friends Kajiro Yamamoto, Mikio Naruse and Senkichi Taniguchi, formed a new independent production unit called Film Art Association (Eiga Geijutsu Kykai). For this organization's debut work, and first film for Daiei studios, Kurosawa turned to a contemporary play by Kazuo Kikuta and, together with Taniguchi, adapted it for the screen. The Quiet Duel starred Toshiro Mifune as an idealistic young doctor struggling with syphilis, a deliberate attempt by Kurosawa to break the actor away from being typecast as gangsters. Released in March 1949, it was a box office success, but is generally considered one of the director's lesser achievements. 

His second film of 1949, also produced by Film Art Association and released by Shintoho, was Stray Dog. The most celebrated of Kurosawa's works from this period, it is a detective movie (perhaps the first important Japanese film in that genre) that explores the mood of Japan during its painful postwar recovery through the story of a young detective, played by Mifune, and his obsession over his handgun, stolen by a penniless young man who proceeds to use it to rob and murder. Adapted from an unpublished novel by Kurosawa in the style of a favorite writer of his, Georges Simenon, it was the director's first collaboration with screenwriter Ryuzo Kikushima, who would later help to script eight other Kurosawa films. A famous, virtually wordless sequence, lasting over eight minutes, shows the detective, disguised as an impoverished veteran, wandering the streets in search of the gun thief; it employed actual documentary footage of war-ravaged Tokyo neighborhoods shot by Kurosawa's friend, Ishir Honda, the future director of Gojira (aka, Godzilla). The film is considered a precursor to the contemporary police procedural and buddy cop film genres. 

Scandal, released by Shochiku in April 1950, was inspired by the director's personal experiences with, and anger towards, Japanese yellow journalism. The work is an ambitious mixture of courtroom drama and social problem film about free speech and personal responsibility, but even Kurosawa regarded the finished product as dramatically unfocused and unsatisfactory, and almost all critics agree. 

However, it would be Kurosawa's second film of 1950, Rashomon, that would ultimately win him a whole new audience.

===International recognition (19501958)===
After finishing Scandal, Kurosawa was approached by Daiei studios, which asked the director to make another film for them. Kurosawa picked a script by an aspiring young screenwriter, Shinobu Hashimoto. (They would eventually write nine films together.) It was based on Rynosuke Akutagawa's experimental short story In a Grove, which recounts the murder of a samurai and the rape of his wife from various different and conflicting points-of-view. Kurosawa saw potential in the script, and with Hashimoto's help, polished and expanded it and then pitched it to Daiei, who were happy to accept the project due to its low budget. 

Shooting of Rashomon began on July 7, 1950 and, after extensive location work in the primeval forest of Nara, wrapped on August 17. Just one week was spent in hurried post-production, hampered by a studio fire, and the finished film premiered at Tokyo's Imperial Theatre on August 25, expanding nationwide the following day. The movie was met by lukewarm reviews, with many critics puzzled by its unique theme and treatment, but it was nevertheless a moderate financial success for Daiei. 

Kurosawa's next film, for Shochiku, was The Idiot, an adaptation of the novel by the director's favorite writer, Fyodor Dostoyevsky. The filmmaker relocated the story from Russia to Hokkaido, but it is otherwise very faithful to the original, a fact seen by many critics as detrimental to the work. A studio-mandated edit shortened it from Kurosawa's original cut of 265 minutes (nearly four-and-a-half hours) to just 166 minutes, making the resulting narrative exceedingly difficult to follow. It is widely considered today to be one of the director's least successful works. Contemporary reviews were very negative, but the film was a moderate success at the box office, largely because of the popularity of one of its stars, Setsuko Hara. 

Meanwhile, unbeknownst to Kurosawa, Rashomon had been entered in the prestigious Venice Film Festival, due to the efforts of Giuliana Stramigioli, a Japan-based representative of an Italian film company, who had seen and admired the movie and convinced Daiei to submit it. On September 10, 1951, Rashomon was awarded the festival's highest prize, the Golden Lion, shocking not only Daiei but the international film world, which at the time was largely unaware of Japan's decades-old cinematic tradition. 

After Daiei very briefly exhibited a subtitled print of the film in Los Angeles, RKO purchased distribution rights to Rashomon in the United States. The company was taking a considerable gamble. It had put out only one prior subtitled film in the American market, and the only previous Japanese talkie commercially released in New York had been Mikio Naruse's comedy, Wife! Be Like a Rose, in 1937: a critical and box-office flop. However, Rashomons commercial run, greatly helped by strong reviews from critics and even the columnist Ed Sullivan, was very successful. (It earned $35,000 in its first three weeks at a single New York theater, an almost unheard-of sum at the time.) This success in turn led to a vogue in America for Japanese movies throughout the 1950s, replacing the enthusiasm for Italian neorealist cinema. (The film was also released, by other distributors, in France, West Germany, Denmark, Sweden and Finland.) Among the Japanese filmmakers whose work, as a result, began to win festival prizes and commercial release in the West were Kenji Mizoguchi (The Life of Oharu, Ugetsu, Sansho the Bailiff) and, somewhat later, Yasujir Ozu (Tokyo Story, An Autumn Afternoon)artists highly respected in Japan but, prior to this period, almost totally unknown in the West. Later generations of Japanese filmmakers who would find acclaim outside Japanfrom Nagisa Oshima and Shohei Imamura to Juzo Itami, Takeshi Kitano and Takashi Miikewere able to pass through the door that Kurosawa was the very first to open.

His career boosted by his sudden international fame, Kurosawa, now reunited with his original film studio, Toho (which would go on to produce his next 11 films), set to work on his next project, Ikiru. The movie stars Takashi Shimura as a cancer-ridden Tokyo bureaucrat, Watanabe, on a final quest for meaning before his death. For the screenplay, Kurosawa brought in Hashimoto as well as writer Hideo Oguni, who would go on to co-write 12 Kurosawa films. Despite the work's grim subject matter, the screenwriters took a satirical approach, which some have compared to the work of Brecht, to both the bureaucratic world of its hero and the U.S. cultural colonization of Japan. (American pop songs figure prominently in the film.) Because of this strategy, the filmmakers are usually credited with saving the picture from the kind of sentimentality common to dramas about characters with terminal illnesses. Ikiru opened in October 1952 to rave reviewsit won Kurosawa his second Kinema Junpo "Best Film" awardand enormous box office success. It remains the most acclaimed of all the artist's films set in the modern era. 

In December 1952, Kurosawa took his Ikiru screenwriters, Shinobu Hashimoto and Hideo Oguni, for a forty-five day secluded residence at an inn to create the screenplay for his next movie, Seven Samurai. The ensemble work was Kurosawa's first proper samurai film, the genre for which he would become most famous. The simple story, about a poor farming village in Sengoku period Japan that hires a group of samurai to defend it against an impending attack by bandits, was given a full epic treatment, with a huge cast (largely consisting of veterans of previous Kurosawa productions) and meticulously detailed action, stretching out to almost three-and-a-half hours of screen time. 

Three months were spent in pre-production and a month in rehearsals. Shooting took up 148 days spread over almost a year, interrupted by production and financing troubles and Kurosawa's health problems. The film finally opened in April 1954, half a year behind its original release date and about three times over budget, making it at the time the most expensive Japanese film ever made. (However, by Hollywood standards, it was a quite modestly budgeted production, even for that time). The film received positive critical reaction and became a big hit, quickly making back the money invested in it and providing the studio with a product that they could, and did, market internationallythough with extensive edits. Over timeand with the theatrical and home video releases of the uncut versionits reputation has steadily grown. It is now regarded by some commentators as the greatest Japanese film ever made, and in 1979, a poll of Japanese film critics also voted it the best Japanese film ever made. 

In 1954, nuclear tests in the Pacific were causing radioactive rainstorms in Japan and one particular incident in March had exposed a Japanese fishing boat to nuclear fallout, with disastrous results. It is in this anxious atmosphere that Kurosawa's next film, Record of a Living Being, was conceived. The story concerned an elderly factory owner (Toshiro Mifune) so terrified of the prospect of a nuclear attack that he becomes determined to move his entire extended family (both legal and extra-marital) to what he imagines is the safety of a farm in Brazil. Production went much more smoothly than the director's previous film, but a few days before shooting ended, Kurosawa's composer, collaborator and close friend Fumio Hayasaka passed away (of tuberculosis) at the age of only 41. The film's score was finished by Hayasaka's student, Masaru Sato, who would go on to score all of Kurosawa's next eight films. Record of a Living Being opened in November 1955 to mixed reviews and muted audience reaction, becoming the first Kurosawa film to lose money during its original theatrical run. Today, it is considered by many to be among the finest films dealing with the psychological effects of the global nuclear stalemate. 

Kurosawa's next project, Throne of Blood, a lavishly produced adaptation of William Shakespeare's Macbethset, like Seven Samurai, in the Sengoku Erarepresented an ambitious transposition of the English work into an Asian context. Kurosawa instructed his leading actress, Isuzu Yamada, to regard the work as if it were a cinematic version of a Japanese rather than a European literary classic. Appropriately, the acting of the players, particularly Yamada, draws heavily on the stylized techniques of the Noh theater. It was filmed in 1956 and released in January 1957 to a slightly less negative domestic response than had been the case with the director's previous film. Abroad, Throne of Blood, regardless of the liberties it takes with its source material, quickly earned a place among the most celebrated Shakespeare adaptations. 

Another adaptation of a classic European theatrical work followed almost immediately, with production of The Lower Depths, based on a play by Maxim Gorky, taking place in May and June 1957. In contrast to the gigantic scope and sweep of Throne of Blood, The Lower Depths was shot on only two confined sets, the better to emphasize the restricted nature of the characters' lives. Though faithful to the play, this adaptation of Russian material to a completely Japanese settingin this case, the late Edo periodunlike his earlier The Idiot, was regarded as artistically successful. The film premiered in September 1957, receiving a mixed response similar to that of Throne of Blood. However, some critics rank it among the director's most underrated works. 

Kurosawa's three consecutive movies after Seven Samurai had not managed to capture Japanese audiences in the way that that film had. The mood of the director's work had been growing increasingly pessimistic and dark, with the possibility of redemption through personal responsibility now very much questioned, particularly in Throne of Blood and The Lower Depths. He recognized this, and deliberately aimed for a more light-hearted and entertaining film for his next production, while switching to the new widescreen format that had been gaining popularity in Japan. The resulting film, The Hidden Fortress, is an action-adventure comedy-drama about a medieval princess, her loyal general and two peasants who all need to travel through enemy lines in order to reach their home region. Released in December 1958, The Hidden Fortress became an enormous box office success in Japan and was warmly received by critics. Today, the film is considered one of Kurosawa's most lightweight efforts, though it remains popular, not least because it is one of several major influences (as George Lucas himself has conceded) on Lucas' hugely popular 1977 space opera, Wars Episode IV: A New Hope|Star Wars]. 

===Birth of a company and the end of an era (19591965)===
Starting with Rashomon, Kurosawa's productions had become increasingly large in scope and so had the director's budgets. Toho, concerned about this development, suggested that he might help finance his own works, therefore making the studio's potential losses smaller, while in turn allowing himself more artistic freedom as co-producer. Kurosawa agreed, and the Kurosawa Production Company was established in April 1959, with Toho as majority shareholder. 

Despite now risking his own money, Kurosawa chose a story more directly critical of the Japanese business and political elites than any of his previous works. The Bad Sleep Well, based on a script by Kurosawa's nephew Mike Inoue, is a revenge drama about a young man who climbs the hierarchy of a corrupt Japanese company with the intention of exposing the men responsible for his father's death. Its theme proved topical: while the film was in production, mass demonstrations were held against the new U.S.-Japan Security treaty, which was seen by many Japanese, particularly the young, as threatening the country's democracy by giving too much power to corporations and politicians. The film opened in September 1960 to positive critical reaction and modest box office success. The 25-minute opening sequence, depicting a corporate wedding reception interrupted by reporters and police (who arrest an executive for corruption), is widely regarded as one of Kurosawa's most skillfully executed set pieces, but the remainder of the film is often perceived as disappointing by comparison. The movie has also been criticized for employing the conventional Kurosawan hero to combat a social evil that cannot be resolved through the actions of individuals, however courageous or cunning. 

Yojimbo (The Bodyguard), Kurosawa Production's second film, centers on a masterless samurai, Sanjuro, who strolls into a 19th-century town ruled by two opposing violent factions and provokes them into destroying each other. The director used this work to play with many genre conventions, particularly the Western, while at the same time offering an unprecedentedly (for the Japanese screen) graphic portrayal of violence. Some commentators have seen the Sanjuro character in this film as a fantasy figure who magically reverses the historical triumph of the corrupt merchant class over the samurai class. Featuring Tatsuya Nakadai in his first major role in a Kurosawa movie, and with innovative photography by Kazuo Miyagawa (who shot Rashomon) and Takao Saito, the film premiered in April 1961 and was an immense success at the box office, earning more than any previous Kurosawa film. Critical reaction was equally positive, and the film proved a major influence on its genre in Japan, ushering in a new era of violent samurai films, known as "cruel films" (zankoku eiga). The movie and its blackly comic tone were also widely imitated abroad. Sergio Leone's A Fistful of Dollars was a virtual (unauthorized) scene-by-scene remake. 

Following the success of Yojimbo, Kurosawa found himself under pressure from Toho to create a sequel. Kurosawa turned to a script he had written before Yojimbo, reworking it to include the hero of his previous film. Sanjuro was the first of three Kurosawa films to be adapted from the work of the writer Shgor Yamamoto (the others would be Red Beard and Dodeskaden). It is lighter in tone and closer to a conventional period film than Yojimbo, though its story of a power struggle within a samurai clan is portrayed with strongly comic undertones. The film opened on January 1, 1962, quickly surpassing Yojimbos box office success and garnering positive reviews. 

Kurosawa had meanwhile instructed Toho to purchase the film rights to King's Ransom, a novel about a kidnapping written by American author and screenwriter Evan Hunter, under his pseudonym of Ed McBain, as one of his 87th Precinct series of crime books. The director intended to create a work condemning kidnapping, which he considered one of the very worst crimes. The suspense film, titled High and Low, was shot during the latter half of 1962 and released in March 1963. It broke Kurosawa's box office record (the third film in a row to do so), became the highest grossing Japanese film of the year, and won glowing reviews. However, his triumph was somewhat tarnished when, ironically, the film was blamed for a wave of kidnappings which occurred in Japan about this time (he himself received kidnapping threats directed at his young daughter, Kazuko). High and Low is considered by many commentators to be among the director's strongest works. 

Kurosawa quickly moved on to his next project, Red Beard. Based on a short story collection by Shgor Yamamoto and incorporating elements from Dostoyevsky's novel The Insulted and Injured, it is a period film, set in a mid-19th century clinic for the poor, in which Kurosawa's humanist themes receive perhaps their fullest statement. A conceited and materialistic, foreign-trained young doctor, Yasumoto, is forced to become an intern at the clinic under the stern tutelage of Doctor Niide, known as "Akahige" ("Red Beard"), played by Mifune. Although he resists Red Beard initially, Yasumoto comes to admire his wisdom and courage, and to perceive the patients at the clinic, whom he at first despised, as worthy of compassion and dignity. 

Yz Kayama, who plays Yasumoto, was an extremely popular film and music star at the time, particularly for his "Young Guy" (Wakadaish) series of musical comedies, so signing him to appear in the film virtually guaranteed Kurosawa strong box-office. The shoot, the filmmaker's longest ever, lasted well over a year (after five months of pre-production), and wrapped in spring 1965, leaving the director, his crew and his actors exhausted. Red Beard premiered in April 1965, becoming the year's highest-grossing Japanese production and the third (and last) Kurosawa film to top the prestigious Kinema Jumpo yearly critics poll. It remains one of Kurosawa's best-known and most-loved works in his native country. Outside Japan, critics have been much more divided. Most commentators concede its technical merits and some praise it as among Kurosawa's best, while others insist that it lacks complexity and genuine narrative power, with still others claiming that it represents a retreat from the artist's previous commitment to social and political change. 

The film marked something of an end of an era for its creator. The director himself recognized this at the time of its release, telling critic Donald Richie that a cycle of some kind had just come to an end and that his future films and production methods would be different. His prediction proved quite accurate. Beginning in the late 1950s, television began increasingly to dominate the leisure time of the formerly large and loyal Japanese cinema audience. And as film company revenues dropped, so did their appetite for riskparticularly the risk represented by Kurosawa's costly production methods. 

Red Beard also marked the midway point, chronologically, in the artist's career. During his previous twenty-nine years in the film industry (which includes his five years as assistant director), he had directed twenty-three films, while during the remaining twenty-eight years, for many and complex reasons, he would complete only seven more. Also, for reasons never adequately explained, Red Beard would be his final film starring Toshiro Mifune. Yu Fujiki, an actor who worked on The Lower Depths, observed, regarding the closeness of the two men on the set, "Mr. Kurosawa's heart was in Mr. Mifune's body." Donald Richie has described the rapport between them as a unique "symbiosis." Virtually all critics agree that the strongest period of Kurosawa's career was the one between 1950 and 1965bookended by Rashomon and Red Beardand that it is not a coincidence that this phase corresponds almost exactly to the time that he and Mifune worked together.

===Hollywood detour (19661968)===
When Kurosawa's exclusive contract with Toho came to an end in 1966, the 56-year-old director was seriously contemplating change. Observing the troubled state of the domestic film industry, and having already received dozens of offers from abroad, the idea of working outside Japan appealed to him as never before. 

For his first foreign project, Kurosawa chose a story based on a Life magazine article. The Embassy Pictures action thriller, to be filmed in English and called simply Runaway Train, would have been his first in color. But the language barrier proved a major problem, and the English version of the screenplay was not even finished by the time filming was to begin in autumn 1966. The shoot, which required snow, was moved to autumn 1967, then canceled in 1968. Almost twenty years later, another foreigner working in Hollywood, Andrei Konchalovsky, would finally make Runaway Train, though from a script totally different from Kurosawa's. 

The director meanwhile had become involved in a much more ambitious Hollywood project. Tora! Tora! Tora!, produced by 20th Century Fox and Kurosawa Production, would be a portrayal of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor from both the American and the Japanese points-of-view, with Kurosawa helming the Japanese half and an English-speaking filmmaker directing the American half. He spent several months working on the script with Ryuzo Kikushima and Hideo Oguni, but very soon the project began to unravel. The director chosen to film the American sequences turned out not to be the prestigious English filmmaker David Lean, as the producers had led Kurosawa to believe, but the much less celebrated special effects expert, Richard Fleischer. The budget was also cut, and the screen time allocated for the Japanese segment would now be no longer than 90 minutesa major problem, considering that Kurosawa's script ran over four hours. After numerous revisions, a more or less finalized cut screenplay was agreed upon in May 1968. Shooting began in early December, but Kurosawa would last only a little over three weeks as director. He struggled to work with an unfamiliar crew and the requirements of a Hollywood production, while his working methods puzzled his American producers, who ultimately concluded that the director must be mentally ill. On Christmas Eve 1968, the Americans announced that Kurosawa had left the production due to "fatigue", effectively firing him. (He was ultimately replaced, for the film's Japanese sequences, with two directors, Kinji Fukasaku and Toshio Masuda.) 

Tora! Tora! Tora!, finally released to unenthusiastic reviews in September 1970, was, as Donald Richie put it, an "almost unmitigated tragedy" in Kurosawa's career. He had spent years of his life on a logistically nightmarish project to which he ultimately did not contribute a foot of film shot by himself. (He had his name removed from the credits, though the script used for the Japanese half was still his and his co-writers'.) He became estranged from his longtime collaborator, writer Ryuzo Kikushima, and never worked with him again. The project had inadvertently exposed corruption in his own production company (a situation reminiscent of his own movie, The Bad Sleep Well). His very sanity had been called into question. Worst of all, the Japanese film industryand perhaps the man himselfbegan to suspect that he would never make another film. 

===A difficult decade (19691977)===
Knowing that his reputation was at stake following the much publicised Tora! Tora! Tora! debacle, Kurosawa moved quickly to a new project to prove he was still viable. To his aid came friends and famed directors Keisuke Kinoshita, Masaki Kobayashi and Kon Ichikawa, who together with Kurosawa established in July 1969 a production company called the Club of the Four Knights (Yonki no kai). Although the plan was for the four directors to create a film each, it has been suggested that the real motivation for the other three directors was to make it easier for Kurosawa to successfully complete a film, and therefore find his way back into the business. 

The first project proposed and worked on was a period film to be called Dora-Heita, but when this was deemed too expensive, attention shifted to Dodesukaden, an adaptation of yet another Shgor Yamamoto work, again about the poor and destitute. The film was shot quickly (by Kurosawa's standards) in about nine weeks, with Kurosawa determined to show he was still capable of working quickly and efficiently within a limited budget. For his first work in color, the dynamic editing and complex compositions of his earlier pictures were set aside, with the artist focusing on the creation of a bold, almost surreal palette of primary colors, in order to reveal the toxic environment in which the characters live. It was released in Japan in October 1970, but though a minor critical success, it was greeted with audience indifference. The picture lost money and caused the Club of the Four Knights to dissolve. Initial reception abroad was somewhat more favorable, but Dodesukaden has since been typically considered an interesting experiment not comparable to the director's best work. 

Unable to secure funding for further work and allegedly suffering from health problems, Kurosawa apparently reached the breaking point: on December 22, 1971, he slit his wrists and throat multiple times. The suicide attempt proved unsuccessful and the director's health recovered fairly quickly, with Kurosawa now taking refuge in domestic life, uncertain if he would ever direct another film. 

In early 1973, the Soviet studio Mosfilm approached the filmmaker to ask if he would be interested in working with them. Kurosawa proposed an adaptation of Russian explorer Vladimir Arsenyev's autobiographical work Dersu Uzala. The book, about a Goldi hunter who lives in harmony with nature until destroyed by encroaching civilization, was one that he had wanted to make since the 1930s. In December 1973, the 63-year-old Kurosawa set off for the Soviet Union with four of his closest aides, beginning a year-and-a-half stay in the country. Shooting began in May 1974 in Siberia, with filming in exceedingly harsh natural conditions proving very difficult and demanding. The picture wrapped in April 1975, with a thoroughly exhausted and homesick Kurosawa returning to Japan and his family in June. Dersu Uzala had its world premiere in Japan on August 2, 1975, and did well at the box office. While critical reception in Japan was muted, the film was better reviewed abroad, winning the Golden Prize at the 9th Moscow International Film Festival, as well as an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Today, critics remain divided over the film: some see it as an example of Kurosawa's alleged artistic decline, while others count it among his finest works. 

Although proposals for television projects were submitted to him, he had no interest in working outside the film world. Nevertheless, the hard-drinking director did agree to appear in a series of television ads for Suntory whiskey, which aired in 1976. While fearing that he might never be able to make another film, the director nevertheless continued working on various projects, writing scripts and creating detailed illustrations, intending to leave behind a visual record of his plans in case he would never be able to film his stories. 

===Two epics (19781986)===
In 1977, American director George Lucas had released Wars Episode IV: A New Hope|Star Wars], a wildly successful science fiction film influenced by Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress, among other works. Lucas, like many other New Hollywood directors, revered Kurosawa and considered him a role model, and was shocked to discover that the Japanese filmmaker was unable to secure financing for any new work. The two met in San Francisco in July 1978 to discuss the project Kurosawa considered most financially viable: Kagemusha, the epic story of a thief hired as the double of a medieval Japanese lord of a great clan. Lucas, enthralled by the screenplay and Kurosawa's illustrations, leveraged his influence over 20th Century Fox to coerce the studio that had fired Kurosawa just ten years earlier to produce Kagemusha, then recruited fellow fan Francis Ford Coppola as co-producer. 

Production began the following April, with Kurosawa in high spirits. Shooting lasted from June 1979 through March 1980 and was plagued with problems, not the least of which was the firing of the original lead actor, Shintaro Katsucreator of the very popular Zatoichi characterdue to an incident in which the actor insisted, against the director's wishes, on videotaping his own performance. (He was replaced by Tatsuya Nakadai, in his first of two consecutive leading roles in a Kurosawa movie.) The film was completed only a few weeks behind schedule and opened in Tokyo in April 1980. It quickly became a massive hit in Japan. The film was also a critical and box office success abroad, winning the coveted Palme d'Or at the 1980 Cannes Film Festival in May, though some critics, then and now, have faulted the film for its alleged coldness. Kurosawa spent much of the rest of the year in Europe and America promoting Kagemusha, collecting awards and accolades, and exhibiting as art the drawings he had made to serve as storyboards for the film. 

alt=A storyboard image painted by Kurosawa for the movie, Ran: it depicts what appears to be a gate, behind which is a long flight of steps, around which are depicted various large structures in the style of 16th Century Japan.
The international success of Kagemusha allowed Kurosawa to proceed with his next project, Ran, another epic in a similar vein. The script, partly based on William Shakespeare's King Lear, depicted a ruthless, bloodthirsty daimyo (warlord), played by Tatsuya Nakadai, who, after foolishly banishing his one loyal son, surrenders his kingdom to his other two sons, who then betray him, thus plunging the entire kingdom into war. As Japanese studios still felt wary about producing another film that would rank among the most expensive ever made in the country, international help was again needed. This time it came from French producer Serge Silberman, who had produced Luis Buuel's final movies. Filming did not begin until December 1983 and lasted more than a year. 

In January 1985, production of Ran was halted as Kurosawa's 64-year-old wife Yko fell ill. She died on February 1. Kurosawa returned to finish his film and Ran premiered at the Tokyo Film Festival on May 31, with a wide release the next day. The film was a moderate financial success in Japan, but a larger one abroad and, as he had done with Kagemusha, Kurosawa embarked on a trip to Europe and America, where he attended the film's premieres in September and October. 

Ran won several awards in Japan, but was not quite as honored there as many of the director's best films of the 1950s and 1960s had been. The film world was shocked, however, when Japan passed over the film in favor of another as its official entry to compete for an Oscar nomination in the Best Foreign Film category. Both the producer and Kurosawa himself attributed this to a misunderstanding: because of the Academy's arcane rules, no one was sure whether Ran qualified as a Japanese film, a French film (due to its financing), or both, so it was not submitted at all. In response to what at least appeared to be a blatant snub by his own countrymen, the director Sidney Lumet led a successful campaign to have Kurosawa receive an Oscar nomination for Best Director that year (Sydney Pollack ultimately won the award for directing Out of Africa). Rans costume designer, Emi Wada, won the movie's only Oscar. 

Kagemusha and Ran, particularly the latter, are often considered to be among Kurosawa's finest works. After Rans release, Kurosawa would point to it as his best film, a major change of attitude for the director who, when asked which of his works was his best, had always previously answered "my next one." 

===Final works and last years (19871998)===
For his next movie, Kurosawa chose a subject very different from any that he had ever filmed before. While some of his previous pictures (for example, Drunken Angel and Kagemusha) had included brief dream sequences, Dreams was to be entirely based upon the director's own dreams. Significantly, for the first time in over forty years, Kurosawa, for this deeply personal project, wrote the screenplay alone. Although its estimated budget was lower than the films immediately preceding it, Japanese studios were still unwilling to back one of his productions, so Kurosawa turned to another famous American fan, Steven Spielberg, who convinced Warner Bros. to buy the international rights to the completed film. This made it easier for Kurosawa's son, Hisao, as co-producer and soon-to-be head of Kurosawa Production, to negotiate a loan in Japan that would cover the film's production costs. Shooting took more than eight months to complete, and Dreams premiered at Cannes in May 1990 to a polite but muted reception, similar to the reaction the picture would generate elsewhere in the world. 

Kurosawa now turned to a more conventional story with Rhapsody in Augustthe director's first film fully produced in Japan since Dodeskaden over twenty years beforewhich explored the scars of the nuclear bombing which destroyed Nagasaki at the very end of World War II. It was adapted from a Kiyoko Murata novel, but the film's references to the Nagasaki bombing came from the director rather than from the book. This was his only movie to include a role for an American movie star: Richard Gere, who plays a small role as the nephew of the elderly heroine. Shooting took place in early 1991, with the film opening on May 25 that year to a largely negative critical reaction, especially in the United States, where the director was accused of promulgating navely anti-American sentiments. 

alt=A poster for Kurosawa's last film, Madadayo, hand-drawn by Kurosawa himself: the image shows the figure of an elderly man in a business suit, apparently dancing on a table, with a fan in each hand, surrounded by similarly attired men observing his dance; below this image are childish Japanese characters spelling out the title of the film.
Kurosawa wasted no time moving onto his next project: Madadayo, or Not Yet. Based on autobiographical essays by Hyakken Uchida, the film follows the life of a Japanese professor of German through the Second World War and beyond. The narrative centers on yearly birthday celebrations with his former students, during which the protagonist declares his unwillingness to die just yeta theme that was becoming increasingly relevant for the film's 81-year-old creator. Filming began in February 1992 and wrapped by the end of September. Its release on April 17, 1993, was greeted by an even more disappointed reaction than had been the case with his two preceding works. 

Kurosawa nevertheless continued to work. He wrote the original screenplays The Sea is Watching in 1993 and After the Rain in 1995. While putting finishing touches on the latter work in 1995, Kurosawa slipped and broke the base of his spine. Following the accident, he would use a wheelchair for the rest of his life, putting an end to any hopes of him directing another film. His longtime wishto die on the set while shooting a movie was never to be fulfilled.

===Death and posthumous works===
Following his accident in 1995, Kurosawa's health began to deteriorate. While his mind remained sharp and lively, his body was giving up, and for the last half year of his life, the director was largely confined to bed, listening to music and watching television at home. On September 6, 1998, Kurosawa died of a stroke in Setagaya, Tokyo, at the age of 88. Kurosawa was survived by his two children and four grandchildren, three from son Hisao's marriage to Hiroko Hayashi Kurosawa grandchildren and one grandson, actor Takayuki Kato, from his daughter Kazuko Kurosawa. grandson by Kazuko 

Following Kurosawa's death, several posthumous works based on his unfilmed screenplays have been produced. After the Rain, directed by Takashi Koizumi, was released in 1998, and The Sea is Watching, directed by Kei Kumai, premiered in 2002. A script created by the Yonki no Kai ("Club of the Four Knights") (Kurosawa, Keisuke Kinoshita, Masaki Kobayashi, and Kon Ichikawa), around the time that Dodeskaden was made, finally was filmed and released (in 2000) as Dora-Heita, by the only surviving founding member of the club, Kon Ichikawa. 

==Working methods, style and themes==

===Working methods===
All biographical sources, as well as the filmmaker's own comments, indicate that Kurosawa was a completely "hands-on" director, passionately involved in every aspect of the filmmaking process. As one interviewer summarized, "he (co-)writes his scripts, oversees the design, rehearses the actors, sets up all the shots and then does the editing." His active participation extended from the initial concept to the editing and scoring of the final product.

====Script====
Kurosawa emphasized time and again that the screenplay was the absolute foundation of a successful film and that, though a mediocre director can sometimes make a passable film out of a good script, even an excellent director can never make a good film out of a bad script. During the postwar period, he began the practice of collaborating with a rotating group of five screenwriters: Eijir Hisaita, Ryuzo Kikushima, Shinobu Hashimoto, Hideo Oguni, and Masato Ide. Whichever members of this group happened to be working on a particular film would gather around a table, often at a hot-springs resort, where they would not be distracted by the outside world. (Seven Samurai, for example, was written in this fashion.) Often they all (except Oguni, who acted as "referee") would work on exactly the same pages of the script, and Kurosawa would choose the best-written version from the different drafts of each particular scene. This method was adopted "so that each contributor might function as a kind of foil, checking the dominance of any one person's point-of-view." 

In addition to the actual script, Kurosawa at this stage often produced extensive, fantastically detailed notes to elaborate his vision. For example, for Seven Samurai, he created six notebooks in which he created (among many other things) detailed biographies of the samurai, including what they wore and ate, how they walked, talked and behaved when greeted, and even how each tied his shoes. For the 101 peasant characters in the film, he created a registry consisting of 23 families and instructed the performers playing these roles to live and work as these "families" for the duration of shooting. 

====Shooting====
For his early films, although they were consistently well photographed, Kurosawa generally used standard lenses and deep-focus photography. Beginning with Seven Samurai (1954), however, Kurosawa's cinematic technique changed drastically with his extensive use of long lens and multiple cameras. The director claimed that he used these lenses and several cameras rolling at once to help the actorsallowing them to be photographed at some distance from the lens, and without any knowledge of which particular camera's image would be utilized in the final cutmaking their performances much more natural. (In fact, Tatsuya Nakadai agreed that the multiple cameras greatly helped his performances with the director.) But these changes had a powerful effect as well on the look of the action scenes in that film, particularly the final battle in the rain. Says Stephen Prince: "He can use the telephoto lenses to get under the horses, in between their hooves, to plunge us into the chaos of that battle in a visual way that is really quite unprecedented, both in Kurosawa's own work and in the samurai genre as a whole." 

With The Hidden Fortress, Kurosawa began to utilize the widescreen (anamorphic) process for the first time in his work. These three techniqueslong lenses, multiple cameras and widescreenwere in later works fully exploited, even in sequences with little or no overt action, such as the early scenes of High and Low that take place in the central character's home, in which they are employed to dramatize tensions and power relationships between the characters within a highly confined space. 

For all his films, but particularly for his jidaigeki, Kurosawa insisted on absolute authenticity of sets, costumes and props. Numerous instances of his fanatical devotion to detail have been recorded, of which the following are only a few examples.

For Throne of Blood, in the scene where Washizu (Mifune) is attacked with arrows by his own men, the director had archers shoot real arrows, hollowed out and running along wires, toward Toshiro Mifune from a distance of about ten feet, with the actor carefully following chalk marks on the ground to avoid being hit. (Some of the arrows missed him by an inch; the actor, who admitted that he was not merely acting terrified in the film, suffered nightmares afterward). 

For Red Beard, to construct the gate for the clinic set, Kurosawa had his assistants dismantle rotten wood from old sets and then create the prop from scratch with this old wood, so the gate would look properly ravaged by time. For the same film, for teacups that appeared in the movie, he ordered his crew to pour fifty years' worth of tea into the cups so they would appear appropriately stained. 

For Ran, art director Yoshir Muraki, constructing the "third castle" set under the director's supervision, created the "stones" of that castle by having photographs taken of actual stones from a celebrated castle, then painting Styrofoam blocks to exactly resemble those stones and gluing them to the castle "wall" through a process known as "rough-stone piling", which required months of work. Later, before shooting the famous scene in which the castle is attacked and set on fire, in order to prevent the Styrofoam "stones" from melting in the heat, the art department coated the surface with four layers of cement, then painted the colors of the ancient stones onto the cement. 

====Editing====
Kurosawa both directed and edited most of his films, which is nearly unique among prominent filmmakers. See List of film director and editor collaborations. The Coen Brothers are perhaps the best known contemporary filmmakers who both direct and edit their films. Kurosawa often remarked that he shot a film simply in order to have material to edit, because the editing of a picture was the most important and creatively interesting part of the process for him. Kurosawa's creative team believed that the director's skill with editing was his greatest talent. Hiroshi Nezu, a longtime production supervisor on his films, said, "Among ourselves, we think that he is Toho's best director, that he is Japan's best scenarist, and that he is the best editor in the world. He is most concerned with the flowing quality which a film must have ... The Kurosawa film flows over the cut, as it were." 

The director's frequent crew member Teruyo Nogami confirms this view. "Akira Kurosawa's editing was exceptional, the inimitable work of a genius ... No one was a match for him." She claimed that Kurosawa carried in his head all the information about all shots filmed, and if, in the editing room, he asked for a piece of film and she handed him the wrong one, he would immediately recognize the error, though she had taken detailed notes on each shot and he had not. She compared his mind to a computer, which could do with edited segments of film what computers do today. 

Kurosawa's habitual method was to edit a film daily, bit by bit, during production. This helped particularly when he started using multiple cameras, which resulted in a large amount of film to assemble. "I always edit in the evening if we have a fair amount of footage in the can. After watching the rushes, I usually go to the editing room and work." Because of this practice of editing as he went along, the post-production period for a Kurosawa film could be startlingly brief: Yojimbo had its Japanese premiere on April 20, 1961, four days after shooting concluded on April 16. 

===="Kurosawa-gumi"====
Throughout his career, Kurosawa worked constantly with people drawn from the same pool of creative technicians, crew members and actors, popularly known as the "Kurosawa-gumi" (Kurosawa group). The following is a partial list of this group, divided by profession. This information is derived from the IMDB pages for Kurosawa's films and Stuart Galbraith IV's filmography: 

Composers: Fumio Hayasaka (Drunken Angel, Stray Dog, Scandal, Rashomon, The Idiot, Ikiru, Seven Samurai, Record of a Living Being); Masaru Sato (Throne of Blood, The Lower Depths, The Hidden Fortress, The Bad Sleep Well, Yojimbo, Sanjuro, High and Low, Red Beard); Tru Takemitsu (Dodeskaden, Ran); Shin-ichir Ikebe (Kagemusha, Dreams, Rhapsody in August, Madadayo).

Cinematographers: Asakazu Nakai (No Regrets for Our Youth, One Wonderful Sunday, Stray Dog, Ikiru, Seven Samurai, Record of a Living Being, Throne of Blood, High and Low, Red Beard, Dersu Uzala, Ran); Kazuo Miyagawa (Rashomon, Yojimbo); Miyagawa was hired as cinematographer for Kagemusha, but about one month into shooting, eye problems caused by diabetes forced him to drop out of the project. See Galbraith, pp. 548549. Takao Sait (Sanjuro, High and Low, Red Beard, Dodeskaden, Kagemusha, Ran, Dreams, Rhapsody in August, Madadayo).

Art Department: Yoshir Muraki served as either assistant art director, art director or production designer for all Kurosawa's films (except for Dersu Uzala) from Drunken Angel until the end of the director's career.

Production Crew: Teruyo Nogami served as script supervisor, production manager, associate director or assistant to the producer on all Kurosawa's films from Rashomon to the end of the director's career. Hiroshi Nezu was production supervisor or unit production manager on all the films from Seven Samurai to Dodeskaden, except Sanjuro. After retiring as a director, Ishir Honda returned more than 30 years later to work again for his friend and former mentor as a directorial advisor, production coordinator and creative consultant on Kurosawa's last five films (Kagemusha, Ran, Dreams, Rhapsody in August and Madadayo). Allegedly one segment of Dreams was actually directed by Honda following Kurosawa's detailed storyboards.

Actors: Leading actors: Takashi Shimura (21 films); Toshiro Mifune (16 films), Susumu Fujita (8 films), Tatsuya Nakadai (6 films) and Masayuki Mori (5 films).
Supporting performers (in alphabetical order): Minoru Chiaki, Kamatari Fujiwara, Bokuzen Hidari, Fumiko Homma, Hisashi Igawa, Yunosuke Ito, Kyoko Kagawa, Daisuke Kato, Isao Kimura, Kokuten Kodo, Akitake Kono, Yoshio Kosugi, Koji Mitsui, Seiji Miyaguchi, Eiko Miyoshi, Nobuo Nakamura, Akemi Negishi, Denjiro Okochi, Noriko Sengoku, Gen Shimizu, Ichiro Sugai, Haruo Tanaka, Akira Terao, Eijiro Tono, Yoshio Tsuchiya, Kichijiro Ueda, Atsushi Watanabe, Isuzu Yamada, Tsutomu Yamazaki and Yoshitaka Zushi.

===Style===
Virtually all commentators have noted Kurosawa's bold, dynamic style, which many have compared to the traditional Hollywood style of narrative moviemaking, one that emphasizes, in the words of one such scholar, "chronological, causal, linear and historical thinking." But it has also been claimed that, from his very first film, the director displayed a technique quite distinct from the seamless style of classic Hollywood. This technique involved a disruptive depiction of screen space through the use of numerous unrepeated camera setups, a disregard for the traditional 180-degree axis of action around which Hollywood scenes have usually been constructed, and an approach in which "narrative time becomes spatialized", with fluid camera movement often replacing conventional editing. The following are some idiosyncratic aspects of the artist's style.

====Axial cut====
In his films of the 1940s and 1950s, Kurosawa frequently employs the "axial cut," in which the camera moves closer to, or further away from, the subject, not through the use of tracking shots or dissolves, but through a series of matched jump cuts. For example, in Sanshiro Sugata II, the hero takes leave of the woman he loves, but then, after walking away a short distance, turns and bows to her, and then, after walking further, turns and bows once more. This sequence of shots is illustrated on film scholar David Bordwell's blog. The three shots are not connected in the film by camera movements or dissolves, but by a series of two jump cuts. The effect is to stress the duration of Sanshiro's departure.

In the opening sequence of Seven Samurai in the peasant village, the axial cut is used twice. When the villagers are outdoors, gathered in a circle, weeping and lamenting the imminent arrival of the bandits, they are glimpsed from above in extreme long shot, then, after the cut, in a much closer shot, then in an even closer shot at ground level as the dialogue begins. A few minutes later, when the villagers go to the mill to ask the village elder's advice, there is a long shot of the mill, with a slowly turning wheel in the river, then a closer shot of this wheel, and then a still closer shot of it. (As the mill is where the elder lives, these shots forge a mental association in the viewer's mind between that character and the mill.) 

====Cutting on motion====
A number of scholars have pointed out Kurosawa's tendency to "cut on motion": that is, to edit a sequence of a character or characters in motion so that an action is depicted in two or more separate shots, rather than one uninterrupted shot. One scholar, as an example, describes a tense scene in Seven Samurai in which the samurai Shichirji, who is standing, wishes to console the peasant Manzo, who is sitting on the ground, and he gets down on one knee to talk to him. Kurosawa chooses to film this simple action in two shots rather than one (cutting between the two only after the action of kneeling has begun) to fully convey Shichirji's humility. Numerous other instances of this device are evident in the movie. "Kurosawa breaks up the action, fragments it, in order to create an emotional effect." 

====Wipe====
A form of cinematic punctuation very strongly identified with Kurosawa is the wipe. This is an effect created through an optical printer, in which, when a scene ends, a line or bar appears to move across the screen, "wiping" away the image while simultaneously revealing the first image of the subsequent scene. As a transitional device, it is used as a substitute for the straight cut or the dissolve (though Kurosawa, of course, often used both of those devices as well). In his mature work, Kurosawa employed the wipe so frequently that it became a kind of signature. For example, one blogger has counted no fewer than 12 instances of the wipe in Drunken Angel. 

There are a number of theories concerning the purpose of this device, which, as James Goodwin notes, was common in silent cinema but became considerably rarer in the more "realistic" sound cinema. Goodwin claims that the wipes in Rashomon, for instance, fulfill one of three purposes: emphasizing motion in traveling shots, marking narrative shifts in the courtyard scenes and marking temporal ellipses between actions (e.g., between the end of one character's testimony and the beginning of another's). He also points out that in The Lower Depths, in which Kurosawa completely avoided the use of wipes, the director cleverly manipulated people and props "in order to slide new visual images in and out of view much as a wipe cut does." 

An instance of the wipe used as a satirical device can be seen in Ikiru. A group of women visit the local government office to petition the bureaucrats to turn a waste area into a children's playground. The viewer is then shown a series of point of view shots of various bureaucrats, connected by wipe transitions, each of whom refers the group to another department. Nora Tennessen comments in her blog (which shows one example) that "the wipe technique makes sequence funnierimages of bureaucrats are stacked like cards, each more punctilious than the last." 

====Image-sound counterpoint====
Kurosawa by all accounts always gave great attention to the soundtracks of his films (Teruyo Nogami's memoir gives many such examples). In the late 1940s, he began to employ music for what he called "counterpoint" to the emotional content of a scene, rather than merely to reinforce the emotion, as Hollywood traditionally did (and still does). The inspiration for this innovation came from a family tragedy. When news reached Kurosawa of his father's death in 1948, he wandered aimlessly through the streets of Tokyo. His sorrow was magnified rather than diminished when he suddenly heard the cheerful, vapid song "The Cuckoo Waltz", and he hurried to escape from this "awful music." He then told his composer, Fumio Hayasaka, with whom he was working on Drunken Angel, to use "The Cuckoo Waltz" as ironic accompaniment to the scene in which the dying gangster, Matsunaga, sinks to his lowest point in the narrative. 

This ironic approach to music can also be found in Stray Dog, a film released a year after Drunken Angel. In the climactic scene, the detective Murakami is fighting furiously with the murderer Yusa in a muddy field. The sound of a Mozart piece is suddenly heard, played on the piano by a woman in a nearby house. As one commentator notes, "In contrast to this scene of primitive violence, the serenity of the Mozart is, literally, other-worldly" and "the power of this elemental encounter is heightened by the music." Nor was Kurosawa's "ironic" use of the soundtrack limited to music. One critic observes that, in Seven Samurai, "During episodes of murder and mayhem, birds chirp in the background, as they do in the first scene when the farmers lament their seemingly hopeless fate." 

===Recurring themes===

====Masterdisciple relationship====
Many commentators have noted the frequent occurrence in Kurosawa's work of the complex relationship between an older and a younger man, who serve each other as master and disciple, respectively. This theme was clearly an expression of the director's life experience. "Kurosawa revered his teachers, in particular Kajiro Yamamoto, his mentor at Toho", according to Joan Mellen. "The salutary image of an older person instructing the young evokes always in Kurosawa's films high moments of pathos." The critic Tadao Sato considers the recurring character of the "master" to be a type of surrogate father, whose role it is to witness the young protagonist's moral growth and approve of it. 

In his very first film, Sanshiro Sugata, after the Judo master Yano becomes the title character's teacher and spiritual guide, "the narrative cast in the form of a chronicle studying the stages of the hero's growing mastery and maturity." The master-pupil relationship in the films of the postwar eraas depicted in such works as Drunken Angel, Stray Dog, Seven Samurai, Red Beard and Dersu Uzalainvolves very little direct instruction, but much learning through experience and example; Stephen Prince relates this tendency to the private and nonverbal nature of the concept of Zen enlightenment. 

By the time of Kagemusha, however, according to Prince, the meaning of this relationship has changed. A thief chosen to act as the double of a great lord continues his impersonation even after his master's death: "the relationship has become spectral and is generated from beyond the grave with the master maintaining a ghostly presence. Its end is death, not the renewal of commitment to the living that typified its outcome in earlier films." However, according to the director's biographer, in his final film, Madadayowhich deals with a teacher and his relationship with an entire group of ex-pupilsa sunnier vision of the theme emerges. "The students hold an annual party for their professor, attended by dozens of former students, now adults of varying age ... This extended sequence ... expresses, as only Kurosawa can, the simple joys of student-teacher relationships, of kinship, of being alive." 

====Heroic champion====
Kurosawa's is a heroic cinema, a series of dramas (mostly) concerned with the deeds and fates of larger-than-life heroes. Stephen Prince has identified the emergence of the unique Kurosawa protagonist with the immediate post-World War II period. The goal of the American Occupation to replace Japanese feudalism with individualism coincided with the director's artistic and social agenda: "Kurosawa welcomed the changed political climate and sought to fashion his own mature cinematic voice." The Japanese critic Tadao Sato concurs: "With defeat in World War II, many Japanese ... were dumbfounded to find that the government had lied to them and was neither just nor dependable. During this uncertain time Akira Kurosawa, in a series of first-rate films, sustained the people by his consistent assertion that the meaning of life is not dictated by the nation but something each individual should discover for himself through suffering." The filmmaker himself remarked that, during this period, "I felt that without the establishment of the self as a positive value there could be no freedom and no democracy." 

The first such postwar hero was, atypically for the artist, a heroineYukie, played by Setsuko Hara, in No Regrets for Our Youth. According to Prince, her "desertion of family and class background to assist a poor village, her perseverance in the face of enormous obstacles, her assumption of responsibility for her own life and for the well-being of others, and her existential loneliness ... are essential to Kurosawan heroism and make of Yukie the first coherent ... example." This "existential loneliness" is also exemplified by Dr. Sanada (Takashi Shimura) in Drunken Angel: "Kurosawa insists that his heroes take their stand, alone, against tradition and battle for a better world, even if the path there is not clear. Separation from a corrupt social system in order to alleviate human suffering, as Sanada does, is the only honorable course." 

Many commentators regard Seven Samurai as the ultimate expression of the artist's heroic ideal. Joan Mellen's comments are typical of this view: "Seven Samurai is above all a homage to the samurai class at its most noble ... Samurai for Kurosawa represent the best of Japanese tradition and integrity." Ironically, it is because of, not in spite of, the chaotic times of civil war depicted in the film that the seven rise to greatness. "Kurosawa locates the unexpected benefits no less than the tragedy of this historical moment. The upheaval forces samurai to channel the selflessness of their credo of loyal service into working for peasants." However, this heroism is futile because "there was already rising ... a merchant class which would supplant the warrior aristocracy." So the courage and supreme skill of the central characters will not prevent the ultimate destruction of themselves or their class.

As Kurosawa's career progressed he seemed to find it increasingly difficult to sustain the heroic ideal. As Prince notes, "Kurosawa's is an essentially tragic vision of life, and this sensibility ... impedes his efforts to realize a socially committed mode of filmmaking." Furthermore, the director's ideal of heroism is subverted by history itself: "When history is articulated as it is in Throne of Blood, as a blind force ... heroism ceases to be a problem or a reality." According to Prince, the filmmaker's vision eventually became so bleak that he would come to view history merely as eternally recurring patterns of violence, within which the individual is depicted as not only unheroic, but utterly helpless (see "Cycles of violence" below).

====Nature and weather====
Nature is a crucial element in Kurosawa's films. According to Stephen Prince, "Kurosawa's sensibility, like that of many Japanese artists, is keenly sensitive to the subtleties and beauties of season and scenery." He has never hesitated to exploit climate and weather as plot elements, to the point where they become "active participants in the drama ... The oppressive heat in Stray Dog and Record of a Living Being is omnipresent and becomes thematized as a signifier of a world disjointed by economic collapse and the atomic threat." The director himself once said, "I like hot summers, cold winters, heavy rains and snows, and I think most of my pictures show this. I like extremes because I find them most alive." 

Wind is also a powerful symbol: "The persistent metaphor of Kurosawa's work is that of wind, the winds of change, of fortune and adversity." "The visually flamboyant battle Yojimbo takes place in the main street, as huge clouds of dust swirl around the combatants ... The winds that stir the dust ... have brought firearms to the town along with the culture of the West, which will end the warrior tradition." 

It is also difficult not to notice the importance of rain to Kurosawa: "Rain in Kurosawa's films is never treated neutrally. When it occurs ... it is never a drizzle or a light mist but always a frenzied downpour, a driving storm." "The final battle Seven Samurai is a supreme spiritual and physical struggle, and it is fought in a blinding rainstorm, which enables Kurosawa to visualize an ultimate fusion of social groups ... but this climactic vision of classlessness, with typical Kurosawan ambivalence, has become a vision of horror. The battle is a vortex of swirling rain and mud ... The ultimate fusion of social identity emerges as an expression of hellish chaos." 

====Cycles of violence====
Beginning with Throne of Blood (1957), an obsession with historical cycles of inexorable savage violencewhat Stephen Prince calls "the countertradition to the committed, heroic mode of Kurosawa's cinema" first appears. According to Donald Richie, within the world of that film, "Cause and effect is the only law. Freedom does not exist." and Prince claims that its events "are inscribed in a cycle of time that infinitely repeats." (He uses as evidence the fact that Washizu's lord, unlike the kindly King Duncan of Shakespeare's play, had murdered his own lord years before to seize power, and is then murdered in turn by Washizu (the Macbeth character) for the same reason.) "The fated quality to the action of Macbeth ... was transposed by Kurosawa with a sharpened emphasis upon predetermined action and the crushing of human freedom beneath the laws of karma." 

Prince claims that Kurosawa's last epics, Kagemusha and particularly Ran, mark a major turning point in the director's vision of the world. In Kagemusha, "where once the world of his films the individual could grasp events tightly and demand that they conform to his or her impulses, now the self is but the epiphenomenon of a ruthless and bloody temporal process, ground to dust beneath the weight and force of history." The following epic, Ran, is "a relentless chronicle of base lust for power, betrayal of the father by his sons, and pervasive wars and murders." The historical setting of the film is used as "a commentary on what Kurosawa now perceives as the timelessness of human impulses toward violence and self-destruction." "History has given way to a perception of life as a wheel of endless suffering, ever turning, ever repeating", which is compared in many instances in the screenplay with hell. "Kurosawa has found hell to be both the inevitable outcome of human behavior and the appropriate visualization of his own bitterness and disappointment." 

==Criticisms==

Despite the extraordinary acclaim that Kurosawa's work has received in Japan and abroad, his films, as well as Kurosawa as an individual, have also been subject to considerable criticism, much of it harsh. Below are summarized some of the more common criticisms of the director, both those made generally and those that are primarily voiced in Japan.

===In general===
In the early to mid-1950s, a number of critics belonging to the French New Wave championed the films of the older Japanese master, Kenji Mizoguchi, at the expense of Kurosawa's work. New Wave critic-filmmaker Jacques Rivette, said: "You can compare only what is comparable and that which aims high enough ... seems to be the only Japanese director who is completely Japanese and yet is also the only one that achieves a true universality, that of an individual." According to such French commentators, Mizoguchi seemed, of the two artists, the more authentically Japanese. But at least one film scholar has questioned the validity of this dichotomy between "Japanese" Mizoguchi and "Western" Kurosawa by pointing out that "Mizo" had been as influenced by Western cinema and Western culture in general as Kurosawa, and that this is reflected in his work. 

A criticism frequently directed at Kurosawa's films is that the director's preoccupation with ethical and moral themes led him at times to create what some commentators regard as sentimental or nave work. Speaking of the postwar "slice of life" drama One Wonderful Sunday, for example, film scholar (and future politician) Audie Bock claimed that not even Kurosawa's celebrated prowess as an editor could save one particular scene from bathos: "The last sequence ... is an excruciating twelve minutes of the boy conducting an imaginary orchestra in an empty amphitheater while his girlfriend appeals directly to the camera for the viewer to join in. Angles and focal lengths change, details of leaves scattering in the wind are intercut, but nothing makes the scene go any faster." 

Some controversy exists about the extent to which Kurosawa's films of the Second World War period could be considered propaganda. The cultural historian Peter B. High sees Kurosawa's wartime cinema as part of the propagandistic trend of Japan at war and as an example of many of these wartime conventions. High refers to his second film, The Most Beautiful, as a "dark and gloomy rendition of the standard formulas of the front genre." Another controversy centers on his alleged refusal to acknowledge Japan's wartime guilt. In one of Kurosawa's last films, Rhapsody in August, an elderly survivor of the atomic attack on Nagasaki is visited by her half-Japanese, half-American nephew, Clark (Richard Gere), who appears (at least to some viewers) to apologize, as an American, for the city's wartime destruction. The New York Times critic Vincent Canby wrote about this film: "A lot of people at Cannes were outraged that the film makes no mention of Pearl Harbor and Japan's atrocities in China ... If Clark can apologize for bombing Nagasaki, why can't Granny apologize for the raid on Pearl Harbor?" 

A number of critics have reacted negatively to the female characters in Kurosawa's movies. Joan Mellen, in her examination of this subject, has maintained that, by the time of Red Beard (1965), "women in Kurosawa have become not only unreal and incapable of kindness, but totally bereft of autonomy, whether physical, intellectual, or emotional ... Women at their best may only imitate the truths men discover." Kurosawa scholar Stephen Prince concurs with Mellen's view, though less censoriously: "Unlike a male-oriented director like Sam Peckinpah, Kurosawa is not hostile to women, but his general lack of interest in them should be regarded as a major limitation of his work." 

===In Japan===
In Japan, both critics and other filmmakers have sometimes accused his work of elitism, because of his focus on exceptional, heroic individuals and groups of men. In her commentary on the deluxe DVD edition of Seven Samurai, Joan Mellen maintains that certain shots of the samurai characters Kambei and Kyuzo, which to her reveal Kurosawa "privileging" these samurai, "support the argument voiced by several Japanese critics that Kurosawa was an elitist ... Kurosawa was hardly a progressive director, they argued, since his peasants could not discover among their own ranks leaders who might rescue the village. Instead, justifying the inequitable class structure of their society and ours, the peasants must rely on the aristocracy, the upper class, and in particular samurai, to ensure their survival ... Kurosawa defended himself against this charge in his interview with me. 'I wanted to say that after everything the peasants were the stronger, closely clinging to the earth ... It was the samurai who were weak because they were being blown by the winds of time.'" 

Because of Kurosawa's popularity with European and American audiences from the early 1950s onward, he has not escaped the charge of deliberately catering to the tastes of Westerners to achieve or maintain that popularity. Joan Mellen, recording the violently negative reaction (in the 1970s) of the left-wing director Nagisa Oshima to Kurosawa and his work, states: "That Kurosawa had brought Japanese film to a Western audience meant Oshima that he must be pandering to Western values and politics." Kurosawa always strongly denied pandering to Western tastes: "He has never catered to a foreign audience" writes Audie Bock, "and has condemned those who do." 

Kurosawa was often criticized by his countrymen for perceived "arrogant" behavior. It was in Japan that the (initially) disparaging nickname "Kurosawa Tenn""The Emperor Kurosawa"was coined. "Like tenn", Yoshimoto claimed, "Kurosawa is said to cloister himself in his own small world, which is completely cut off from the everyday reality of the majority of Japanese. The nickname tenn is used in this sense to create an image of Kurosawa as a director who abuses his power solely for the purpose of self-indulgence." 

==Worldwide impact==

===Reputation among filmmakers===
Many celebrated directors have been influenced by Kurosawa and/or have expressed admiration for his work. The filmmakers cited below are grouped according to three categories: a) those who, like Kurosawa himself, established international critical reputations in the 1950s and early 1960s; b) the so-called "New Hollywood" directors, that is, American moviemakers who, for the most part, established their reputations in the early to mid-1970s; and c) other Asian directors.

alt=Photo of the director Robert Altman in his mid-60s, wearing a goatee, glasses, a wide-brimmed white hat and a jacket and looking directly into the camera.
Ingmar Bergman called his own film The Virgin Spring "touristic, a lousy imitation of Kurosawa", and added, "At that time my admiration for the Japanese cinema was at its height. I was almost a samurai myself!" Federico Fellini in an interview declared the director "the greatest living example of all that an author of the cinema should be"despite admitting to having seen only one of his films, Seven Samurai. Roman Polanski in 1965 cited Kurosawa as one of his three favorite filmmakers (with Fellini and Orson Welles), singling out Seven Samurai, Throne of Blood and The Hidden Fortress for praise. Bernardo Bertolucci considered the Japanese master's influence to be seminal: "Kurosawa's movies and La Dolce Vita of Fellini are the things that pushed me, sucked me into being a film director." 

Kurosawa's "New Hollywood" admirers have included Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola, Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, George Lucas, and John Milius. Robert Altman, when he first saw Rashomon (during the period when he worked regularly in television rather than feature films), was so impressed by its cinematographer's achievement of shooting several shots with the camera aimed directly at the sunallegedly it was the first film in which this was done successfullythat he claims he was inspired the very next day to begin incorporating shots of the sun into his television work. It was Coppola who said of Kurosawa, "One thing that distinguishes is that he didn't make one masterpiece or two masterpieces. He made, you know, eight masterpieces." Both Spielberg and Scorsese have praised the older man's role as teacher and role modelas a sensei, to use the Japanese term. Spielberg has declared, "I have learned more from him than from almost any other filmmaker on the face of the earth", while Scorsese remarked, "Let me say it simply: Akira Kurosawa was my master, and ... the master of so many other filmmakers over the years." As already noted above, several of these moviemakers were also instrumental in helping Kurosawa obtain financing for his late films: Lucas and Coppola served as co-producers on Kagemusha, while the Spielberg name, lent to the 1990 production, Dreams, helped bring that picture to fruition. 

As the first Asian filmmaker to achieve international prominence, Kurosawa has naturally served as an inspiration for other Asian auteurs. Of Rashomon, the most famous director of India, Satyajit Ray, said: "The effect of the film on me first seeing it in Calcutta in 1952 was electric. I saw it three times on consecutive days, and wondered each time if there was another film anywhere which gave such sustained and dazzling proof of a director's command over every aspect of film making." Other Asian admirers include the Japanese actor and director Takeshi Kitano, Hong Kong filmmaker John Woo and mainland Chinese director Zhang Yimou, who called Kurosawa "the quintessential Asian director." 

===Remakes===

===Awards and honors===

==Legacy==
Kurosawa Production Co., established in 1959, continues to oversee much of Kurosawa's legacy. The director's son, Hisao Kurosawa, is the current head of the company. Its American subsidiary, Kurosawa Enterprises, is located in Los Angeles. Rights to Kurosawa's works are held by Kurosawa Production and the film studios under which he worked, most notably Toho. Kurosawa Production works closely with the Akira Kurosawa Foundation, established in December 2003 and also run by Hisao Kurosawa. The foundation organizes an annual short film competition and spearheads Kurosawa-related projects, including a recently shelved one to build a memorial museum for the director. 

In 1981, the Kurosawa Film Studio was opened in Yokohama; two additional locations have since been launched in Japan. A large collection of archive material, including scanned screenplays, photos and news articles, has been made available through the Akira Kurosawa Digital Archive, a Japanese website maintained by Ryukoku University Digital Archives Research Center in collaboration with Kurosawa Production. Anaheim University's Akira Kurosawa School of Film was launched in spring 2009 with the backing of Kurosawa Production. It offers online programs in digital film making, with headquarters in Anaheim and a learning center in Tokyo. 

Two film awards have also been named in Kurosawa's honor. The Akira Kurosawa Award for Lifetime Achievement in Film Directing is awarded during the San Francisco International Film Festival, while the Akira Kurosawa Award is given during the Tokyo International Film Festival. In commemoration of the 100th anniversary of Kurosawa's birth in 2010, a project called AK100 was launched in 2008. The AK100 Project aims to "expose young people who are the representatives of the next generation, and all people everywhere, to the light and spirit of Akira Kurosawa and the wonderful world he created." 

Anaheim University in cooperation with the Kurosawa Family established the Anaheim University Akira Kurosawa School of Film to offer online and blended learning programs on Akira Kurosawa and filmmaking.

==Filmography==

===On home video===
All thirty films directed by Kurosawa are available on DVD worldwide, most of them from more than one distributor and in more than one region code. His films have begun to be released on Blu-ray. 

===As Writer===
Work with Akira Kurosawa credited as writer, by year:

* 1941 Uma (Horse) as writer
* 1942 Seishun no kiryu (Wind Currents of Youth)
* 1942 Tsubasa no gaika (The Triumphant Song of the Wings)
* 1944 Dohyosai (Wrestling-Ring Festival)
* 1945 Appare Ishin Tasuke (Bravo! Ishin Tasuke)
* 1947 Yottsu no koi no monogatari (Four Love Stories) segment
* 1947 Ginrei no hate (To the End of the Snow-Capped Mountains; aka Snow Trail)
* 1948 Shozo (The Portrait)
* 1949 Jigoku no kifujin (The Lady from Hell)
* 1949 Jyakoman to Tetsu (Jakoman and Tetsu)
* 1950 Akatsuki no dasso (Escape at Dawn)
* 1950 Jiruba no Tetsu (Tetsu of Jilba)
* 1950 Tateshi danpei (Fencing Master)
* 1951 Ai to nikushimi no kanata e (Beyond Love and Hate)
* 1951 Kedamono no yado (The Den of Beasts)
* 1952 Araki Sauemon  Ketto kagiya no tsuji (Sauemon Araki  Duel at Key-Makers Corner; aka Vendetta for a Samurai)
* 1952 Sengoku burai (Vagabonds in a Country at War; aka Sword for Hire)
* 1953 Fukeyo harukaze (Blow! Spring Wind; aka My Wonderful Yellow Car)
* 1955 Kieta chutai (Vanished Enlisted Man)
* 1955 Asunaro monogatari (Hiba Arborvitae Story; aka Tomorrow Ill Be a Fire Tree)
* 1957 Nichiro senso shori no hishi  Tekichu odan sanbyaku ri (Three Hundred Miles Through Enemy Lines; aka Advance Patrol)
* 1959 Sengoku gunto-den (The Story of Robbers of the Civil Wars; aka Saga of the Vagabonds)
* 1985 Runaway Train
* 2000 Ame Agaru (After the Rain)
* 2000 Dora-Heita (Alley Cat)
* 2002 Umi wa miteita (The Sea is Watching)

==See also==

*Gendai-geki
*List of Japanese actors
*List of Japanese actresses
*List of Japanese film directors
*Samurai cinema

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

===Sources===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Buchanan, Judith (2005). Shakespeare on Film. Pearson Longman. ISBN 0-582-43716-4.
* Burch, Nel (1979). To the Distant Observer: Form and Meaning in the Japanese Cinema. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-03605-0. Available online at the Center for Japanese Studies, University of Michigan
* Cowie, Peter (2010). Akira Kurosawa: Master of Cinema. Rizzoli Publications. ISBN 0-8478-3319-4.
* Davies, Anthony (1990). Filming Shakespeare's Plays: The Adaptions of Laurence Olivier, Orson Welles, Peter Brook and Akira Kurosawa. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-39913-0.
* Desser, David (1983). The Samurai Films of Akira Kurosawa (Studies in Cinema No. 23). UMI Research Press. ISBN 0-8357-1924-3.
* 
* Leonard, Kendra Preston (2009). Shakespeare, Madness, and Music: Scoring Insanity in Cinematic Adaptations. Plymouth: The Scarecrow Press. ISBN 0-8108-6946-2.
* Sorensen, Lars-Martin (2009). Censorship of Japanese Films During the U.S. Occupation of Japan: The Cases of Yasujiro Ozu and Akira Kurosawa. Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 0-7734-4673-7.

==External links==

*
*
*Akira Kurosawa at the Criterion Collection
*Akira Kurosawa: News, Information and Discussion
*Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database
*Great Performances: Kurosawa (PBS)
*CineFiles: Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive (Kurosawa search)
*Akira Kurosawa at Japanese celebrity's grave guide 
*
*Several trailers
*Anaheim University Akira Kurosawa School of Film



[[Ancient Egypt]]

The Great Sphinx and the pyramids of Giza are among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of ancient Egypt.
 
 

Ancient Egypt was an ancient civilization of Northeastern Africa, concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River in what is now the modern country of Egypt. It is one of six civilizations globally to arise independently. Egyptian civilization coalesced around 3150 BC (according to conventional Egyptian chronology) with the political unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under the first pharaoh. Dodson (2004) p. 46 The history of ancient Egypt occurred in a series of stable Kingdoms, separated by periods of relative instability known as Intermediate Periods: the Old Kingdom of the Early Bronze Age, the Middle Kingdom of the Middle Bronze Age and the New Kingdom of the Late Bronze Age.

Egypt reached the pinnacle of its power during the New Kingdom, in the Ramesside period where it rivalled the Hittite Empire, Assyrian Empire and Mitanni Empire, after which it entered a period of slow decline. Egypt was invaded or conquered by a succession of foreign powers (such as the Canaanites/Hyksos, Libyans, Nubians, Assyria, Babylonia, Achaemenids and Macedonian Greece) in the Third Intermediate Period of Egypt and Late Period. In the aftermath of Alexander the Great's death, one of his generals, Ptolemy Soter, established himself as the new ruler of Egypt. This Greek Ptolemaic Dynasty ruled Egypt until 30 BC, when, under Cleopatra, it fell to the Roman Empire and became a Roman province. Clayton (1994) p. 217 

The success of ancient Egyptian civilization came partly from its ability to adapt to the conditions of the Nile River valley. The predictable flooding and controlled irrigation of the fertile valley produced surplus crops, which supported a more dense population, and social development and culture. With resources to spare, the administration sponsored mineral exploitation of the valley and surrounding desert regions, the early development of an independent writing system, the organization of collective construction and agricultural projects, trade with surrounding regions, and a military intended to defeat foreign enemies and assert Egyptian dominance. Motivating and organizing these activities was a bureaucracy of elite scribes, religious leaders, and administrators under the control of a pharaoh, who ensured the cooperation and unity of the Egyptian people in the context of an elaborate system of religious beliefs. James (2005) p. 8 Manuelian (1998) pp. 67 

The many achievements of the ancient Egyptians include the quarrying, surveying and construction techniques that supported the building of monumental pyramids, temples, and obelisks; a system of mathematics, a practical and effective system of medicine, irrigation systems and agricultural production techniques, the first known ships, Egyptian faience and glass technology, new forms of literature, and the earliest known peace treaty, made with Hittites. Clayton (1994) p. 153 Egypt left a lasting legacy. Its art and architecture were widely copied, and its antiquities carried off to far corners of the world. Its monumental ruins have inspired the imaginations of travelers and writers for centuries. A new-found respect for antiquities and excavations in the early modern period by Europeans and Egyptians led to the scientific investigation of Egyptian civilization and a greater appreciation of its cultural legacy. James (2005) p. 84 

==History==
Map of ancient Egypt, showing major cities and sites of the Dynastic period (c. 3150 BC to 30 BC)

The Nile has been the lifeline of its region for much of human history. Shaw (2002) pp. 17, 6769 The fertile floodplain of the Nile gave humans the opportunity to develop a settled agricultural economy and a more sophisticated, centralized society that became a cornerstone in the history of human civilization. Shaw (2002) p. 17 Nomadic modern human hunter-gatherers began living in the Nile valley through the end of the Middle Pleistocene some 120 thousand years ago. By the late Paleolithic period, the arid climate of Northern Africa became increasingly hot and dry, forcing the populations of the area to concentrate along the river region.

===Predynastic period===

A typical Naqada II jar decorated with gazelles. (Predynastic Period)
In Predynastic and Early Dynastic times, the Egyptian climate was much less arid than it is today. Large regions of Egypt were covered in treed savanna and traversed by herds of grazing ungulates. Foliage and fauna were far more prolific in all environs and the Nile region supported large populations of waterfowl. Hunting would have been common for Egyptians, and this is also the period when many animals were first domesticated. 

By about 5500 BC, small tribes living in the Nile valley had developed into a series of cultures demonstrating firm control of agriculture and animal husbandry, and identifiable by their pottery and personal items, such as combs, bracelets, and beads. The largest of these early cultures in upper (Southern) Egypt was the Badari, which probably originated in the Western Desert; it was known for its high quality ceramics, stone tools, and its use of copper. Hayes (1964) p. 220 

The Badari was followed by the Amratian (Naqada I) and Gerzeh (Naqada II) cultures, Childe, V. Gordon (1953), New Light on the Most Ancient Near East, (Praeger Publications) which brought a number of technological improvements. As early as the Naqada I Period, predynastic Egyptians imported obsidian from Ethiopia, used to shape blades and other objects from flakes. Barbara G. Aston, James A. Harrell, Ian Shaw (2000). Paul T. Nicholson and Ian Shaw editors. "Stone," in Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, Cambridge, 577, pp. 4647. Also note: Barbara G. Aston (1994). "Ancient Egyptian Stone Vessels," Studien zur Archologie und Geschichte Altgyptens 5, Heidelberg, pp. 2326. (See on-line posts: and .) In Naqada II times, early evidence exists of contact with the Near East, particularly Canaan and the Byblos coast. Patai, Raphael (1998), 'Children of Noah: Jewish Seafaring in Ancient Times (Princeton Uni Press) Over a period of about 1,000 years, the Naqada culture developed from a few small farming communities into a powerful civilization whose leaders were in complete control of the people and resources of the Nile valley. Establishing a power center at Hierakonpolis, and later at Abydos, Naqada III leaders expanded their control of Egypt northwards along the Nile. Shaw (2002) p. 61 They also traded with Nubia to the south, the oases of the western desert to the west, and the cultures of the eastern Mediterranean and Near East to the east. Royal Nubian burials at Qustul produced artifacts bearing the oldest-known examples of Egyptian dynastic symbols, such as the white crown of Egypt and falcon. 

The Naqada culture manufactured a diverse selection of material goods, reflective of the increasing power and wealth of the elite, as well as societal personal-use items, which included combs, small statuary, painted pottery, high quality decorative stone vases, cosmetic palettes, and jewelry made of gold, lapis, and ivory. They also developed a ceramic glaze known as faience, which was used well into the Roman Period to decorate cups, amulets, and figurines. During the last predynastic phase, the Naqada culture began using written symbols that eventually were developed into a full system of hieroglyphs for writing the ancient Egyptian language. Allen (2000) p. 1 

===Early Dynastic Period (c. 30502686 BC)===
 The Early Dynastic Period was approximately contemporary to the early Sumerian-Akkadian civilisation of Mesopotamia and of ancient Elam. The third-century BC Egyptian priest Manetho grouped the long line of pharaohs from Menes to his own time into 30 dynasties, a system still used today. Clayton (1994) p. 6 He chose to begin his official history with the king named "Meni" (or Menes in Greek) who was believed to have united the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt (around 3100 BC). Shaw (2002) pp. 7880 

The transition to a unified state happened more gradually than ancient Egyptian writers represented, and there is no contemporary record of Menes. Some scholars now believe, however, that the mythical Menes may have been the pharaoh Narmer, who is depicted wearing royal regalia on the ceremonial Narmer Palette, in a symbolic act of unification. Clayton (1994) pp. 1213 In the Early Dynastic Period about 3150 BC, the first of the Dynastic pharaohs solidified control over lower Egypt by establishing a capital at Memphis, from which he could control the labour force and agriculture of the fertile delta region, as well as the lucrative and critical trade routes to the Levant. The increasing power and wealth of the pharaohs during the early dynastic period was reflected in their elaborate mastaba tombs and mortuary cult structures at Abydos, which were used to celebrate the deified pharaoh after his death. Shaw (2002) p. 70 The strong institution of kingship developed by the pharaohs served to legitimize state control over the land, labour, and resources that were essential to the survival and growth of ancient Egyptian civilization. 
The Narmer Palette depicts the unification
of the Two Lands. Robins (1997) p. 32 

===Old Kingdom (26862181 BC)===

The Giza PyramidsMajor advances in architecture, art, and technology were made during the Old Kingdom, fueled by the increased agricultural productivity and resulting population, made possible by a well-developed central administration. James (2005) p. 40 Some of ancient Egypt's crowning achievements, the Giza pyramids and Great Sphinx, were constructed during the Old Kingdom. Under the direction of the vizier, state officials collected taxes, coordinated irrigation projects to improve crop yield, drafted peasants to work on construction projects, and established a justice system to maintain peace and order. Shaw (2002) p. 102 Khafre Enthroned

Along with the rising importance of a central administration arose a new class of educated scribes and officials who were granted estates by the pharaoh in payment for their services. Pharaohs also made land grants to their mortuary cults and local temples, to ensure that these institutions had the resources to worship the pharaoh after his death. Scholars believe that five centuries of these practices slowly eroded the economic power of the pharaoh, and that the economy could no longer afford to support a large centralized administration. Shaw (2002) pp. 1167 As the power of the pharaoh diminished, regional governors called nomarchs began to challenge the supremacy of the pharaoh. This, coupled with severe droughts between 2200 and 2150 BC, is assumed to have caused the country to enter the 140-year period of famine and strife known as the First Intermediate Period. Clayton (1994) p. 69 

===First Intermediate Period (21811991 BC)===

After Egypt's central government collapsed at the end of the Old Kingdom, the administration could no longer support or stabilize the country's economy. Regional governors could not rely on the king for help in times of crisis, and the ensuing food shortages and political disputes escalated into famines and small-scale civil wars. Yet despite difficult problems, local leaders, owing no tribute to the pharaoh, used their new-found independence to establish a thriving culture in the provinces. Once in control of their own resources, the provinces became economically richerwhich was demonstrated by larger and better burials among all social classes. Shaw (2002) p. 120 In bursts of creativity, provincial artisans adopted and adapted cultural motifs formerly restricted to the royalty of the Old Kingdom, and scribes developed literary styles that expressed the optimism and originality of the period. Shaw (2002) p. 146 

Free from their loyalties to the pharaoh, local rulers began competing with each other for territorial control and political power. By 2160 BC, rulers in Herakleopolis controlled Lower Egypt in the north, while a rival clan based in Thebes, the Intef family, took control of Upper Egypt in the south. As the Intefs grew in power and expanded their control northward, a clash between the two rival dynasties became inevitable. Around 2055 BC the northern Theban forces under Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II finally defeated the Herakleopolitan rulers, reuniting the Two Lands. They inaugurated a period of economic and cultural renaissance known as the Middle Kingdom. Clayton (1994) p. 29 

===Middle Kingdom (21341690 BC)===

Amenemhat III, the last great ruler of the Middle Kingdom

The pharaohs of the Middle Kingdom restored the country's prosperity and stability, thereby stimulating a resurgence of art, literature, and monumental building projects. Shaw (2002) p. 148 Mentuhotep II and his Eleventh Dynasty successors ruled from Thebes, but the vizier Amenemhat I, upon assuming kingship at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty around 1985 BC, shifted the nation's capital to the city of Itjtawy, located in Faiyum. Clayton (1994) p. 79 From Itjtawy, the pharaohs of the Twelfth Dynasty undertook a far-sighted land reclamation and irrigation scheme to increase agricultural output in the region. Moreover, the military reconquered territory in Nubia that was rich in quarries and gold mines, while laborers built a defensive structure in the Eastern Delta, called the "Walls-of-the-Ruler", to defend against foreign attack. Shaw (2002) p. 158 

With the pharaohs' having secured military and political security and vast agricultural and mineral wealth, the nation's population, arts, and religion flourished. In contrast to elitist Old Kingdom attitudes towards the gods, the Middle Kingdom experienced an increase in expressions of personal piety and what could be called a democratization of the afterlife, in which all people possessed a soul and could be welcomed into the company of the gods after death. Shaw (2002) pp. 17982 Middle Kingdom literature featured sophisticated themes and characters written in a confident, eloquent style. The relief and portrait sculpture of the period captured
subtle, individual details that reached new heights of technical perfection. Robins (1997) p. 90 

The last great ruler of the Middle Kingdom, Amenemhat III, allowed Semitic-speaking Canaanite settlers from the Near East into the delta region to provide a sufficient labour force for his especially active mining and building campaigns. These ambitious building and mining activities, however, combined with severe Nile floods later in his reign, strained the economy and precipitated the slow decline into the Second Intermediate Period during the later Thirteenth and Fourteenth dynasties. During this decline, the Canaanite settlers began to seize control of the delta region, eventually coming to power in Egypt as the Hyksos. Shaw (2002) p. 188 

===Second Intermediate Period (16741549 BC) and the Hyksos===

Around 1785 BC, as the power of the Middle Kingdom pharaohs weakened, a Semitic Canaanite people called the Hyksos had already settled in the Eastern Delta town of Avaris, seized control of Egypt, and forced the central government to retreat to Thebes. The pharaoh was treated as a vassal and expected to pay tribute. Ryholt (1997) p. 310 The Hyksos ("foreign rulers") retained Egyptian models of government and identified as pharaohs, thus integrating Egyptian elements into their culture. They and other Semitic invaders introduced new tools of warfare into Egypt, most notably the composite bow and the horse-drawn chariot. Shaw (2002) p. 189 

After their retreat, the native Theban kings found themselves trapped between the Canaanite Hyksos ruling the north and the Hyksos' Nubian allies, the Kushites, to the south of Egypt. After years of vassalage, Thebes gathered enough strength to challenge the Hyksos in a conflict that lasted more than 30 years, until 1555 BC The pharaohs Seqenenre Tao II and Kamose were ultimately able to defeat the Nubians to the south of Egypt, but failed to defeat the Hyksos. That task fell to Kamose's successor, Ahmose I, who successfully waged a series of campaigns that permanently eradicated the Hyksos' presence in Egypt. He established a new dynasty. In the New Kingdom that followed, the military became a central priority for the pharaohs seeking to expand Egypt's borders and attempting to gain mastery of the Near East. Shaw (2002) p. 224 

The maximum territorial extent of ancient Egypt (15th century BC)

===New Kingdom (15491069 BC)===

The New Kingdom pharaohs established a period of unprecedented prosperity by securing their borders and strengthening diplomatic ties with their neighbours, including the Mitanni Empire, Assyria, and Canaan. Military campaigns waged under Tuthmosis I and his grandson Tuthmosis III extended the influence of the pharaohs to the largest empire Egypt had ever seen. Between their reigns, Hatshepsut generally promoted peace and restored trade routes lost during the Hyksos occupation, as well as expanding to new regions. When Tuthmosis III died in 1425 BC, Egypt had an empire extending from Niya in north west Syria to the fourth waterfall of the Nile in Nubia, cementing loyalties and opening access to critical imports such as bronze and wood. James (2005) p. 48 

Djeser-Djeseru is the main building of Hatshepsut's mortuary temple complex at Deir el-Bahri, the building is an example of perfect symmetry that predates the Parthenon by a thousand years
The New Kingdom pharaohs began a large-scale building campaign to promote the god Amun, whose growing cult was based in Karnak. They also constructed monuments to glorify their own achievements, both real and imagined. The pharaoh Hatshepsut used such hyperbole and grandeur during her reign of almost twenty-two years. Her reign was very successful, marked by an extended period of peace and wealth-building, trading expeditions to Punt, restoration of foreign trade networks, and great building projects, including an elegant mortuary temple that rivaled the Greek architecture of a thousand years later, a colossal pair of obelisks, and a chapel at Karnak. Despite her achievements, Amenhotep II, the heir to Hatshepsut's nephew-stepson Tuthmosis III, sought to erase her legacy near the end of his father's reign and throughout his, touting many of her accomplishments as his. Clayton (1994) p. 108 He also tried to change many established traditions that had developed over the centuries, which some suggest was a futile attempt to prevent other women from becoming pharaoh and to curb their influence in the kingdom.

Around 1350 BC, the stability of the New Kingdom seemed threatened further when Amenhotep IV ascended the throne and instituted a series of radical and chaotic reforms. Changing his name to Akhenaten, he touted the previously obscure sun deity Aten as the supreme deity, suppressed the worship of most other deities, and attacked the power of the temple that had become dominated by the priests of Amun in Thebes, whom he saw as corrupt. Aldred (1988) p. 259 Moving the capital to the new city of Akhetaten (modern-day Amarna), Akhenaten turned a deaf ear to events in the Near East (where the Hittites, Mitanni, and Assyrians were vying for control). He was devoted to his new religion and artistic style. After his death, the cult of the Aten was quickly abandoned, the priests of Amun soon regained power and returned the capital to Thebes. Under their influence the subsequent pharaohs Tutankhamun, Ay, and Horemheb worked to erase all mention of Akhenaten's heresy, now known as the Amarna Period. Cline (2001) p. 273 

Four colossal statues of Ramesses II flank the entrance of his temple Abu Simbel
Around 1279 BC, Ramesses II, also known as Ramesses the Great, ascended the throne, and went on to build more temples, erect more statues and obelisks, and sire more children than any other pharaoh in history. With his two principal wives and large harem, Ramesses II sired more than 100 children. Clayton (1994) p. 146 A bold military leader, Ramesses II led his army against the Hittites in the Battle of Kadesh (in modern Syria) and, after fighting to a stalemate, finally agreed to the first recorded peace treaty, around 1258 BC. Tyldesley (2001) pp. 767 With both the Egyptians and Hittite Empire proving unable to gain the upper hand over one another, and both powers also fearful of the expanding Middle Assyrian Empire, Egypt withdraw from much of the Near East. The Hittites were thus left to compete unsuccessfully with the powerful Assyrians and the newly arrived Phrygians.

Egypt's wealth, however, made it a tempting target for invasion, particularly by the Libyan Berbers to the west, and the Sea Peoples, a powerful confederation of largely Greek, Luwian and Phoenician/Caananite pirates from the Aegean. Initially, the military was able to repel these invasions, but Egypt eventually lost control of its remaining territories in southern Caanan, much of it falling to the Assyrians. The effects of external threats were exacerbated by internal problems such as corruption, tomb robbery, and civil unrest. After regaining their power, the high priests at the temple of Amun in Thebes accumulated vast tracts of land and wealth, and their expanded power splintered the country during the Third Intermediate Period. James (2005) p. 54 

===Third Intermediate Period (1069653 BC)===

Following the death of Ramesses XI in 1078 BC, Smendes assumed authority over the northern part of Egypt, ruling from the city of Tanis. The south was effectively controlled by the High Priests of Amun at Thebes, who recognized Smendes in name only. Cerny (1975) p. 645 During this time, Berber tribes from what was later to be called Libya had been settling in the western delta, and the chieftains of these settlers began increasing their autonomy. Libyan princes took control of the delta under Shoshenq I in 945 BC, founding the so-called Libyan Berber, or Bubastite, dynasty that ruled for some 200 years. Shoshenq also gained control of southern Egypt by placing his family members in important priestly positions.

In the mid-ninth century BC, Egypt made a failed attempt to once more gain a foothold in Western Asia. Osorkon II of Egypt, along with a large alliance of nations and peoples, including; Israel, Hamath, Phoenicia/Caanan, the Arabs, Arameans, and neo Hittites among others, engaged in the Battle of Karkar against the powerful Assyrian king Shalmaneser III in 853 BC. However, this coalition of powers failed and the Assyrian Empire continued to dominate Western Asia.

Libyan Berber control began to erode as a rival native dynasty in the delta arose under Leontopolis. Also, the Nubians of the Kushites threatened Egypt from the lands to the south. 

Around 730 BC Libyans from the west fractured the political unity of the country

Drawing on millennia of interaction (trade, acculturation, occupation, assimilation, and war ) with Egypt, the Kushite king Piye left his Nubian capital of Napata and invaded Egypt around 727 BC. Piye easily seized control of Thebes and eventually the Nile Delta. Shaw (2002) p. 345 He recorded the episode on his stela of victory. Piye set the stage for subsequent Twenty-fifth dynasty pharaohs, such as Taharqa, to reunite the "Two lands" of Northern and Southern Egypt. The Nile valley empire was as large as it had been since the New Kingdom.

The Twenty-fifth dynasty ushered in a renaissance period for ancient Egypt. Religion, the arts, and architecture were restored to their glorious Old, Middle, and New Kingdom forms. Pharaohs, such as Taharqa, built or restored temples and monuments throughout the Nile valley, including at Memphis, Karnak, Kawa, Jebel Barkal, etc. It was during the Twenty-fifth dynasty that there was the first widespread construction of pyramids (many in modern Sudan) in the Nile Valley since the Middle Kingdom. 

Piye made various unsuccessful attempts to extend Egyptian influence in the Near East, then controlled by Assyria. In 720 BC, he sent an army in support a rebellion against Assyria, which was taking place in Philistia and Gaza. However, Piye was defeated by Sargon II and the rebellion failed. In 711 BC, Piye again supported a revolt against the Assyrians by the Israelites of Ashdod and was once again defeated by the Assyrian king Sargon II. Subsequently, Piye was forced from the Near East. F Leo Oppenheim - Ancient Mesopotamia 

From the 10th century BC onwards, Assyria fought for control of the southern Levant. Frequently, cities and kingdoms of the southern Levant appealed to Egypt for aide in their struggles against the powerful Assyrian army. Taharqa enjoyed some initial success in his attempts to regain a foothold in the Near East. Taharqa aided the Judean King Hezekiah when Hezekiah and Jerusalem was besieged by the Assyrian king, Sennacherib (2 Kings 19:9; Isaiah 37:9). Scholars disagree on the primary reason for Assyria's abandonment of their siege on Jerusalem. Reasons for the Assyrian withdrawal range from conflict with the Egyptian/Kushite army to divine intervention to surrender to disease. Henry Aubin argues that the Kushite/Egyptian army saved Jerusalem from the Assyrians and prevented the Assyrians from returning to capture Jerusalem for the remainder of Sennacherib's life (20 years). Some argue that disease was the primary reason for failing to actually take the city and Senacherib's annals claim Judah was forced into tribute regardless. George Roux - Ancient Iraq 

The Assyrians began their invasion of Egypt under king Esarhaddon, successor of Sennacherib. Sennacherib had been murdered by his own sons for destroying the rebellious city of Babylon. In 674 BC, Taharqa defeated Esarhaddon and the Assyrian army outright on Egyptian soil. In 671 BC, Esarhaddon drove the Kushites from Northern Egypt and back to their Nubian homeland. However, the native Egyptian rulers installed by Esarhaddon were unable to retain full control of the whole country for long. Two years later, Taharqa returned from Nubia and seized control of a section of southern Egypt as far north as Memphis. Esarhaddon prepared to return to Egypt and once more eject Taharqa, however he fell ill and died in his capital, Nineveh, before he left Assyria. His successor, Ashurbanipal, sent a general with a small, but well trained army, which defeated Taharqa at Memphis and once more drove him from Egypt. Taharqa died in Nubia two years later.

His successor, Tanutamun, also made a failed attempt to regain Egypt for Nubia. He successfully defeated Necho, the puppet ruler installed by Ashurbanipal, taking Thebes in the process. The Assyrians then sent a large army southwards. Tantamani (Tanutamun) was heavily routed and fled back to Nubia. The Assyrian army sacked Thebes to such an extent it never truly recovered. A native ruler, Psammetichus I was placed on the throne, as a vassal of Ashurbanipal, and the Nubians were never again to pose a threat. Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq p 330332 
Twenty-fifth Dynasty

===Late Period (672332 BC)===

With no permanent plans for conquest, the Assyrians left control of Egypt to a series of vassals who became known as the Saite kings of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty. By 653 BC, the Saite king Psamtik I (taking advantage of the fact that Assyria was involved in a fierce war conquering Elam and that few Assyrian troops were stationed in Egypt) was able to free Egypt relatively peacefully from Assyrian vassalage with the help of Lydian and Greek mercenaries, the latter of whom were recruited to form Egypt's first navy. Psamtik and his successors however were careful to maintain peaceful relations with Assyria. Greek influence expanded greatly as the city of Naukratis became the home of Greeks in the delta.

In 609 BC Necho II went to war with Babylonia, the Chaldeans, the Medians and the Scythians in an attempt to save Assyria, which after a brutal civil war was being ovverrun by this coalition of powers. However, the attempt to save Egypts former masters failed. The Egyptians delayed intervening too long, and Nineveh had already fallen and King Sin-shar-ishkun was dead by the time Necho II sent his armies northwards. However Necho easily brushed aside the Israelite army under King Josiah but he and the Assyrians then lost a battle at Harran to the Babylonians, Medes and Scythians. Necho II and Ashur-uballit II of Assyria were finally defeated at Carchemish in Aramea (modern Syria) in 605 BC. The Egyptians remained in the area for some decades, struggling with the Babylonian kings Nabopolassar and Nebuchadnezzar II for control of portions of the former Assyrian Empire in The Levant. However, they were eventually driven back into Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar II even briefly invaded Egypt itself in 567 BC. The Saite kings based in the new capital of Sais witnessed a brief but spirited resurgence in the economy and culture, but in 525 BC, the powerful Persians, led by Cambyses II, began their conquest of Egypt, eventually capturing the pharaoh Psamtik III at the battle of Pelusium. Cambyses II then assumed the formal title of pharaoh, but ruled Egypt from his home of Susa in Persia (modern Iran), leaving Egypt under the control of a satrapy. A few temporarily successful revolts against the Persians marked the fifth century BC, but Egypt was never able to permanently overthrow the Persians. Shaw (2002) p. 383 

Following its annexation by Persia, Egypt was joined with Cyprus and Phoenicia (modern Lebanon) in the sixth satrapy of the Achaemenid Persian Empire. This first period of Persian rule over Egypt, also known as the Twenty-seventh dynasty, ended in 402 BC, and from 380343 BC the Thirtieth Dynasty ruled as the last native royal house of dynastic Egypt, which ended with the kingship of Nectanebo II. A brief restoration of Persian rule, sometimes known as the Thirty-first Dynasty, began in 343 BC, but shortly after, in 332 BC, the Persian ruler Mazaces handed Egypt over to the Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great without a fight. Shaw (2002) p. 385 

===Ptolemaic dynasty===

In 332 BC, Alexander the Great conquered Egypt with little resistance from the Persians and was welcomed by the Egyptians as a deliverer. The administration established by Alexander's successors, the Macedonian Ptolemaic dynasty, was based on an Egyptian model and based in the new capital city of Alexandria. The city showcased the power and prestige of Hellenistic rule, and became a seat of learning and culture, centered at the famous Library of Alexandria. Shaw (2002) p. 405 The Lighthouse of Alexandria lit the way for the many ships that kept trade flowing through the cityas the Ptolemies made commerce and revenue-generating enterprises, such as papyrus manufacturing, their top priority. Shaw (2002) p. 411 

Hellenistic culture did not supplant native Egyptian culture, as the Ptolemies supported time-honored traditions in an effort to secure the loyalty of the populace. They built new temples in Egyptian style, supported traditional cults, and portrayed themselves as pharaohs. Some traditions merged, as Greek and Egyptian gods were syncretized into composite deities, such as Serapis, and classical Greek forms of sculpture influenced traditional Egyptian motifs. Despite their efforts to appease the Egyptians, the Ptolemies were challenged by native rebellion, bitter family rivalries, and the powerful mob of Alexandria that formed after the death of Ptolemy IV. Shaw (2002) p. 418 In addition, as Rome relied more heavily on imports of grain from Egypt, the Romans took great interest in the political situation in the country. Continued Egyptian revolts, ambitious politicians, and powerful Syriac opponents from the Near East made this situation unstable, leading Rome to send forces to secure the country as a province of its empire. James (2005) p. 62 

===Roman Period===

The Fayum mummy portraits epitomize the meeting of Egyptian and Roman cultures.

Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC, following the defeat of Marc Antony and Ptolemaic Queen Cleopatra VII by Octavian (later Emperor Augustus) in the Battle of Actium. The Romans relied heavily on grain shipments from Egypt, and the Roman army, under the control of a prefect appointed by the Emperor, quelled rebellions, strictly enforced the collection of heavy taxes, and prevented attacks by bandits, which had become a notorious problem during the period. James (2005) p. 63 Alexandria became an increasingly important center on the trade route with the orient, as exotic luxuries were in high demand in Rome. Shaw (2002) p. 426 

Although the Romans had a more hostile attitude than the Greeks towards the Egyptians, some traditions such as mummification and worship of the traditional gods continued. Shaw (2002) p. 422 The art of mummy portraiture flourished, and some of the Roman emperors had themselves depicted as pharaohs, though not to the extent that the Ptolemies had. The former lived outside Egypt and did not perform the ceremonial functions of Egyptian kingship. Local administration became Roman in style and closed to native Egyptians. 

From the mid-first century AD, Christianity took root in Egypt as it was seen as another cult that could be accepted. However, it was an uncompromising religion that sought to win converts from Egyptian Religion and Greco-Roman religion and threatened the popular religious traditions. This led to persecution of converts to Christianity, culminating in the great purges of Diocletian starting in 303, but eventually Christianity won out. Shaw (2003) p. 431 In 391 the Christian Emperor Theodosius introduced legislation that banned pagan rites and closed temples. "The Church in Ancient Society", Henry Chadwick, p. 373, Oxford University Press US, 2001, ISBN 0-19-924695-5 Alexandria became the scene of great anti-pagan riots with public and private religious imagery destroyed. "Christianizing the Roman Empire A.D 100400", Ramsay MacMullen, p. 63, Yale University Press, 1984, ISBN 0-300-03216-1 As a consequence, Egypt's native religious culture was continually in decline. While the native population certainly continued to speak their language, the ability to read hieroglyphic writing slowly disappeared as the role of the Egyptian temple priests and priestesses diminished. The temples themselves were sometimes converted to churches or abandoned to the desert. Shaw (2002) p. 445 

In the fourth century AD, the Roman Empire split into two, and Egypt became part of the Eastern Empire, known as the Byzantine Empire. The Eastern Empire became increasingly "oriental" and "Eastern" in style, as its links with the old Greco-Roman world faded. The Greek system of local government by citizens had now entirely disappeared.

The Sassanid Persians who were involved in a long running and draining war with Byzantium for control of the Near East, Asia Minor, North Africa and the east Mediterranean, briefly recaptured Egypt under King Khosrow II in 618 AD, but were ejected by the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius in 628 AD.

===Arab Muslim Period===
An army of 4,000 Arabs led by Amr Ibn Al-Aas was sent by the Caliph Umar, successor to Muhammad, to spread Islamic rule to the west. The Arabs crossed into Egypt from Palestine in December 639 AD, and advanced rapidly into the Nile Delta. The Imperial garrisons, exhausted by constant war with the Persians, retreated into the walled towns, where they successfully held out for a year or more. But the Arabs sent for reinforcements, and in April 641 they captured Alexandria. The Byzantines did assemble a fleet with the aim of recapturing Egypt, and won back Alexandria in 645, but the Muslims retook the city in 646, completing the Arab Muslim conquest of Egypt. Thus ended 975 years of Grco-Roman rule over Egypt.

Local resistance by the native Egyptian Copts however, began to materialize shortly thereafter and would last until at least the ninth century. The Arabs imposed a special tax, known as Jizya, on the Egyptians, who were by this time Coptic Christians. They acquired the status of dhimmis, and all native Egyptians were prohibited from joining the army. The Arabs in the seventh century used the term quft to describe the indigenous people of Egypt. Thus, Egyptians became known as Copts, and the non-Chalcedonian Egyptian Church became known as the Coptic Church. The indigenous population of Egypt was gradually and largely Arabized and Islamicized over the following centuries, However, native Egyptian identity and language survived among the Copts, who spoke the Coptic language, a direct descendant of the Demotic Egyptian (which itself was an evolution of Ancient Egyptian) spoken in the Roman era. Since the eighteenth century, Coptic has mostly been limited to liturgical use and today Coptic is extinct as a primary language. Copts still to this day espouse an Egyptian rather than Arab ethnic identity.

==Government and economy==

===Administration and commerce===

150px

The pharaoh was the absolute monarch of the country and, at least in theory, wielded complete control of the land and its resources. The king was the supreme military commander and head of the government, who relied on a bureaucracy of officials to manage his affairs. In charge of the administration was his second in command, the vizier, who acted as the king's representative and coordinated land surveys, the treasury, building projects, the legal system, and the archives. Manuelian (1998) p. 358 At a regional level, the country was divided into as many as 42 administrative regions called nomes each governed by a nomarch, who was accountable to the vizier for his jurisdiction. The temples formed the backbone of the economy. Not only were they houses of worship, but were also responsible for collecting and storing the nation's wealth in a system of granaries and treasuries administered by overseers, who redistributed grain and goods. Manuelian (1998) p. 363 

Much of the economy was centrally organized and strictly controlled. Although the ancient Egyptians did not use coinage until the Late period, they did use a type of money-barter system, Meskell (2004) p. 23 with standard sacks of grain and the deben, a weight of roughly 91 g of copper or silver, forming a common denominator. Manuelian (1998) p. 372 Workers were paid in grain; a simple laborer might earn 5 sacks (200 kg or 400 lb) of grain per month, while a foreman might earn 7 sacks (250 kg or 550 lb). Prices were fixed across the country and recorded in lists to facilitate trading; for example a shirt cost five copper deben, while a cow cost 140 deben. Grain could be traded for other goods, according to the fixed price list. During the fifth century BC coined money was introduced into Egypt from abroad. At first the coins were used as standardized pieces of precious metal rather than true money, but in the following centuries international traders came to rely on coinage. Walbank (1984) p. 125 

===Social status===
Egyptian society was highly stratified, and social status was expressly displayed. Farmers made up the bulk of the population, but agricultural produce was owned directly by the state, temple, or noble family that owned the land. Manuelian (1998) p. 383 Farmers were also subject to a labor tax and were required to work on irrigation or construction projects in a corve system. James (2005) p. 136 Artists and craftsmen were of higher status than farmers, but they were also under state control, working in the shops attached to the temples and paid directly from the state treasury. Scribes and officials formed the upper class in ancient Egypt, the so-called "white kilt class" in reference to the bleached linen garments that served as a mark of their rank. Billard (1978) p. 109 The upper class prominently displayed their social status in art and literature. Below the nobility were the priests, physicians, and engineers with specialized training in their field. Slavery was known in ancient Egypt, but the extent and prevalence of its practice are unclear. 
Punishment in ancient Egypt.
176px
The ancient Egyptians viewed men and women, including people from all social classes except slaves, as essentially equal under the law, and even the lowliest peasant was entitled to petition the vizier and his court for redress. Although, slaves were mostly used as indentured servants. They were able to buy and sell, or work their way to freedom or nobility, and usually were treated by doctors in the workplace. Slavery in Ancient Egyptfrom http://www.reshafim.org.il. Retrieved August 28, 2012. Both men and women had the right to own and sell property, make contracts, marry and divorce, receive inheritance, and pursue legal disputes in court. Married couples could own property jointly and protect themselves from divorce by agreeing to marriage contracts, which stipulated the financial obligations of the husband to his wife and children should the marriage end. Compared with their counterparts in ancient Greece, Rome, and even more modern places around the world, ancient Egyptian women had a greater range of personal choices and opportunities for achievement. Women such as Hatshepsut and Cleopatra VI even became pharaohs, while others wielded power as Divine Wives of Amun. Despite these freedoms, ancient Egyptian women did not often take part in official roles in the administration, served only secondary roles in the temples, and were not as likely to be as educated as men. 

Scribes were elite and well educated. They assessed taxes, kept records, and were responsible for administration.

===Legal system===
The head of the legal system was officially the pharaoh, who was responsible for enacting laws, delivering justice, and maintaining law and order, a concept the ancient Egyptians referred to as Ma'at. Although no legal codes from ancient Egypt survive, court documents show that Egyptian law was based on a common-sense view of right and wrong that emphasized reaching agreements and resolving conflicts rather than strictly adhering to a complicated set of statutes. Local councils of elders, known as Kenbet in the New Kingdom, were responsible for ruling in court cases involving small claims and minor disputes. More serious cases involving murder, major land transactions, and tomb robbery were referred to the Great Kenbet, over which the vizier or pharaoh presided. Plaintiffs and defendants were expected to represent themselves and were required to swear an oath that they had told the truth. In some cases, the state took on both the role of prosecutor and judge, and it could torture the accused with beatings to obtain a confession and the names of any co-conspirators. Whether the charges were trivial or serious, court scribes documented the complaint, testimony, and verdict of the case for future reference. Oakes (2003) p. 472 

Punishment for minor crimes involved either imposition of fines, beatings, facial mutilation, or exile, depending on the severity of the offense. Serious crimes such as murder and tomb robbery were punished by execution, carried out by decapitation, drowning, or impaling the criminal on a stake. Punishment could also be extended to the criminal's family. Beginning in the New Kingdom, oracles played a major role in the legal system, dispensing justice in both civil and criminal cases. The procedure was to ask the god a "yes" or "no" question concerning the right or wrong of an issue. The god, carried by a number of priests, rendered judgment by choosing one or the other, moving forward or backward, or pointing to one of the answers written on a piece of papyrus or an ostracon. McDowell (1999) p. 168 

===Agriculture===

A tomb relief depicts workers plowing the fields, harvesting the crops, and threshing the grain under the direction of an overseer, painting in the tomb of Nakht.
225px

A combination of favorable geographical features contributed to the success of ancient Egyptian culture, the most important of which was the rich fertile soil resulting from annual inundations of the Nile River. The ancient Egyptians were thus able to produce an abundance of food, allowing the population to devote more time and resources to cultural, technological, and artistic pursuits. Land management was crucial in ancient Egypt because taxes were assessed based on the amount of land a person owned. Manuelian (1998) p. 361 

Farming in Egypt was dependent on the cycle of the Nile River. The Egyptians recognized three seasons: Akhet (flooding), Peret (planting), and Shemu (harvesting). The flooding season lasted from June to September, depositing on the river's banks a layer of mineral-rich silt ideal for growing crops. After the floodwaters had receded, the growing season lasted from October to February. Farmers plowed and planted seeds in the fields, which were irrigated with ditches and canals. Egypt received little rainfall, so farmers relied on the Nile to water their crops. Nicholson (2000) p. 514 From March to May, farmers used sickles to harvest their crops, which were then threshed with a flail to separate the straw from the grain. Winnowing removed the chaff from the grain, and the grain was then ground into flour, brewed to make beer, or stored for later use. Nicholson (2000) p. 506 

The ancient Egyptians cultivated emmer and barley, and several other cereal grains, all of which were used to make the two main food staples of bread and beer. Nicholson (2000) p. 510 Flax plants, uprooted before they started flowering, were grown for the fibers of their stems. These fibers were split along their length and spun into thread, which was used to weave sheets of linen and to make clothing. Papyrus growing on the banks of the Nile River was used to make paper. Vegetables and fruits were grown in garden plots, close to habitations and on higher ground, and had to be watered by hand. Vegetables included leeks, garlic, melons, squashes, pulses, lettuce, and other crops, in addition to grapes that were made into wine. Nicholson (2000) pp. 577 and 630 

Sennedjem plows his fields with a pair of oxen, used as beasts of burden and a source of food.

====Animals====

The Egyptians believed that a balanced relationship between people and animals was an essential element of the cosmic order; thus humans, animals and plants were believed to be members of a single whole. Strouhal (1989) p. 117 Animals, both domesticated and wild, were therefore a critical source of spirituality, companionship, and sustenance to the ancient Egyptians. Cattle were the most important livestock; the administration collected taxes on livestock in regular censuses, and the size of a herd reflected the prestige and importance of the estate or temple that owned them. In addition to cattle, the ancient Egyptians kept sheep, goats, and pigs. Poultry such as ducks, geese, and pigeons were captured in nets and bred on farms, where they were force-fed with dough to fatten them. Manuelian (1998) p. 381 The Nile provided a plentiful source of fish. Bees were also domesticated from at least the Old Kingdom, and they provided both honey and wax. Nicholson (2000) p. 409 

The ancient Egyptians used donkeys and oxen as beasts of burden, and they were responsible for plowing the fields and trampling seed into the soil. The slaughter of a fattened ox was also a central part of an offering ritual. Horses were introduced by the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, and the camel, although known from the New Kingdom, was not used as a beast of burden until the Late Period. There is also evidence to suggest that elephants were briefly utilized in the Late Period, but largely abandoned due to lack of grazing land. Dogs, cats and monkeys were common family pets, while more exotic pets imported from the heart of Africa, such as lions, were reserved for royalty. Herodotus observed that the Egyptians were the only people to keep their animals with them in their houses. During the Predynastic and Late periods, the worship of the gods in their animal form was extremely popular, such as the cat goddess Bastet and the ibis god Thoth, and these animals were bred in large numbers on farms for the purpose of ritual sacrifice. Oakes (2003) p. 229 

===Natural resources===

Egypt is rich in building and decorative stone, copper and lead ores, gold, and semiprecious stones. These natural resources allowed the ancient Egyptians to build monuments, sculpt statues, make tools, and fashion jewelry. Greaves (1929) p. 123 Embalmers used salts from the Wadi Natrun for mummification, which also provided the gypsum needed to make plaster. Lucas (1962) p. 413 Ore-bearing rock formations were found in distant, inhospitable wadis in the eastern desert and the Sinai, requiring large, state-controlled expeditions to obtain natural resources found there. There were extensive gold mines in Nubia, and one of the first maps known is of a gold mine in this region. The Wadi Hammamat was a notable source of granite, greywacke, and gold. Flint was the first mineral collected and used to make tools, and flint handaxes are the earliest pieces of evidence of habitation in the Nile valley. Nodules of the mineral were carefully flaked to make blades and arrowheads of moderate hardness and durability even after copper was adopted for this purpose. Nicholson (2000) p. 28 Ancient Egyptians were among the first to use minerals such as sulfur as cosmetic substances. C.Michael Hogan. 2011. Sulfur. Encyclopedia of Earth, eds. A. Jorgensen and C.J. Cleveland, National Council for Science and the environment, Washington DC 

The Egyptians worked deposits of the lead ore galena at Gebel Rosas to make net sinkers, plumb bobs, and small figurines. Copper was the most important metal for toolmaking in ancient Egypt and was smelted in furnaces from malachite ore mined in the Sinai. Scheel (1989) p. 14 Workers collected gold by washing the nuggets out of sediment in alluvial deposits, or by the more labor-intensive process of grinding and washing gold-bearing quartzite. Iron deposits found in upper Egypt were utilized in the Late Period. Nicholson (2000) p. 166 High-quality building stones were abundant in Egypt; the ancient Egyptians quarried limestone all along the Nile valley, granite from Aswan, and basalt and sandstone from the wadis of the eastern desert. Deposits of decorative stones such as porphyry, greywacke, alabaster, and carnelian dotted the eastern desert and were collected even before the First Dynasty. In the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods, miners worked deposits of emeralds in Wadi Sikait and amethyst in Wadi el-Hudi. Nicholson (2000) p. 51 

===Trade===

Hatshepsut's trading expedition to the Land of Punt.
The ancient Egyptians engaged in trade with their foreign neighbors to obtain rare, exotic goods not found in Egypt. In the Predynastic Period, they established trade with Nubia to obtain gold and incense. They also established trade with Palestine, as evidenced by Palestinian-style oil jugs found in the burials of the First Dynasty pharaohs. Shaw (2002) p. 72 An Egyptian colony stationed in southern Canaan dates to slightly before the First Dynasty. Naomi Porat and Edwin van den Brink (editor), "An Egyptian Colony in Southern Palestine During the Late Predynastic to Early Dynastic," in The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th to 3rd Millennium BC (1992), pp. 433440. Narmer had Egyptian pottery produced in Canaan and exported back to Egypt. Naomi Porat, "Local Industry of Egyptian Pottery in Southern Palestine During the Early Bronze I Period," in Bulletin of the Egyptological, Seminar 8 (1986/1987), pp. 109129. See also University College London web post, 2000. 

By the Second Dynasty at latest, ancient Egyptian trade with Byblos yielded a critical source of quality timber not found in Egypt. By the Fifth Dynasty, trade with Punt provided gold, aromatic resins, ebony, ivory, and wild animals such as monkeys and baboons. Shaw (2002) p. 322 Egypt relied on trade with Anatolia for essential quantities of tin as well as supplementary supplies of copper, both metals being necessary for the manufacture of bronze. The ancient Egyptians prized the blue stone lapis lazuli, which had to be imported from far-away Afghanistan. Egypt's Mediterranean trade partners also included Greece and Crete, which provided, among other goods, supplies of olive oil. Manuelian (1998) p. 145 In exchange for its luxury imports and raw materials, Egypt mainly exported grain, gold, linen, and papyrus, in addition to other finished goods including glass and stone objects. Harris (1990) p. 13 

==Language==

===Historical development===

The Egyptian language is a northern Afro-Asiatic language closely related to the Berber and Semitic languages. Loprieno (1995b) p. 2137 It has the second longest history of any language (after Sumerian), having been written from c. 3200 BC to the Middle Ages and remaining as a spoken language for longer. The phases of ancient Egyptian are Old Egyptian, Middle Egyptian (Classical Egyptian), Late Egyptian, Demotic and Coptic. Loprieno (2004) p. 161 Egyptian writings do not show dialect differences before Coptic, but it was probably spoken in regional dialects around Memphis and later Thebes. Loprieno (2004) p. 162 

Ancient Egyptian was a synthetic language, but it became more analytic later on. Late Egyptian develops prefixal definite and indefinite articles, which replace the older inflectional suffixes. There is a change from the older verbsubjectobject word order to subjectverbobject. Loprieno (1995b) p. 213738 The Egyptian hieroglyphic, hieratic, and demotic scripts were eventually replaced by the more phonetic Coptic alphabet. Coptic is still used in the liturgy of the Egyptian Orthodox Church, and traces of it are found in modern Egyptian Arabic. Vittman (1991) pp. 197227 

===Sounds and grammar===

Ancient Egyptian has 25 consonants similar to those of other Afro-Asiatic languages. These include pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, voiced and voiceless stops, voiceless fricatives and voiced and voiceless affricates. It has three long and three short vowels, which expanded in Later Egyptian to about nine. Loprieno (1995a) p. 46 The basic word in Egyptian, similar to Semitic and Berber, is a triliteral or biliteral root of consonants and semiconsonants. Suffixes are added to form words. The verb conjugation corresponds to the person. For example, the triconsonantal skeleton is the semantic core of the word 'hear'; its basic conjugation is , 'he hears'. If the subject is a noun, suffixes are not added to the verb: Loprieno (1995a) p. 74 , 'the woman hears'.

Adjectives are derived from nouns through a process that Egyptologists call nisbation because of its similarity with Arabic. Loprieno (2004) p. 175 The word order is in verbal and adjectival sentences, and in nominal and adverbial sentences. Allen (2000) pp. 67, 70, 109 The subject can be moved to the beginning of sentences if it is long and is followed by a resumptive pronoun. Loprieno (2005) p. 2147 Verbs and nouns are negated by the particle n, but nn is used for adverbial and adjectival sentences. Stress falls on the ultimate or penultimate syllable, which can be open (CV) or closed (CVC). Loprieno (2004) p. 173 

===Writing===

The Rosetta stone (ca 196 BC) enabled linguists to begin the process of hieroglyph decipherment. Allen (2000) p. 13 

Hieroglyphic writing dates from c. 3000 BC, and is composed of hundreds of symbols. A hieroglyph can represent a word, a sound, or a silent determinative; and the same symbol can serve different purposes in different contexts. Hieroglyphs were a formal script, used on stone monuments and in tombs, that could be as detailed as individual works of art. In day-to-day writing, scribes used a cursive form of writing, called hieratic, which was quicker and easier. While formal hieroglyphs may be read in rows or columns in either direction (though typically written from right to left), hieratic was always written from right to left, usually in horizontal rows. A new form of writing, Demotic, became the prevalent writing style, and it is this form of writingalong with formal hieroglyphsthat accompany the Greek text on the Rosetta Stone. Loprieno (1995a) pp. 1026 

Around the first century AD, the Coptic alphabet started to be used alongside the Demotic script. Coptic is a modified Greek alphabet with the addition of some Demotic signs. Allen (2000) p. 7 Although formal hieroglyphs were used in a ceremonial role until the fourth century, towards the end only a small handful of priests could still read them. As the traditional religious establishments were disbanded, knowledge of hieroglyphic writing was mostly lost. Attempts to decipher them date to the Byzantine Loprieno (2004) p. 166 and Islamic periods in Egypt, El-Daly (2005) p. 164 but only in 1822, after the discovery of the Rosetta stone and years of research by Thomas Young and Jean-Franois Champollion, were hieroglyphs almost fully deciphered. Allen (2000) p. 8 

===Literature===

The Edwin Smith surgical papyrus (c. 16th century BC) describes anatomy and medical treatments and is written in hieratic.

Writing first appeared in association with kingship on labels and tags for items found in royal tombs. It was primarily an occupation of the scribes, who worked out of the Per Ankh institution or the House of Life. The latter comprised offices, libraries (called House of Books), laboratories and observatories. Strouhal (1989) p. 235 Some of the best-known pieces of ancient Egyptian literature, such as the Pyramid and Coffin Texts, were written in Classical Egyptian, which continued to be the language of writing until about 1300 BC. Later Egyptian was spoken from the New Kingdom onward and is represented in Ramesside administrative documents, love poetry and tales, as well as in Demotic and Coptic texts. During this period, the tradition of writing had evolved into the tomb autobiography, such as those of Harkhuf and Weni. The genre known as Sebayt ("instructions") was developed to communicate teachings and guidance from famous nobles; the Ipuwer papyrus, a poem of lamentations describing natural disasters and social upheaval, is a famous example.

The Story of Sinuhe, written in Middle Egyptian, might be the classic of Egyptian literature. Lichtheim (1975) p. 11 Also written at this time was the Westcar Papyrus, a set of stories told to Khufu by his sons relating the marvels performed by priests. Lichtheim (1975) p. 215 The Instruction of Amenemope is considered a masterpiece of near-eastern literature. "Wisdom in Ancient Israel", John Day,/John Adney Emerton,/Robert P. Gordon/ Hugh Godfrey/Maturin Williamson, p23, Cambridge University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-521-62489-4 Towards the end of the New Kingdom, the vernacular language was more often employed to write popular pieces like the Story of Wenamun and the Instruction of Any. The former tells the story of a noble who is robbed on his way to buy cedar from Lebanon and of his struggle to return to Egypt. From about 700 BC, narrative stories and instructions, such as the popular Instructions of Onchsheshonqy, as well as personal and business documents were written in the demotic script and phase of Egyptian. Many stories written in demotic during the Graeco-Roman period were set in previous historical eras, when Egypt was an independent nation ruled by great pharaohs such as Ramesses II. Lichtheim (1980) p. 159 

==Culture==

===Daily life===
 Ostraca of hunting a lion with a spear, aided by a dog.
 Statues depicting lower-class ancient Egyptian occupations.
 A painted depiction of Senet (in the tomb of Queen Nefertari, Valley of the Queens, Thebes, Egypt), one of the world's earliest known board games.
Most ancient Egyptians were farmers tied to the land. Their dwellings were restricted to immediate family members, and were constructed of mud-brick designed to remain cool in the heat of the day. Each home had a kitchen with an open roof, which contained a grindstone for milling grain and a small oven for baking the bread. Manuelian (1998) p. 401 Walls were painted white and could be covered with dyed linen wall hangings. Floors were covered with reed mats, while wooden stools, beds raised from the floor and individual tables comprised the furniture. Manuelian (1998) p. 403 

The ancient Egyptians placed a great value on hygiene and appearance. Most bathed in the Nile and used a pasty soap made from animal fat and chalk. Men shaved their entire bodies for cleanliness; perfumes and aromatic ointments covered bad odors and soothed skin. Manuelian (1998) p. 405 Clothing was made from simple linen sheets that were bleached white, and both men and women of the upper classes wore wigs, jewelry, and cosmetics. Children went without clothing until maturity, at about age 12, and at this age males were circumcised and had their heads shaved. Mothers were responsible for taking care of the children, while the father provided the family's income. Manuelian (1998) pp. 4067 
The ancient Egyptians maintained a rich cultural heritage complete with feasts and festivals accompanied by music and dance.
Music and dance were popular entertainments for those who could afford them. Early instruments included flutes and harps, while instruments similar to trumpets, oboes, and pipes developed later and became popular. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians played on bells, cymbals, tambourines, drums, and imported lutes and lyres from Asia. The sistrum was a rattle-like musical instrument that was especially important in religious ceremonies.

The ancient Egyptians enjoyed a variety of leisure activities, including games and music. Senet, a board game where pieces moved according to random chance, was particularly popular from the earliest times; another similar game was mehen, which had a circular gaming board. Juggling and ball games were popular with children, and wrestling is also documented in a tomb at Beni Hasan. Manuelian (1998) p. 126 The wealthy members of ancient Egyptian society enjoyed hunting and boating as well.

The excavation of the workers' village of Deir el-Madinah has resulted in one of the most thoroughly documented accounts of community life in the ancient world that spans almost four hundred years. There is no comparable site in which the organisation, social interactions, working and living conditions of a community were studied in such detail. "The Cambridge Ancient History: II Part I, The Middle East and the Aegean Region, c.1800-13380 B.C", Edited I.E.S EdwardsC.JGaddN.G.L Hammond-E.Sollberger, Cambridge at the University Press, p. 380, 1973, ISBN 0-521-08230-7 

===Cuisine===

Egyptian cuisine remained remarkably stable over time; indeed, the cuisine of modern Egypt retains some striking similarities to the cuisine of the ancients. The staple diet consisted of bread and beer, supplemented with vegetables such as onions and garlic, and fruit such as dates and figs. Wine and meat were enjoyed by all on feast days while the upper classes indulged on a more regular basis. Fish, meat, and fowl could be salted or dried, and could be cooked in stews or roasted on a grill. Manuelian (1998) pp. 399400 

Karnak temple's hypostyle halls are constructed with rows of thick columns supporting the roof beams.

===Architecture===

The well preserved Temple of Horus at Edfu is an exemplar of Egyptian architecture.
The architecture of ancient Egypt includes some of the most famous structures in the world: the Great Pyramids of Giza and the temples at Thebes. Building projects were organized and funded by the state for religious and commemorative purposes, but also to reinforce the power of the pharaoh. The ancient Egyptians were skilled builders; using simple but effective tools and sighting instruments, architects could build large stone structures with accuracy and precision. Clarke (1990) pp. 947 

The domestic dwellings of elite and ordinary Egyptians alike were constructed from perishable materials such as mud bricks and wood, and have not survived. Peasants lived in simple homes, while the palaces of the elite were more elaborate structures. A few surviving New Kingdom palaces, such as those in Malkata and Amarna, show richly decorated walls and floors with scenes of people, birds, water pools, deities and geometric designs. Badawy (1968) p. 50 Important structures such as temples and tombs that were intended to last forever were constructed of stone instead of bricks. The architectural elements used in the world's first large-scale stone building, Djoser's mortuary complex, include post and lintel supports in the papyrus and lotus motif.

The earliest preserved ancient Egyptian temples, such as those at Giza, consist of single, enclosed halls with roof slabs supported by columns. In the New Kingdom, architects added the pylon, the open courtyard, and the enclosed hypostyle hall to the front of the temple's sanctuary, a style that was standard until the Graeco-Roman period. The earliest and most popular tomb architecture in the Old Kingdom was the mastaba, a flat-roofed rectangular structure of mudbrick or stone built over an underground burial chamber. The step pyramid of Djoser is a series of stone mastabas stacked on top of each other. Pyramids were built during the Old and Middle Kingdoms, but most later rulers abandoned them in favor of less conspicuous rock-cut tombs. Dodson (1991) p. 23 The Twenty-fifth dynasty was a notable exception, as all Twenty-fifth dynasty pharaohs constructed pyramids. 

===Art===

The Bust of Nefertiti, by the sculptor Thutmose, is one of the most famous masterpieces of ancient Egyptian art.

The ancient Egyptians produced art to serve functional purposes. For over 3500 years, artists adhered to artistic forms and iconography that were developed during the Old Kingdom, following a strict set of principles that resisted foreign influence and internal change. Robins (1997) p. 29 These artistic standardssimple lines, shapes, and flat areas of color combined with the characteristic flat projection of figures with no indication of spatial depthcreated a sense of order and balance within a composition. Images and text were intimately interwoven on tomb and temple walls, coffins, stelae, and even statues. The Narmer Palette, for example, displays figures that can also be read as hieroglyphs. Robins (1997) p. 21 Because of the rigid rules that governed its highly stylized and symbolic appearance, ancient Egyptian art served its political and religious purposes with precision and clarity. Robins (2001) p. 12 

Ancient Egyptian artisans used stone to carve statues and fine reliefs, but used wood as a cheap and easily carved substitute. Paints were obtained from minerals such as iron ores (red and yellow ochres), copper ores (blue and green), soot or charcoal (black), and limestone (white). Paints could be mixed with gum arabic as a binder and pressed into cakes, which could be moistened with water when needed. Nicholson (2000) p. 105 

Hathor-Menkaure-Bat triad of the Fourth Dynasty  the deities flank the pharaoh and provide the authority to rule  Cairo Museum
Pharaohs used reliefs to record victories in battle, royal decrees, and religious scenes. Common citizens had access to pieces of funerary art, such as shabti statues and books of the dead, which they believed would protect them in the afterlife. James (2005) p. 122 During the Middle Kingdom, wooden or clay models depicting scenes from everyday life became popular additions to the tomb. In an attempt to duplicate the activities of the living in the afterlife, these models show laborers, houses, boats, and even military formations that are scale representations of the ideal ancient Egyptian afterlife. Robins (1998) p. 74 

Despite the homogeneity of ancient Egyptian art, the styles of particular times and places sometimes reflected changing cultural or political attitudes. After the invasion of the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, Minoan-style frescoes were found in Avaris. Shaw (2002) p. 216 The most striking example of a politically driven change in artistic forms comes from the Amarna period, where figures were radically altered to conform to Akhenaten's revolutionary religious ideas. Robins (1998) p. 149 This style, known as Amarna art, was quickly and thoroughly erased after Akhenaten's death and replaced by the traditional forms. Robins (1998) p. 158 

===Religious beliefs===

The Book of the Dead was a guide to the deceased's journey in the afterlife.

Beliefs in the divine and in the afterlife were ingrained in ancient Egyptian civilization from its inception; pharaonic rule was based on the divine right of kings. The Egyptian pantheon was populated by gods who had supernatural powers and were called on for help or protection. However, the gods were not always viewed as benevolent, and Egyptians believed they had to be appeased with offerings and prayers. The structure of this pantheon changed continually as new deities were promoted in the hierarchy, but priests made no effort to organize the diverse and sometimes conflicting myths and stories into a coherent system. James (2005) p. 102 These various conceptions of divinity were not considered contradictory but rather layers in the multiple facets of reality. "The Oxford Guide: Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology", edited by Donald B. Redford, p. 106, Berkley, 2003, ISBN 0-425-19096-X 

The Ka statue provided a physical place for the Ka to manifest.

Gods were worshiped in cult temples administered by priests acting on the king's behalf. At the center of the temple was the cult statue in a shrine. Temples were not places of public worship or congregation, and only on select feast days and celebrations was a shrine carrying the statue of the god brought out for public worship. Normally, the god's domain was sealed off from the outside world and was only accessible to temple officials. Common citizens could worship private statues in their homes, and amulets offered protection against the forces of chaos. James (2005) p. 117 After the New Kingdom, the pharaoh's role as a spiritual intermediary was de-emphasized as religious customs shifted to direct worship of the gods. As a result, priests developed a system of oracles to communicate the will of the gods directly to the people. Shaw (2002) p. 313 

The Egyptians believed that every human being was composed of physical and spiritual parts or aspects. In addition to the body, each person had a wt (shadow), a ba (personality or soul), a ka (life-force), and a name. Allen (2000) pp. 79, 945 The heart, rather than the brain, was considered the seat of thoughts and emotions. After death, the spiritual aspects were released from the body and could move at will, but they required the physical remains (or a substitute, such as a statue) as a permanent home. The ultimate goal of the deceased was to rejoin his ka and ba and become one of the "blessed dead", living on as an akh, or "effective one". For this to happen, the deceased had to be judged worthy in a trial, in which the heart was weighed against a "feather of truth". If deemed worthy, the deceased could continue their existence on earth in spiritual form. Wasserman, et al. (1994) pp. 1503 

Pharaohs' tombs were provided with vast quantities of wealth, such as this golden mask from the mummy of Tutankhamun.

===Burial customs===

The ancient Egyptians maintained an elaborate set of burial customs that they believed were necessary to ensure immortality after death. These customs involved preserving the body by mummification, performing burial ceremonies, and interring with the body goods the deceased would use in the afterlife. Before the Old Kingdom, bodies buried in desert pits were naturally preserved by desiccation. The arid, desert conditions were a boon throughout the history of ancient Egypt for burials of the poor, who could not afford the elaborate burial preparations available to the elite. Wealthier Egyptians began to bury their dead in stone tombs and use artificial mummification, which involved removing the internal organs, wrapping the body in linen, and burying it in a rectangular stone sarcophagus or wooden coffin. Beginning in the Fourth Dynasty, some parts were preserved separately in canopic jars. 

Anubis was the ancient Egyptian god associated with mummification and burial rituals; here, he attends to a mummy.

By the New Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had perfected the art of mummification; the best technique took 70 days and involved removing the internal organs, removing the brain through the nose, and desiccating the body in a mixture of salts called natron. The body was then wrapped in linen with protective amulets inserted between layers and placed in a decorated anthropoid coffin. Mummies of the Late Period were also placed in painted cartonnage mummy cases. Actual preservation practices declined during the Ptolemaic and Roman eras, while greater emphasis was placed on the outer appearance of the mummy, which was decorated. 

Wealthy Egyptians were buried with larger quantities of luxury items, but all burials, regardless of social status, included goods for the deceased. Beginning in the New Kingdom, books of the dead were included in the grave, along with shabti statues that were believed to perform manual labor for them in the afterlife. Rituals in which the deceased was magically re-animated accompanied burials. After burial, living relatives were expected to occasionally bring food to the tomb and recite prayers on behalf of the deceased. James (2005) p. 124 

==Military==

An Egyptian chariot.
The ancient Egyptian military was responsible for defending Egypt against foreign invasion, and for maintaining Egypt's domination in the ancient Near East. The military protected mining expeditions to the Sinai during the Old Kingdom and fought civil wars during the First and Second Intermediate Periods. The military was responsible for maintaining fortifications along important trade routes, such as those found at the city of Buhen on the way to Nubia. Forts also were constructed to serve as military bases, such as the fortress at Sile, which was a base of operations for expeditions to the Levant. In the New Kingdom, a series of pharaohs used the standing Egyptian army to attack and conquer Kush and parts of the Levant. Shaw (2002) p. 245 

Typical military equipment included bows and arrows, spears, and round-topped shields made by stretching animal skin over a wooden frame. In the New Kingdom, the military began using chariots that had earlier been introduced by the Hyksos invaders. Weapons and armor continued to improve after the adoption of bronze: shields were now made from solid wood with a bronze buckle, spears were tipped with a bronze point, and the Khopesh was adopted from Asiatic soldiers. Manuelian (1998) pp. 36667 The pharaoh was usually depicted in art and literature riding at the head of the army, it has been suggested that at least a few pharaohs, such as Seqenenre Tao II and his sons, did do so. Clayton (1994) p. 96 although it has also been argued that "kings of this period did not personally act as frontline war leaders, fighting alongside their troops." Soldiers were recruited from the general population, but during, and especially after, the New Kingdom, mercenaries from Nubia, Kush, and Libya were hired to fight for Egypt. Shaw (2002) p. 400 

==Technology, medicine, and mathematics==

===Technology===

In technology, medicine and mathematics, ancient Egypt achieved a relatively high standard of productivity and sophistication. Traditional empiricism, as evidenced by the Edwin Smith and Ebers papyri (c. 1600 BC), is first credited to Egypt. The Egyptians created their own alphabet and decimal system.
Glassmaking was a highly developed art.

===Faience and glass===
Even before the Old Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had developed a glassy material known as faience, which they treated as a type of artificial semi-precious stone. Faience is a non-clay ceramic made of silica, small amounts of lime and soda, and a colorant, typically copper. Nicholson (2000) p. 177 The material was used to make beads, tiles, figurines, and small wares. Several methods can be used to create faience, but typically production involved application of the powdered materials in the form of a paste over a clay core, which was then fired. By a related technique, the ancient Egyptians produced a pigment known as Egyptian Blue, also called blue frit, which is produced by fusing (or sintering) silica, copper, lime, and an alkali such as natron. The product can be ground up and used as a pigment. Nicholson (2000) p. 109 

The ancient Egyptians could fabricate a wide variety of objects from glass with great skill, but it is not clear whether they developed the process independently. Nicholson (2000) p. 195 It is also unclear whether they made their own raw glass or merely imported pre-made ingots, which they melted and finished. However, they did have technical expertise in making objects, as well as adding trace elements to control the color of the finished glass. A range of colors could be produced, including yellow, red, green, blue, purple, and white, and the glass could be made either transparent or opaque. Nicholson (2000) p. 215 

===Medicine===

Ancient Egyptian medical instruments depicted in a Ptolemaic period inscription on the temple at Kom Ombo.
The medical problems of the ancient Egyptians stemmed directly from their environment. Living and working close to the Nile brought hazards from malaria and debilitating schistosomiasis parasites, which caused liver and intestinal damage. Dangerous wildlife such as crocodiles and hippos were also a common threat. The lifelong labors of farming and building put stress on the spine and joints, and traumatic injuries from construction and warfare all took a significant toll on the body. The grit and sand from stone-ground flour abraded teeth, leaving them susceptible to abscesses (though caries were rare). Filer (1995) p. 94 

The diets of the wealthy were rich in sugars, which promoted periodontal disease. Filer (1995) pp. 7880 Despite the flattering physiques portrayed on tomb walls, the overweight mummies of many of the upper class show the effects of a life of overindulgence. Filer (1995) p. 21 Adult life expectancy was about 35 for men and 30 for women, but reaching adulthood was difficult as about one-third of the population died in infancy. Figures are given for adult life expectancy and do not reflect life expectancy at birth. Filer (1995) p. 25 

Ancient Egyptian physicians were renowned in the ancient Near East for their healing skills, and some, such as Imhotep, remained famous long after their deaths. Filer (1995) p. 39 Herodotus remarked that there was a high degree of specialization among Egyptian physicians, with some treating only the head or the stomach, while others were eye-doctors and dentists. Strouhal (1989) p. 243 Training of physicians took place at the Per Ankh or "House of Life" institution, most notably those headquartered in Per-Bastet during the New Kingdom and at Abydos and Sas in the Late period. Medical papyri show empirical knowledge of anatomy, injuries, and practical treatments. Stroual (1989) pp. 24446 

Wounds were treated by bandaging with raw meat, white linen, sutures, nets, pads, and swabs soaked with honey to prevent infection, Stroual (1989) p. 250 while opium thyme and belladona were used to relieve pain. The earliest records of burn treatment describe burn dressings that use the milk from mothers of male babies. Prayers were made to the goddess Isis. Moldy bread, honey and copper salts were also used to prevent infection from dirt in burns. Garlic and onions were used regularly to promote good health and were thought to relieve asthma symptoms. Ancient Egyptian surgeons stitched wounds, set broken bones, and amputated diseased limbs, but they recognized that some injuries were so serious that they could only make the patient comfortable until death occurred. Filer (1995) p. 38 

===Shipbuilding===
Seagoing ship from Hateshepsut's Deir el-Bahari temple relief of a Punt Expedition

Documented extent of Ancient Egyptian geographic knowledgeEarly Egyptians knew how to assemble planks of wood into a ship hull and had mastered advanced forms of shipbuilding as early as 3000 BC. The Archaeological Institute of America reports that some of the oldest ships yet unearthed are known as the Abydos boats. Ward, Cheryl. "World's Oldest Planked Boats", inArchaeology (Volume 54, Number 3, May/June 2001). Archaeological Institute of America. These are a group of 14 discovered ships in Abydos that were constructed of wooden planks "sewn" together. Discovered by Egyptologist David O'Connor of New York University, Schuster, Angela M.H. "This Old Boat", 11 December 2000. Archaeological Institute of America. woven straps were found to have been used to lash the planks together, and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks helped to seal the seams. Because the ships are all buried together and near a mortuary belonging to Pharaoh Khasekhemwy, originally they were all thought to have belonged to him, but one of the 14 ships dates to 3000 BC, and the associated pottery jars buried with the vessels also suggest earlier dating. The ship dating to 3000 BC was 75 ft long and is now thought to perhaps have belonged to an earlier pharaoh. According to professor O'Connor, the 5,000-year-old ship may have even belonged to Pharaoh Aha. 

Early Egyptians also knew how to assemble planks of wood with treenails to fasten them together, using pitch for caulking the seams. The "Khufu ship", a 43.6-meter vessel sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza in the Fourth Dynasty around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example that may have filled the symbolic function of a solar barque. Early Egyptians also knew how to fasten the planks of this ship together with mortise and tenon joints. 

Large seagoing ships are known to have been heavily used by the Egyptians in their trade with the city states of the eastern Mediterranean, especially Byblos (on the coast of modern day Lebanon), and in several expeditions down the Red Sea to the Land of Punt. Shelley Wachsmann, Seagoing Ships and Seamanship in the Bronze Age Levant (Texas A&M University Press, 2009), p. 19. In fact one of the earliest Egyptian words for a seagoing ship is a "Byblos Ship" which originally defined a class of Egyptian seagoing ships used on the Byblos run;however, by the end of the Old Kingdom, the term had come to include large seagoing ships, whatever their destination. Shelley Wachsmann , Seagoing Ships and Seamanship in the Bronze Age Levant (Texas A&M University Press, 2009), p. 19. 

In 2011 archaeologists from Italy, the United States, and Egypt excavating a dried-up lagoon known as Mersa Gawasis have unearthed traces of an ancient harbor that once launched early voyages like Hatshepsuts Punt expedition onto the open ocean. Egypt's Ancient Fleet: Lost for Thousands of Years, Discovered in a Desolate Cave Some of the sites most evocative evidence for the ancient Egyptians seafaring prowess include large ship timbers and hundreds of feet of ropes, made from papyrus, coiled in huge bundles. Egypt's Ancient Fleet: Lost for Thousands of Years, Discovered in a Desolate Cave 
And in 2013 a team of Franco-Egyptian archaeologists discovered what is believed to be the world's oldest port, dating back about 4500 years, from the time of King Cheops on the Red Sea coast near Wadi el-Jarf (about 110 miles south of Suez) Most Ancient Port, Hieroglyphic Papyri Found, Discovery News 

===Mathematics===

chart in Senemut's tomb, 18th dynasty Full version at [http://www.metmuseum.org/Collections/search-the-collections/100000870#fullscreen Met Museum ]]

The earliest attested examples of mathematical calculations date to the predynastic Naqada period, and show a fully developed numeral system. Understanding of Egyptian mathematics is incomplete due to paucity of available material and lack of exhaustive study of the texts that have been uncovered. Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 13 The importance of mathematics to an educated Egyptian is suggested by a New Kingdom fictional letter in which the writer proposes a scholarly competition between himself and another scribe regarding everyday calculation tasks such as accounting of land, labor, and grain. Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 11 Texts such as the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus and the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus show that the ancient Egyptians could perform the four basic mathematical operationsaddition, subtraction, multiplication, and divisionuse fractions, compute the volumes of boxes and pyramids, and calculate the surface areas of rectangles, triangles, and circles. They understood basic concepts of algebra and geometry, and could solve simple sets of simultaneous equations. Clarke (1990) p. 222 

Mathematical notation was decimal, and based on hieroglyphic signs for each power of ten up to one million. Each of these could be written as many times as necessary to add up to the desired number; so to write the number eighty or eight hundred, the symbol for ten or one hundred was written eight times respectively. Clarke (1990) p. 217 Because their methods of calculation could not handle most fractions with a numerator greater than one, they had to write fractions as the sum of several fractions. For example, they resolved the fraction two-fifths into the sum of one-third + one-fifteenth. Standard tables of values facilitated this. Clarke (1990) p. 218 Some common fractions, however, were written with a special glyphthe equivalent of the modern two-thirds is shown on the right. Gardiner (1957) p. 197 

Ancient Egyptian mathematicians had a grasp of the principles underlying the Pythagorean theorem, knowing, for example, that a triangle had a right angle opposite the hypotenuse when its sides were in a 345 ratio. Strouhal (1989) p. 241 They were able to estimate the area of a circle by subtracting one-ninth from its diameter and squaring the result:

:Area  2 = ()r 2  3.16r 2,

a reasonable approximation of the formula r 2. Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 31 

The golden ratio seems to be reflected in many Egyptian constructions, including the pyramids, but its use may have been an unintended consequence of the ancient Egyptian practice of combining the use of knotted ropes with an intuitive sense of proportion and harmony. Kemp (1989) p. 138 

==Legacy==

Tourists riding a camel in front of Giza pyramids
Frontispiece of Description de l'gypte, published in 38 volumes between 1809 and 1829.

The culture and monuments of ancient Egypt have left a lasting legacy on the world. The cult of the goddess Isis, for example, became popular in the Roman Empire, as obelisks and other relics were transported back to Rome. Siliotti (1998) p. 8 The Romans also imported building materials from Egypt to erect Egyptian style structures. Early historians such as Herodotus, Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus studied and wrote about the land, which Romans came to view as a place of mystery. Siliotti (1998) p. 10 

During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Egyptian pagan culture was in decline after the rise of Christianity and later Islam, but interest in Egyptian antiquity continued in the writings of medieval scholars such as Dhul-Nun al-Misri and al-Maqrizi. El-Daly (2005) p. 112 In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, European travelers and tourists brought back antiquities and wrote stories of their journeys, leading to a wave of Egyptomania across Europe. This renewed interest sent collectors to Egypt, who took, purchased, or were given many important antiquities. Siliotti (1998) p. 13 

Although the European colonial occupation of Egypt destroyed a significant portion of the country's historical legacy, some foreigners had more positive results. Napoleon, for example, arranged the first studies in Egyptology when he brought some 150 scientists and artists to study and document Egypt's natural history, which was published in the Description de l'gypte. Siliotti (1998) p. 100 

In the 20th century, the Egyptian Government and archaeologists alike recognized the importance of cultural respect and integrity in excavations. The Supreme Council of Antiquities now approves and oversees all excavations, which are aimed at finding information rather than treasure. The council also supervises museums and monument reconstruction programs designed to preserve the historical legacy of Egypt.

==See also==
* Outline of ancient Egypt
* Glossary of ancient Egypt artifacts
* Index of ancient Egypt-related articles
* Toynbee's law of challenge and response

==Notes==

==References==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* BBC History: Egyptiansprovides a reliable general overview and further links
* Ancient History Encyclopedia on Egypt
* Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book Door Marshall Clagett, 1989
* Ancient Egyptian Metallurgy A site that shows the history of Egyptian metalworking
* Napoleon on the Nile: Soldiers, Artists, and the Rediscovery of Egypt, Art History.
* Ancient Egyptmaintained by the British Museum, this site provides a useful introduction to Ancient Egypt for older children and young adolescents
* Digital Egypt for Universities. Outstanding scholarly treatment with broad coverage and cross references (internal and external). Artifacts used extensively to illustrate topics.
* Priests of Ancient Egypt In-depth-information about Ancient Egypt's priests, religious services and temples. Much picture material and bibliography. In English and German.
* Ancient Egypt
* UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology
* Ancient Egypt and the Role of Women by Dr Joann Fletcher

 



[[Analog Brothers]]

Analog Brothers is an experimental hip-hop crew featuring Ice Oscillator also known as Ice-T (keyboards, drums, vocals), Keith Korg also known as Kool Keith (bass, strings, vocals), Mark Moog also known as Marc Live (drums, violyns and vocals), Silver Synth also known as Black Silver (synthesizer, lazar bell and vocals), and Rex Roland also known as Pimp Rex (keyboards, vocals, production). Its album Pimp to Eat featured guest appearances by various members of Rhyme Syndicate, Odd Oberheim, Jacky jasper (who appears as Jacky Jasper on the song "We Sleep Days" and H-Bomb on "War"), D.J. Cisco from S.M., the Synth-a-Size Sisters and Teflon.

While the group only recorded one album together as the Analog Brothers, a few bootlegs of its live concert performances, including freestyles with original lyrics, have occasionally surfaced online. After Pimp to Eat, the Analog Brothers continued performing together in various line ups. Kool Keith and Marc Live joined with Jacky jasper to release two albums as KHM. Marc Live rapped with Ice T's group SMG. Marc also formed a group with Black Silver called Live Black, but while five of their tracks were released on a demo CD sold at concerts, Live Black's first album has yet to be released.

In 2008, Ice-T and Black Silver toured together as Black Ice, and released an album together called Urban Legends.

In addition to all this, the Analog Brothers continue to make frequent appearances on each other's solo albums.

==Discography==
* 2005. A.D. (single) (2000)
* Pimp to Eat (Ground Control/Nu Gruv) (2000)

==External links==
*Kool Keith's Site
*Ultrakeith
*
*Analog Brothers at Discogs



[[Motor neuron disease]]

The motor neuron diseases (MND) are a group of neurological disorders that selectively affect motor neurons, the cells that control voluntary muscle activity including speaking, walking, swallowing, and general movement of the body. They are generally progressive in nature, and cause increasing disability and, eventually, death.

==Terminology==
Terms used to describe the motor neuron diseases can be confusing. In the United Kingdom, motor neuron disease (sometimes spelt as motor neurone disease) refers both to the group of motor neuron diseases which includes amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and to ALS itself as motor neuron disease - this is simply because ALS is the most common form. The other four motor neuron diseases are primary lateral sclerosis, progressive muscular atrophy, progressive bulbar palsy and pseudobulbar palsy. In the United States, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is commonly used both for the specific disorder (sometimes referred to there as Lou Gehrig's disease) and as a umbrella term for the group of MNDs. To avoid confusion, the annual scientific research conference dedicated to the study of MND is called the "International ALS/MND Symposium".

Although MND refers to a specific subset of pathologically similar diseases, there are numerous other afflictions of motor neurons that are pathologically distinct from MND, have a different clinical course and should not be confused with MND, such as spinal muscular atrophy, spinobulbar muscular atrophy, CharcotMarieTooth disease, GuillainBarr syndrome, and many others.

==Classification==
In the most common classification, the term "motor neuron disease" applies to the following five disorders which affect either upper motor neurons (UMN) or lower motor neurons (LMN), or both:

 Type UMN degeneration LMN degeneration 
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) yes yes 
 Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) yes no 
 Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) no yes 
 Progressive bulbar palsy (PBP) no yes  bulbar region 
 Pseudobulbar palsy yes  bulbar region no 

Even though diseases known as spinal muscular atrophies, including the most common spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), affect motor neurons and are classified as MND by the disease terminology classification system Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), they are not classified as such by the tenth International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) published in 1992 and thus are not discussed in this article.

==References==

==External links==

* 

 



[[Abjad]]

An abjad is a type of writing system where each symbol always or usually stands for a consonant, leaving the reader to supply the appropriate vowel.
It is a term suggested by Peter T. Daniels to replace the common terms "consonantary", "consonantal alphabet" or "syllabary" to refer to the family of scripts called West Semitic.

Abjad is thought to be based on the first letters (a, b, g, d) found in all Semitic language such as Phoenician, Syriac, Hebrew, and Arabic. In Arabic, "A" (), "B" (), "" (), "D" () make the word "abjad" which means "alphabet". The modern Arabic word for "alphabet" and "abjad" is interchangeably either "" or "". The word "alphabet" in English has a source in Greek language in which the first two letters were "A" (alpha) and "B" (beta), hence "alphabeta" (in Spanish and Italian, "alfabeto", but also called "abecedario", from "a" "b" "c" "d"). In Hebrew the first two letters are "A" (aleph), "B" (bet) hence "alephbet." It is also used to enumerate a list in the same manner that "a, b, c, d" (etc.) are used in the English language.

==Etymology==
The name "abjad" ( ) is derived from pronouncing the first letters of the Arabic alphabet in order. The ordering () of Arabic letters used to match that of the older Hebrew, Phoenician and Semitic alphabets; (read from right to left: ) or .

The word is also used as a synonym for alphabet in Malay as Malay has many loanwords from Arabic.

==Terminology==
According to the formulations of Daniels, abjads differ from alphabets in that only consonants, not vowels, are represented among the basic graphemes. Abjads differ from abugidas, another category invented by Daniels, in that in abjads, the vowel sound is implied by phonology, and where vowel marks exist for the system, such as nikkud for Hebrew and arakt for Arabic, their use is optional and not the dominant (or literate) form. Abugidas mark the vowels (other than the "inherent" vowel) with a diacritic, a minor attachment to the letter, or a standalone glyph. Some abugidas use a special symbol to suppress the inherent vowel so that the consonant alone can be properly represented. In a syllabary, a grapheme denotes a complete syllable, that is, either a lone vowel sound or a combination of a vowel sound with one or more consonant sounds.

The antagonism of abjad versus alphabet, as it was formulated by Daniels, has been rejected by other scholars because abjad is also used as a term not only for the Arabic numeral system but, which is most important in terms of historical grammatology, als as term for the alphabetic device (i.e. letter order) of ancient Northwest Semitic scripts in opposition to the 'south Arabian order. This caused fatal effects on terminology in general and especially in (ancient) Semitic philology. Also, it suggests that consonantal alphabets, in opposition to for instance the Greek alphabet, were not yet true alphabets and not yet entirely complete, lacking something important to be a fully working script system. It has also been objected that, as a set of letters, an alphabet is not the mirror of what should be there in a language from a phonemic or even phonological point of view, rather, it is the data stock of what provides maximum efficiency with least effort from a semantic point of view.
 Reinhard G. Lehmann: "27-30-22-26. How Many Letters Needs an Alphabet? The Case of Semitic", in: The idea of writing: Writing across borders / edited by Alex de Voogt and Joachim Friedrich Quack, Leiden: Brill 2012, p. 11-52, esp. p. 22-27 

==Values table==
The Abjad gadol (see below) values are:

 Decimal Hebrew Glyph 1 Aleph 2 Bet 3 Gimel 4 Daled 5 He 6 Vav 7 Zayin 8 Heth 9 Teth 

 Decimal Hebrew Glyph 10 Yud 20 Kaph 30 Lamed 40 Mem 50 Nun 60 Samech 70 Ayin 80 Pe 90 Tsade 

 Decimal Hebrew Glyph 100 Qoph 200 Reish 300 Shin 400 Taw 500 Kaph (final) 600 Mem (final) 700 Nun (final) 800 Pe (final) 900 Tsade (final) 

==Origins==
A specimen of Proto-Sinaitic script containing a phrase which may mean 'to Baalat'. The line running from the upper left to lower right reads mt l bclt.

All known abjads belong to the Semitic family of scripts. These scripts are thought to derive from the Proto-Sinaitic alphabet (dated to about 1500 BC), which is thought to derive from Egyptian hieroglyphs. The abjad was significantly simpler than the earlier hieroglyphs. The number of distinct glyphs was reduced tremendously at the cost of increased ambiguity.

The first abjad to gain widespread usage was the Phoenician abjad. Unlike other contemporary scripts, such as Cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphs, the Phoenician script consisted of only about two dozen symbols. This made the script easy to learn, and Phoenician seafaring merchants took the script wherever they went. Phoenician gave way to a number of new writing systems, including the Greek alphabet and Aramaic, a widely used abjad. The Greek alphabet evolved into the modern western alphabets, such as Latin and Cyrillic, while Aramaic became the ancestor of many modern abjads and abugidas of Asia.

Aramaic spread across Asia, reaching as far as India and may become Brahmi, the ancestral abugida to most modern Indian and Southeast Asian scripts. In the Middle East, Aramaic gave rise to the Hebrew and Nabataean abjads, which retained many of the Aramaic letter forms. The Syriac script was a cursive variation of Aramaic. It is unclear whether the Arabic abjad was derived from Nabatean or Syriac.

==Impure abjads==
"Al-'Arabiyya", lit. "Arabic." An example of the Arabic script, which is an impure abjad.

"Impure" abjads have characters for some vowels, optional vowel diacritics, or both. The term "pure" abjad refers to scripts entirely lacking in vowel indicators. However, most modern abjads, such as Arabic, Hebrew, Aramaic and Avestan, are "impure" abjads, that is, they also contain symbols for some of the vowel phonemes. An example of a "pure" abjad is ancient Phoenician.

===Addition of vowels===

In the 9th century BC, the Greeks adapted the Phoenician script for use in their own language. The phonetic structure of the Greek language created too many ambiguities when the vowels went unrepresented, so the script was modified. They did not need letters for the guttural sounds represented by aleph, he, heth or ayin, so these symbols were assigned vocalic values. The letters waw and yod were also used. The Greek alphabet thus became the world's first to have symbols representing vowel sounds.

Abugidas developed along a slightly different route. The basic consonantal symbol was considered to have an inherent "a" vowel sound. Hooks or short lines attached to various parts of the basic letter modify the vowel. In this way, the South Arabian alphabet evolved into the Ge'ez alphabet between the 5th century BC and the 5th century AD. Similarly, around the 3rd century BC, the Brhm script developed (from the Aramaic abjad, it has been hypothesized).

The other major family of abugidas, Canadian Aboriginal syllabics, was initially developed in the 1840s by missionary and linguist James Evans for the Cree and Ojibwe languages. Evans used features of Devanagari script and Pitman shorthand to create his initial abugida. Later in the 19th century, other missionaries adapted Evans' system to other Canadian aboriginal languages. Canadian syllabics differ from other abugidas in that the vowel is indicated by rotation of the consonantal symbol, with each vowel having a consistent orientation.

==Abjads and the structure of Semitic languages==
The abjad form of writing is well-adapted to the morphological structure of the Semitic languages it was developed to write. This is because words in Semitic languages are formed from a root consisting of (usually) three consonants, the vowels being used to indicate inflectional or derived forms. For instance, according to Classical Arabic and Modern Standard Arabic, the Arabic root (to sacrifice) can be derived the forms (he sacrificed), (you (masculine singular) sacrificed), (he slaughtered), (he slaughters), and (slaughterhouse). In each case, the absence of full glyphs for vowels makes the common root clearer, improving word recognition while reading.

==Comparative chart of Abjads, extinct and extant==

 ID Name In use Cursive Direction # of letters Area of origin Used by Languages Time period (age) Influenced by Writing systems influenced 
 1 Syriac yes yes right-left 22 consonants Middle-East Syrian Church Aramaic, Syriac, Assyrian Neo-Aramaic ~ 700 BCE , http://www.omniglot.com/writing/alphabetic.htm. Nabatean, Palmyran, Mandaic, Parthian, Pahlavi, Sogdian, Avestan and Manichean 
 2 Hebrew yes no right-left 22 consonants + 5 final letters Middle-East Israelis, Some Jewish diaspora communities, Ancient Hebrew Tribes Hebrew, Ladino, Bukhari, Yiddish, Judeo-Arabic > 1100 BCE Proto-Hebrew, Early Aramaic 
 3 Arabic yes yes right-left 28 Middle-East and North Africa Over 200 million people Arabic, Bosnian, Kashmiri, Kurdish, Kyrghyz, Malay, Persian/Farsi, Pashto, Balochi, Turkish, Urdu, Uyghur, others ~ 500 CE Nabataean Aramaic 
 4 Aramaic (Imperial) no no right-left 22 Middle-East Archaemenid, Persian, Babylonian, and Assyrian empires Imperial Aramaic, Hebrew ~ 500 BCE Phoenician Late Hebrew, Nabataean, Syriac 
 5 Aramaic (Early) no no right-left 22 Middle-East Various Semitic Peoples ~ 1000-900 BCE Phoenician Hebrew, Imperial Aramaic. 
 6 Ancient Berber no no top-bottom, right-left 22 (right-left) 25 (up-down) , http://www.ancientscripts.com/berber.html. North Africa Women in Tuareg Society Tifinagh 600 BCE Punic, South Arabian Tifinagh 
 7 Nabataean no no right-left 22 Middle-East Nabataean Kingdom Nabataean 200 BCE Aramaic Arabic 
 8 Middle Persian, (Pahlavi) no no right-left 22 Middle-East Sassanian Empire Pahlavi, Middle Persian Aramaic Psalter, Avestan 
 9 Mandaic no yes right-left 24 Iraq, Iran Ahvz, Iran Mandaic ~ 200 CE Aramaic Neo-Mandaic 
 10 Psalter no yes right-left 21 Northwestern China Persian Script for Paper Writing ~ 400 CE , Encyclopdia Iranica. Syriac 
 11 Phoenician no no right-left, Boustrophedon 22 Byblos Canaanites Phoenician, Punic ~ 1000-1500 BCE Proto- Canaanite Alphabet Punic(variant), Greek, Etruscan, Latin, Arabic, and Hebrew 
 12 Parthian no no right-left 22 Parthia (modern-day equivalent of Northeastern Iran) Parthian & Sassanian periods of Persian Empire Parthian ~200 BCE Aramaic 
 13 Sabaean no no system right-left, boustrophedon 29 Southern Arabia (Sheba) Southern Arabians Sabaean ~ 500 BCE Byblos Ethiopic (Eritrea & Ethiopia) 
 14 Punic no no right-left 22 Carthage (Tunisia), North Africa, Mediterranean Punic Culture Punic, Neo-Punic Phoenician 
 15 Proto-Sinaitic, Proto-Canaanite no no left-right 30 Egypt, Sinai, Canaan Canaanites Canaanite ~ 1900-1700 BCE In conjunction with Egyptian Hieroglyphs Phoenician, Hebrew 
 16 Ugaritic no yes left-right 30 Ugarit (modern-day Northern Syria) Ugarites Ugaritic, Hurrian ~ 1400 BCE 
 17 South Arabian yes (Zabr - cursive form of the South Arabian script) no right-left, left-right (reversed letters) 29 South-Arabia (Yemen) D'mt Kingdom Amharic, Tigrinya, Tigre, Semitic, Chushitic, Nilo-Saharan 900 BCE Proto-Sinaitic Ge'ez ((Ethiopia)(Eritrea)) 
 18 Sogdian no no (yes in later versions) right-left, left-right(vertical) 20 parts of China (Xinjiang), Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan Buddhists, Manichaens Sogdian ~ 400 CE Syriac Old Uyghur alphabet, Yaqnabi (Tajikistan dialect) 
 19 Samaritan yes (700 people) no right-left 22 Mesopatamia or Levant (Disputed) Samaritans (Nablus and Holon) Samaritan Aramaic, Samaritan Hebrew ~ 100-0 BCE Paleo-Hebrew Alphabet 

==See also==
* Abjad numerals
* Abugida
* Gematria (Hebrew system of mystical numerology)
* Numerology
* Shorthand (constructed writing systems that are structurally abjads)

==References==

; Sources
* 

 


[[Abugida]]

An inscription of Swampy Cree using Canadian Aboriginal syllabics, an abugida developed by Christian missionaries for Aboriginal Canadian languages

An abugida (from Geez  bugida), also called an alphasyllabary, is a segmental writing system in which consonantvowel sequences are written as a unit: each unit is based on a consonant letter, and vowel notation is secondary. This contrasts with a full alphabet, in which vowels have status equal to consonants, and with an abjad, in which vowel marking is absent or optional. (In less formal contexts, all three types of script may commonly be termed as alphabets.) Abugidas include the extensive Brahmic family of scripts of South and Southeast Asia.

Abugida as a term in linguistics was proposed by Peter T. Daniels in his 1990 typology of writing systems. Abugida is an Ethiopian name for the Geez script, taken from four letters of that script,  bu gi da, in much the same way that abecedary is derived from Latin a be ce de, and alphabet is derived from the names of the two first letters in the Greek alphabet, alpha and beta. As Daniels used the word, an abugida is in contrast with a syllabary, where letters with shared consonants or vowels show no particular resemblance to one another, and also with an alphabet proper, where independent letters are used to denote both consonants and vowels. The term alphasyllabary was suggested for the Indic scripts in 1997 by William Bright, following South Asian linguistic usage, to convey the idea that "they share features of both alphabet and syllabary". He describes this term as "formal", i.e., more concerned with graphic arrangement of symbols, whereas abugida was "functional", putting the focus on soundsymbol correspondence. However, this is not a distinction made in the literature. William Bright (2000:6566): A Matter of Typology: Alphasyllabaries and Abugidas. In: Studies in the Linguistic Sciences. Volume 30, Number 1, pages 6371 

Abugidas were long considered to be syllabaries, or intermediate between syllabaries and alphabets, and the term syllabics is retained in the name of Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics. Other terms that have been used include neosyllabary (Fvrier 1959), pseudo-alphabet (Householder 1959), semisyllabary (Diringer 1968; a word that has other uses) and syllabic alphabet (Coulmas 1996; this term is also a synonym for syllabary). 

==Description==
In general, a letter of an abugida transcribes a consonant. Letters are written as a linear sequence, in most cases left to right. Vowels are written through modification of these consonantal letters, either by means of diacritics (which may not follow the direction of writing the letters), or by changes in the form of the letter itself.

Vowels not preceded by a consonant may be represented with a zero consonant letter, modified to indicate the vowel, or separate letters for each vowel, that are distinct from the corresponding dependent vowel signs. Consonants not followed by a vowel may be represented with:
*a modification that explicitly indicates the lack of a vowel (virama),
*a lack of vowel marking (often with ambiguity between no vowel and a default inherent vowel),
*vowel marking for a short or neutral vowel such as schwa (with ambiguity between no vowel and that short or neutral vowel),
*conjunct consonant letters, where two or more letters are graphically joined in a ligature, or
*dependent consonant signs, which may be smaller or differently placed versions of the full consonant letters, or may be distinct signs altogether.

There are three principal families of abugidas, depending on whether vowels are indicated by modifying consonants by diacritics, distortion, or orientation. John D. Berry (2002:19) Language Culture Type 
*The oldest and largest is the Brahmic family of India and Southeast Asia, in which vowels are marked with diacritics and syllable-final consonants, when they occur, are indicated with ligatures, diacritics, or with a special vowel-canceling mark.
*In the Ethiopic family, vowels are marked by modifying the shapes of the consonants, and one of the vowel-forms serves additionally to indicate final consonants.
*In the Cree family, vowels are marked by rotating or flipping the consonants, and final consonants are indicated with either special diacritics or superscript forms of the main initial consonants.

Tna of the Maldives has dependent vowels and a zero vowel sign, but no inherent vowel.

Feature North Indic South Indic Tna Ethiopic Canadian 
 Vowel representationafter consonant Dependent sign (diacritic)in distinct position per vowel Fused diacritic Rotate/reflect 
 Initial vowelrepresentation Distinct inlineletter per vowel Zero consonant plusdependent vowel in SEA Glottal stopplus dependent Zero consonantplus dependent 
 Inherent vowel(value of no vowel sign) ] No N/A 
 Zero vowel sign(sign for no value) Often Always used whenno final vowel No 
 Consonant cluster Conjunct Stack or separate Separate 
 Final consonant Inline except Inline Dependent 
 Distinct final sign Only for No Only in Western 
 Final sign position Inline but  top Inline Raised or inline 

===Indic (Brahmic)===

Indic scripts originated in India and spread to Southeast Asia. All surviving Indic scripts are descendants of the Brahmi alphabet. Today they are used in most languages of South Asia (although replaced by Perso-Arabic in Urdu, Kashmiri and some other languages of Pakistan and India) and mainland Southeast Asia (Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia; but not Malaysia or Vietnam). The primary division is into North Indic scripts used in Northern India, Nepal, Tibet and Bhutan, and Southern Indic scripts used in South India, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.
South Indic letter forms are very rounded; North Indic less so, though Oriya, Golmol and Litumol of Nepal script are rounded.

Most North Indic scripts' full letters incorporate a horizontal line at the top, with Gujarati and Oriya script as exceptions; South Indic scripts do not.

Indic scripts indicate vowels through dependent vowel signs (diacritics) around the consonants, often including a sign that explicitly indicates the lack of a vowel. If a consonant has no vowel sign, this indicates a default vowel. Vowel diacritics may appear above, below, to the left, to the right, or around the consonant.

The most widely used Indic script is Devanagari, shared by Hindi, Bhojpuri, Marathi, Nepali, and often Sanskrit. A basic letter such as  in Hindi represents a syllable with the default vowel, in this case ka (). In some languages, including Hindi, it becomes a final closing consonant at the end of a word, in this case k. The inherent vowel may be changed by adding vowel mark (diacritics), producing syllables such as  ki,  ku,  ke,  ko. The mora a consonant letter represents, either with or without a marked vowel, is called an akshara.

A 19th-century manuscript in the Devanagari script

 Diacritic placement in Brahmic abugidas position syllable pronunciation base form script 
 above   Devanagari 
 below  
 left  
 right  
 around   Tamil 
 surround   Khmer 
 within   Kannada 

In many of the Brahmic scripts, a syllable beginning with a cluster is treated as a single character for purposes of vowel marking, so a vowel marker like -i, falling before the character it modifies, may appear several positions before the place where it is pronounced. For example, the game cricket in Hindi is  krike; the diacritic for appears before the consonant cluster , not before the . A more unusual example is seen in the Batak alphabet: Here the syllable bim is written ba-ma-i-(virama). That is, the vowel diacritic and virama are both written after the consonants for the whole syllable.

In many abugidas, there is also a diacritic to suppress the inherent vowel, yielding the bare consonant. In Devanagari,  is k, and  is l. This is called the virma or halantam in Sanskrit. It may be used to form consonant clusters, or to indicate that a consonant occurs at the end of a word. Thus in Sanskrit, a default vowel consonant such as  does not take on a final consonant sound. Instead, it keeps its vowel. For writing two consonants without a vowel in between, instead of using diacritics on the first consonant to remove its vowel, another popular method of special conjunct forms is used in which two or more consonant characters are merged to express a cluster, such as Devanagari:  kla. (Note that some fonts display this as  followed by , rather than forming a conjunct. This expedient is used by ISCII and South Asian scripts of Unicode.) Thus a closed syllable such as kal requires two aksharas to write.

The Rng script used for the Lepcha language goes further than other Indic abugidas, in that a single akshara can represent a closed syllable: Not only the vowel, but any final consonant is indicated by a diacritic. For example, the syllable would be written as something like , here with an underring representing and an overcross representing the diacritic for final . Most other Indic abugidas can only indicate a very limited set of final consonants with diacritics, such as or , if they can indicate any at all.

===Ethiopic===
The Ge'ez script, an abugida of Eritrea and Ethiopia
In Ethiopic, where the term abugida originates, the diacritics have been fused to the consonants to the point that they must be considered modifications of the form of the letters. Children learn each modification separately, as in a syllabary; nonetheless, the graphic similarities between syllables with the same consonant is readily apparent, unlike the case in a true syllabary.

Though now an abugida, the Ge'ez alphabet, until the advent of Christianity (ca. AD 350), had originally been what would now be termed an abjad. In the Ge'ez abugida (or fidel), the base form of the letter (also known as fidel) may be altered. For example,  h (base form),  hu (with a right-side diacritic that doesn't alter the letter),  hi (with a subdiacritic that compresses the consonant, so it is the same height),  h or (where the letter is modified with a kink in the left arm).

===Canadian Aboriginal syllabics===

In the family known as Canadian Aboriginal syllabics, which was inspired by the Devanagari script of India, vowels are indicated by changing the orientation of the syllabogram. Each vowel has a consistent orientation; for example, Inuktitut  pi,  pu,  pa;  ti,  tu,  ta. Although there is a vowel inherent in each, all rotations have equal status and none can be identified as basic. Bare consonants are indicated either by separate diacritics, or by superscript versions of the aksharas; there is no vowel-killer mark.

==Borderline cases==

===Vowelled abjads===
Consonantal scripts ("abjads") are normally written without indication of many vowels. However in some contexts like teaching materials or scriptures, Arabic and Hebrew are written with full indication of vowels via diacritic marks (harakat, niqqud) making them effectively abugidas. The Brahmic and Ethiopic families are thought to have originated from the Semitic abjads by the addition of vowel marks.

The Arabic scripts used for Kurdish in Iraq and for Uighur in Xinjiang (People's Republic of China), as well as the Hebrew script of Yiddish, are fully vowelled, but because the vowels are written with full letters rather than diacritics and there are no inherent vowels, these are considered alphabets, not abugidas.

===Phagspa===
The imperial Mongol script called Phagspa was derived from the Tibetan abugida, but all vowels are written in-line rather than as diacritics. However, it retains the features of having an inherent vowel /a/ and having distinct initial vowel letters.

===Pahawh===
Pahawh Hmong is a non-segmental script that indicates syllable onsets and rimes, such as consonant clusters and vowels with final consonants. Thus it is not segmental and cannot be considered an abugida. However, it superficially resembles an abugida with the roles of consonant and vowel reversed. Most syllables are written with two letters in the order rimeonset (typically vowel-consonant), even though they are pronounced as onset-rime (consonant-vowel), rather like the position of the vowel in Devanagari, which is written before the consonant. Pahawh is also unusual in that, while an inherent rime (with mid tone) is unwritten, it also has an inherent onset . For the syllable , which requires one or the other of the inherent sounds to be overt, it is that is written. Thus it is the rime (vowel) which is basic to the system.

===Meroitic===
It is difficult to draw a dividing line between abugidas and other segmental scripts. For example, the Meroitic script of ancient Sudan did not indicate an inherent a (one symbol stood for both m and ma, for example), and is thus similar to Brahmic family of abugidas. However, the other vowels were indicated with full letters, not diacritics or modification, so the system was essentially an alphabet that did not bother to write the most common vowel.

===Shorthand===
Several systems of shorthand use diacritics for vowels, but they do not have an inherent vowel, and are thus more similar to Thaana and Kurdish script than to the Brahmic scripts. The Gabelsberger shorthand system and its derivatives modify the following consonant to represent vowels. The Pollard script, which was based on shorthand, also uses diacritics for vowels; the placements of the vowel relative to the consonant indicates tone. Pitman shorthand uses straight strokes and quarter-circle marks in different orientations as the principal "alphabet" of consonants; vowels are shown as light and heavy dots, dashes and other marks in one of 3 possible positions to indicate the various vowel-sounds. However, to increase writing-speed Pitman has rules for "vowel indication" using the positioning or choice of consonant signs so that writing vowel-marks can be dispensed with.

==Development==
As the term alphasyllabary suggests, abugidas have been considered an intermediate step between alphabets and syllabaries. Historically, abugidas appear to have evolved from abjads (vowelless alphabets). They contrast with syllabaries, where there is a distinct symbol for each syllable or consonant-vowel combination, and where these have no systematic similarity to each other, and typically develop directly from logographic scripts. Compare the Devanagari examples above to sets of syllables in the Japanese hiragana syllabary:  ka,  ki,  ku,  ke,  ko have nothing in common to indicate k; while  ra,  ri,  ru,  re,  ro have neither anything in common for r, nor anything to indicate that they have the same vowels as the k set.

Most Indian and Indochinese abugidas appear to have first been developed from abjads with the and Brhm scripts; the abjad in question is usually considered to be the Aramaic one, but while the link between Aramaic and Kharosthi is more or less undisputed, this is not the case with Brahmi. The Kharosthi family does not survive today, but Brahmi's descendants include most of the modern scripts of South and Southeast Asia. Ge'ez derived from a different abjad, the Sabean script of Yemen; the advent of vowels coincided with the introduction of Christianity about AD 350;. Getatchew Haile, "Ethiopic Writing". In Daniels & Bright (1996) The World's Writing Systems 

" is encumbered with the drawback of an excessively awkward and cumbrous written character. ... At first glance, an book seems to be all curves, and it takes a second look to notice that there is something inside each." (G.A. Grierson, Linguistic Survey of India, 1903)

Development of Oriyan scripts
Development of ancient numerals in Oriya

==Other types of writing systems==
* Featural alphabet
* Abjad
* Alphabet
* Logogram
* Syllabary

==Partial list of abugidas==

Comparison of various abugidas descended from Brahmi script. May iva protect those who take delight in the language of the gods. (Kalidasa)

*Brahmic family, descended from Brhm (c. 6th century BC)
**Assamese
**Balinese
**Balti
**Batak
**Baybayin, pre-Hispanic script of Tagalog and other Philippine languages
**Kulitan 
**Bengali
**Bhujimol
**Box-head a script in India
**Buginese also known as Lontara
**Buhid, used by Mangyans in Mindoro, Philippines
**Burmese
**Chalukya
**Cham
**Chola
**Devanagari (used to write Nepali, Sanskrit, Pali, modern Hindi, Marathi etc.)
**Dehong Dai
**Golmol
**Goykanadi
**Grantha
**Gujarati
**Gurmukhi
**Hanuno'o, a script used by Mangyans in Mindoro, Philippines
**Javanese
**Kadamba
**Kaithi
**Kannada
**Kawi script used by ancient Javanese, Malays, and pre-Hispanic Filipinos
**Khmer
**Lampung also known as Had Lampung
**Lanna
**Lepcha
**Limbu
**Lao (before spelling reforms)
**Malayalam
**Manipuri (also known as Meitei Mayek script)
**Modi used to write Marathi
**Oriya
**Old Kawi progenitor of Indonesian and Philippine scripts
**Pachumol
**Phags-Pa created for Kublai Khan's Yuan China
**Prachalit Nepal
**Ranjana
**Redjang
**Sharada
**Siddham used to write Sanskrit
**Sinhala
**Sorang Sompeng
**Sourashtra
**Soyombo script
**Sundanese
**Syloti Nagri
**Tagbanwa in Palawan, Philippines
**Tai Dam
**Tamil
**Telugu
**Thai
**Tibetan
**Tirhuta used to write Maithili
**Tocharian  extinct
**Tulu
**Varang Kshiti
**Vatteluttu aka round script
* (extinct), from the 3rd century BC
*Ge'ez (Ethiopic), from the 4th century AD
*Canadian Aboriginal syllabics
**Cree-Ojibwe syllabics
**Inuktitut syllabics
**Blackfoot syllabics
**Carrier syllabics

*Thaana
*Pollard script
*Pitman shorthand
*Tengwar (fictional)

===Abugida-like scripts===
*Meroitic (extinct) (an alphabet with an inherent vowel)

==References==

==External links==
*Syllabic alphabets  Omniglot's list of abugidas, including examples of various writing systems
*Alphabets  list of abugidas and other scripts (in Spanish)
*Comparing Devanagari with Burmese, Khmer, Thai, and Tai Tham scripts

 


[[ABBA]]

ABBA were a Swedish pop group formed in Stockholm in 1972, comprising Agnetha Fltskog, Bjrn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, and Anni-Frid Lyngstad. ABBA is an acronym of the first letters of the band members' first names (Agnetha, Benny, Bjrn and Anni-Frid) and is sometimes stylized as the registered trademark . They became one of the most commercially successful acts in the history of popular music, topping the charts worldwide from 1975 to 1982. They are also known for winning in the Eurovision Song Contest 1974, giving Sweden its first victory in the history of the contest and being the most successful group ever to take part in the competition.

ABBA have sold over 380 million albums and singles worldwide, which makes them one of the best-selling music artists of all time, and the second best selling music group of all time. ABBA was the first group to come from a non-English-speaking country that enjoyed consistent success in the charts of English-speaking countries, including the UK, Ireland, the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. The group also enjoyed significant success in Latin American markets, and recorded a collection of their hit songs in Spanish.

During the band's active years, Fltskog and Ulvaeus were very much in love, and married, as were Lyngstad and Andersson, although both couples later divorced. At the height of their popularity, both relationships were suffering strain which ultimately resulted in the collapse of the Ulvaeus-Fltskog marriage in 1979 and the Andersson-Lyngstad marriage in 1981. These relationship changes were reflected in the group's music, with later compositions including more introspective, brooding, dark lyrics. Comments about this period start around time 1:10 on tract. Youtube.com (30 July 2013). Retrieved on 19 April 2014. 

After ABBA broke up in late 1982, Andersson and Ulvaeus achieved success writing music for the stage while Lyngstad and Fltskog pursued solo careers with mixed success. ABBA's music declined in popularity until several films, notably Muriel's Wedding and The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert, revived interest in the group, spawning several tribute bands. In 1999, ABBA's music was adapted into the successful musical Mamma Mia! that toured worldwide. A film of the same name, released in 2008, became the highest-grossing film in the United Kingdom that year. The group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 15 March 2010. 

ABBA were honored at the 50th anniversary celebration of the Eurovision Song Contest in 2005, when their hit "Waterloo" was chosen as the best song in the competition's history. 

==History==

===Before ABBA (1960s)===

Benny Andersson (born 16 December 1946 in Stockholm, Sweden) became (at age 18) a member of a popular Swedish pop-rock group the Hep Stars that performed covers, amongst other things, of international hits. The Hep Stars were known as "the Swedish Beatles". 10 Things You Never Knew About Abba. Virginmedia.com. Retrieved on 19 April 2014. They also set up Hep House, their equivalent of Apple Corps. Andersson played the keyboard and eventually started writing original songs for his band, many of which became major hits, including "No Response" that hit number 3 in 1965, "Sunny Girl", "Wedding", and "Consolation", all of which hit number 1 in 1966. Andersson also had a fruitful songwriting collaboration with Lasse Berghagen, with whom he wrote his first Svensktoppen entry "Sagan om lilla Sofie" ("The Story of Little Sophie") in 1968.

Bjrn Ulvaeus (born 25 April 1945 in Gothenburg/Gteborg, Sweden) also began his musical career at 18 (as a singer and guitarist), when he fronted The Hootenanny Singers, a popular Swedish folk-skiffle group. Ulvaeus started writing English-language songs for his group, and even had a brief solo career alongside. The Hootenanny Singers and The Hep Stars sometimes crossed paths while touring. In June 1966, Ulvaeus and Andersson decided to write a song together. Their first attempt was "Isn't It Easy to Say", a song later recorded by The Hep Stars. Stig Anderson was the manager of The Hootenanny Singers and founder of the Polar Music label. He saw potential in the collaboration, and encouraged them to write more. Both also began playing occasionally with the other's bands on stage and on record, although it was not until 1969 that the pair wrote and produced some of their first real hits together: "Ljuva sextital" ("Merry Sixties"), recorded by Brita Borg, and The Hep Stars' 1969 hit "Speleman" ("Fiddler").

Andersson wrote and submitted the song "Hej, Clown" for the 1969 Melodifestivalen, the national festival to select the Swedish entry to the Eurovision Song Contest. The song tied for first place, but re-voting relegated Andersson's song to second place. On that occasion Andersson briefly met his future spouse, singer Anni-Frid Lyngstad, who also participated in the contest. A month later, the two had become a couple. As their respective bands began to break up during 1969, Andersson and Ulvaeus teamed up and recorded their first album together in 1970, called Lycka ("Happiness"), which included original songs sung by both men. Their spouses were often present in the recording studio, and sometimes added backing vocals; Fltskog even co-wrote a song with the two. Ulvaeus still occasionally recorded and performed with The Hootenanny Singers until the summer of 1974, and Andersson took part in producing their records.

Agnetha Fltskog (born 5 April 1950 in Jnkping, Sweden) sang with a local dance band headed by Bernt Enghardt who sent a demo recording of the band to Karl Gerhard Lundkvist. The demo tape featured a song written and sung by Agnetha: "Jag var s kr". Lundkvist was so impressed with her voice that he was convinced she would be a star. After going through considerable effort to locate the singer, he arranged for Agnetha to come to Stockholm and to record two of her own songs. This led to Agnetha having a number 1 record in Sweden with a self-composed song and selling more than 80,000 copies while she was still only 17. She was soon noticed by the critics and songwriters as a talented singer/songwriter of schlager style songs. Fltskog's main inspiration in her early years were singers such as Connie Francis. Along with her own compositions, she recorded covers of foreign hits and performed them on tours in Swedish folkparks. Most of her biggest hits were self-composed, which was quite unusual for a female singer in the 1960s. Agnetha released four solo LPs between 1968 and 1971. She had many successful singles in the Swedish charts.

During filming of a Swedish TV special in May 1969, Fltskog met Ulvaeus, and they married on 6 July 1971. Fltskog and Ulvaeus eventually were involved in each other's recording sessions, and soon even Andersson and Lyngstad added backing vocals to her third studio album Som jag r (As I Am) (1970). In 1972, Fltskog starred as Mary Magdalene in the original Swedish production of Jesus Christ Superstar and attracted favourable reviews. Between 1967 and 1975, Fltskog released five studio albums. 

Anni-Frid "Frida" Lyngstad (born 15 November 1945 in Bjrksen in Ballangen, Norway) sang from the age of 13 with various dance bands, and worked mainly in a jazz-oriented cabaret style. She also formed her own band, the Anni-Frid Four. In the summer of 1967, she won a national talent competition with "En ledig dag" ("A Day Off") a Swedish version of the bossa nova song "A Day in Portofino", which is included in the EMI compilation Frida 19671972. The first prize was a recording contract with EMI Sweden and to perform live on the most popular TV shows in the country. This TV performance, amongst many others, is included in the 3 hour documentary Frida  The DVD. Lyngstad released several schlager style singles on EMI without much success. When Benny Andersson started to produce her recordings in 1971, she had her first number 1 single, "Min egen stad" ("My Own Town") written by Benny featuring all the future ABBA members on backing vocals. Lyngstad toured and performed regularly in the folkpark circuit and made appearances on radio and TV. She met Ulvaeus briefly in 1963 during a talent contest, and Fltskog during a TV show in early 1968.

Lyngstad finally linked up with her future bandmates in 1969. On 1 March 1969, she participated in the Melodifestivalen, where she met Andersson for the first time. A few weeks later they met again during a concert tour in southern Sweden and they soon became a couple. Andersson produced her single "Peter Pan" in September 1969  her first collaboration with Benny & Bjrn, as they had written the song. Andersson would then produce Lyngstad's debut studio album, Frida, which was released in March 1971. Lyngstad also played in several revues and cabaret shows in Stockholm between 1969 and 1973. After ABBA formed, she recorded another successful album in 1975, Frida ensam, which included a Swedish rendition of "Fernando", a hit on the Swedish radio charts before the English version was released. 

====First live performance and the start of "Festfolket"====
An attempt at combining their talents occurred in April 1970 when the two couples went on holiday together to the island of Cyprus. What started as singing for fun on the beach ended up as an improvised live performance in front of the United Nations soldiers stationed on the island. Andersson and Ulvaeus were at this time recording their first album together, Lycka, which was to be released in September 1970. Fltskog and Lyngstad added backing vocals on several tracks during June, and the idea of them working together saw them launch a stage act, "Festfolket" (which translates from Swedish to mean both "Party People" and "Engaged Couples") on 1 November 1970 in Gothenburg.

The cabaret show attracted generally negative reviews, except for the performance of the Andersson and Ulvaeus hit "Hej, gamle man" ("Hello, Old Man"); the first Bjrn and Benny recording to feature all four. They also performed solo numbers from respective albums, but the lukewarm reception convinced the foursome to shelve plans for working together for the time being, and each soon concentrated on individual projects again.

====First record together "Hej, gamle man"====
"Hej, gamle man", a song about an old Salvation Army soldier, became the quartet's first hit. The record was credited to Bjrn & Benny and reached number 5 on the sales charts and number 1 on Svensktoppen, staying there for 15 weeks.

It was during 1971 that the four artists began working together more, adding vocals to the others' recordings. Fltskog, Andersson and Ulvaeus toured together in May, while Lyngstad toured on her own. Frequent recording sessions brought the foursome closer together during the summer. 

===Forming the group (1970 till 1973)===
After the 1970 release of Lycka, two more singles credited to 'Bjrn & Benny' were released in Sweden, "Det kan ingen doktor hjlpa" ("No Doctor Can Help with That") and "Tnk om jorden vore ung" ("Imagine If the Earth Were Young"), with more prominent vocals by Fltskog and Lyngstadand moderate chart success.

Fltskog and Ulvaeus, now married, started performing together with Andersson on a regular basis at the Swedish folkparks during the summer of 1971.

Stig Anderson, founder and owner of Polar Music, was determined to break into the mainstream international market with music by Andersson and Ulvaeus. "One day the pair of you will write a song that becomes a worldwide hit", he predicted. Stig Anderson encouraged Ulvaeus and Andersson to write a song for Melodifestivalen, and after two rejected entries in 1971, Andersson and Ulvaeus submitted their new song "Sg det med en sng" ("Say It with a Song") for the 1972 contest, choosing newcomer Lena Anderson to perform. The song came in third place, encouraging Stig Anderson, and became a hit in Sweden. 

The first signs of foreign success came as a surprise, as the Andersson and Ulvaeus single "She's My Kind of Girl" was released through Epic Records in Japan in March 1972, giving the duo a Top 10 hit. Two more singles were released in Japan, "En Carousel" ("En Karusell" in Scandinavia, an earlier version of "Merry-Go-Round") and "Love Has Its Ways" (a song they wrote with Kichi Morita). 

====First hit as Agnetha, Anni-Frid, Benny & Bjrn====
Ulvaeus and Andersson persevered with their songwriting and experimented with new sounds and vocal arrangements. "People Need Love" was released in June 1972, featuring guest vocals by the women, who were now given much greater prominence. Stig Anderson released it as a single, credited to Bjrn & Benny, Agnetha & Anni-Frid. The song peaked at number 17 in the Swedish combined single and album charts, enough to convince them they were on to something. The single also became the first record to chart for the quartet in the United States, where it peaked at number 114 on the Cashbox singles chart and number 117 on the Record World singles chart. Labeled as Bjrn & Benny (with Svenska Flicka), it was released there through Playboy Records. However, according to Stig Anderson, "People Need Love" could have been a much bigger American hit, but a small label like Playboy Records did not have the distribution resources to meet the demand for the single from retailers and radio programmers. Interview with Songwriter magazine, 6, 1981, pp.2325. 

The foursome decided to record their first album together in the autumn of 1972, and sessions began on 26 September 1972. The women shared lead vocals on "Nina, Pretty Ballerina" (a top ten hit in Austria) that day, and their voices in harmony for the first time gave the foursome an idea of the quality of their combined talents.

===="Ring Ring"====
In 1973, the band and their manager Stig Anderson decided to have another try at Melodifestivalen, this time with the song "Ring Ring". The studio sessions were handled by Michael B. Tretow, who experimented with a "wall of sound" production technique that became the wholly new sound. Stig Anderson arranged an English translation of the lyrics by Neil Sedaka and Phil Cody and they thought this would be a surefire winner. However, on 10 February 1973, the song came third in Melodifestivalen, thus it never reached the Eurovision Song Contest itself. Nevertheless, the group released their debut studio album, also called Ring Ring. The album did well and the "Ring Ring" single was a hit in many parts of Europe and also in South Africa. However, Stig Anderson felt that the true breakthrough could only come with a UK or US hit. 

Though Agnetha Fltskog gave birth to her first child in 1973 she was for a shorter period replaced by Inger Brundin on a trip to West Germany.

====Official naming====
In early 1973, Stig Anderson, tired of unwieldy names, started to refer to the group privately and publicly as ABBA. At first, this was a play on words, as Abba is also the name of a well-known fish-canning company in Sweden, and itself an acronym. However, since the fish-canners were unknown outside Sweden, Anderson came to believe the name would work in international markets. A competition to find a suitable name for the group was held in a Gothenburg newspaper. The group was impressed with the names "Alibaba", "FABB", and "Baba", but in the end all the entries were ignored and it was officially announced in the summer that the group were to be known as "ABBA". The group negotiated with the canners for the rights to the name. "ABBA" is an acronym formed from the first letters of each group member's first name: Agnetha, Bjrn, Benny and Anni-Frid. During a promotional photo, Benny flipped his "B" horizontally for fun, and from 1976 onwards the first 'B' in the logo version of the name was "mirror-image" reversed on the band's promotional material and  became the group's registered trademark.

The first time "ABBA" is found written on paper is on a recording session sheet from the Metronome Studio in Stockholm, dated 16 October 1973. This was first written as "Bjrn, Benny, Agnetha & Frida", but was subsequently crossed out with "ABBA" written in large letters on top.

The official logo, using the bold version of the News Gothic typeface, was designed by Rune Sderqvist, and appeared for the first time on the "Dancing Queen" single in August 1976, and subsequently on all later original albums and singles. But the idea for the official logo was made by the German photographer Wolfgang Heilemann on a "Dancing Queen" shoot for the teenage magazine Bravo. On the photo, the ABBA members held a giant initial letter of his/her name. After the pictures were made, Heilemann found out that one of the men held his letter backwards as in . They discussed it and the members of ABBA liked it. Following their acquisition of the group's catalogue, Polygram began using variations of the ABBA logo, using a different font and adding a crown emblem to it in 1992 for the first release of the ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits compilation. When Universal Music purchased Polygram (and, thus, ABBA's label Polar Music International), control of the group's catalogue was returned to Stockholm. Since then, the original logo has been reinstated on all official products. ABBA Logo 25th Anniversary Retrieved from Internet Archive 10 January 2014. 

===Breakthrough (19731976)===
ABBA making an appearance on Dutch TV in April 1974: Clockwise from left Benny Andersson, Bjrn Ulvaeus, Agnetha Fltskog and Anni-Frid Lyngstad

====Eurovision Song Contest 1974====
As the group entered the Melodifestivalen with "Ring Ring" but failed to qualify as the 1973 Swedish entry, Stig Anderson immediately started planning for the 1974 contest.

Ulvaeus, Andersson and Stig Anderson believed in the possibilities of using the Eurovision Song Contest as a way to make the music business aware of them as songwriters, as well as the band itself. In late 1973, they were invited by Swedish television to contribute a song for the Melodifestivalen 1974 and from a number of new songs, the upbeat number "Waterloo" was chosen; the group was now inspired by the growing glam rock scene in England.

ABBA won their national heats on Swedish television on 9 February 1974, and with this third attempt were far more experienced and better prepared for the Eurovision Song Contest. Winning the 1974 Contest on 6 April 1974 gave ABBA the chance to tour Europe and perform on major television shows; thus the band saw the "Waterloo" single chart in many European countries. "Waterloo" was ABBA's first number one single in big markets such as the UK and Germany. In the United States, the song peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, paving the way for their first album and their first trip as a group there. Albeit a short promotional visit, it included their first performance on American television, The Mike Douglas Show. The album Waterloo only peaked at number 145 on the Billboard 200 chart, but received unanimous high praise from the US critics: Los Angeles Times called it "a compelling and fascinating debut album that captures the spirit of mainstream pop quite effectively  an immensely enjoyable and pleasant project", while Creem characterized it as "a perfect blend of exceptional, lovable compositions".

ABBA's follow-up single, "Honey, Honey", peaked at number 27 on the US Billboard Hot 100, and was a number 2 hit in Germany. However, in the United Kingdom, ABBA's British record label, Epic, decided to re-release a remixed version of "Ring Ring" instead of "Honey, Honey", and a cover version of the latter by Sweet Dreams peaked at number 10. Both records debuted on the UK chart within one week of each other. "Ring Ring" failed to reach the Top 30 in the United Kingdom, increasing growing speculation that the group was simply a Eurovision one-hit wonder.

====Post-Eurovision====
In November 1974, ABBA embarked on their first European tour, playing dates in Denmark, West Germany and Austria. It was not as successful as the band had hoped, since most of the venues did not sell out. Due to a lack of demand, they were even forced to cancel a few shows, including a sole concert scheduled in Switzerland. The second leg of the tour, which took them through Scandinavia in January 1975, was very different. They played to full houses everywhere and finally got the reception they had aimed for. Live performances continued during the summer of 1975 when ABBA embarked on a fourteen open-air date tour of Sweden and Finland. Their Stockholm show at the Grna Lund amusement park had an estimated audience of 19,200. Bjrn Ulvaeus later said that "If you look at the singles we released straight after Waterloo, we were trying to be more like the Sweet, a semi-glam rock group, which was stupid because we were always a pop group." 

In late 1974, "So Long" was released as a single in the United Kingdom but it received no airplay from Radio 1 and failed to chart. In the summer of 1975 ABBA released "I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do", which again received little airplay on Radio 1 but managed to climb the charts, to number 38. Later in 1975, the release of their self-titled third studio album ABBA and single "SOS" brought back their chart presence in the UK, where the single hit number 6 and the album peaked at number 13. "SOS" also became ABBA's second number 1 single in Germany and their third in Australia. Success was further solidified with "Mamma Mia" reaching number 1 in the United Kingdom, Germany and Australia. In the United States, "SOS" peaked at number 10 on the Record World Top 100 singles chart and number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, picking up the BMI Award along the way as one of the most played songs on American radio in 1975.

The success of the group in the United States had until that time been limited to single releases. By early 1976, the group already had four Top 30 singles on the US charts, but the album market proved to be tough to crack. The eponymous ABBA album generated three American hits, but it only peaked at number 165 on the Cashbox album chart and number 174 on the Billboard 200 chart. Opinions were voiced, by Creem in particular, that in the US ABBA had endured "a very sloppy promotional campaign". Nevertheless, the group enjoyed warm reviews from the American press. Cashbox went as far as saying that "there is a recurrent thread of taste and artistry inherent in Abba's marketing, creativity and presentation that makes it almost embarrassing to critique their efforts", while Creem wrote: "SOS is surrounded on this LP by so many good tunes that the mind boggles".

In Australia, the airing of the music videos for "I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do" and "Mamma Mia" on the nationally-broadcast TV pop show Countdown (which premiered in August 1975) saw the band rapidly gain enormous popularity, and Countdown become a key promoter of the group via their distinctive music videos. This started an immense interest for ABBA in Australia, resulting in both the single and album holding down the No. 1 positions on the charts for months.

===Superstardom (19761981)===
In March 1976, the band released the compilation album Greatest Hits, despite having had only six top 40 hits in the United Kingdom and the United States. Nevertheless, it became their first UK number 1 album, and also took ABBA into the Top 50 on the US album charts for the first time, eventually selling more than a million copies there. At the same time, Germany released a compilation named The Very Best of ABBA, also becoming a number 1 album there whereas the Greatest Hits compilation followed a few months later to number 2 on the German charts, despite all similarities with The Very Best album. Also included on Greatest Hits was a new single, "Fernando", which went to number 1 in at least thirteen countries worldwide, including the United Kingdom, Germany and Australia, and the single went on to sell over 10 million copies worldwide. In Australia, the song occupied the top position for 14 weeks (and stayed in the chart for 40 weeks), tying with The Beatles' "Hey Jude" for longest-running number one, and making "Fernando" one of the best-selling singles of all time in Australia. That same year, the group received its first international prize, with "Fernando" being chosen as the "Best Studio Recording of 1975". In the United States, "Fernando" reached the Top 10 of the Cashbox Top 100 singles chart and number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100. It also topped the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart, ABBA's first American number one single on any chart.
left
The group's fourth studio album, Arrival, a number 1 bestseller in Europe and Australia, represented a new level of accomplishment in both songwriting and studio work, prompting rave reviews from more rock-oriented UK music weeklies such as Melody Maker and New Musical Express, and mostly appreciative notices from US critics. Hit after hit flowed from Arrival: "Money, Money, Money", another number 1 in Germany and Australia, and "Knowing Me, Knowing You", ABBA's sixth consecutive German number 1 as well as another UK number 1. The real sensation was "Dancing Queen", not only topping the charts in loyal markets the UK, Germany and Australia, but also reaching number 1 in the United States. In South Africa, ABBA had astounding success with "Fernando", "Dancing Queen" and "Knowing Me, Knowing You" being among the top 20 best-selling singles for 197677. In 1977, Arrival was nominated for the inaugural BRIT Award in the category "Best International Album of the Year". By this time ABBA were popular in the United Kingdom, most of Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand. In Frida  The DVD, Lyngstad explains how she and Fltskog developed as singers, as ABBA's recordings grew more complex over the years.

The band's popularity in the United States would remain on a comparatively smaller scale, and "Dancing Queen" became the only Billboard Hot 100 number 1 single ABBA had there (they did, however, get three more singles to the number 1 position on other Billboard charts, including Billboard Adult Contemporary and Hot Dance Club Play). Nevertheless, Arrival finally became a true breakthrough release for ABBA on the US album market where it peaked at number 20 on the Billboard 200 chart and was certified gold by RIAA.

====European and Australian tour====
In January 1977, ABBA embarked on their first major tour. The group's status had changed dramatically and they were clearly regarded as superstars. They opened their much anticipated tour in Oslo, Norway on 28 January, and mounted a lavishly produced spectacle that included a few scenes from their self-written mini-operetta The Girl with the Golden Hair. The concert attracted immense media attention from across Europe and Australia. They continued the tour through Western Europe visiting Gothenburg, Copenhagen, Berlin, Cologne, Amsterdam, Antwerp, Essen, Hanover, Hamburg, ending with shows in the United Kingdom in Manchester, Birmingham, Glasgow and two sold-out concerts at London's Royal Albert Hall. Tickets for these two shows were available only by mail application and it was later revealed that the box-office received 3.5 million requests for tickets, enough to fill the venue 580 times. Along with praise ("ABBA turn out to be amazingly successful at reproducing their records", wrote Creem), there were complaints that "ABBA performed slickly...but with a zero personality coming across from a total of 16 people on stage" (Melody Maker). One of the Royal Albert Hall concerts was filmed as a reference for the filming of the Australian tour for what became , though it is not exactly known how much of the concert was filmed.

Agnetha Fltskog at the opening concert of ABBA's European and Australian Tour in Oslo, 28 January 1977.
After the European leg of the tour, in March 1977, ABBA played 11 dates in Australia before a total of 160,000 people. The opening concert in Sydney at the Sydney Showground on 3 March to an audience of 20,000 was marred by torrential rain with Lyngstad slipping on the wet stage during the concert. However all four members would later recall this concert as most memorable of their career. Upon their arrival in Melbourne, a civic reception was held at the Melbourne Town Hall and ABBA appeared on the balcony to greet an enthusiastic crowd of 6,000. In Melbourne, the group played three concerts at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl with 14,500 at each including the Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser and his family. At the first Melbourne concert, an additional 16,000 people gathered outside the fenced-off area to listen to the concert. In Adelaide, the group performed one concert at West Lakes Football Stadium before 20,000 people with another 10,000 listening outside. During the first of five concerts in Perth, there was a bomb scare with everyone having to evacuate the Entertainment Centre. The trip was accompanied by mass hysteria and unprecedented media attention ("Swedish ABBA stirs box-office in Down Under tour...and the media coverage of the quartet rivals that set to cover the upcoming Royal tour of Australia", wrote Variety), and is captured on film in , directed by Lasse Hallstrm.

The Australian tour and its subsequent ABBA: The Movie produced some ABBA lore, as well. Fltskog's blonde good looks had long made her the band's "pin-up girl", a role she disdained. During the Australian tour, she performed in a skin-tight white jumpsuit, causing one Australian newspaper to use the headline "Agnetha's bottom tops dull show". When asked about this at a news conference, she replied: "Don't they have bottoms in Australia?" DVD documentaries: The Winner Takes It All (2002) and Super Troupers (2004) 

In December 1977, ABBA followed up Arrival with the more ambitious fifth album , released to coincide with the debut of ABBA: The Movie. Although the album was less well received by UK reviewers, it did spawn more worldwide hits: "The Name of the Game" and "Take a Chance on Me", which both topped the UK charts, and peaked at number 12 and number 3 respectively on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the US. Although "Take a Chance on Me" did not top the American charts, it proved to be ABBA's biggest hit single there, selling more copies than "Dancing Queen". The Album also included "Thank You for the Music", the B-side of "Eagle" in countries where the latter had been released as a single, and was belatedly released as an A-side single in the United Kingdom and Ireland in 1983. "Thank You for the Music" has become one of the best loved and best known ABBA songs without being released as a single during the group's lifetime.

====Polar Music Studio formation====
Polar Music Studios was situated in this building at 58 Sankt Eriksgatan in Stockholm until 2004

By 1978 ABBA were one of the biggest bands in the world. They converted a vacant movie theatre into the Polar Music Studio, a state-of-the-art studio in Stockholm. The studio was used by several other bands; notably Genesis' Duke and Led Zeppelin's In Through the Out Door were recorded there. During May, the group went to the United States for a promotional campaign, performing alongside Andy Gibb on Olivia Newton-John's TV show. Recording sessions for the single "Summer Night City" were an uphill struggle, but upon release the song became another hit for the group. The track would set the stage for ABBA's foray into disco with their next album. 

On 9 January 1979, the group performed "Chiquitita" at the Music for UNICEF Concert held at the United Nations General Assembly to celebrate UNICEF's Year of the Child. ABBA donated the copyright of this worldwide hit to the UNICEF; see Music for UNICEF Concert. "Bee Gees, Olivia were a hit with the VIPs" (11 January 1979). Courier Mail (Brisbane); p. 30. The single was released the following week, and reached number 1 in ten countries.

====North American and European tours====
In mid-January 1979, Ulvaeus and Fltskog announced they were getting divorced. The news caused interest from the media, and led to speculation about the band's future. ABBA assured the press and their fan base they were continuing their work as a group, and that the divorce would not affect them. "ABBA divorce  Agnetha moves out" (17 January 1979). The Sun (Sydney); p. 1. Nonetheless, the media continued to confront them with this in interviews. To escape the media swirl and concentrate on their writing, Andersson and Ulvaeus secretly travelled to Compass Point Studios in Nassau, Bahamas, where for two weeks they prepared their next album's songs in relative quiet.

The group's sixth studio album, Voulez-Vous, was released in April 1979, the title track of which was recorded at the famous Criteria Studios in Miami, Florida, with the assistance of recording engineer Tom Dowd amongst others. The album topped the charts across Europe and in Japan and Mexico, hit the Top 10 in Canada and Australia and the Top 20 in the United States. None of the singles from the album reached number 1 on the UK charts, but "Chiquitita", "Does Your Mother Know", "Angeleyes" (with "Voulez-Vous", released as a double A-side) and "I Have a Dream" were all UK Top 5 hits. In Canada, "I Have a Dream" became ABBA's second number 1 on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart (after "Fernando" hit the top previously). Also in 1979, the group released their second compilation album, Greatest Hits Vol. 2, which featured a brand new track: "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)", another number 3 hit in both the UK and Germany. In Russia during the late 1970s, the group was paid in oil commodities because of an embargo on the ruble. Rodgers, Peter (16 March 1980). "Pop goes ABBA's $2m oil gamble: ABBA may lose enormous amount of money following venture into oil market. " The Sunday Times; Business News, p 53 

On 13 September 1979, ABBA began their at the Northlands Coliseum in Edmonton, Canada, with a full house of 14,000. "The voices of the band, Agnetha's high sauciness combined with round, rich lower tones of Anni-Frid, were excellent...Technically perfect, melodically correct and always in perfect pitch...The soft lower voice of Anni-Frid and the high, edgy vocals of Agnetha were stunning", raved Edmonton Journal.

During the next four weeks they played a total of 17 sold-out dates, 13 in the United States and four in Canada. The last scheduled ABBA concert in the United States in Washington, D.C. was cancelled due to Fltskog's emotional distress suffered during the flight from New York to Boston, when the group's private plane was subjected to extreme weather conditions and was unable to land for an extended period. They appeared at the Boston Music Hall for the performance 90 minutes late. The tour ended with a show in Toronto, Canada at Maple Leaf Gardens before a capacity crowd of 18,000. "ABBA plays with surprising power and volume; but although they are loud, they're also clear, which does justice to the signature vocal sound...Anyone who's been waiting five years to see Abba will be well satisfied", wrote Record World.

On 19 October 1979, the tour resumed in Western Europe where the band played 23 sold-out gigs, including six sold-out nights at London's Wembley Arena.

====Progression====
Super Trouper, seventh studio album released by the group in 1980
In March 1980, ABBA travelled to Japan where upon their arrival at Narita International Airport, they were besieged by thousands of fans. The group played eleven concerts to full houses, including six shows at Tokyo's Budokan. This tour was the last "on the road" adventure of their career.
In the summer of 1980, the group released the single "The Winner Takes It All" the group's eighth UK chart topper (and their first since 1978). The song is widely misunderstood as being written about Ulvaeus and Fltskog's marital tribulations; Ulvaeus wrote the lyrics, but has stated they were not about his own divorce; Fltskog has repeatedly stated she was not the loser in their divorce. In the United States, the single peaked at number 8 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became ABBA's second Billboard Adult Contemporary number 1. It was also re-recorded by Andersson and Ulvaeus with a slightly different backing track, by French chanteuse Mireille Mathieu at the end of 1980  as "Bravo Tu As Gagn", with French lyrics by Alain Boublil. November the same year saw the release of ABBA's seventh album Super Trouper, which reflected a certain change in ABBA's style with more prominent use of synthesizers and increasingly personal lyrics. It set a record for the most pre-orders ever received for a UK album after one million copies were ordered before release. The 2nd single from the album, "Super Trouper", also hit number 1 in the UK, becoming the group's ninth and final UK chart-topper. Another track from the Super Trouper album, "Lay All Your Love on Me", released in 1981 as a 12-inch single only in selected territories, managed to top the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart and peaked at number 7 on the UK singles chart becoming, at the time, the highest ever charting 12-inch release in UK chart history.

Also in 1980, ABBA recorded a compilation of Spanish-language versions of their hits called Gracias Por La Msica. This was released in Spanish-speaking countries as well as in Japan and Australia. The album became a major success, and along with the Spanish version of "Chiquitita", this signalled the group's breakthrough in Latin America. ABBA Oro: Grandes xitos, the Spanish equivalent of ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits, was released in 1999.

===Final album and performances (19811982)===
 ABBA during a TV special Dick Cavett Meets ABBA in April 1981

In January 1981, Ulvaeus married Lena Kllersj, and manager Stig Anderson celebrated his 50th birthday with a party. For this occasion, ABBA recorded the track "Hovas Vittne" (a pun on the Swedish name for Jehovah's Witness and Anderson's birthplace, Hova) as a tribute to him, and released it only on 200 red vinyl copies, to be distributed to the guests attending the party. This single has become a sought-after collectible. In mid-February 1981, Andersson and Lyngstad announced they were filing for divorce. Information surfaced that their marriage had been an uphill struggle for years, and Benny had already met another woman, Mona Nrklit, whom he married in November 1981.

Andersson and Ulvaeus had songwriting sessions during the spring of 1981, and recording sessions began in mid-March. At the end of April, the group recorded a TV special, Dick Cavett Meets ABBA with the US talk show host Dick Cavett. The Visitors, ABBA's eighth and final studio album, showed a songwriting maturity and depth of feeling distinctly lacking from their earlier recordings but still placing the band squarely in the pop genre, with catchy tunes and harmonies. Although not revealed at the time of its release, the album's title track, according to Ulvaeus, refers to the secret meetings held against the approval of totalitarian governments in Soviet-dominated states, while other tracks address topics like failed relationships, the threat of war, ageing, and loss of innocence. The album's only major single release, "One of Us", proved to be the last of ABBA's nine number 1 singles in Germany in December 1981; and the swansong of their sixteen Top 5 singles on the South African chart. "One of Us" was also ABBA's final Top 10 hit in the UK.

Although it topped the album charts across most of Europe, including the UK and Germany, The Visitors was not as commercially successful as its predecessors, showing a commercial decline in previously loyal markets such as France, Australia and Japan. A track from the album, "When All Is Said and Done", was released as a single in North America, Australia and New Zealand, and fittingly became ABBA's final Top 40 hit in the US (debuting on the US charts on 31 December 1981), while also reaching the US Adult Contemporary Top 10, and number 4 on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart in Canada. The song's lyrics, as with "The Winner Takes It All" and "One of Us", dealt with the painful experience of separating from a long-term partner, though it looked at the trauma more optimistically. With the now publicised story of Andersson and Lyngstad's divorce, speculation increased of tension within the band. Also released in the United States was the title track of The Visitors, which hit the Top Ten on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart.

====Final recording sessions====
In the spring of 1982, songwriting sessions had started and the group came together for more recordings. Plans were not completely clear, but a new album, tentatively named Opus 10, was discussed and the prospect of a small tour suggested. The recording sessions in May and June 1982 were a struggle, and only three songs were eventually recorded: "You Owe Me One", "I Am the City" and "Just Like That". Andersson and Ulvaeus were not satisfied with the outcome, so the tapes were shelved and the group took a break for the summer. 

Back in the studio again in early August, the group had changed plans for the rest of the year: they settled for a Christmas release of a double album compilation of all their past single releases to be named . New songwriting and recording sessions took place, and during October and November, they released the singles "The Day Before You Came"/"Cassandra" and "Under Attack"/"You Owe Me One", the A-sides of which were included on the compilation album. Neither single made the Top 20 in the United Kingdom, though "The Day Before You Came" became a Top 5 hit in many European countries such as Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium. The album went to number 1 in the UK and Belgium, Top 5 in the Netherlands and Germany and Top 20 in many other countries. "Under Attack", the group's final release before disbanding, was a Top 5 hit in the Netherlands and Belgium.

"I Am the City" and "Just Like That" were left unreleased on The Singles: The First Ten Years for possible inclusion on the next projected studio album, though this never came to fruition. "I Am the City" was eventually released on the compilation album Gold: More Hits|More ABBA Gold] in 1993, while "Just Like That" has been recycled in new songs with other artists produced by Andersson and Ulvaeus. A reworked version of the verses ended up in the musical Chess. The chorus section of "Just Like That" was eventually released on a retrospective box set in 1994. Despite a number of requests from fans, Ulvaeus and Andersson are still refusing to release ABBA's version of "Just Like That" in its entirety, even though the complete version surfaced on bootlegs.

The group travelled to London to promote The Singles: The First Ten Years in the first week of November 1982, appearing on Saturday Superstore and The Late, Late Breakfast Show, and also to West Germany in the second week, to perform on Show Express. On 19 November 1982, ABBA appeared for the last time in Sweden on the TV programme Njesmaskinen, and on 11 December 1982, they made their last performance ever, transmitted to the UK on Noel Edmonds' The Late, Late Breakfast Show, through a live link from a TV studio in Stockholm.

====Final performances====
Andersson and Ulvaeus began collaborating with Tim Rice in early 1983 on writing songs for the musical project Chess, while Fltskog and Lyngstad both concentrated on international solo careers. While Andersson and Ulvaeus were working on the musical, a further co-operation among the three of them came with the musical Abbacadabra that was produced in France for television. It was a children's musical utilising 14 ABBA songs. Alain and Daniel Boublil, who wrote Les Misrables, had been in touch with Stig Anderson about the project, and the TV musical was aired over Christmas on French TV and later a Dutch version was also broadcast. Boublil previously also wrote the French lyric for Mireille Mathieu's version of "The Winner Takes It All".

Lyngstad, who had recently moved to Paris, participated in the French version, and recorded a single, "Belle", a duet with French singer Daniel Balavoine. The song was a cover of ABBA's 1976 instrumental track "Arrival". As the single "Belle" sold well in France, Cameron Mackintosh wanted to stage an English-language version of the show in London, with the French lyrics translated by David Wood and Don Black; Andersson and Ulvaeus got involved in the project, and contributed with one new song, "The Seeker". "Abbacadabra" premired on 8 December 1983 at The Lyric Hammersmith Theatre in London, to mixed reviews and full houses for eight weeks, closing on 21 January 1984. Lyngstad was also involved in this production, recording "Belle" in English as "Time", a duet with actor and singer B. A. Robertson: the single sold well, and was produced and recorded by Andersson and Ulvaeus.

Anni-Frid lyngstad performed "I Have A Dream" with a children's choir on French television in 1984 -solo-.

All four members made their final public appearance, as four friends more than as ABBA, in January 1986, when they recorded a video of themselves performing an acoustic version of "Tivedshambo", which was the first song written by their manager, Stig Anderson, for a Swedish TV show honouring Anderson on his 55th birthday. The four had not seen each other for more than two years. That same year they also performed privately at another friend's 40th birthday: their old tour manager, Claes af Geijerstam. They sang a self-written song titled "Der Kleine Franz" that was later to resurface in Chess. Also in 1986, ABBA Live was released, featuring selections of live performances from the group's 1977 and 1979 tours. The four members were guests at the 50th birthday of Grel Hanser in 1999. Hanser was a long-time friend of all four, and also former secretary of Stig Anderson. Honouring Grel, ABBA performed a Swedish birthday song "Med En Enkel Tulipan" a cappella. Bjrn Ulvaeus. raffem.com  ABBA's last known appearance (1999) 

Benny Andersson has on several occasions performed old ABBA songs. In June 1992, he and Ulvaeus appeared with U2 at a Stockholm concert, singing the chorus of "Dancing Queen", and a few years later during the final performance of the B & B in Concert in Stockholm, Andersson joined the cast for an encore at the piano. Andersson frequently adds an ABBA song to the playlist when he performs with his BAO band. He also played the piano during new recordings of the ABBA songs "Like an Angel Passing Through My Room" with opera singer Anne Sofie von Otter, and "When All Is Said and Done" with Swede Viktoria Tolstoy. In 2002, Andersson and Ulvaeus both performed an a cappella rendition of the first verse of "Fernando" as they accepted their Ivor Novello award in London. Lyngstad performed and recorded an a cappella version of "Dancing Queen" with the Swedish group The Real Group in 1993, and has also re-recorded "I Have a Dream" with Swiss singer Dan Daniell in 2003.

===Breaking up===
ABBA has never officially announced the end of the group, but it has long been considered dissolved. Their final public performance together as ABBA was on the British TV programme The Late, Late Breakfast Show (live from Stockholm) on 11 December 1982. In January 1983, Fltskog started recording sessions for a solo album, as Lyngstad had successfully released her album Something's Going On some months earlier. Ulvaeus and Andersson, meanwhile, started songwriting sessions for the musical Chess. In interviews at the time, Bjrn and Benny denied the split of ABBA ("Who are we without our ladies? Initials of Brigitte Bardot?"), and Lyngstad and Fltskog kept claiming in interviews that ABBA would come together for a new album repeatedly during 1983 and 1984. Internal strife between the group and their manager escalated and the band members sold their shares in Polar Music during 1983. Except for a TV appearance in 1986, the foursome did not come together publicly again until they were reunited at the Swedish premiere of the Mamma Mia! movie on 4 July 2008.

In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, following the premiere, Ulvaeus and Andersson confirmed that there was nothing that could entice them back on stage again. Ulvaeus said: "We will never appear on stage again. There is simply no motivation to re-group. Money is not a factor and we would like people to remember us as we were. Young, exuberant, full of energy and ambition. I remember Robert Plant saying Led Zeppelin were a cover band now because they cover all their own stuff. I think that hit the nail on the head." 
However, on 3 January 2011, Fltskog, who has been long considered to be the most reclusive member of the group and possibly also the major obstacle to any reunion, raised the possibility of reuniting for a one-off engagement. She admitted that she has not yet brought the idea up to the other three members. In April 2013, she reiterated her hopes for reunion during an interview with Die Zeit, stating: "If they ask me, I'll say yes." 

In a May 2013 interview, Faltskog, aged 63 at the time, confirmed that an Abba reunion will never eventuate: "I think we have to accept that it will not happen, because we are too old and each one of us has their own life. Too many years have gone by since we stopped, and theres really no meaning in putting us together again." Faltskog further explained that the band members remained on amenable terms: "Its always nice to see each other now and then and to talk a little and to be a little nostalgic." In an April 2014 interview, Faltskog, when asked about whether the band might reunite for a new recording said "It's difficult to talk about this because then all the news stories will be: 'Abba is going to record another song!' But as long as we can sing and play, then why not? I would love to, but it's up to Bjrn and Benny." 

===After ABBA===

====Benny Andersson and Bjrn Ulvaeus====

In October 1984, Ulvaeus and Andersson together with lyricist Tim Rice released the musical concept double album Chess. The singles "One Night in Bangkok" (with vocals by Murray Head and Anders Glenmark ) and "I Know Him So Well" (a duet by Barbara Dickson and Elaine Paige, and later also recorded by both Barbra Streisand and Whitney Houston) were both hugely successful. The former reached number 1 in Australia, Germany, Spain and Switzerland; number 2 in Austria, France and New Zealand; number 3 in Canada, Norway, Sweden and the US, as well as reaching the top 10 in a few other countries. In May 1986, the musical premired in London's West End, and ran for almost three years. Chess also opened on Broadway in April 1988, but closed within two months due to bad reviews. In Stockholm, the composers staged Chess p svenska (Chess in Swedish) in 2003, with some new material, including the musical numbers "Han r en man, han r ett barn" ("He's a Man, He's a Child") and "Glm mig om du kan" ("Forget Me If You Can"). In 2008, the musical was again revived for a successful staging at London's Royal Albert Hall which was subsequently released on DVD, and then in two successful separate touring productions in the United States and United Kingdom, in 2010.

Benny Andersson during a performance in Minnesota 2006

Andersson and Ulvaeus' next project, Kristina frn Duvemla, an epic Swedish musical, premiered in Malm, in southern Sweden in October 1995. The musical ran for five years in Stockholm, and an English version has been in development for some considerable time. It has been reported that a Broadway production is in its earliest stages of pre-production. In the meantime, following some earlier workshops, a full presentation of the English translation of the musical in concert, now with the shortened name of "Kristina", took place to capacity crowds in September 2009 at New York's Carnegie Hall, and in April 2010 at London's Royal Albert Hall, followed by a CD release of the New York recordings.

Since 1983, besides Chess and Kristina frn Duvemla, Benny Andersson has continued writing songs with Ulvaeus. The pair produced two English-language pop albums with Swedish duo Gemini in 1985 and 1987. In 1987, Andersson also released his first solo album on his own label, Mono Music, called "Klinga mina klockor" ("Ring My Bells"), all new material inspired by Swedish folk music  and followed it with his second album titled November 1989.

In the 1990s, Andersson wrote music for the popular Swedish cabaret quartet Ainbusk Singers, giving them two hits: "Lassie" and "lska mig" ("Love me"), and later produced Shapes, an English-language album by the group's Josefin Nilsson with all-new material by Andersson and Ulvaeus. Andersson has also regularly written music for films (most notably to Roy Andersson's Songs from the Second Floor). In 2001, Andersson formed his own band, Benny Anderssons Orkester (BAO), which released three successful albums in 2001, 2004 and 2007 respectively. Andersson has the distinction of remaining the longest in the Swedish Radio Svensktoppen charts; the song "Du r min man" ("You Are My Man"), sung by Helen Sjholm, spent 278 weeks there between 2004 and 2009. Andersson released his third album BAO 3 in October 2007, of new material with his band BAO and vocalists Helen Sjholm and Tommy Krberg, as well as playing to full houses at two of Sweden's largest concert venues in October and November 2007, with an audience of 14,000.

Bjrn Ulvaeus at Gothenburg Book Fair 2007 Ulvaeus has not appeared on stage performing music since ABBA, but had a reunion with his co-members of the Hootenanny Singers on 16 July 2005 at a music festival in his hometown of Vstervik, singing their 1966 hit "Marianne".

Andersson and Ulvaeus have been highly involved in the worldwide productions of the musical Mamma Mia!, alongside Lyngstad who attends premieres. They were also involved in the production of the successful film version of the musical, which opened in July 2008. Andersson produced the soundtrack utilising many of the musicians ABBA used on their albums and tours. Andersson made a cameo appearance in the movie as a 'fisherman' piano player in the "Dancing Queen" scene, while Ulvaeus is seen as a Greek god playing a lyre during the closing credits.

Andersson and Ulvaeus have continuously been writing new material; most recently the two wrote 7 songs for Anderssons 'BAO' 2011 album 'O Klang Och Jubeltid', performed as usual by vocalists Sjholm, Krberg and Moreus. In July 2009, 'BAO' released their first international release, now named The Benny Andersson Band, with the album The Story of a Heart. The album was a compilation of 14 tracks from Andersson's five Swedish-language releases between 1987 and 2007, including five songs now recorded with lyrics by Ulvaeus in English, and the new title song premiered on BBC2's Ken Bruce Show. A Swedish-language version of the title track, "Sommaren Du Fick" ("The Summer You Got"), was released as a single in Sweden prior to the English version, with vocals by Helen Sjholm.
In the spring of 2009, Andersson also released a single recorded by the staff at his privately owned Stockholm hotel Hotel Rival, titled "2nd Best to None", accompanied by a video showing the staff at work. In 2008, Andersson and Ulvaeus wrote a song for Swedish singer Sissela Kyle, titled "Jag vill bli gammal" ("I Wanna Grow Old"), for her Stockholm stage show "Your Days Are Numbered", which was never recorded and released, but did get a TV performance. Ulvaeus also contributed lyrics to ABBA's 1976 instrumental track "Arrival" for Sarah Brightman's cover version recorded for her 2008 album Winter Symphony. New English lyrics have also been written for Andersson's 1999 song "Innan Gryningen" (then also named "Millennium Hymn"), with the new title "The Silence of the Dawn" for Barbara Dickson (performed live, but not yet recorded and released). In 2007, they wrote the new song "Han som har vunnit allt" ("He Who's Won It All") for actor/singer Anders Ekborg. Bjrn wrote English lyrics for two older songs from Benny's solo albums: "I Walk with You Mama" ("Stockholm by Night", 1989) and "After the Rain" ("Efter regnet", 1987) for opera singer Anne Sofie von Otter, for her Andersson tribute album I Let the Music Speak. Barbara Dickson recorded (but not yet released) a Bjrn & Benny song called 'The Day The Wall Came Tumbling Down'; the song eventually was released by Australian 'Mamma Mia!' musical star Anne Wood 201 album of ABBA covers, Divine Discontent. As of October 2012, Bjrn Ulvaeus has mentioned writing new material with Benny for a 'BAO' Christmas release (also mentioned as a BAO 'box'), and Benny is busy writing music for a Swedish language obscure musical, 'Hjlp Skes' ('Help is Wanted') together with Kristina Lugn and Lars Rudolfsson, premiering 8 February 2013.
Andersson has also written music for a documentary film about Olof Palme, re-recording the track 'Sorgmarch' from his last album throughout the film.

====Agnetha Fltskog and Anni-Frid Lyngstad====

Both female members of ABBA pursued solo careers on the international scene after their work with the group. In 1982, Lyngstad chose Genesis drummer and vocalist Phil Collins to produce the album Something's Going On and unveiled the hit single and video "I Know There's Something Going On" in the autumn of that year. The single became a number 1 hit in France (where it spent five weeks at the top), Belgium, Switzerland and Costa Rica. The track reached number 3 in Austria, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Poland, and was also a Top 10 hit in Germany, Italy, Finland, South Africa and Australia. Sveriges Television documented this historical event, by filming the whole recording process. The result became a one-hour TV documentary, including interviews with Lyngstad, Collins, Ulvaeus and Andersson as well as all the musicians. This documentary and the promotion videos from the album are included in Frida - The DVD.

Lyngstad's second solo album after ABBA was called Shine, produced by Steve Lillywhite. Shine was recorded in Paris and released in 1984.Shine was Lyngstad's final studio album release for twelve years. It featured "Slowly", the last known Andersson-Ulvaeus composition to have been recorded by one of the former female ABBA vocalists to date. The promotion videos and clips for "Shine" are included in Frida  The DVD.

In 1980, Agnetha Fltskog recorded Nu tndas tusen juleljus (Now a thousand Christmas candles are lit) a Swedish Christmas album along with her 7 year old daughter Linda. The album was released in 1981. Nu tndas tusen julejus, which was Fltskog's first Swedish language recording for the Polar Music label after having left CBS-Cupol, peaked at No. 6 on the Swedish album chart in January 1982, has been re-released on CD by Polar Music/PolyGram/Universal Music all through the 1990s and 2000s and is one of the best-selling Swedish Christmas albums of all time. The album name is derived from one of Scandinavia's best-known Christmas carols.

In 1983, Fltskog released the solo album Wrap Your Arms Around Me which achieved platinum sales in Sweden. This included the single "The Heat Is On", which was a hit all over Europe and Scandinavia. It reached number one in Sweden and Norway and number two in the Netherlands and Belgium. In the United States, Fltskog earned a Billboard Top 30 hit with "Can't Shake Loose". In Europe, the single "Wrap Your Arms Around Me" was another successful hit, topping the charts in Belgium and Denmark, reaching the Top 5 in Sweden, the Netherlands and South Africa, and the Top 20 in Germany and France. The album sold 1,2 million copies worldwide. The album was produced by the highly successful producer and songwriter Mike Chapman, also known for his work with The Sweet, Mud, Suzi Quatro, Blondie, Pat Benatar and The Knack.

"It's So Nice to be Rich" was Agnetha's fourth top ten hit in Sweden in 1983. Her duet with Tomas Ledin, "Never Again" was the first one.

Fltskog's second English-language solo album, Eyes of a Woman, was released in March 1985, peaking at number 2 in Sweden and another platinum seller and performing reasonably well in Europe. The album was produced by Eric Stewart of 10cc. The first single from the album was her self-penned "I Won't Let You Go". Agnetha's duet with Ola Hkansson "The Way You Are" was a number one hit in Sweden in 1986 and was awarded double platinum.

In early 1987, Agnetha recorded an album "Kom flj med I vr karusell" ('Come ride with me on my carousell') with her son Christian. The album contained songs for children and was sung in Swedish. For the album Agnetha recorded duets with her son and with a choir of children. She also recorded a few solo songs. The production was modern and fresh. The single 'Pa Sondag' was much played at the radio and even made the Swedish top 10, unique for a song made for kids to enjoy.

Also in November 1987, Fltskog released her third post-ABBA solo album, the Peter Cetera-produced I Stand Alone, which also included the Billboard Adult Contemporary duet with Cetera, "I Wasn't the One (Who Said Goodbye)", as well as the European charting singles "The Last Time" and "Let It Shine". The album was extremely successful in Sweden, where it spent eight weeks at number 1 and was awarded double-platinum. Shortly after some minor European promotion for the album in early 1988, Fltskog withdrew from public life and halted her music career. In 1996, she released her autobiography, As I Am, and a compilation album featuring her solo hits alongside some ABBA classics.

In 2004, she made a successful comeback, releasing the critically acclaimed album My Colouring Book, which debuted at number 1 in Sweden (achieving triple-platinum status), number 6 in Germany, and number 12 in the UK, winning a silver award, and achieving gold status in Finland. The single "If I Thought You'd Ever Change Your Mind" (a cover of the Cilla Black 1960s song) became Fltskog's biggest solo hit in the United Kingdom, reaching number 11. The single peaked at number 2 in Sweden and was a hit throughout Scandinavia and Europe. A further single, "When You Walk in the Room", was released but met with less success, only peaking at number 34 in the United Kingdom. In January 2007, she sang a live duet on stage with Swedish singer Tommy Krberg at the after party for the final performance of the musical, Mamma Mia!, in Stockholm, at which Benny Andersson and Bjrn Ulvaeus were also present.

In 1992, Lyngstad had been asked and chosen to be the chairperson for the environmental organisation "Artister fr miljn" (Artists for the Environment) in Sweden. She became chairwoman for this organisation from 1992 to 1995. To mark her interests for the environment, she recorded the Julian Lennon song "Saltwater" and performed it live in Stockholm. She arranged and financed summer camps for poor children in Sweden, focusing on environmental and ecological issues. Her environmental work for this organisation led up to the decision to record again. The album Djupa andetag (Deep Breaths) was released towards the end of 1996 and became a success in Sweden, where it reached number 1. The lyrics for the single from this album, "ven en blomma" ("Even a Flower"), deal with environmental issues. In 2004, Lyngstad recorded a song called "The Sun Will Shine Again", written especially for her and released with former Deep Purple member Jon Lord. The couple made several TV performances with this song in Germany. Lyngstad lives a relatively low-profile life but occasionally appears at a party or charity function. On 26 August 1992, she married Prince Heinrich Ruzzo Reuss von Plauen, of the German Reuss family. Von Plauen died of lymphoma in 1999 at the age of 49. In addition to losing her husband, Lyngstad had also lost her daughter Lise-Lotte in a car crash a year earlier.

On 15 November 2005, Lyngstad's 60th birthday, Universal released the Frida Box Set, consisting of the solo albums she recorded for the Polar Label. Also included is the 3-hour documentary Frida  The DVD. On this DVD, which covers her entire singing career, the viewer is guided by Lyngstad herself through the years from her TV debut in Sweden in 1967 to the TV performances she made in Germany in 2004. Many rare clips are included in the set and each performance is explained by Lyngstad herself. The interview with Lyngstad was filmed in the Swiss Alps in summer 2005.

Lyngstad returned to the recording studio in 2010 to record vocals for the Cat Stevens song "Morning Has Broken", for Swedish guitarist Georg Wadenius's October 2010 album Reconnections. The album, which featured other guest vocalists, reached number 17 in the Swedish charts.

In May 2013, Fltskog released a solo album entitled A through the Verve music label. In a promotional interview, Fltskog explained that the album was unplanned and it was after she heard the first three songs that she felt that she "had to do this the album". She also revealed that she completed singing lessons prior to recording A, as she felt a "a bit rusty" in her throat. Fltskog stated that she would not be undertaking any tours or live performances in support of the album, explaining: "I'm not that young anymore. I dont have the energy to do that, and also I dont want to travel too much." The title of the album was conceived of by the studio production team. 
In 2004 she recorded an album of 1960s covers who had the most impact on her teenage years as a music contender. "A" has been very successful, earning her 4 Gold Records in UK where it peaked at # 6, Australia, Germany and Sweden. In both UK and Australia it was in the top 100 albums of 2013.

===Revival===
The same year the members of ABBA went their separate ways, the French production of a "tribute" show (a children's TV musical named Abbacadabra using 14 ABBA songs) spawned new interest in the group's music.

After receiving little attention during the mid-to-late-1980s, ABBA's music experienced a resurgence in the early 1990s due to the UK synth-pop duo Erasure, who released a cover extended play featuring versions of ABBA songs which topped the charts in 1992. As U2 arrived in Stockholm for a concert in June of that year, the band paid homage to ABBA by inviting Bjrn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson to join them on stage for a rendition of "Dancing Queen", playing guitar and keyboards. September 1992 saw the release of ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits, a new compilation album. The single "Dancing Queen" received radio airplay in the UK in summer 1992 to promote the album. The song returned to the Top 20 of the UK singles chart in August that year, this time peaking at number 16.

The enormous interest in the ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits compilation saw the release of in 1993.

In 1994, two Australian cult films caught the attention of the world's media, both focusing on admiration for ABBA: The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert and Muriel's Wedding. The same year, Thank You for the Music, a four-disc box set comprising all the group's hits and stand-out album tracks, was released with the involvement of all four members. "By the end of the twentieth century", American critic Chuck Klosterman wrote a decade later, "it was far more contrarian to hate ABBA than to love them." (online copy) 

ABBA were soon recognised and embraced by other acts: Evan Dando of The Lemonheads recorded a cover version of "Knowing Me, Knowing You"; Sinad O'Connor and Boyzone's Stephen Gately have recorded "Chiquitita"; Tanita Tikaram, Blancmange and Steven Wilson paid tribute to "The Day Before You Came". Cliff Richard covered "Lay All Your Love on Me", while Dionne Warwick, Peter Cetera, and Celebrity Skin recorded their versions of "SOS". U.S. alternative-rock musician Marshall Crenshaw has also been known to play a version of "Knowing Me, Knowing You" in concert appearances, while legendary English Latin pop songwriter Richard Daniel Roman has recognized ABBA as a major influence. Swedish metal guitarist Yngwie Malmsteen covered "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)" with slightly altered lyrics.

Two different compilation albums of ABBA songs have been released. ABBA: A Tribute coincided with the 25th anniversary celebration and featured 17 songs, some of which were recorded especially for this release. Notable tracks include Go West's "One of Us", Army of Lovers "Hasta Maana", Information Society's "Lay All Your Love on Me", Erasure's "Take a Chance on Me" (with MC Kinky), and Lyngstad's a cappella duet with The Real Group of "Dancing Queen". A second 12-track album was released in 1999, entitled ABBAMANIA, with proceeds going to the Youth Music charity in England. It featured all new cover versions: notable tracks were by Madness ("Money, Money, Money"), Culture Club ("Voulez-Vous"), The Corrs ("The Winner Takes It All"), Steps ("Lay All Your Love on Me", "I Know Him So Well"), and a medley entitled "Thank ABBA for the Music" performed by several artists and as featured on the Brits Awards that same year.

In 1997, an ABBA tribute group was formed, the ABBA Teens, which was subsequently renamed the A-Teens to allow the group some independence. The group's first album, "The ABBA Generation", consisting solely of ABBA covers reimagined as 1990s pop songs, was a worldwide success and so were subsequent albums. The group disbanded in 2004 due to a grueling schedule and intentions to go solo.

In Sweden, the growing recognition of the legacy of Andersson and Ulvaeus resulted in the 1998 B & B Concerts: a tribute concert (with Swedish singers who had worked with the songwriters through the years) showcasing not only their ABBA years, but hits both before and after ABBA. The concert was a success, and was ultimately released on CD. It later toured Scandinavia and even went to Beijing in the People's Republic of China for two concerts.

In 2000, ABBA was reported to have turned down an offer of approximately US$1,000,000,000 (one billion US dollars) to do a reunion tour consisting of 100 concerts. Basham, David (2 February 2000) "ABBA Nixes Billion-Dollar Offer To Reunite". MTV News. 

For the 2004 semi-final of the Eurovision Song Contest, staged in Istanbul 30 years after ABBA had won the contest in Brighton, all four members made cameo appearances in a special comedy video made for the interval act, entitled "Our Last Video Ever". Others well-known stars such as Rik Mayall, Cher and Iron Maiden's Eddie also made appearances in the video. It was not included in the official DVD release of the Eurovision Contest, but was issued as a separate DVD release, retitled The Last Video at the request of the former ABBA members.

In 2005, all four members of ABBA appeared at the Stockholm premiere of the musical Mamma Mia!. 

On 22 October 2005, at the 50th anniversary celebration of the Eurovision Song Contest, "Waterloo" was chosen as the best song in the competition's history. 

On 4 July 2008, all four ABBA members were reunited at the Swedish premiere of the film Mamma Mia!. It was only the second time all of them had appeared together in public since 1986. During the appearance, they re-emphasized that they intended never to officially reunite, citing the opinion of Robert Plant that the re-formed Led Zeppelin was more like a cover band of itself than the original band. Ulvaeus stated that he wanted the band to be remembered as they were during the peak years of their success. 
Posing together with the actors from the motion picture Mamma Mia! The Movie on 4 July 2008, are the original ABBA members. Far left, Benny Andersson. Fifth from left, Agnetha Fltskog, with her hand on Anni-Frid Lyngstad's shoulder. Second from right, Bjrn Ulvaeus.
The compilation album , originally released in 1992, returned to number one in the UK album charts for the fifth time on 3 August 2008. On 14 August 2008, the Mamma Mia! The Movie film soundtrack went to number 1 on the US Billboard charts, ABBA's first US chart-topping album. During the band's heyday the highest album chart position they had ever achieved in America was number 14.

In November 2008, all eight studio albums, together with a ninth of rare tracks, was released as The Albums. Thomas, Stephen. (11-24-2008) The Albums  ABBA. AllMusic. Retrieved on 30 April 2012. It hit several charts, peaking at number 4 in Sweden and reaching the Top 10 in several other European territories.

In 2008, Sony Computer Entertainment Europe, in collaboration with Universal Music Group Sweden AB, released SingStar ABBA on both the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation 3 games consoles, as part of the SingStar music video games. The PS2 version features 20 ABBA songs, while 25 songs feature on the PS3 version.

On 22 January 2009, Fltskog and Lyngstad appeared together on stage to receive the Swedish music award "Rockbjrnen" (for "lifetime achievement"). In an interview, the two women expressed their gratitude for the honorary award and thanked their fans.

On 25 November 2009, PRS for Music announced that the British public voted ABBA as the band they would most like to see re-form. 

On 27 January 2010, ABBAWORLD, a 25-room touring exhibition featuring interactive and audiovisual activities, debuted at Earls Court Exhibition Centre in London. According to the exhibition's website, ABBAWORLD is "approved and fully supported" by the band members. 

"Mamma Mia" was released as one of the first few non-premium song selections for the online RPG game Bandmaster. On 17 May 2011, "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!" was added as a non-premium song selection for the Bandmaster Philippines server. On 15 November 2011, Ubisoft released a dancing game called for the Wii.

In January 2012, Universal Music announced the re-release of ABBA's final album The Visitors, featuring a previously unheard track "From a Twinkling Star to a Passing Angel". 

A book entitled Abba: The Official Photo Book was published in early 2014 to mark the 40-year anniversary of the band's Eurovision victory. The book reveals that part of the reason for the band's outrageous costumes were the Swedish tax laws at the time that allowed the cost of brazen outfits that were not suitable for public display to be deducted against tax. 

==Recording process==
Abba were perfectionists in the studio and would work on tracks tirelessly until they got them right, rather than leaving them and coming back to them later. ABBA  In Their Own Words, compiled by Rosemary York, 1981, pp 5765. Omnibus Press ISBN 0-86001-950-0 
 
The band would create the basic rhythm track with a drummer, guitarist and bass player. All the other arrangements  vocals, other instruments  would be overlaid onto this basic track. The vocals would then be added, and orchestra overdubs were usually left till last. 

The women of the band would contribute ideas at the studio stage. Benny and Bjorn would play them the backing tracks and they would make comments and suggestions. According to Agnetha, the women had the final say in how the lyrics were shaped. Frida says: "When we gather around the piano to get our voices tuned up, we often come up with things we can use in the backing vocals." 

After all the vocals and overdubs had been done, the band would take up to five days to mix a song. 

==Awards and nominations==

==The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame==
On 15 March 2010, ABBA was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Bee Gees members Barry Gibb and Robin Gibb. The ceremony was held at The Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City. The group was represented by Anni-Frid Lyngstad and Benny Andersson. 

==Success in the United States==
During their active career, from 1972 to 1982, ABBA placed twenty singles on the Billboard Hot 100 fourteen of which made the top 40 (13 on the Cashbox Top 100) and ten of which made the Top 20 on both charts. A total of four of those singles reached the Top 10, including "Dancing Queen" which reached number 1 in April 1977.
While "Fernando" and "SOS" did not break the Top 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, reaching #13 and #15 respectively, they did reach the Top 10 on Cashbox ("Fernando") and Record World ("SOS") charts. Both "Dancing Queen" and "Take A Chance On Me" were certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over one million copies each. Gold & Platinum Searchable Database  April 19, 2014. RIAA. Retrieved on 19 April 2014. 

The group also had 12 Top 20 singles on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart with two of them, "Fernando" and "The Winner Takes It All", reaching number 1. "Lay All Your Love on Me" was ABBA's fourth number 1 single on a Billboard chart, topping the Hot Dance Club Play chart. The singles "Dancing Queen" and "Take a Chance on Me" were certified gold (more than 1 million copies sold) by the RIAA.

Nine ABBA albums made their way into the top half of the Billboard 200 album chart, with seven of them reaching the Top 50 and four reaching the Top 20. ABBA: The Album was the highest-charting album of the group's career, peaking at No. 14. Five albums received RIAA gold certification (more than 500,000 copies sold), while three acquired platinum status (selling more than one million copies). In 1993, the ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits collection was released in the United States and has since become a seven-time platinum best-seller. It also topped the Billboard Top Pop Catalog Albums chart (it also peaked at number 11 on a Billboard Comprehensive Albums chart).

==Fashion, style, videos, advertising campaigns==
ABBA was widely noted for the colourful and trend-setting costumes its members wore. Aftonbladet 4 February 2000: "The clothes were a part of making us popular." The reason for the wild costumes was Swedish tax law. The clothes could be deductible only if they could not be worn other than for performances. Choreography by Graham Tainton also contributed to their performance style.

The videos that accompanied some of the band's biggest hits are often cited as being among the earliest examples of the genre. Most of ABBA's videos (and ABBA: The Movie) were directed by Lasse Hallstrm, who would later direct the films My Life as a Dog, The Cider House Rules and Chocolat. ABBA: Bang a Boomerang. Australian Broadcasting Corporation, January 2013 (documentary, 57 mins), see 6:0012:00 min (IMDB entry) 

ABBA made videos because their songs were hits in many different countries and personal appearances were not always possible. This was also done in an effort to minimize travelling, particularly to countries that would have required extremely long flights. Fltskog and Ulvaeus had two young children and Fltskog, who was also afraid of flying, was very reluctant to leave her children for such a long time. ABBA's manager, Stig Anderson, realized the potential of showing a simple video clip on television to publicize a single or album, thereby allowing easier and quicker exposure than a concert tour. Some of these videos became classics because of the 1970s-era costumes and early video effects, such as the grouping of the band members in different combinations of pairs, overlapping one singer's profile with the other's full face, and the contrasting of one member against another.

In 1976, ABBA participated in a high-profile advertising campaign by the Matsushita Electric Industrial (today's Panasonic), which was designed to promote the brand National. This campaign was designed initially for Australia, where "National" was still the primary brand used by Matsushita, who had not introduced the "Panasonic" brand to Australia yet despite its widespread use in other parts of the world such as the United States. However, the campaign was also aired in Japan. Five commercials, each approximately one minute long, were produced, each using the "National Song" sung by ABBA, which used the melody and instrumental arrangement of "Fernando", adapted with new lyrics promoting National, and working in several slogans used by National in their advertising. 

==Political controversy==
In September 2010, band members Andersson and Ulvaeus criticized the right-wing Danish People's Party (DF) for using the ABBA song "Mamma Mia" (with modified lyrics) at rallies. The band had threatened to file a lawsuit against the DF, saying they never allowed their music to be used politically and that they had absolutely no interest in supporting the party. Their record label Universal Music later said that no legal action would be taken because an agreement had been reached. 

==Discography==

* Ring Ring (1973)
* Waterloo (1974)
* ABBA (1975)
* Arrival (1976)
* The Album (1977)
* Voulez-Vous (1979)
* Super Trouper (1980)
* The Visitors (1981)

==Tours==
* European Tour (19741975)
* European & Australian Tour (1977)
* (19791980)

==ABBA-related tributes==
* Abbacadabra  A French children's musical based on songs from ABBA
* Abbacadabra  A tribute band
* Abbaesque  An Irish ABBA tribute band
* Abba-esque  Erasure's 1992 EP
* ABBAmania  An ITV programme and tribute album to Swedish pop band ABBA released in 1999
* Abbasalutely  A compilation album released in 1995 as a tribute album to ABBA
* adbacadabra  An American ABBA tribute band
* Arrival From Sweden  A Swedish ABBA tribute band, formed in 1995
* A*Teens  A pop music group from Stockholm, Sweden
* Bjrn Again  The earliest-formed ABBA tribute band (1988)
* Generation Abba  Live ABBA tribute concerts on tour in Canada, Europe and Middle-East
* Mamma Mia!  Musical stage show based on the songs of ABBA
* Mamma Mia! The Movie  Film adaption of the musical stage show
* Gabba  An ABBA/Ramones tribute band that covers the former in the style of the latter, the name being a pun on "Gabba Gabba Hey".
* Babba  Australian tribute band
* The Abba's/Supertroopers  A Dutch rock group, a spin-off from Hallo Venray, performing ABBA covers as well as Dutch traditionals
* Abba feeling-Hungarian tribute band
* AbbaShow  Double Italian ABBA tribute band.

==See also==

* 
* ABBAMAIL
* List of ABBA tribute albums
* List of best-selling music artists
* List of Swedes in music
* List of unreleased ABBA songs
* Music of Sweden
* Swedish popular music
* ABBA City Walks  Stockholm City Museum

==References==
Notes

Bibliography
* 

Further reading
*Carl Magnus Palm. ABBA - The Complete Recording Sessions (1994)
* Oldham, Andrew, Calder, Tony & Irvin, Colin (1995) "ABBA: The Name of the Game", ISBN 0-283-06232-0
* Potiez, Jean-Marie (2000). ABBA  The Book ISBN 1-85410-928-6
* Palm, Carl Joslin (2004). From "ABBA" to "Mamma Mia!" ISBN 1-85227-864-1

==External links==

* 
* 
* ABBAinter.net TV-performances archive
* 
* ABBA Stars  funpage Czech revival ABBA Stars.
* ABBA Songs  ABBA Album and Song details.

 



[[Allegiance]]

An allegiance is a duty of fidelity said to be owed by a subject or a citizen to his/her state or sovereign.

==Etymology==
From Middle English ligeaunce (see medieval Latin ligeantia, "a liegance"). The al- prefix was probably added through confusion with another legal term, allegeance, an "allegation" (the French allegeance comes from the English). Allegiance is formed from "liege," from Old French liege, "liege, free", of Germanic origin. The connection with Latin ligare, "to bind," is erroneous.

==Usage==
The term allegiance was traditionally often used by English legal commentators in a larger sense, divided by them into natural and local, the latter applying to the deference which even a foreigner must pay to the institutions of the country in which he happens to live. However it is in its proper sense, in which it indicates national character and the subjection due to that character, that the word is more important.

In that sense it represents the feudal liege homage, which could be due only to one lord, while simple homage might be due to every lord under whom the person in question held land.

==United Kingdom==
The English doctrine, which was at one time adopted in the United States, asserted that allegiance was indelible: "Nemo potest exuere patriam". Accordingly, as the law stood before 1870, every person who by birth or naturalisation satisfied the conditions set forth, though he should be removed in infancy to another country where his family resided, owed an allegiance to the British crown which he could never resign or lose, except by act of parliament or by the recognition of the independence or the cession of the portion of British territory in which he resided. 

This refusal to accept any renunciation of allegiance to the Crown led to conflict with the United States over impressment, and then led to further conflicts even during the War of 1812, when thirteen Irish American prisoners of war were executed as traitors after the Battle of Queenston Heights; Winfield Scott urged American reprisal, but none was carried out. John Eisenhower (1997), Agent of Destiny: The Life and Times of Winfield Scott, New York: Free Press. 

Allegiance is the tie which binds the subject to the Sovereign in return for that protection which the Sovereign affords the subject. It was the mutual bond and obligation between monarch and subjects, whereby subjects are called his liege subjects, because they are bound to obey and serve him; and he is called their liege lord, because he should maintain and defend them (Ex parte Anderson (1861) 3 El & El 487; 121 ER 525; China Navigation Co v Attorney-General (1932) 48 TLR 375; Attorney-General v Nissan 1 All ER 629; Oppenheimer v Cattermole 3 All ER 1106). The duty of the Crown towards its subjects is to govern and protect. The reciprocal duty of the subject towards the Crown is that of allegiance. 

At common law allegiance is a true and faithful obedience of the subject due to his Sovereign. As the subject owes to his king his true and faithful allegiance and obedience, so the Sovereign 

* duplex et reciprocum ligamen; quia sicut subditus regi tenetur ad obedientiam, ita rex subdito tenetur ad protectionem; merito igitur ligeantia dicitur a ligando, quia continet in se duplex ligamen (Calvin's Case (1608) 7 Co Rep 1a; Jenk 306; 2 State Tr 559; 77 ER 377).

Natural allegiance and obedience is an incident inseparable to every subject, for parte Anderson (1861) 3 El & El 487; 121 ER 525). Natural-born subjects owe allegiance wherever they may be. Where territory is occupied in the course of hostilities by an enemy's force, even if the annexation of the occupied country is proclaimed by the enemy, there can be no change of allegiance during the progress of hostilities on the part of a citizen of the occupied country (R v Vermaak (1900) 21 NLR 204 (South Africa)). 

Allegiance is owed both to the Sovereign as a natural person and to the Sovereign in the political capacity (Re Stepney Election Petition, Isaacson v Durant (1886) 17 QBD 54 (per Lord Coleridge CJ)). Attachment to the person of the reigning Sovereign is not sufficient. Loyalty requires affection also to the office of the Sovereign, attachment to royalty, attachment to the law and to the constitution of the realm, and he who would, by force or by fraud, endeavour to prostrate that law and constitution, though he may retain his affection for its head, can boast but an imperfect and spurious species of loyalty (R v O'Connell (1844) 7 ILR 261). 

There were four kinds of allegiances (Rittson v Stordy (1855) 3 Sm & G 230; De Geer v Stone (1882) 22 Ch D 243; Isaacson v Durant (1886) 54 LT 684; Gibson, Gavin v Gibson 3 KB 379; Joyce v DPP AC 347; Collingwood v Pace (1661) O Bridg 410; Lane v Bennett (1836) 1 M & W 70; Lyons Corp v East India Co (1836) 1 Moo PCC 175; Birtwhistle v Vardill (1840) 7 Cl & Fin 895; R v Lopez, R v Sattler (1858) Dears & B 525; Ex p Brown (1864) 5 B & S 280); 

(a) Ligeantia naturalis, absoluta, pura et indefinita, and this originally is due by nature and birthright, and is called alta ligeantia, and those that owe this are called subditus natus;

(b) Ligeantia acquisita, not by nature but by acquisition or denization, being called a denizen, or rather denizon, because they are subditus datus; 

(c) Ligeantia localis, by operation of law, when a friendly alien enters the country, because so long as they are in the country they are within the Sovereign's protection, therefore they owe the Sovereign a local obedience or allegiance (R v Cowle (1759) 2 Burr 834; Low v Routledge (1865) 1 Ch App 42; Re Johnson, Roberts v Attorney-General 1 Ch 821; Tingley v Muller 2 Ch 144; Rodriguez v Speyer AC 59; Johnstone v Pedlar 2 AC 262; R v Tucker (1694) Show Parl Cas 186; R v Keyn (1876) 2 Ex D 63; Re Stepney Election Petn, Isaacson v Durant (1886) 17 QBD 54);

(d) A legal obedience, where a particular law requires the taking of an oath of allegiance by subject or alien alike.

Natural allegiance was acquired by birth within the Sovereign's dominions (except for the issue of diplomats or of invading forces or of an alien in enemy occupied territory). The natural allegiance and obedience is an incident inseparable to every subject, for as soon as they are born they owe by birthright allegiance and obedience to the Sovereign (Ex p. Anderson (1861) 3 E & E 487). A natural-born subject owes allegiance wherever they may be, so that where territory is occupied in the course of hostilities by an enemy's force, even if the annexation of the occupied country is proclaimed by the enemy, there can be no change of allegiance during the progress of hostilities on the part of a citizen of the occupied country (R v Vermaak (1900) 21 NLR 204 (South Africa)). 

Acquired allegiance was acquired by naturalisation or denization. Denization, or ligeantia acquisita, appears to be threefold (Thomas v Sorrel (1673) 3 Keb 143); 

* (a) absolute, as the common denization, without any limitation or restraint;
* (b) limited, as when the Sovereign grants letters of denization to an alien, and the alien's male heirs, or to an alien for the term of their life;
* (c) It may be granted upon condition, cujus est dare, ejus est disponere, and this denization of an alien may come about three ways: by Parliament; by letters patent, which was the usual manner; and by conquest.

Local allegiance was due by an alien while in the protection of the Crown. All friendly resident aliens incurred all the obligations of subjects (The Angelique (1801) 3 Ch Rob App 7). An alien, coming into a colony also became, temporarily a subject of the Crown, and acquired rights both within and beyond the colony, and these latter rights could not be affected by the laws of that colony (Routledge v Low (1868) LR 3 HL 100; 37 LJ Ch 454; 18 LT 874; 16 WR 1081, HL; Reid v Maxwell (1886) 2 TLR 790; Falcon v Famous Players Film Co 2 KB 474). 

A resident alien owed allegiance even when the protection of the Crown was withdrawn owing to the occupation of an enemy, because the absence of the Crown's protection was temporary and involuntary (de Jager v Attorney-Geneneral of Natal AC 326). 

Legal allegiance was due when an alien took an oath of allegiance required for a particular office under the Crown. 

By the Naturalisation Act 1870, it was made possible for British subjects to renounce their nationality and allegiance, and the ways in which that nationality is lost are defined. So British subjects voluntarily naturalized in a foreign state are deemed aliens from the time of such naturalization, unless, in the case of persons naturalized before the passing of the act, they have declared their desire to remain British subjects within two years from the passing of the act. Persons who from having been born within British territory are British subjects, but who at birth became under the law of any foreign state subjects of such state, and also persons who though born abroad are British subjects by reason of parentage, may by declarations of alienage get rid of British nationality. Emigration to an uncivilized country leaves British nationality unaffected: indeed the right claimed by all states to follow with their authority their subjects so emigrating is one of the usual and recognized means of colonial expansion.

==United States==
The doctrine that no man can cast off his native allegiance without the consent of his sovereign was early abandoned in the United States, and Chief Justice John Rutledge also declared in Talbot v. Janson, "a man may, at the same time, enjoy the rights of citizenship under two governments." 3 U.S. 133, www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/historics/USSC_CR_0003_Z04.html . On July 27, 1868, the day before the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, U.S. Congress declared in the preamble of the Expatriation Act that "the right of expatriation is a natural and inherent right of all people, indispensable to the enjoyment of the rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness," and (Section I) one of "the fundamental principles of this government" (United States Revised Statutes, sec. 1999). Every natural-born citizen of a foreign state who is also an American citizen and every natural-born American citizen who is a citizen of a foreign land owes a double allegiance, one to the United States, and one to his homeland (in the event of an immigrant becoming a citizen of the US), or to his adopted land (in the event of an emigrant natural born citizen of the US becoming a citizen of another nation). If these allegiances come into conflict, he or she may be guilty of treason against one or both. If the demands of these two sovereigns upon his duty of allegiance come into conflict, those of the United States have the paramouont authority in American law; likewise, those of the foreign land have paramount authority in their legal system. In such a situation, it may be incumbent on the individual to renounce one of his citizenships to avoid possibly being forced into situations where countervailing duties are required of him, such as might occur in the event of war.

==Oath of allegiance==

The oath of allegiance is an oath of fidelity to the sovereign taken by all persons holding important public office and as a condition of naturalization. By ancient common law it might be required of all persons above the age of 12, and it was repeatedly used as a test for the disaffected. In England it was first imposed by statute in the reign of Elizabeth I of England (1558) and its form has more than once been altered since. Up to the time of the revolution the promise was, "to be true and faithful to the king and his heirs, and truth and faith to bear of life and limb and terrene honour, and not to know or hear of any ill or damage intended him without defending him therefrom." This was thought to favour the doctrine of absolute non-resistance, and accordingly the convention parliament enacted the form that has been in use since that time  "I do sincerely promise and swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty ..."

==In Islam==

The word used in the Arabic language for allegiance is bay'at (Arabic: ), which means "taking hand". The practice is sanctioned in the Qur'an by Surah 48:10: "Verily, those who give thee their allegiance, they give it but to Allah Himself". The word is used for the oath of allegiance to an emir. It is also used for the initiation ceremony specific to many Sufi orders.

==See also==

* Impressment
* Legitimacy (political)
* Mandate of Heaven
* Pledge of Allegiance
* Renunciation of citizenship
* Treason
* Usurpation
* War of 1812
* Winfield Scott

==References==

;Attribution
* footnotes:
** See also Salmond on "Citizenship and Allegiance," in the Law Quarterly Review (July 1901, January 1902).

 



[[Altenberg]]

Altenberg (German for "old mountain") may refer to:

==Places==
===Germany===
* Altenberg, Saxony, a town in the Free State of Saxony
** Altenberg bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton track, a venue for bobsleigh, luge and skeleton located in Altenberg, Saxony
* Altenberg (Bergisches Land), an area in Odenthal, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany
** Altenberg Abbey, Cistercian monastery in Altenberg (Bergisches Land)
** "Altenberg Cathedral", the former church of this Cistercian monastery
* Altenberg, part of Oberasbach, Bavaria
* Altenberg, part of Denkendorf, Bavaria
* Altenberg, part of Syrgenstein, Bavaria
* Altenberg is also a lost town and archaeological site in the Kreis Siegen-Wittgenstein, North Rhine-Westphalia
* Altenberga, municipality in the Saale-Holzfeld district, Thuringia
* Altenberg Abbey, Hesse, a former Premonstratensian nunnery near Wetzlar in Hesse
* Altenberg, a former zinc factory in Oberhausen, North Rhine-Westphalia, now the Rheinische Industriemuseum
* Grube Altenberg, a derelict mine near Msen in the Siegerland

===Austria===
* Altenberg in Tulln near Vienna, part of Sankt Andr-Wrdern in Lower Austria
* Altenberg bei Linz, in Upper Austria
* Altenberg an der Rax, in Styria

===Switzerland===
* Altenberg, a district in the city of Bern

===Belgium===
* Altenberg, the German name for Moresnet and Neutral Moresnet
** Altenberg, the German name for Vieille Montagne ("old mountain" in French), the former zinc mine in Kelmis, Moresnet

==People==
Any place called Altenberg may have given rise to Altenberg as a family name, such as:
* Jakob Altenberg (1875-1944), Austrian businessman
* Peter Altenberg (1859-1919), Austrian writer and poet
* Altenberg Publishing (1880-1934), a family business in Poland

==See also==
* Altenberg Lieder, Five Orchestral Songs by Alban Berg
* Altenburg (disambiguation)

__NOTOC__



[[MessagePad]]

The MessagePad is the first series of personal digital assistant devices developed by Apple Computer for the Newton platform in 1993. Some electronic engineering and the manufacture of Apple's MessagePad devices was undertaken in Japan by the Sharp Corporation. The devices were based on the ARM 610 RISC processor and all featured handwriting recognition software and were developed and marketed by Apple. The devices ran the Newton OS.

==Details==
=== Screen and input ===
With the MessagePad 120 with Newton OS 2.0, the Newton Keyboard by Apple became available, which can also be used via the dongle on Newton devices with a Newton InterConnect port, most notably the Apple MessagePad 2000/2100 series, as well as the Apple eMate 300.

Newton devices featuring Newton OS 2.1 or higher can be used with the screen turned horizontally ("landscape") as well as vertically ("portrait"). A change of a setting rotates the contents of the display by 90, 180 or 270 degrees. Handwriting recognition still works properly with the display rotated, although display calibration is needed when rotation in any direction is used for the first time or when the Newton device is reset.

eMate 300
MP2000

====Handwriting recognition====

In initial versions (Newton OS 1.x) the handwriting recognition gave extremely mixed results for users and was sometimes inaccurate. The original handwriting recognition engine was called Calligrapher, and was licensed from a Russian company called Paragraph International. Calligrapher's design was quite sophisticated; it attempted to learn the user's natural handwriting, using a database of known words to make guesses as to what the user was writing, and could interpret writing anywhere on the screen, whether hand-printed, in cursive, or a mix of the two. By contrast, Palm Pilot's Graffiti had a less sophisticated design than Calligrapher, but was sometimes found to be more accurate and precise due to its reliance on a fixed, predefined stroke alphabet. The stroke alphabet used letter shapes which resembled standard handwriting, but which were modified to be both simple and very easy to differentiate. Graffiti Accuracy Palm Computing also released two versions of Graffiti for Newton devices. Ironically, the Newton version sometimes performed better and could also show strokes as they were being written as input was done on the display itself, rather than on a silkscreen area.

For editing text, Newton had a very intuitive system for handwritten editing, such as scratching out words to be deleted, circling text to be selected, or using written carets to mark inserts. Read about HWR, ink text, Sketches, & Shapes in Apple's MessagePad Handbook available in Apple's Newton Manuals collection 

Later releases of the Newton operating system retained the original recognizer for compatibility, but added a hand-printed-text-only (not cursive) recognizer, called "Rosetta", which was developed by Apple, included in version 2.0 of the Newton operating system, and refined in Newton 2.1. Rosetta is generally considered a significant improvement and many reviewers, testers, and most users consider the Newton 2.1 handwriting recognition software better than any of the alternatives even 10 years after it was introduced. HWR accuracy:
*See comments in Wired's Apple Newton Just Won't Drop (4 yrs later)
*See text under "Handwriting Recognition" in Pen Computing's First Look at Newton OS 2.0
*See "Opportunity Squandered" in Pen Computing's Why did Apple kill the Newton?
*See comments under "Software" in MacTech's MessagePad 2000 review
*Comments by Pen Computing's editor
*See user testing results discussed in part 6 of this A.I. Magazine article on Newton HWR
*MessagePad 2000 review at Small Dog Electronics
*See comments under "Note-taking" in MessagePad 2000 review at "The History and Macintosh Society"
*What's Right With The Newton: HWR
*A very large number of references on slashdot.org, here are a few: "leaps and bounds ahead of what anyone was doing then or is doing now", "recognition is out of this world" in thread attached to Newton Won't Die, "still isn't a handwriting recognition system available that's as good" in thread attached to NewtonOS Running on Linux PDA, "recognition of 3 years ago is better than anything else on the market today" in thread attached to "Inkwell No Longer From the Newton?", "excellent handwriting recognition", "awesome recognition", ""great handwriting recognition" in thread attached to The Newton O.S. Creeps Toward New Hardware, "best I've ever seen" in thread attached to Apple Newton vs Samsung Q1 UMPC
*Assessment by Apple developer
*Prof. Warden's MessagePad 130 review
 Recognition and computation of handwritten horizontal and vertical formulas such as "1 + 2 =" was also under development but never released. 'Random historical thoughts...' - MARC. Marc.info (November 6, 2006). Retrieved on August 2, 2013. However, users wrote similar programs which could evaluate mathematical formulas using the Newton OS Intelligent Assistant, a unique part of every Newton device.

The handwriting recognition and parts of the user interface for the Newton are best understood in the context of the broad history of Pen computing, which is quite extensive. [http://users.erols.com/rwservices/pens/penhist.html Notes on the (relatively unknown) History of Pen-based Computing 

A vital feature of the Newton handwriting recognition system is the modeless error correction. That is, correction done in situ without using a separate window or widget, using a minimum of gestures. If a word is recognized improperly, the user could double-tap the word and a list of alternatives would pop up in a menu under the stylus. Most of the time, the correct word will be in the list. If not, a button at the bottom of the list allows the user to edit individual characters in that word. Other pen gestures could do such things as transpose letters (also in situ). The correction popup also allowed the user to revert to the original, un-recognized letter shapes - this would be useful in note-taking scenarios if there was insufficient time to make corrections immediately. To conserve memory and storage space, alternative recognition hypotheses would not be saved indefinitely. If the user returned to a note a week later, for example, they would only see the best match. Error correction in many current handwriting systems provides such functionality but adds more steps to the process, greatly increasing the interruption to a user's workflow that a given correction requires.

====User interface====

Text could also be entered by tapping with the stylus on a small on-screen pop-up QWERTY virtual keyboard, although more layouts were developed by users. Newton devices could also accept free-hand "Sketches", "Shapes", and "Ink Text", much like a desktop computer graphics tablet. With "Shapes", Newton could recognize that the user was attempting to draw a circle, a line, a polygon, etc., and it would clean them up into perfect vector representations (with modifiable control points and defined vertices) of what the user was attempting to draw. "Shapes" and "Sketches" could be scaled or deformed once drawn. "Ink text" captured the user's free-hand writing but allowed it to be treated somewhat like recognized text when manipulating for later editing purposes ("ink text" supported word wrap, could be formatted to be bold, italic, etc.). Pen Computing's First Look at Newton OS 2.0 At any time a user could also direct their Newton device to recognize selected "ink text" and turn it into recognized text (deferred recognition). A Newton note (or the notes attached to each contact in Names and each Dates calendar or to-do event) could contain any mix of interleaved text, Ink Text, Shapes, and Sketches.

===Connectivity===
The MessagePad 100 series of devices used Macintosh's proprietary serial ports&mdash;round Mini-DIN 8 connectors. The MessagePad 2000/2100 models (as well as the eMate 300) have a small, proprietary Newton InterConnect port. However, the development of the Newton hardware/software platform was canceled by Steve Jobs on February 27, 1998, so the InterConnect port, while itself very advanced, can only be used to connect a serial dongle. A prototype multi-purpose InterConnect device containing serial, audio in, audio out, and other ports was also discovered. In addition, all Newton devices have infrared connectivity, initially only the Sharp ASK protocol, but later also IrDA, though the Sharp ASK protocol was kept in for compatibility reasons. Unlike the Palm Pilot, all Newton devices are equipped with a standard PC Card expansion slot (two on the 2000/2100). This allows native modem and even Ethernet connectivity; Newton users have also written drivers for 802.11b wireless networking cards and ATA-type flash memory cards (including the popular CompactFlash format), as well as for Bluetooth cards. Newton can also dial a phone number through the built-in speaker of the Newton device by simply holding a telephone handset up to the speaker and transmitting the appropriate tones. Fax and printing support is also built in at the operating system level, although it requires peripherals such as parallel adapters, PCMCIA cards, or serial modems, the most notable of which is the lightweight Newton Fax Modem released by Apple in 1993. It is powered by 2 AA batteries, and can also be used with a power adapter. It provides data transfer at 2400 bit/s, and can also send and receive fax messages at 9600 and 4800 bit/s respectively.

===Power options===
The original Apple MessagePad and MessagePad 100 used four AAA batteries. They were eventually replaced by AA batteries with the release of the Apple MessagePad 110.

The use of 4 AA NiCd (MessagePad 110, 120 and 130) and 4x AA NiMH cells (MP2x00 series, eMate 300) give a runtime of up to 30 hours (MP2100 with two 20 MB Linear Flash memory PC Cards, no backlight usage) and up to 24 hours with backlight on. While adding more weight to the handheld Newton devices than AAA batteries or custom battery packs, the choice of an easily replaceable/rechargeable cell format gives the user a still unsurpassed runtime and flexibility of power supply. This, together with the flash memory used as internal storage starting with the Apple MessagePad 120 (if all cells lost their power, no data was lost due to the non-volatility of this storage), gave birth to the slogan "Newton never dies, it only gets new batteries".

===Later efforts and improvements===
The Apple MessagePad 2000/2100, with a vastly improved handwriting recognition system, 162 MHz StrongARM SA-110 RISC processor, Newton OS 2.1, and a better, clearer, backlit screen, attracted critical plaudits. 

===Cases===
Apple and third parties marketed several "wallets" (cases) for the handheld Newton devices, which would hold them securely along with the owner's credit cards, driver's license, business cards, and cash. Most also protected the LCD screen. 

==Market reception==
The original Apple MessagePad and MessagePad 100 were limited by the very short lifetime of their inadequate AAA batteries.

The Original Apple Newton's handwriting recognition was made light of in The Simpsons episode "Lisa on Ice".
Critics also panned the handwriting recognition that was available in the debut models, which had been trumpeted in the Newton's marketing campaign. It was this problem that was skewered in the Doonesbury comic strips Egg freckles comic strip in which a written text entry is (erroneously) translated as "Egg Freckles?", as well as in the animated television series The Simpsons. However, the word 'freckles' was not included in the Newton dictionary, although a user could add it themselves. Difficulties were in part caused by the long time requirements for the Calligrapher handwriting recognition software to "learn" the user's handwriting; this process could take anywhere from two weeks to two months.

Another factor which limited the early Newton devices' appeal was that desktop connectivity was not included in the basic retail package, a problem that was later solved with 2.x Newton devices - these were bundled with a serial cable and the appropriate Newton Connection Utilities software.

Later versions of Newton OS offered improved handwriting recognition, quite possibly a leading reason for the continued popularity of the devices among Newton users. Even given the age of the hardware and software, Newtons still demand a sale price on the used market far greater than that of comparatively aged PDAs produced by other companies. In 2006 CNET compared an Apple MessagePad 2000 to a Samsung Q1, and the Newton was declared better. Apple Newton vs Samsung Q1 UMPC, Special Features at CNET.co.uk In 2009, CNET compared an Apple MessagePad 2000 to an iPhone, and the Newton was still declared better. Apple Newton vs iPhone 

A chain of dedicated Newton only stores called Newton Source existed from 1994 through 1998. Locations included NYC, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago and Boston. The Westwood Village, California, near U.C.L.A. featured the trademark red and yellow lightbulb Newton logo in neon. The stores provided an informative educational venue to learn about the Newton platform in a hands on relaxed fashion. The stores had no traditional computer retail counters and featured oval desktops where interested users could become intimately involved with the Newton product range. The stores were a model for the later Apple Stores. 

==Newton device models==

 Device Model No. Processor Memory Display Newton OS Version Newton OS languages Ports PCMCIA Power Weight & Dimensions Introduced Discontinued Code Name 
 OMP (Original Newton MessagePad) H1000 ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB ROM, 640kB RAM 336 x 240 (B&W) 1.0 to 1.05, or 1.10 to 1.11 English or German RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AAA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 0.41 kg, 18.42 cm H x 11.43 cm W x 1.91 cm D August 3, 1993 in the US, December 1993 in Germany March 1994 Junior 
 Sharp ExpertPad PI-7000 ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB ROM, 640kB RAM 336 x 240 (B&W) 1.0 to 1.05, or 1.10 to 1.11 English or Japanese RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AAA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 182mm x 112mm x 28mm (with screen lid open) August 3, 1993 in the US, ? in Japan March 1994 ? 
 Apple MessagePad 100 H1000 ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB ROM, 640kB RAM 336 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 English, German or French RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AAA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 0.41 kg, 18.42 cm H x 11.43 cm W x 1.91 cm D March 1994 April 1995 ? 
 Apple MessagePad 110 H0059 ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB ROM, 1 MB RAM 320 x 240 (B&W) 1.2 or 1.3 English or French RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 0.45 kg, 20.32 cm H x 10.16 cm W x 3 cm D March 1994 April 1995 Lindy 
 Sharp ExpertPad PI-7100 ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB ROM, 640kB RAM 336 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 English or Japanese RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AAA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 182mm x 112mm x 28mm (with screen lid open) April 1994 late 1994 ? 
 Apple MessagePad 120 H0131 ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB (OS 1.3) or 8 MB (OS 2.0) ROM, 1.0 MB, or 2.0 MB RAM 320 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 or 2.0 English, German or French RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 0.45 kg, 20.32 cm H x 10.16 cm W x 3 cm D October 1994 in Germany, January 1995 in the US June 1996 Gelato 
 Digital Ocean Tarpon ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB (OS 1.3) or 8 MB (OS 2.0) ROM, 687kB RAM, Flash memory 320 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 or 2.0 English RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 10\" x 4.5\" x 2.5\" (3 lb. 3 oz.) January 1995 in the US ? ? 
 Motorola Marco ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB (OS 1.3) ROM, 687kB RAM, Flash memory 320 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 English RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply ? January 1995 in the US ? ? 
 Harris SuperTech 2000 ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 4 MB (OS 1.3) ROM, 687kB RAM, Flash memory 320 x 240 (B&W) 1.3 English RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply ? August 1995 in the US ? ? 
 Digital Ocean Seahorse ? ARM 610 (20 MHz) 8 MB (OS 2.0) ROM, 687kB RAM, Flash memory 320 x 240 (B&W) 2.0 English RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 9.5\" x 4.5\" x 2.5\" (48 oz.) January 1996 in the US ? ? 
 Apple MessagePad 130 H0196 ARM 610 (20 MHz) 8 MB ROM, 2.5 MB RAM 320 x 240 (B&W) w/ backlight 2.0 English or German RS422, LocalTalk & SHARP ASK Infrared 1 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiCd rechargeable or external power supply 0.45 kg, 20.32 cm H x 10.16 cm W x 3 cm D March 1996 April 1997 Dante 
 Apple eMate 300 H0208 ARM 710a (25 MHz) 8 MB ROM, 1 MB RAM, 2 MB Flash Memory, Expandable Internally to 2 MB Random Access Memory and 4 MB Flash Memory 480 x 320 greyscale (16 shades) w/ backlight 2.1 (2.2) English IrDA, headphone port, Interconnect port, LocalTalk, Audio I/O, Autodock 1 PCMCIA-slot I/II/III, 5v NiMH battery pack (built-in) or external power supply 1.81 kg, 30.5 cm H x 29 cm W x 5.33 cm D March 1997 February 1998 ? 
 Apple MessagePad 2000 H0136 StrongARM SA-110 (162 MHz) 8 MB ROM, 1 MB RAM, 4 MB Flash memory 480 x 320 greyscale (16 shades) w/ backlight 2.1 English Dual-mode IR; IrDA & SHARP ASK Infrared, LocalTalk, Audio I/O, Autodock, Phone I/O 2 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiMH rechargeable or external power supply 0.64 kg, 21.1 cm H x 11.94 cm W x 2.79 cm D March 1997 February 1998 Q 
 Apple MessagePad 2100 H0149 StrongARM SA-110 (162 MHz) 8 MB ROM, 4 MB RAM, 4 MB Flash memory 480 x 320 greyscale (16 shades) w/ backlight 2.1 English or German Dual-mode IR; IrDA & SHARP ASK Infrared, LocalTalk, Audio I/O, Autodock 2 PCMCIA-slot II, 5v or 12v 4 AA or NiMH rechargeable or external power supply 0.64 kg, 21.1 cm H x 11.94 cm W x 2.79 cm D November 1997 February 1998 ? 

Notes: The eMate 300 actually has ROM chips silk screened with 2.2 on them. Stephanie Mak on her website discusses this: Other Homebrew eMate Hacks 
If one removes all patches to the eMate 300 (by replacing the ROM chip, and then putting in the original one again, as the eMate and the MessagePad 2000/2100 devices erase their memory completely after replacing the chip), the result will be the Newton OS saying that this is version 2.2.00. Also, the Original MessagePad and the MessagePad 100 share the same model number, as they only differ in the ROM chip version. (The OMP has OS versions 1.0 to 1.05, or 1.10 to 1.11, while the MP100 has 1.3 that can be upgraded with various patches.)

 

==Other uses==
Petrosains uses Newton technology.
There were a number of projects that used the Newton as a portable information device in cultural settings such as museums. For example, Visible Interactive created a walking tour in San Francisco's Chinatown but the most significant effort took place in Malaysia at the Petronas Discovery Center, known as Petrosains. Petrosains 

In 1995, an exhibit design firm, DMCD Inc., was awarded the contract to design a new 100,000 sqft science museum in the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur. A major factor in the award was the concept that visitors would use a Newton device to access additional information, find out where they were in the museum, listen to audio, see animations, control robots and other media, and to bookmark information for printout at the end of the exhibit.

The device became known as the ARIF, a Malay word for "wise man" or "seer" and it was also an acronym for A Resourceful Informative Friend. Some 400 ARIFS were installed and over 300 are still in use today. The development of the ARIF system was extremely complex and required a team of hardware and software engineers, designers, and writers. ARIF is an ancestor of the PDA systems used in museums today and it boasted features that have not been attempted since.

The Newton was also used in healthcare applications, for example in collecting data directly from patients. Newtons were used as electronic diaries, with patients entering their symptoms and other information concerning their health status on a daily basis. The compact size of the device and its ease of use made it possible for the electronic diaries to be carried around and used in the patients' everyday life setting. This was an early example of electronic patient-reported outcomes (ePRO) 

==See also==
* Newton (platform)
* Newton OS
* eMate 300
* NewtonScript
* Orphaned technology
* Pen computing

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Apple's MessagePad 2100 description
* Apple's MessagePad 2100 technical specs
* A selection of PDFs of Apple's Newton manuals
* Apple's press release on the debut of the MessagePad 2100
* Apple's overview of features & limitations of Newton Connection Utilities
* Newton overview at Newton Source archived from Apple
* Newton FAQ
* Pen Computing's First Look at Newton OS 2.0
* Newton Gallery
* Birth of the Newton
* The Newton Hall of Fame: People behind the Newton
* Pen Computing's Why did Apple kill the Newton?
* Pen Computing's Newton Notes column archive
* A.I. Magazine article by Yaeger on Newton HWR design, algorithms, & quality and associated slides
* Info on Newton HWR from Apple's HWR Technical Lead
* Notes on the History of Pen-based Computing (YouTube)

==External links==

===Additional Resources & Information===
*Defying Gravity: The Making of Newton, by Kounalakis & Menuez (Hardcover)
**Hardcover: 192 pages
**Publisher: Beyond Words Publishing (October 1993)
**ISBN 0941831949
**ISBN 978-0941831949
*
*Complete Developer's manual for the StrongARM SA-110
*Beginner's overview of the StrongARM SA-110 Microprocessor

===Reviews===
*MessagePad 2000 review at "The History and Macintosh Society"
*Prof. Wittmann's collection of Newton & MessagePad reviews



[[A. E. van Vogt]]

Alfred Elton van Vogt (; April 26, 1912  January 26, 2000) was a Canadian-born science fiction author regarded as one of the most popular and complex "Although Vogt catered for the pulps, he intensified the emotional impact and complexity of the stories they would bear" science fiction writers of the mid-twentieth century: the "Golden Age" of the genre.

==Early life and writings==

Van Vogt was born on a farm in Edenburg, a Russian Mennonite community east of Gretna, Manitoba, Canada. Until he was four years old, van Vogt and his family spoke only a dialect of Low German in the home. Panshin, Alexei "Man Beyond Man. The Early Stories of A. E. van Vogt" (page 1). Retrieved 2010-08-29. Van Vogt's father, a lawyer, moved his family several times and his son found these moves difficult, remarking in later life:

After starting his writing career by writing for "true confession" style pulp magazines like True Story, van Vogt decided to switch to writing something he enjoyed, science fiction. Elliot, Jeffery: An Interview with A. E. Van Vogt, Science Fiction Review #23, 1977. Available online http://www.angelfire.com/art/megathink/vanvogt/vanvogt_interview.html Retrieved on 2010-08-29 This happened after he casually picked up the August 1938 issue of Astounding Science Fiction from a newsstand, and found the story "Who Goes There?". The story inspired him to write "Vault of the Beast", which he would send to the same magazine. It was rejected, but the rejection letter encouraged him to try again. He would then send in a new story called "The Black Destroyer", which was accepted, while a rewritten version of "Vault of the Beast" would be published in 1940.

Van Vogt's first SF publication was inspired by The Voyage of the Beagle by Charles Darwin. Drake, H. L., A. E. van Vogt: Science Fantasy's Icon, Booklocker.com Inc, 2001, page 36. "The Black Destroyer" was published by John W. Campbell in Astounding Science Fiction, July 1939, the centennial year of Darwin's journal. It featured a fierce, carnivorous alien, the coeurl, stalking the crew of an exploration spaceship. The second Space Beagle story appeared in December, "Discord in Scarlet". Each was the cover story "The Voyage of the Space Beagle" (cover images for numerous editions and adaptations of "The Black Destroyer" and its series). The Weird Worlds of A. E. van Vogt. Magnus Axelsson (pre-2000 to 2009). Now hosted by icshi.net. Retrieved 2013-04-04. and was accompanied by interior illustrations, created by Frank Kramer and Paul Orban. Panshin, Alexei (1994). "Introduction to Slan". Connecticut: The Easton Press. Quote: "His first published SF story was "Black Destroyer" in the July 1939 Astounding. Not only was "Black Destroyer" pictured on the cover of the magazine, but it would be recognized as one of the most significant stories published in Astounding that year". (Van Vogt and Kramer thus debuted in the issue of Astounding that is sometimes singled out for ushering in the "Golden Age" of science fiction. For example, Peter Nicholls () says "The beginning of Campbell's particular Golden Age of SF can be pinpointed as the summer of 1939" and goes on to begin the discussion with the July 1939 issue. Lester del Rey () comments that "July was the turning point". ) The former story served as the inspiration for a number of science fiction movies.
In 1950, the two were combined with two other stories as a fix-up novel, The Voyage of the Space Beagle (Simon & Schuster), which was published in at least five European languages by 1955. Positing the need for exobiologists who will appreciate the differences between the inhabitants of other planets and ourselves, it stresses the importance of the civilian rather than military in exploration of other cultures.

Van Vogt's first completed novel, and one of his most famous, is Slan (Arkham House, 1946), which Campbell serialized in Astounding September to December 1940. Using what became one of van Vogt's recurring themes, it told the story of a 9-year-old superman living in a world in which his kind are slain by Homo sapiens.

In 1941, van Vogt decided to become a full-time writer, quitting his job at the Canadian Department of National Defence. Extremely prolific for a few years, van Vogt wrote a large number of short stories. In the 1950s, many of them were retrospectively patched together into novels, or "fixups" as he called them, a term which entered the vocabulary of science fiction criticism. When the original stories were related (e.g., The War against the Rull) this was often successful. When not (e.g., Quest for the Future) the disparate stories thrown together generally made for a less coherent plot.

==Post-war philosophy==

In 1944, van Vogt moved to Hollywood, California, where his writing took on new dimensions after World War II. Van Vogt was always interested in the idea of all-encompassing systems of knowledge (akin to modern meta-systems)the characters in his very first story used a system called "Nexialism" to analyze the alien's behaviour, and he became interested in the general semantics of Alfred Korzybski.

He subsequently wrote three novels merging these overarching themes, The World of Null-A and The Pawns of Null-A in the late 1940s, and Null-A Three in the early 1980s. Null-A, or non-Aristotelian logic, refers to the capacity for, and practice of, using intuitive, inductive reasoning (compare fuzzy logic), rather than reflexive, or conditioned, deductive reasoning.

Van Vogt was also profoundly affected by revelations of totalitarian police states that emerged after World War II. He wrote a mainstream novel that was set in Communist China, The Violent Man (1962); he said that to research this book he had read 100 books about China. Into this book he incorporated his view of "the violent male type", which he described as a "man who had to be right", a man who "instantly attracts women" and who he said were the men who "run the world". 

At the same time, in his fiction, van Vogt was consistently sympathetic to absolute monarchy as a form of government. This was the case, for instance, in the Weapon Shop series, the Mixed Men series, and in single stories such as "Heir Apparent" (1945), whose protagonist was described as a "benevolent dictator".

Van Vogt systematized his writing method, using scenes of 800 words or so where a new complication was added or something resolved. Several of his stories hinge on temporal conundra, a favorite theme. He stated that he acquired many of his writing techniques from three books: Narrative Technique by Thomas Uzzell, The Only Two Ways to Write a Story by John Gallishaw, and Twenty Problems of the Short-Story Writer by Gallishaw. 

He also claimed many of his ideas came from dreams; throughout his writing life he arranged to be awakened every 90 minutes during his sleep period so he could write down his dreams. Platt, Charles, "A. E. van Vogt  A Profile". From Who Writes Science Fiction? (London: Savoy Books, 1980); Dream Makers: The Uncommon People Who Write Science Fiction (Berkeley Books, 1980). 

In 1950, van Vogt was briefly appointed as head of L. Ron Hubbard's Dianetics operation in California. Dianetics was the secular precursor to Hubbard's Church of Scientology. The operation went broke nine months later, but never went bankrupt, due to van Vogt's arrangements with creditors. Van Vogt and his wife opened their own Dianetics centre, partly financed by his writings, until he "signed off" around 1961. At the time of his interview with Charles Platt, van Vogt was still president of the Californian Association of Dianetic Auditors.

In 1951, he published "The Weapon Shops of Isher", a true science fiction classic with strong political overtones. Between 1950 and 1960, van Vogt produced collections, notable fixups such as: The Mixed Men (1952) and The War Against the Rull (1959), and the two "Clane" novels, Empire of the Atom (1957) and The Wizard of Linn (1962), which were inspired (like Asimov's Foundation series) by the fall of the Roman Empire, specifically Claudius. He resumed writing again in the 1960s, mainly at Frederik Pohl's invitation. His later novels included fixups such as The Beast (aka Moonbeast) (1963), Rogue Ship (1965), Quest for the Future (1970) and Supermind (1977); expanded short stories (The Darkness on Diamondia (1972), Future Glitter (aka Tyranopolis) (1973); original novels such as Children of Tomorrow (1970), The Battle of Forever (1971) and The Anarchistic Colossus (1977); plus sequels to his classic works, many of which were promised, but only one of which appeared, Null-A Three (1984; originally published in French). Several later books were original in Europe, and at least one novel has only ever appeared in Italian, no English version yet published.
On January 26, 2000, van Vogt died in Los Angeles, USA from Alzheimer's disease and was survived by his second wife, the former Lydia Bereginsky.

==Critical reception==

Critical opinion about the quality of van Vogt's work has been sharply divided.

One early and articulate critic was Damon Knight. In a chapter-long essay reprinted in In Search of Wonder, entitled "Cosmic Jerrybuilder: A. E. van Vogt", Knight famously remarked that van Vogt "is no giant; he is a pygmy who has learned to operate an overgrown typewriter". Knight described The World of Null-A as "one of the worst allegedly-adult science fiction stories ever published". About van Vogt's writing, Knight said:

About Empire of the Atom Knight wrote:

Knight also expressed misgivings about van Vogt's politics, noting that his stories almost invariably present absolute monarchy in a favorable light.

On the other hand, when science fiction author Philip K. Dick was asked "Vertex Interviews Philip K. Dick". Vertex, Vol. 1, no. 6, February 1974. which science fiction writers had influenced his work the most, he replied:

Dick also defended van Vogt against Damon Knights criticisms:

In a review of Transfinite: The Essential A.E. van Vogt, science fiction writer Paul Di Filippo said:

In The John W. Campbell Letters, Campbell says, "The son-of-a-gun gets hold of you in the first paragraph, ties a knot around you, and keeps it tied in every paragraph thereafterincluding the ultimate last one". 

Harlan Ellison (who began reading van Vogt as a teenager) Ellison, Harlan (June 1999), "Van is Here, But Van is Gone". Introduction to Futures Past: The Best Short Fiction of A.E. van Vogt (Kilimanjaro Corp., 1999). Reprinted in "A. E. van Vogt, 1912-2000" (SFRevu 2001-01-28). Retrieved 2001-08-31. Quote: "Van is still with us, as I write this, in June of 1999, slightly less than fifty years since I first encountered van Vogt prose in a January 1950 issue of Startling Stories ...." wrote, "Van was the first writer to shine light on the restricted ways in which I had been taught to view the universe and the human condition". 

Writing in 1984 David Hartwell said: Hartwell, David (1984), Age of Wonders: Exploring the Worlds of Science Fiction, New York, Walker, pages 131-32. ISBN 978-0-89366-163-2. 

The literary critic Leslie A. Fiedler said something similar: Fiedler, Leslie A. (1983), "The Criticism of Science Fiction", Coordinates: Placing Science Fiction and Fantasy, ed. George E. Slusser, Eric S. Rabkin, and Robert Scholes (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press), pages 10-11. ISBN 978-0-8093-1105-7. 

The American literary critic Fredric Jameson says of van Vogt:

Nevertheless, van Vogt still has his critics. For example Darrell Schweitzer writing to The New York Review of Science Fiction in 1999 Schweitzer, Darrell (1999), "Letters of Comment", The New York Review of Science Fiction, May 1999, Number 129, Vol. 11, No. 9. quoted a passage from the original van Vogt novelette "The Mixed Men", which he was then reading, and remarked:

==Recognition==

In 1946, van Vogt and his first wife, Edna Mayne Hull, were Guests of Honor at the fourth World Science Fiction Convention. 

In 1980, van Vogt received a "Casper Award" (precursor to the Canadian Prix Aurora Awards) for Lifetime Achievement. 

The Science Fiction Writers of America named him its 14th Grand Master in 1995 (presented 1996). 
There had been great controversy within SFWA regarding its long wait in bestowing its highest honor (limited to living writers, no more than one annually ). Writing an obituary of van Vogt, Robert J. Sawyer, a fellow Canadian writer of science fiction remarked:

It is generally held that the "damnable SFWA politics" concerns Damon Knight, the founder of the SFWA, who abhorred van Vogt's style and politics and thoroughly demolished his literary reputation in the 1950s. Hartwell, David: "The Way We Were: A. E. van Vogt, 1912-2000", The New York Review of Science Fiction, March 2000, Number 139, Vol. 12, No. 7, page 24. 

Harlan Ellison was more explicit in 1999 introduction to Futures Past: The Best Short Fiction of A. E. van Vogt: 

In 1996, van Vogt received a Special Award from the World Science Fiction Convention "for six decades of golden age science fiction". That same year, the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in its inaugural class of two deceased and two living persons, along with writer Jack Williamson (also living) and editors Hugo Gernsback and John W. Campbell. 

The works of van Vogt were translated into French by the surrealist Boris Vian (The World of Null-A as Le Monde des  in 1958), and van Vogt's works were "viewed as great literature of the surrealist school". Watson, Ian (1999), "Science Fiction, Surrealism, and Shamanism", The New York Review of Science Fiction, June 1999, Number 130, Vol. 11, No. 10, page 9. 

==Quotes==
Concerning Theodore Sturgeon's death, van Vogt commented: 

==Works==

===Novels===
Primary dates represent first publication in book form.
* Slan (1946) serial
* The Weapon Makers (1947) (serial 1943, revised 1952) (also published as One Against Eternity (1964))
* The Book of Ptath (1947) (in Unknown Worlds, 1947) (later as Two Hundred Million A.D. and Ptath )
* The World of Null-A (1948) (revised from 1945 serial, and again 1970)
* The House That Stood Still (1950), also published as The Mating Cry and The Undercover Aliens. The sexual interludes anonymously added to The Mating Cry for its Galaxy Beacon edition have been retained in many later editions.
* The Voyage of the Space Beagle (1950) shorts
* The Weapon Shops of Isher (1951) up
* The Mixed Men (1952), also published as Mission to the Stars up
* The Universe Maker (1953) (revised from 1950 story, 'The Shadow Men')
* Planets for Sale (1954), with Edna Mayne Hull shorts
* The Pawns of Null-A (1956), also published as The Players of Null-A
* The Mind Cage (1957) from short, 'The Great Judge', 1948
* Empire of the Atom (1957) shorts
* Siege of the Unseen (1959) 'The Chronicler' (1946) published as The Three Eyes of Evil
* The War against the Rull (1959) 
* Earth's Last Fortress (1960), first stand-alone publication, previously titled Recruiting Station and Masters of Time
* The Wizard of Linn (1962) (serial, 1950)
* The Violent Man (1962), political thriller set in China
* The Beast (1963), also published as Moonbeast 
* Rogue Ship (1965) 
* The Winged Man (1966), with Edna Mayne Hull
* The Changeling (1967) stand-alone publication of story first published in 1942 and 1944 in Astounding Stories
* The Silkie (1969) short stories
* Children of Tomorrow (1970)
* Quest for the Future (1970) 
* The Battle of Forever (1971)
* The Darkness on Diamondia (1972) short story
* Future Glitter (1973), also published as Tyranopolis
* The Man with a Thousand Names (1974)
* The Secret Galactics (1974), also published as Earth Factor X
* Supermind (1977) short stories; including a collaboration with James H. Schmitz and Edna Mayne Hull
* The Anarchistic Colossus (1977)
* The Enchanted Village (1979), chapbook
* Renaissance (1979)
* Cosmic Encounter (1979)
* Computerworld (1983), also published as Computer Eye
* Null-A Three (1984)
* To Conquer Kiber (1985) published in English
* Slan Hunter (2007), with Kevin J. Anderson

===Collections===
* Out of the Unknown (1948), with Edna Mayne Hull
* Masters of Time (1950) (aka Recruiting Station) includes The Changeling, both works were later published separately
* Triad (1951) omnibus of The World of Null A, The Voyage of the Space Beagle, Slan.
* Away and Beyond (1952) (abridged in paperback in 1959; abridged (differently) in paperback in 1963)
* (1952)
* The Twisted Men (1964)
* Monsters (1965) (later as SF Monsters (1967)) abridged as The Blal (1976)
* A Van Vogt Omnibus (1967), omnibus of Planets for Sale (with Edna Mayne Hull), The Beast, The Book of Ptath
* The Far Out Worlds of Van Vogt (1968)
* The Sea Thing and Other Stories (1970) (expanded from Out of the Unknown by adding an original story by Hull; later abridged in paperback as Out of the Unknown by removing 2 of the stories)
* M33 in Andromeda (1971)
* More Than Superhuman (1971)
* The Proxy Intelligence and Other Mind Benders, ), with Edna Mayne Hull (1971), revised as The Gryb (1976)
* Van Vogt Omnibus 2 (1971), omnibus of The Mind Cage, The Winged Man (with Edna Mayne Hull), Slan.
* The Book of Van Vogt (1972), also published as Lost: Fifty Suns (1979)
* The Three Eyes of Evil Including Earth's Last Fortress (1973)
* The Best of A. E. van Vogt (1974) later split into 2 volumes
* The Worlds of A. E. van Vogt (1974) (expanded from The Far Out Worlds of Van Vogt by adding 3 stories)
* The Best of A. E. van Vogt (1976) to 1974 edition
* Away and Beyond (1977)
* Pendulum (1978) (almost all original stories and articles)
* Futures Past: The Best Short Fiction of A.E. Van Vogt (1999)
* Transfinite: The Essential A.E. van Vogt (2002)
* Transgalactic (2006)

===Nonfiction===
* The Hypnotism Handbook (1956, Griffin Publishing Company, with Charles Edward Cooke)
* The Money Personality (1972, Parker Publishing Company Inc, West Nyack, NY, ISBN 978-0-13-600676-3)
* Reflections of A. E. Van Vogt: The Autobiography of a Science Fiction Giant (1979, Fictioneer Books Ltd, Lakemont, GA)
* A Report on the Violent Male (1992, Paupers' Press, UK, ISBN 978-0-946650-40-8)

==See also==
 

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==
* 
* Sevagram, the A.E. van Vogt information site
* Obituary at LocusOnline (Locus Publications)
* "Writers: A. E. van Vogt (19122000, Canada)"  bibliography at SciFan
* 
* A. E. van Vogt's fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online
* 



[[Anna Kournikova]]

Anna Sergeyevna Kournikova (; born 7 June 1981) is a Russian American retired professional tennis player. Her appearance and celebrity status made her one of the best known tennis stars worldwide, despite her never winning a WTA singles title. At the peak of her fame, fans looking for images of Kournikova made her name one of the most common search strings on Google Search. 

Despite her lack of a title, she reached No. 8 in the world in 2000. She achieved greater success playing doubles, where she was at times the World No. 1 player. With Martina Hingis as her partner, she won Grand Slam titles in Australia in 1999 and 2002. They referred to themselves as the "Spice Girls of Tennis". 

Kournikova's professional tennis career ended prematurely at the age of 21 due to serious back and spinal problems, including a herniated disk. She lives in Miami Beach, Florida, and plays in occasional exhibitions and in doubles for the St. Louis Aces of World Team Tennis. She was a new trainer for season 12 of the television show The Biggest Loser, replacing Jillian Michaels, but did not return for season 13. In addition to her tennis and television work, Kournikova serves as a Global Ambassador for Population Services International's "Five & Alive" program, which addresses health crises facing children under the age of five and their families. 

== Early life ==
Anna Kournikova was born in Moscow, Soviet Union, on 7 June 1981. Her father, Sergei Kournikov (born 1961), a former Greco-Roman wrestling champion, eventually earned a PhD and was a professor at the University of Physical Culture and Sport in Moscow. As of 2001, he was still a part-time martial arts instructor there. Her mother Alla (born 1963) had been a 400-metre runner. 

Sergei Kournikov has said, "We were young and we liked the clean, physical life, so Anna was in a good environment for sport from the beginning". 

Kournikova received her first tennis racquet as a New Year gift in 1986 at age 5. Describing her early regimen, she said, "I played two times a week from age six. It was a children's program. And it was just for fun; my parents didn't know I was going to play professionally, they just wanted me to do something because I had lots of energy. It was only when I started playing well at seven that I went to a professional academy. I would go to school, and then my parents would take me to the club, and I'd spend the rest of the day there just having fun with the kids." In 1986, Kournikova became a member of the Spartak Tennis Club, coached by Larissa Preobrazhenskaya. In 1989, at the age of eight, Kournikova began appearing in junior tournaments, and by the following year, was attracting attention from tennis scouts across the world. Kournikova signed a management deal at age ten and went to Bradenton, Florida, to train at Nick Bollettieri's celebrated tennis academy. 

== Tennis career ==

=== 19891997: Early years and breakthrough ===
Following her arrival in the United States, Kournikova became prominent on the tennis scene. At 14, she won the European Championships and the Italian Open Junior tournament. She became the youngest player to win the 18-and-under division of the Junior Orange Bowl tennis tournament. By the end of the year, Kournikova was crowned the ITF Junior World Champion U-18 and Junior European Champion U-18. 

In 1994, Kournikova received a wild card into ITF tournament in Moscow qualifications, but lost to third seeded Sabine Appelmans. She debuted in professional tennis at 14 in the Fed Cup for Russia, the youngest player ever to participate and win. In 1995, she turned pro, and won two ITF titles, in Midland, Michigan and Rockford, Illinois. The same year Kournikova reached her first WTA Tour doubles final at the Kremlin Cup. Partnering with 1995 Wimbledon girls' champion in both singles and doubles Aleksandra Olsza, they lost to Meredith McGrath and Larisa Neiland.

In 1996, she started playing under a new coach, Ed Nagel. Her six-year tenure with Ed would produce terrific results. At 15, she made her grand slam debut, when she reached the fourth round of the 1996 US Open, only to be stopped by then-top ranked player Steffi Graf, the eventual champion. After this tournament, Kournikova's ranking jumped from No. 144 to debut in the Top 100 at No. 69. Kournikova was a member of the Russian delegation to the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1996, she was named WTA Newcomer of the Year, and she was ranked No. 57 in the end of the season. 

Kournikova entered the 1997 Australian Open as World No. 67, where she lost in the first round to World No. 12 Amanda Coetzer. At the Italian Open, Kournikova lost to Amanda Coetzer in the second round. However, she reached the semifinals in the doubles partnering with Elena Likhovtseva, before losing to the sixth seeds Mary Joe Fernndez and Patricia Tarabini. 

At the 1997 French Open, Kournikova made it to the third round before losing to World No. 1 Martina Hingis. She also reached the third round in doubles with Likhovtseva. At the 1997 Wimbledon Championships, Kournikova became only the second woman in the open era to reach the semifinals in her Wimbledon debut, the first being Chris Evert in 1972. There she lost to eventual champion Martina Hingis.

At the 1997 US Open, she lost in the second round to the eleventh seed Irina Sprlea. Partnering with Likhovtseva, she reached the third round of the women's doubles event. Kournikova played her last WTA Tour event of 1997 at Porsche Tennis Grand Prix in Filderstadt, losing to Amanda Coetzer in the second round of singles, and in the first round of doubles to Lindsay Davenport and Jana Novotn partnering with Likhovtseva. She broke into the top 50 on 19 May, and was ranked No. 32 in singles and No. 41 in doubles at the end of the season. 

=== 19982000: Success and stardom ===
In 1998, Kournikova broke into the WTA's top 20 rankings for the first time, when she was ranked No. 16. At the 1998 Australian Open, Kournikova lost in the third round to World No. 1 player Martina Hingis. She also partnered with Larisa Neiland in women's doubles, and they lost to eventual champions Hingis and Mirjana Lui in the second round. Although she lost in the second round of the Paris Open to Anke Huber in singles, Kournikova reached her second doubles WTA Tour final, partnering with Larisa Neiland. They lost to Sabine Appelmans and Miriam Oremans. Kournikova and Neiland reached their second consecutive final at the Linz Open, losing to Alexandra Fusai and Nathalie Tauziat. At the Miami Open, Kournikova reached her first WTA Tour singles final, before losing to Venus Williams in the final. 

 Anna Kournikova practices her backhand for a match at the Family Circle Cup Tennis Tournament on Daniel Island in Charleston, South Carolina.
Kournikova then reached two consecutive quarterfinals, at Amelia Island and the Italian Open, losing respectively to Lindsay Davenport and Martina Hingis. At the German Open, she reached the semifinals in both singles and doubles, partnering with Larisa Neiland. At the 1998 French Open Kournikova had her best result at this tournament, making it to the fourth round before losing to Jana Novotn. She also reached her first Grand Slam doubles semifinals, losing with Neiland to Lindsay Davenport and Natasha Zvereva. During her quarterfinals match at the grass-court Eastbourne Open versus Steffi Graf, Kournikova injured her thumb, which would eventually force her to withdraw from the 1998 Wimbledon Championships. However, she won that match, but then withdraw from her semifinals match against Arantxa Snchez Vicario. Kournikova returned for the Du Maurier Open and made it to the third round, before losing to Conchita Martnez. At the 1998 US Open Kournikova reached the fourth round before losing to Arantxa Snchez Vicario. Her strong year qualified her for the year-end 1998 WTA Tour Championships, but she lost to Monica Seles in the first round. However, with Seles, she won her first WTA doubles title, in Tokyo, beating Mary Joe Fernndez and Arantxa Snchez Vicario in the final. At the end of the season, she was ranked No. 10 in doubles. 

At the start of the 1999 season, Kournikova advanced to the fourth round in singles before losing to Mary Pierce. However, Kournikova won her first doubles Grand Slam title, partnering Martina Hingis. The two defeated Lindsay Davenport and Natasha Zvereva in the final. At the Tier I Family Circle Cup, Kournikova reached her second WTA Tour final, but lost to Martina Hingis. She then defeated Jennifer Capriati, Lindsay Davenport and Patty Schnyder on her route to the Bausch & Lomb Championships semifinals, losing to Ruxandra Dragomir. At The French Open, Kournikova reached the fourth round before losing to eventual champion Steffi Graf. Once the grass-court season commenced in England, Kournikova lost to Nathalie Tauziat in the semifinals in Eastbourne. At Wimbledon, Kournikova lost to Venus Williams in the fourth round. She also reached the final in mixed doubles, partnering with Jonas Bjrkman, but they lost to Leander Paes and Lisa Raymond. Kournikova again qualified for year-end WTA Tour Championships, but lost to Mary Pierce in the first round, and ended the season as World No. 12. 

Kournikova (left) with doubles partner Martina Hingis.
While Kournikova had a successful singles season, she was even more successful in doubles. After their victory at the Australian Open, she and Martina Hingis won tournaments in Indian Wells, Rome, Eastbourne and the WTA Tour Championshiops, and reached the final of The French Open where they lost to Serena and Venus Williams. Partnering with Elena Likhovtseva, Kournikova also reached the final in Stanford. On 22 November 1999 she reached the World No. 1 ranking in doubles, and ended the season at this ranking. Anna Kournikova and Martina Hingis were presented with the WTA Award for Doubles Team of the Year.

Kournikova opened her 2000 season winning the Gold Coast Open doubles tournament partnering with Julie Halard. She then reached the singles semifinals at the Medibank International Sydney, losing to Lindsay Davenport. At the 2000 Australian Open, she reached the fourth round in singles and the semifinals in doubles. That season, Kournikova reached eight semifinals (Sydney, Scottsdale, Stanford, San Diego, Luxembourg, Leipzig and 2000 WTA Tour Championships), seven quarterfinals (Gold Coast, Tokyo, Amelia Island, Hamburg, Eastbourne, Zrich and Philadelphia) and one final. On 20 November 2000 she broke into top 10 for the first time, reaching No. 8. She was also ranked No. 4 in doubles at the end of the season. Kournikova was once again, more successful in doubles. She reached the final of the 2000 US Open in mixed doubles, partnering with Max Mirnyi, but they lost to Jared Palmer and Arantxa Snchez Vicario. She also won six doubles titles  Gold Coast (with Julie Halard), Hamburg (with Natasha Zvereva), Filderstadt, Zrich, Philadelphia and the 2000 WTA Tour Championships (with Martina Hingis).

=== 20012003: Injuries and final years ===
Her 2001 season was dominated by injury, including a left foot stress fracture which forced her withdrawal from twelve tournaments, including the French Open and Wimbledon. She underwent surgery in April. She reached her second career grand slam quarterfinals, at the Australian Open. Kournikova then withdrew from several events due to continuing problems with her left foot and did not return until Leipzig. With Barbara Schett, she won the doubles title in Sydney. She then lost in the finals in Tokyo, partnering with Iroda Tulyaganova, and at San Diego, partnering with Martina Hingis. Hingis and Kournikova also won the Kremlin Cup. At the end of the 2001 season, she was ranked No. 74 in singles and No. 26 in doubles. 

At the Medibank International Sydney in 2002
Kournikova was quite successful in 2002. She reached the semifinals of Auckland, Tokyo, Acapulco and San Diego, and the final of the China Open, losing to Anna Smashnova. This was Kournikova's last singles final. With Martina Hingis, she lost in the final at Sydney, but they won their second grand slam title together, the Australian Open. They also lost in the quarterfinals of the US Open. With Chanda Rubin, Kournikova played the semifinals of Wimbledon, but they lost to Serena and Venus Williams. Partnering Janet Lee, she won the Shanghai title. At the end of 2002 season, she was ranked No. 35 in singles and No. 11 in doubles. 

In 2003, Anna Kournikova collected her first grand slam match victory in two years at the Australian Open. She defeated Henrieta Nagyov in the 1st round, and then lost to Justine Henin-Hardenne in the 2nd round. She withdrew from Tokyo due to a sprained back suffered at the Australian Open and did not return to Tour until Miami. On 9 April, in what would be the final WTA match of her career, Kournikova retired in the 1st round of the Family Circle Cup in Charleston, South Carolina, due to a left adductor strain. Her singles world ranking was 67. She reached the semifinals at the ITF tournament in Sea Island, before withdrawing from a match versus Maria Sharapova due to the adductor injury. She lost in the 1st round of the ITF tournament in Charlottesville. She did not compete for the rest of the season due to a continuing back injury. At the end of the 2003 season and her professional career, she was ranked No. 305 in singles and No. 176 in doubles. 

Kournikova's two Grand Slam doubles titles came in 1999 and 2002, both at the Australian Open in the Women's Doubles event with partner Martina Hingis. Kournikova proved a successful doubles player on the professional circuit, winning 16 tournament doubles titles, including two Australian Opens and being a finalist in mixed doubles at the US Open and at Wimbledon, and reaching the No. 1 ranking in doubles in the Women's Tennis Association tour rankings. Her pro career doubles record was 20071. However, her singles career plateaued after 1999. For the most part, she managed to retain her ranking between 10 and 15 (her career high singles ranking was No.8), but her expected finals breakthrough failed to occur; she only reached four finals out of 130 singles tournaments, never in a Grand Slam event, and never won one.

Her singles record is 209129. Her final playing years were marred by a string of injuries, especially back injuries, which caused her ranking to erode gradually. As a personality Kournikova was among the most common search strings for both articles and images in her prime. 

=== 2004present: Exhibitions and World Team Tennis ===
Kournikova at a USO-sponsored tour at Forward Operating Base Sharana on 15 December 2009

Kournikova has not played on the WTA Tour since 2003, but still plays exhibition matches for charitable causes. In late 2004, she participated in three events organized by Elton John and by fellow tennis players Serena Williams and Andy Roddick. In January 2005, she played in a doubles charity event for the Indian Ocean tsunami with John McEnroe, Andy Roddick, and Chris Evert. In November 2005, she teamed up with Martina Hingis, playing against Lisa Raymond and Samantha Stosur in the WTT finals for charity. Kournikova is also a member of the St. Louis Aces in the World Team Tennis (WTT), playing doubles only.

In September 2008, Kournikova showed up for the 2008 Nautica Malibu Triathlon held at Zuma Beach in Malibu, California. Anna Kournikova showed up yesterday for the 2008 Nautica Malibu Triathlon Sportsmates The Race raised funds for children's Hospital Los Angeles. She won that race for women's K-Swiss team. On 27 September 2008, Kournikova played exhibition mixed doubles matches in Charlotte, North Carolina, partnering with Tim Wilkison and Karel Novek. Sport Mates Gallery: Mixed Doubles Exhibition in Charlotte, North Carolina Sportsmates Kournikova and Wilkison defeated Jimmy Arias and Chanda Rubin, and then Kournikova and Novacek defeated Rubin and Wilkison. 

On 12 October 2008, Anna Kournikova played one exhibition match for the annual charity event, hosted by Billie Jean King and Elton John, and raised more than $400,000 for the Elton John AIDS Foundation and Atlanta AIDS Partnership Fund. The annual charity event raised more than $400,000 for the Elton John AIDS Foundation and Atlanta AIDS Partnership Fund Sportsmates She played doubles with Andy Roddick (they were coached by David Chang) versus Martina Navratilova and Jesse Levine (coached by Billie Jean King); Kournikova and Roddick won. 

Kournikova competed alongside John McEnroe, Tracy Austin and Jim Courier at the "Legendary Night", which was held on 2 May 2009, at the Turning Stone Event Center in Verona, New York. Big Time Tennis Names to CNY CNY Central, 17 March 2009 The exhibition included a mixed doubles match of McEnroe and Austin against Courier and Kournikova.

In 2008, she was named a spokesperson for K-Swiss. In 2005, Kournikova stated that if she were 100% fit, she would like to come back and compete again. Elle July 2005, page #? 

In June 2010, Kournikova reunited with her doubles partner Martina Hingis to participate in competitive tennis for the first time in seven years in the Invitational Ladies Doubles event at Wimbledon. On 29 June 2010 they defeated the British pair Samantha Smith and Anne Hobbs. 
 

== Playing style ==
As a player, Kournikova was noted for her footspeed and aggressive baseline play, and excellent angles and dropshots; however, her relatively flat, high-risk groundstrokes tended to produce frequent errors, and her serve was sometimes unreliable in singles.

Kournikova plays right-handed with a two-handed backhand. She is a great player at the net. She can hit forceful groundstrokes and also drop shots. 

Her playing style fits the profile for a doubles player, and is complemented by her height. She has been compared to such doubles specialists as Pam Shriver and Peter Fleming. 

== Personal life ==
Kournikova was in a relationship with fellow Russian Pavel Bure, an NHL ice hockey player. The two met in 1999 when Kournikova was still linked to Bure's former Russian teammate Sergei Fedorov. Bure and Kournikova were reported to have been engaged in 2000 after a reporter took a photo of them together in a Florida restaurant where Bure supposedly asked Kournikova to marry him. As the story made headlines in Russia, where they were both heavily followed in the media as celebrities, Bure and Kournikova both denied any engagement. Kournikova, 10 years younger than Bure, was 18 years old at the time. 

The following year, Kournikova and Fedorov were married in Moscow. Fedorov claimed he and Kournikova were married in 2001, and divorced in 2003. Kournikova's representatives deny any marriage to Fedorov; however, Fedorov's agent Pat Brisson claims that although he does not know when they got married, he knew "Fedorov was married". 

Kournikova started dating pop star Enrique Iglesias in late 2001 (she appeared in his video, "Escape"). Moss, Corey. "Enrique Iglesias Serves Up...". Retrieved 8 December 2013 Kournikova has consistently refused to directly confirm or deny the status of her personal relationships. In June 2008, Iglesias was quoted by the Daily Star as having married Kournikova the previous year and subsequently separated. The couple have invested in a $20 million home to be built on a private island in Miami. 

Kournikova resides in Miami Beach, Florida.

== Media publicity ==
Kournikova preparing to serve
Most of Kournikova's fame has come from the publicity surrounding her looks and her personal life. During her debut at the 1996 US Open at the age of 15, the western world noticed her beauty, and soon pictures of her appeared in numerous magazines worldwide.

In 2000, Kournikova became the new face for Berlei's shock absorber sports bras, and appeared in the "only the ball should bounce" billboard campaign. Following that, she was cast by the Farrelly brothers for a minor role in the 2000 film Me, Myself & Irene starring Jim Carrey and Rene Zellweger. Photographs of her scantily clad form have appeared in various men's magazines, including one in the much-publicized 2004 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, where she posed in bikinis and swimsuits, and in other men's publications such as FHM and Maxim. Kournikova was named one of People's 50 Most Beautiful People in 1998 and was voted "hottest female athlete" on ESPN.com. In 2002 she also placed first in FHM's 100 Sexiest Women in the World in US and UK editions. By contrast, ESPNciting the degree of hype as compared to actual accomplishments as a singles playerranked Kournikova 18th in its "25 Biggest Sports Flops of the Past 25 Years". Kournikova was also ranked No. 1 in the ESPN Classic series "Who's number 1?" when the series featured sport's most overrated athletes.

She continued to be the most searched athlete on the Internet through 2008 even though she had retired from the professional tennis circuit years earlier. After slipping from first to sixth among athletes in 2009, she moved back up to third place among athletes in terms of search popularity in 2010. 

In October 2010, Kournikova headed to NBC's The Biggest Loser where she led the contestants in a tennis-workout challenge. Anna Kournikova Making Appearance on 'The Biggest Loser' , peoplestar.co.uk, Retrieved on 1 October 2010. In May 2011, it was announced that Kournikova would join The Biggest Loser as a regular celebrity trainer in season 12. She did not return for season 13. 

In November 2010, she became an American citizen. In 2011, Men's Health named her one of the "100 Hottest Women of All-Time", ranking her at No. 29. 

== Influences on popular culture ==
A variation of a White Russian made with skim milk is known as an Anna Kournikova. In the lingo of the poker variation Texas Hold 'em, the hole cards AceKing (unsuited) are sometimes referred to as an "Anna Kournikova", a term introduced by the poker commentator Vince van Patten during a WPT tournament because it "looks great but never wins". A video game featuring Kournikova's licensed appearance, titled Anna Kournikova's Smash Court Tennis, was developed by Namco and released for the PlayStation in Japan and Europe in November 1998. http://www.giantbomb.com/anna-kournikovas-smash-court-tennis/3030-15769/ A computer virus named the Anna Kournikova virus arose on 12 February 2001. 

== Career statistics and awards ==

* 1996: WTA Newcomer of the Year
* 1999: WTA Doubles Team of the Year (with Martina Hingis)

== See also ==
* World TeamTennis, currently playing for the St. Louis Aces.

== Books ==
* Anna Kournikova by Susan Holden (2001) (ISBN 978-1-84222-416-8 / ISBN 978-1-84222-416-8)
* Anna Kournikova (Women Who Win) by Connie Berman (2001) (ISBN 978-0-7910-6529-7 / ISBN 978-0-7910-6529-7)

== References ==

==External links==

*Official Site
*
*
*
*
*

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 



[[Alfons Maria Jakob]]

Alfons Maria Jakob (2 July 1884, Aschaffenburg/Bavaria&ndash;17 October 1931, Hamburg) was a German neurologist who worked in the field of neuropathology.

He was born in Aschaffenburg, Bavaria and educated in medicine at the universities of Munich, Berlin, and Strasbourg, where obtained his doctorate in 1908. In 1909 he commenced clinical work under the psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin and did laboratory work with Franz Nissl and Alois Alzheimer in Munich.

In 1911 he went to Hamburg to work with Theodor Kaes and became head of the laboratory of anatomical pathology at the psychiatric State Hospital Hamburg-Friedrichsberg. Following the death of Kaes in 1913, Jakob succeeded him as prosector. After serving in the German army in World War I, he returned to Hamburg and climbed the academic ladder. He was habilitated in neurology in 1919 and in 1924 became professor of neurology. Under Jakob's guidance the department grew rapidly. He made notable contributions to knowledge on concussion and secondary nerve degeneration and became a doyen of neuropathology.

Jakob published five monographs and more than 75 papers. His neuropathological studies contributed greatly to the delineation of several diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Friedreich's ataxia. He first recognised and described Alper's disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (the latter with Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt). He accumulated experience in neurosyphilis, having a 200-bedded ward devoted exclusively to that disorder. Jakob made a lecture tour of the United States and South America where he wrote a paper on the neuropathology of yellow fever.

He suffered from chronic osteomyelitis for the last 7 years of his life. This eventually caused a retroperitoneal abscess and paralytic ileus from which he died following operation.

==Associated eponym==
* Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: A very rare and incurable degenerative neurological disease. It is the most common form of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies caused by prions.

==Bibliography==
* Die extrapyramidalen Erkrankungen. In: Monographien aus dem Gesamtgebiete der Neurologie und Psychiatry, Berlin, 1923
* Normale und pathologische Anatomie und Histologie des Grosshirns. Separate printing of Handbuch der Psychiatry. Leipzig, 19271928
* Das Kleinhirn. In: Handbuch der mikroskopischen Anatomie, Berlin, 1928
* Die Syphilis des Gehirns und seiner Hute. In: Oswald Bumke (edit.): Handbuch der Geisteskrankheiten, Berlin, 1930



[[Agnosticism]]

Agnosticism is the view that the truth values of certain claimsespecially claims about the existence or non-existence of any deity, as well as other religious and metaphysical claimsare unknown or unknowable. (page 56 in 1967 edition)
 

 

 
According to the philosopher William L. Rowe, in the popular sense, an agnostic is someone who neither believes nor disbelieves in the existence of a deity or deities, whereas a theist and an atheist believe and disbelieve, respectively. 

Thomas Henry Huxley, an English biologist, coined the word agnostic in 1869. However, earlier thinkers have written works that promoted agnostic points of view. These thinkers include Sanjaya Belatthaputta, a 5th-century BCE Indian philosopher who expressed agnosticism about any afterlife, 
 Bhaskar (1972). 
 
Protagoras, a 5th-century BCE Greek philosopher was agnostic about the gods. 
 
The Nasadiya Sukta in the Rigveda is agnostic about the origin of the universe. Patri, Umesh and Prativa Devi. "Progress of Atheism in India: A Historical Perspective". Atheist Centre 19401990 Golden Jubilee. Vijayawada, February 1990. Retrieved 2007-04-02.
 

 
 

Since the time that Huxley coined the term, many other thinkers have extensively written about agnosticism. 

==Defining agnosticism==
Thomas Henry Huxley said: Wikisource has the full text of the article here.
 
 

According to philosopher William L. Rowe, in the strict sense, agnosticism is the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to justify either the belief that God exists or the belief that God does not exist. 

===Etymology===
Agnostic () was used by Thomas Henry Huxley in a speech at a meeting of the Metaphysical Society in 1869 to describe his philosophy, which rejects all claims of spiritual or mystical knowledge. 
 
 

Early Christian church leaders used the Greek word gnosis (knowledge) to describe "spiritual knowledge". Agnosticism is not to be confused with religious views opposing the ancient religious movement of Gnosticism in particular; Huxley used the term in a broader, more abstract sense. 
 
Huxley identified agnosticism not as a creed but rather as a method of skeptical, evidence-based inquiry. 

In recent years, scientific literature dealing with neuroscience and psychology has used the word to mean "not knowable". Oxford English Dictionary, Additions Series, 1993 
In technical and marketing literature, "agnostic" can also mean independence from some parametersfor example, "platform agnostic" 
 
or "hardware agnostic" 

===Qualifying agnosticism===
Scottish Enlightenment philosopher David Hume contended that meaningful statements about the universe are always qualified by some degree of doubt. He asserted that the fallibility of human beings means that they cannot obtain absolute certainty except in trivial cases where a statement is true by definition (i.e. tautologies such as "all bachelors are unmarried" or "all triangles have three corners"). Hume, David, "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding" (1748) 

===Types of agnosticism===
A person calling oneself 'agnostic' is stating that he or she has no opinion on the existence of God, as there is no definitive evidence for or against. Agnosticism has, however, more recently been subdivided into several categories. Variations include:
;Agnostic atheism: The view of those who do not believe in the existence of any deity, but do not claim to know if a deity does or does not exist. 
 

 

 
;Agnostic theism: The view of those who do not claim to know of the existence of any deity, but still believe in such an existence. 
;Apathetic or pragmatic agnosticism: The view that there is no proof of either the existence or nonexistence of any deity, but since any deity that may exist appears unconcerned for the universe or the welfare of its inhabitants, the question is largely academic. Therefore, their existence has little to no impact on personal human affairs and should be of little theological interest. 
 

 
;Strong agnosticism (also called "hard", "closed", "strict", or "permanent agnosticism"): The view that the question of the existence or nonexistence of a deity or deities, and the nature of ultimate reality is unknowable by reason of our natural inability to verify any experience with anything but another subjective experience. A strong agnostic would say, "I cannot know whether a deity exists or not, and neither can you." 
 

 

 
;Weak agnosticism (also called "soft", "open", "empirical", or "temporal agnosticism"): The view that the existence or nonexistence of any deities is currently unknown but is not necessarily unknowable; therefore, one will withhold judgment until evidence, if any, becomes available. A weak agnostic would say, "I don't know whether any deities exist or not, but maybe one day, if there is evidence, we can find something out." 

==History==

===Hindu philosophy===

Throughout the history of Hinduism there has been a strong tradition of philosophic speculation and skepticism. 
 
 

The Rig Veda takes an agnostic view on the fundamental question of how the universe and the gods were created. Nasadiya Sukta (Creation Hymn) in the tenth chapter of the Rig Veda says: 
 

 
 

===Greek philosophy===
Agnostic thought, in the form of skepticism, emerged as a formal philosophical position in ancient Greece. Its proponents included Protagoras, Pyrrho, Carneades, Sextus Empiricus 
 
and, to some degree, Socrates, who was a strong advocate for a skeptical approach to epistemology. 

Pyrrho said that we should refrain from making judgement as we can can never know the true reality. According to Pyrrho, having opinion was possible, but certainty and knowledge are impossible. 
 
Carneades was also a skeptic in relation to all knowledge claims. He proposed a probability theory, however, according to him, certainty could never be attained. Protagoras rejected the conventional accounts of the gods. He said: 

===Hume, Kant, and Kierkegaard===
Aristotle, 
 
Anselm, 
 Williams, Thomas, "Saint Anselm", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
 
Aquinas, 
 

 
and Descartes 
 
presented arguments attempting to rationally prove the existence of God. The skeptical empiricism of David Hume, the antinomies of Immanuel Kant, and the existential philosophy of Sren Kierkegaard convinced many later philosophers to abandon these attempts, regarding it impossible to construct any unassailable proof for the existence or non-existence of God. 

In his 1844 book, Philosophical Fragments, Kierkegaard writes: Kierkegaard, Sren. Philosophical Fragments. Ch. 3
 

===Thomas Henry Huxley===
Thomas Henry Huxley
Agnostic views are as old as philosophical skepticism, but the terms agnostic and agnosticism were created by Huxley to sum up his thoughts on contemporary developments of metaphysics about the "unconditioned" (Hamilton) and the "unknowable" (Herbert Spencer). Though Huxley began to use the term "agnostic" in 1869, his opinions had taken shape some time before that date. In a letter of September 23, 1860, to Charles Kingsley, Huxley discussed his views extensively: 
 
 

And again, to the same correspondent, May 6, 1863: 

Of the origin of the name agnostic to describe this attitude, Huxley gave the following account: 

===William Stewart Ross===
William Stewart Ross wrote under the name of Saladin. He championed agnosticism in opposition to the atheism of Charles Bradlaugh as an open-ended spiritual exploration. Alastair Bonnett 'The Agnostic Saladin' History Today, 2013, 63,2, pp. 4752
 
In Why I am an Agnostic (c. 1889) he claims that agnosticism is "the very reverse of atheism". 

===Robert G. Ingersoll===
Robert G. Ingersoll
Robert G. Ingersoll, an Illinois lawyer and politician who evolved into a well-known and sought-after orator in 19th-century America, has been referred to as the "Great Agnostic". 

In an 1896 lecture titled Why I Am An Agnostic, Ingersoll related why he was an agnostic: 

In the conclusion of the speech he simply sums up the agnostic position as: 

===Bertrand Russell===
Bertrand Russell
Bertrand Russell's pamphlet, Why I Am Not a Christian, based on a speech delivered in 1927 and later included in a book of the same title, is considered a classic statement of agnosticism. 

 
He calls upon his readers to "stand on their own two feet and look fair and square at the world with a fearless attitude and a free intelligence". 

In 1939, Russell gave a lecture on The existence and nature of God, in which he characterized himself as an atheist. He said: 

However, later in the same lecture, discussing modern non-anthropomorphic concepts of God, Russell states: Collected Papers, Vol. 10, p.258 

In Russell's 1947 pamphlet, Am I An Atheist Or An Agnostic? (subtitled A Plea For Tolerance In The Face Of New Dogmas), he ruminates on the problem of what to call himself: 
 
 

In his 1953 essay, What Is An Agnostic? Russell states: 
 
 

Later in the essay, Russell adds: 

===Leslie Weatherhead===

In 1965 Christian theologian Leslie Weatherhead published The Christian Agnostic, in which he argues: 
 
 

Although radical and unpalatable to conventional theologians, Weatherhead's agnosticism falls far short of Huxley's, and short even of weak agnosticism: 

===Charles Darwin===
 Charles Darwin

Raised in a religious environment, Charles Darwin studied to be an Anglican clergyman. While eventually doubting parts of his faith, Darwin continued to help in church affairs, even while avoiding church attendance. Darwin stated that it would be "absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist". Letter 12041  Darwin, C. R. to Fordyce, John, 7 May 1879 Darwin's Complex loss of Faith The Guardian 17 September 2009 Although reticent about his religious views, in 1879 he wrote that "I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God.  I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind." 

==Demographics==
Percentage of people in various European countries who said: "I don't believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force." (2005) 

Demographic research services normally do not differentiate between various types of non-religious respondents, so agnostics are often classified in the same category as atheists or other non-religious people. 

A 2010 survey published in Encyclopdia Britannica found that the non-religious people or the agnostics made up about 9.6% of the world's population. 
 
A NovemberDecember 2006 poll published in the Financial Times gives rates for the United States and five European countries. The rates of agnosticism in the United States were at 14%, while the rates of agnosticism in the European countries surveyed were considerably higher: Italy (20%), Spain (30%), Great Britain (35%), Germany (25%), and France (32%). 

A study conducted by the Pew Research Center found that about 16% of the world's people, the third largest group after Christianity and Islam, have no religious affiliation. 
 
According to a 2012 report by the Pew Research Center, agnostics made up 3.3% of the US adult population. 
 
In the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, conducted by the Pew Research Center, 55% of agnostic respondents expressed "a belief in God or a universal spirit", 
 
whereas 41% stated that they thought that they felt a tension "being non-religious in a society where most people are religious". 

Proportion of atheists and agnostics around the world.

Other studies have placed the estimated percentage of atheists, agnostics, and other nonbelievers in a personal god as low as single digits in Poland, Romania, Cyprus, and some other European countries. in 
 
According to the 2011 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 22% of Australians have "no religion", a category that includes agnostics. 

 
Between 64% and 65% 
 
of Japanese and up to 81% 
 
of Vietnamese are atheists, agnostics, or do not believe in a god. An official European Union survey reported that 3% of the EU population is unsure about their belief in a god or spirit. 

==Criticism==
Agnosticism is criticized from a variety of standpoints. Some religious thinkers see agnosticism as limiting the mind's capacity to know reality to materialism. Some atheists criticize the use of the term agnosticism as functionally indistinguishable from atheism; this results in frequent criticisms of those who adopt the term as avoiding the 'atheist label'. 

Some thinkers and philosophers deny the validity of agnosticism, seeing it as a limitation of man's capacity to know the reality, by asserting that human intelligence has a non-material, spiritual element. They affirm that "not being able to see or hold some specific thing does not necessarily negate its existence," using gravity, entropy, reason and thought as examples. 

===Theistic===
Theistic critics claim that agnosticism is impossible in practice, since a person can live only either as if God did not exist (etsi deus non daretur), or as if God did exist (etsi deus daretur). 

 

 
 

Religious scholars such as Laurence B. Brown criticize the misuse of the word Agnosticism, claiming that it has become one of the most misapplied terms in metaphysics. Brown raises the question, "You claim that nothing can be known with certainty ... how, then, can you be so sure?" 
 
 

====Christian====
According to Joseph Ratzinger, strong agnosticism in particular limits contradicts itself in affirming the power of reason to know scientific truth. He blames the exclusion of reasoning from religion and ethics for dangerous pathologies such as crimes against humanity and ecological disasters. 
 

 
Benedict XVI, Address at the University of Regensburg 2006
 
"Agnosticism", said Ratzinger, "is always the fruit of a refusal of that knowledge which is in fact offered to man ... The knowledge of God has always existed". He asserted that agnosticism is a choice of comfort, pride, dominion, and utility over truth, and is opposed by the following attitudes: the keenest self-criticism, humble listening to the whole of existence, the persistent patience and self-correction of the scientific method, a readiness to be purified by the truth. 

The Catholic Church sees merit in examining what it calls Partial Agnosticism, specifically those systems that "do not aim at constructing a complete philosophy of the unknowable, but at excluding special kinds of truth, notably religious, from the domain of knowledge". 
 
However, the Church is historically opposed to a full denial of the capacity of human reason to know God. The Council of the Vatican, relying on biblical scripture, declares, "God, the beginning and end of all, can, by the natural light of human reason, be known with certainty from the works of creation` 

Christian Philosopher Blaise Pascal argued that even if there were truly no evidence for God, agnostics should consider what is now known as Pascal's Wager: the infinite expected value of acknowledging God is always greater than the finite expected value of not acknowledging his existence, and thus it is a safer "bet" to choose God. 

Peter Kreeft and Ronald Tacelli cited 20 arguments for God's existence, Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God, from the Handbook of Christian Apologetics by Peter Kreeft and Fr. Ronald Tacelli, SJ, Intervarsity Press, 1994.
 
asserting that any 'demand' for evidence testable in a laboratory is in effect asking God, the supreme being, to become man's servant. 

===Atheistic===
According to Richard Dawkins, a distinction between agnosticism and atheism is unwieldy and depends on how close to zero a person is willing to rate the probability of existence for any given god-like entity. About himself, Dawkins continues, "I am agnostic only to the extent that I am agnostic about fairies at the bottom of the garden." The God Delusion p. 74 
Dawkins also identifies two categories of agnostics: Temporary Agnostics in Practice (TAPs), and Permanent Agnostics in Principle (PAPs). Dawkins considers temporary agnosticism an entirely reasonable position, but views permanent agnosticism as "fence-sitting, intellectual cowardice". The God Delusion p. 70 

==Related concepts==
Ignosticism is the view that a coherent definition of a deity must be put forward before the question of the existence of a deity can be meaningfully discussed. If the chosen definition is not coherent, the ignostic holds the noncognitivist view that the existence of a deity is meaningless or empirically untestable. 

A.J. Ayer, Theodore Drange, and other philosophers see both atheism and agnosticism as incompatible with ignosticism on the grounds that atheism and agnosticism accept "a deity exists" as a meaningful proposition that can be argued for or against. Ayer, Language, 115: "There can be no way of proving that the existence of a God ... is even probable. ... For if the existence of such a god were probable, then the proposition that he existed would be an empirical hypothesis. And in that case it would be possible to deduce from it, and other empirical hypotheses, certain experimental propositions which were not deducible from those other hypotheses alone. But in fact this is not possible." Drange, Atheism 

==See also==

==References==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Albert Einstein on Religion Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Why I Am An Agnostic by Robert G. Ingersoll, .
* Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Agnosticism
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
* Agnosticism from INTERS  Interdisciplinary Encyclopedia of Religion and Science
* Agnosticism  from ReligiousTolerance.org
* What do Agnostics Believe?  A Jewish perspective
* Fides et Ratio  the relationship between faith and reason Karol Wojtyla 
* For a utilitarian analysis of religion, see The (F)Utility of Religion: Who Needs God(s)?A Prospective Bible for Non-Believers at http://bradmusil.kramernet.org
* The Natural Religion by Dr Brendan Connolly, 2008
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Argon]]

Argon is a chemical element with symbol Ar and atomic number 18. It is in group 18 of the periodic table and is a noble gas. In older versions of the periodic table, the noble gases were identified as Group VIIIA or as Group 0. See Group (periodic table). Argon is the third most common gas in the Earth's atmosphere, at 0.93% (9,300 ppm), making it approximately 23.8 times as abundant as the next most common atmospheric gas, carbon dioxide (390 ppm), and more than 500 times as abundant as the next most common noble gas, neon (18 ppm). Nearly all of this argon is radiogenic argon-40 derived from the decay of potassium-40 in the Earth's crust. In the universe, argon-36 is by far the most common argon isotope, being the preferred argon isotope produced by stellar nucleosynthesis in supernovas.

The name "argon" is derived from the Greek word , neuter singular form of  meaning "lazy" or "inactive", as a reference to the fact that the element undergoes almost no chemical reactions. The complete octet (eight electrons) in the outer atomic shell makes argon stable and resistant to bonding with other elements. Its triple point temperature of 83.8058 K is a defining fixed point in the International Temperature Scale of 1990.

Argon is produced industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air. Argon is mostly used as an inert shielding gas in welding and other high-temperature industrial processes where ordinarily non-reactive substances become reactive; for example, an argon atmosphere is used in graphite electric furnaces to prevent the graphite from burning. Argon gas also has uses in incandescent and fluorescent lighting, and other types of gas discharge tubes. Argon makes a distinctive blue-green gas laser.

==Characteristics==
A small piece of rapidly melting solid argon.
Argon has approximately the same solubility in water as oxygen, and is 2.5 times more soluble in water than nitrogen. Argon is colorless, odorless, nonflammable and nontoxic as a solid, liquid, and gas. Material Safety Data Sheet Gaseous Argon, Universal Industrial Gases, Inc. Retrieved 14 October 2013. Argon is chemically inert under most conditions and forms no confirmed stable compounds at room temperature.

Although argon is a noble gas, it has been found to have the capability of forming some compounds. For example, the creation of argon fluorohydride (HArF), a marginally stable compound of argon with fluorine and hydrogen, was reported by researchers at the University of Helsinki in 2000 
 .
Although the neutral ground-state chemical compounds of argon are presently limited to HArF, argon can form clathrates with water when atoms of it are trapped in a lattice of the water molecules 
 .
Argon-containing ions and excited state complexes, such as and ArF, respectively, are known to exist. Theoretical calculations have predicted several argon compounds that should be stable 
 , but for which no synthesis routes are currently known.

==History==
Lord Rayleigh's method for the isolation of argon, based on an experiment of Henry Cavendish's. The gases are contained in a test-tube (A) standing over a large quantity of weak alkali (B), and the current is conveyed in wires insulated by U-shaped glass tubes (CC) passing through the liquid and round the mouth of the test-tube. The inner platinum ends (DD) of the wire receive a current from a battery of five Grove cells and a Ruhmkorff coil of medium size.
Argon (, neuter singular form of , Greek meaning "inactive", in reference to its chemical inactivity) 
 
 was suspected to be present in air by Henry Cavendish in 1785 but was not isolated until 1894 by Lord Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay at University College London in an experiment in which they removed all of the oxygen, carbon dioxide, water and nitrogen from a sample of clean air. 
 
 
 They had determined that nitrogen produced from chemical compounds was one-half percent lighter than nitrogen from the atmosphere. The difference seemed insignificant, but it was important enough to attract their attention for many months. They concluded that there was another gas in the air mixed in with the nitrogen. 
 Argon was also encountered in 1882 through independent research of H. F. Newall and W. N. Hartley. Each observed new lines in the color spectrum of air but were unable to identify the element responsible for the lines. Argon became the first member of the noble gases to be discovered. The symbol for argon is now "Ar", but up until 1957 it was "A". 
 

== Occurrence ==
Argon constitutes 0.934% by volume and 1.288% by mass of the Earth's atmosphere, 
 and air is the primary raw material used by industry to produce purified argon products. Argon is isolated from air by fractionation, most commonly by cryogenic fractional distillation, a process that also produces purified nitrogen, oxygen, neon, krypton and xenon. 
 The Earth's crust and seawater contain 1.2 ppm and 0.45 ppm of argon, respectively. 

== Isotopes ==

The main isotopes of argon found on Earth are (99.6%), (0.34%), and (0.06%). Naturally occurring , with a half-life of 1.25 years, decays to stable (11.2%) by electron capture or positron emission, and also to stable (88.8%) via beta decay. These properties and ratios are used to determine the age of rocks by the method of K-Ar dating. 
 

In the Earth's atmosphere, is made by cosmic ray activity, primarily with . In the subsurface environment, it is also produced through neutron capture by or alpha emission by calcium. is created from the neutron spallation of as a result of subsurface nuclear explosions. It has a half-life of 35 days. 

Argon is notable in that its isotopic composition varies greatly between different locations in the solar system. Where the major source of argon is the decay of [[potassium-40|]] in rocks, will be the dominant isotope, as it is on Earth. Argon produced directly by stellar nucleosynthesis, in contrast, is dominated by the alpha process nuclide, . Correspondingly, solar argon contains 84.6% based on solar wind measurements, 
 
and the ratio of the three isotopes 36Ar : 38Ar : 40Ar in the atmospheres of the outer planets is measured to be 8400 : 1600 : 1. This contrasts with the abundance of primordial in Earth's atmosphere: only 31.5 ppmv (= 9340 ppmv  0.337%), comparable to that of neon (18.18 ppmv); and with measurements by interplanetary probes.

The Martian atmosphere contains 1.6% of and 5 ppm of . The Mariner probe fly-by of the planet Mercury in 1973 found that Mercury has a very thin atmosphere with 70% argon, believed to result from releases of the gas as a decay product from radioactive materials on the planet. In 2005, the Huygens probe discovered the presence of exclusively on Titan, the largest moon of Saturn. 
 

The predominance of radiogenic is responsible for the standard atomic weight of terrestrial argon being greater than that of the next element, potassium, which was puzzling at the time when argon was discovered. Mendeleev had placed the elements in his periodic table in order of atomic weight, but the inertness of argon suggested a placement before the reactive alkali metal. Henry Moseley later solved this problem by showing that the periodic table is actually arranged in order of atomic number. (See History of the periodic table).

==Compounds==

Space-filling model of argon fluorohydride.
Argon's complete octet of electrons indicates full s and p subshells. This full outer energy level makes argon very stable and extremely resistant to bonding with other elements. Before 1962, argon and the other noble gases were considered to be chemically inert and unable to form compounds; however, compounds of the heavier noble gases have since been synthesized. In August 2000, the first argon compound was formed by researchers at the University of Helsinki. By shining ultraviolet light onto frozen argon containing a small amount of hydrogen fluoride with caesium iodide, argon fluorohydride (HArF) was formed. 
 It is stable up to 40 kelvin (233 C). The metastable dication, which is valence isoelectronic with carbonyl fluoride, was observed in 2010. 
 Argon-36, in the form of argon hydride ions, has been detected in cosmic dust associated with the Crab Nebula supernova; this was the first noble-gas molecule detected in outer space. 
 

==Production==

===Industrial===
Argon is produced industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air in a cryogenic air separation unit; a process that separates liquid nitrogen, which boils at 77.3 K, from argon, which boils at 87.3 K, and liquid oxygen, which boils at 90.2 K. About 700,000 tonnes of argon are produced worldwide every year. 
 

===In radioactive decays===
40Ar, the most abundant isotope of argon, is produced by the decay of 40K with a half-life of 1.25 years by electron capture or positron emission. Because of this, it is used in potassium-argon dating to determine the age of rocks.

==Applications==
Cylinders containing argon gas for use in extinguishing fire without damaging server equipment
There are several different reasons argon is used in particular applications:
* An inert gas is needed. In particular, argon is the cheapest alternative when nitrogen is not sufficiently inert.
* Low thermal conductivity is required.
* The electronic properties (ionization and/or the emission spectrum) are necessary.

Other noble gases would probably work as well in most of these applications, but argon is by far the cheapest. Argon is inexpensive since it occurs naturally in air, and is readily obtained as a byproduct of cryogenic air separation in the production of liquid oxygen and liquid nitrogen: the primary constituents of air are used on a large industrial scale. The other noble gases (except helium) are produced this way as well, but argon is the most plentiful by far. The bulk of argon applications arise simply because it is inert and relatively cheap.

===Industrial processes===
Argon is used in some high-temperature industrial processes, where ordinarily non-reactive substances become reactive. For example, an argon atmosphere is used in graphite electric furnaces to prevent the graphite from burning.

For some of these processes, the presence of nitrogen or oxygen gases might cause defects within the material. Argon is used in various types of arc welding such as gas metal arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding, as well as in the processing of titanium and other reactive elements. An argon atmosphere is also used for growing crystals of silicon and germanium.

Argon is used in the poultry industry to asphyxiate birds, either for mass culling following disease outbreaks, or as a means of slaughter more humane than the electric bath. Argon's relatively high density causes it to remain close to the ground during gassing. Its non-reactive nature makes it suitable in a food product, and since it replaces oxygen within the dead bird, argon also enhances shelf life. 
 

Argon is sometimes used for extinguishing fires where damage to equipment is to be avoided.

===Scientific research===
Liquid argon is used as the target for neutrino experiments and direct dark matter searches. The interaction of a hypothetical WIMP particle with the argon nucleus produces scintillation light that is detected by photomultiplier tubes. Two-phase detectors also use argon gas to detect the ionized electrons produced during the WIMP-nucleus scattering. As with most other liquefied noble gases, argon has a high scintillation lightyield (~ 51 photons/keV 
 ), is transparent to its own scintillation light, and is relatively easy to purify. Compared to xenon, argon is cheaper and has a distinct scintillation time profile which allows the separation of electronic recoils from nuclear recoils. On the other hand, its intrinsic gamma-ray background is larger due to contamination, unless one uses underground argon sources with a low level of radioactivity. Dark matter detectors currently operating with liquid argon include WArP, ArDM, microCLEAN and DEAP-I. Neutrino experiments include Icarus and MicroBooNE both of which use high purity liquid argon in a time projection chamber for fine grained three-dimensional imaging of neutrino interactions.

===Preservative===
A sample of caesium is packed under argon to avoid reactions with air
Argon is used to displace oxygen- and moisture-containing air in packaging material to extend the shelf-lives of the contents (argon has the European food additive code of E938). Aerial oxidation, hydrolysis, and other chemical reactions which degrade the products are retarded or prevented entirely. Bottles of high-purity chemicals and certain pharmaceutical products are available in sealed bottles or ampoules packed in argon. In wine making, argon is used to top-off barrels to avoid the aerial oxidation of ethanol to acetic acid during the aging process.

Argon is also available in aerosol-type cans, which may be used to preserve compounds such as varnish, polyurethane, paint, etc. for storage after opening. Zawalick, Steven Scott "Method for preserving an oxygen sensitive liquid product" Issue date: 7 October 2003 

Since 2002, the American National Archives stores important national documents such as the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution within argon-filled cases to retard their degradation. Using argon reduces gas leakage, compared with the helium used in the preceding five decades. 
 

===Laboratory equipment===
Gloveboxes are often filled with argon, which recirculates over scrubbers to maintain an oxygen-, nitrogen-, and moisture-free atmosphere

Argon may be used as the inert gas within Schlenk lines and gloveboxes. The use of argon over comparatively less expensive nitrogen is preferred where nitrogen may react with the experimental reagents or apparatus.

Argon may be used as the carrier gas in gas chromatography and in electrospray ionization mass spectrometry; it is the gas of choice for the plasma used in ICP spectroscopy. Argon is preferred for the sputter coating of specimens for scanning electron microscopy. Argon gas is also commonly used for sputter deposition of thin films as in microelectronics and for wafer cleaning in microfabrication.

===Medical use===
Cryosurgery procedures such as cryoablation use liquefied argon to destroy cancer cells. In surgery it is used in a procedure called "argon enhanced coagulation" which is a form of argon plasma beam electrosurgery. The procedure carries a risk of producing gas embolism in the patient and has resulted in the death of one person via this type of accident. 
 

Blue argon lasers are used in surgery to weld arteries, destroy tumors, and to correct eye defects. 

Argon has also been used experimentally to replace nitrogen in the breathing or decompression mix known as Argox, to speed the elimination of dissolved nitrogen from the blood. 
 

===Lighting===
Argon gas-discharge lamp forming the symbol for argon "Ar".

Incandescent lights are filled with argon, to preserve the filaments at high temperature from oxidation. It is used for the specific way it ionizes and emits light, such as in plasma globes and calorimetry in experimental particle physics. Gas-discharge lamps filled with argon provide blue light. Argon is also used for the creation of blue and green laser light.

===Miscellaneous uses===
Argon is used for thermal insulation in energy efficient windows. 
 Argon is also used in technical scuba diving to inflate a dry suit, because it is inert and has low thermal conductivity. 
 
Argon is being used as a propellant in the development of the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR).
Compressed argon gas is allowed to expand, to cool the seeker heads of the AIM-9 Sidewinder missile, and other missiles that use cooled thermal seeker heads. The gas is stored at high pressure. 
 

Argon-39, with a half-life of 269 years, has been used for a number of applications, primarily ice core and ground water dating. Also, potassium-argon dating is used in dating igneous rocks. 

==Safety==
Although argon is non-toxic, it is 38% denser than air and is therefore considered a dangerous asphyxiant in closed areas. It is also difficult to detect because it is colorless, odorless, and tasteless. A 1994 incident in which a man was asphyxiated after entering an argon filled section of oil pipe under construction in Alaska highlights the dangers of argon tank leakage in confined spaces, and emphasizes the need for proper use, storage and handling. 
 

==See also==
*Industrial gas

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* Triple point temperature: 83.8058 K  
* Triple point pressure: 69 kPa  

==External links==
* Silicon at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* USGS Periodic Table  Argon
* Diving applications: Why Argon?

 



[[Arsenic]]

Arsenic is a chemical element with symbol As and atomic number 33. Arsenic occurs in many minerals, usually in conjunction with sulfur and metals, and also as a pure elemental crystal. It was first documented by Albertus Magnus in 1250. Arsenic is a metalloid. It can exist in various allotropes, although only the gray form has important use in industry.

The main use of metallic arsenic is for strengthening alloys of copper and especially lead (for example, in car batteries). Arsenic is a common n-type dopant in semiconductor electronic devices, and the optoelectronic compound gallium arsenide is the most common semiconductor in use after doped silicon. Arsenic and its compounds, especially the trioxide, are used in the production of pesticides, treated wood products, herbicides, and insecticides. These applications are declining, however. 

Arsenic is notoriously poisonous to multicellular life, although a few species of bacteria are able to use arsenic compounds as respiratory metabolites. Arsenic contamination of groundwater is a problem that affects millions of people across the world.

==Characteristics==

===Physical characteristics===
Crystal structure common to Sb, AsSb and gray As
The three most common arsenic allotropes are metallic gray, yellow and black arsenic, with gray being the most common. Gray arsenic (-As, space group Rm No. 166) adopts a double-layered structure consisting of many interlocked ruffled six-membered rings. Because of weak bonding between the layers, gray arsenic is brittle and has a relatively low Mohs hardness of 3.5. Nearest and next-nearest neighbors form a distorted octahedral complex, with the three atoms in the same double-layer being slightly closer than the three atoms in the next. This relatively close packing leads to a high density of 5.73 g/cm3. Gray arsenic is a semimetal, but becomes a semiconductor with a bandgap of 1.21.4 eV if amorphized. Gray arsenic is also the most stable form. Yellow arsenic is soft and waxy, and somewhat similar to tetraphosphorus (). Both have four atoms arranged in a tetrahedral structure in which each atom is bound to each of the other three atoms by a single bond. This unstable allotrope, being molecular, is the most volatile, least dense and most toxic. Solid yellow arsenic is produced by rapid cooling of arsenic vapor, . It is rapidly transformed into the gray arsenic by light. The yellow form has a density of 1.97 g/cm3. Black arsenic is similar in structure to red phosphorus. 
Black arsenic can also be formed by cooling vapor at around 100220 C. It is glassy and brittle. It is also a poor electrical conductor. "http://www.chemicool.com/elements/arsenic.html 

===Isotopes===

Naturally occurring arsenic is composed of one stable isotope, 75As. This makes it a monoisotopic element. As of 2003, at least 33 radioisotopes have also been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 60 to 92. The most stable of these is 73As with a half-life of 80.30 days. All other isotopes have half-lives of under one day, with the exception of 71As (t=65.30 hours), 72As (t=26.0 hours), 74As (t=17.77 days), 76As (t=1.0942 days), and 77As (t=38.83 hours). Isotopes that are lighter than the stable 75As tend to decay by + decay, and those that are heavier tend to decay by  decay, with some exceptions.

At least 10 nuclear isomers have been described, ranging in atomic mass from 66 to 84. The most stable of arsenic's isomers is 68mAs with a half-life of 111 seconds. 

===Chemistry===
When heated in air, arsenic oxidizes to arsenic trioxide; the fumes from this reaction have an odor resembling garlic. This odor can be detected on striking arsenide minerals such as arsenopyrite with a hammer. Arsenic (and some arsenic compounds) sublimes upon heating at atmospheric pressure, converting directly to a gaseous form without an intervening liquid state at 887 K. The triple point is 3.63 MPa and 1090 K. Arsenic makes arsenic acid with concentrated nitric acid, arsenious acid with dilute nitric acid, and arsenic trioxide with concentrated sulfuric acid. 

==Compounds==

Arsenic compounds resemble in some respects those of phosphorus which occupies the same group (column) of the periodic table. Arsenic is less commonly observed in the pentavalent state, however. The most common oxidation states for arsenic are: 3 in the arsenides, such as alloy-like intermetallic compounds; and +3 in the arsenites, arsenates(III), and most organoarsenic compounds. Arsenic also bonds readily to itself as seen in the square As ions in the mineral skutterudite. In the +3 oxidation state, arsenic is typically pyramidal owing to the influence of the lone pair of electrons. 

===Inorganic compounds===
Arsenic forms colorless, odorless, crystalline oxides As2O3 ("white arsenic") and As2O5 which are hygroscopic and readily soluble in water to form acidic solutions. Arsenic(V) acid is a weak acid. Its salts are called arsenates which are the basis of arsenic contamination of groundwater, a problem that affects many people. Synthetic arsenates include Paris Green (copper(II) acetoarsenite), calcium arsenate, and lead hydrogen arsenate. These three have been used as agricultural insecticides and poisons.

The protonation steps between the arsenate and arsenic acid are similar to those between phosphate and phosphoric acid. Unlike phosphorous acid, arsenous acid is genuinely tribasic, with the formula As(OH)3.

A broad variety of sulfur compounds of arsenic are known. Orpiment (As2S3) and realgar (As4S4) are somewhat abundant and were formerly used as painting pigments. In As4S10, arsenic has a formal oxidation state of +2 in As4S4 which features As-As bonds so that the total covalency of As is still 3. 

All trihalides of arsenic(III) are well known except the astatide which is unknown. Arsenic pentafluoride (AsF5) is the only important pentahalide, reflecting the lower stability of the 5+ oxidation state. (pentachloride is stable only below 50 C. )

====Alloys====
Arsenic is used as the group 5 element in the III-V semiconductors gallium arsenide, indium arsenide, and aluminium arsenide. The valence electron count of GaAs is the same as a pair of Si atoms, but the band structure is completely different which results distinct bulk properties. Other arsenic alloys include the II-IV semiconductor cadmium arsenide. 

===Organoarsenic compounds===

Trimethylarsine
A large variety of organoarsenic compounds are known. Several were developed as chemical warfare agents during World War I, including vesicants such as lewisite and vomiting agents such as adamsite. Cacodylic acid, which is of historic and practical interest, arises from the methylation of arsenic trioxide, a reaction that has no analogy in phosphorus chemistry.

==Occurrence and production==

A large sample of native arsenic

Arsenic makes up about 1.5 ppm (0.00015%) of the Earth's crust, making it the 53rd most abundant element. Soil contains 110 ppm of arsenic. Seawater has only 1.6 ppb arsenic. 

Minerals with the formula MAsS and MAs2 (M = Fe, Ni, Co) are the dominant commercial sources of arsenic, together with realgar (an arsenic sulfide mineral) and native arsenic. An illustrative mineral is arsenopyrite (FeAsS), which is structurally related to iron pyrite. Many minor As-containing minerals are known. Arsenic also occurs in various organic forms in the environment. 

Arsenic output in 2006 
In 2005, China was the top producer of white arsenic with almost 50% world share, followed by Chile, Peru, and Morocco, according to the British Geological Survey and the United States Geological Survey. Most operations in the US and Europe have closed for environmental reasons. The arsenic is recovered mainly as a side product from the purification of copper. Arsenic is part of the smelter dust from copper, gold, and lead smelters. 

On roasting in air of arsenopyrite, arsenic sublimes as arsenic(III) oxide leaving iron oxides, while roasting without air results in the production of metallic arsenic. Further purification from sulfur and other chalcogens is achieved by sublimation in vacuum or in a hydrogen atmosphere or by distillation from molten lead-arsenic mixture. 

 Country 2012 AsO3 Production 
 Belgium 1,000 T 
 Chile 10,000 T 
 China 25,000 T 
 Morocco 6,000 T 
 Russia 1,500 T 
 Other Countries 300 T 
 World Total 44,000 T 

==History==
Realgar
Alchemical symbol for arsenic
The word arsenic has its origin in the Syriac word   (al) zarniqa, from the Persian word zarnikh, meaning "yellow" (literally "gold-colored") and hence "(yellow) orpiment". It was adopted into Greek as arsenikon (), a form that is folk etymology, being the neuter form of the Greek word arsenikos (), meaning "male", "virile". The Greek word was adopted in Latin as arsenicum, which in French became arsenic, from which the English word arsenic is taken. Arsenic sulfides (orpiment, realgar) and oxides have been known and used since ancient times. Zosimos (circa 300 AD) describes roasting sandarach (realgar) to obtain cloud of arsenic (arsenious oxide), which he then reduces to metallic arsenic. As the symptoms of arsenic poisoning were somewhat ill-defined, it was frequently used for murder until the advent of the Marsh test, a sensitive chemical test for its presence. (Another less sensitive but more general test is the Reinsch test.) Owing to its use by the ruling class to murder one another and its potency and discreetness, arsenic has been called the Poison of Kings and the King of Poisons. 
The arsenic labyrinth, part of Botallack Mine, Cornwall.

During the Bronze Age, arsenic was often included in bronze, which made the alloy harder (so-called "arsenical bronze"). 
Albertus Magnus (Albert the Great, 11931280) is believed to have been the first to isolate the element from a compound in 1250, by heating soap together with arsenic trisulfide. In 1649, Johann Schrder published two ways of preparing arsenic. Crystals of elemental (native) arsenic are found in nature, although rare.

Cadet's fuming liquid (impure cacodyl), often claimed as the first synthetic organometallic compound, was synthesized in 1760 by Louis Claude Cadet de Gassicourt by the reaction of potassium acetate with arsenic trioxide. 

In the Victorian era, "arsenic" ("white arsenic" or arsenic trioxide) was mixed with vinegar and chalk and eaten by women to improve the complexion of their faces, making their skin paler to show they did not work in the fields. Arsenic was also rubbed into the faces and arms of women to "improve their complexion". The accidental use of arsenic in the adulteration of foodstuffs led to the Bradford sweet poisoning in 1858, which resulted in approximately 20 deaths. 

Two pigments based on arsenic have been widely used since their discovery  Paris Green and Scheele's Green. After arsenic's toxicity became widely known, they were less often used as pigments, so these compounds were more often used as insecticides. In the 1860s an arsenic by-product of dye production, London Purple  a solid consisting of a mixture of arsenic trioxide, aniline, lime and ferrous oxide, which is insoluble in water and very toxic by inhalation and ingestion "London purple.(8012-74-6)", Chemical Book  was widely used, but Paris Green, another arsenic based dye, was later substituted for it. With better understanding of the toxicology mechanism, two other compounds were used starting in the 1890s. Arsenite of lime and arsenate of lead were used widely as insecticides until the discovery of DDT in 1942. 

==Applications==

===Agricultural===
Roxarsone is a controversial arsenic compound used as a nutritional supplement for chickens
The toxicity of arsenic to insects, bacteria and fungi led to its use as a wood preservative. In the 1950s a process of treating wood with chromated copper arsenate (also known as CCA or Tanalith) was invented, and for decades this treatment was the most extensive industrial use of arsenic. An increased appreciation of the toxicity of arsenic resulted in a ban for the use of CCA in consumer products; the European Union and United States initiated this process in 2004. CCA remains in heavy use in other countries however, e.g. Malaysian rubber plantations. 

Arsenic was also used in various agricultural insecticides and poisons. For example, lead hydrogen arsenate was a common insecticide on fruit trees, but contact with the compound sometimes resulted in brain damage among those working the sprayers. In the second half of the 20th century, monosodium methyl arsenate (MSMA) and disodium methyl arsenate (DSMA)  less toxic organic forms of arsenic  have replaced lead arsenate in agriculture. With the exception of cotton farming the use of the organic arsenicals was phased out until 2013. 

Arsenic is used as a feed additive in poultry and swine production, in particular in the U.S. to increase weight gain, improve feed efficiency, and to prevent disease. An example is roxarsone, which had been used as a broiler starter by about 70% of U.S. broiler growers. The Poison-Free Poultry Act of 2009 proposes to ban the use of roxarsone in industrial swine and poultry production. Alpharma, a subsidiary of Pfizer Inc., which produces Roxarsone, voluntarily suspended sales of the drug in response to studies showing elevated levels of inorganic arsenic, a carcinogen, in treated chickens. A successor to Alpharma, Zoetis, continues to sell nitarsone, primarily for use in turkeys. 

===Medical use===
During the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries, a number of arsenic compounds were used as medicines, including arsphenamine (by Paul Ehrlich) and arsenic trioxide (by Thomas Fowler). Arsphenamine as well as neosalvarsan was indicated for syphilis and trypanosomiasis, but has been superseded by modern antibiotics. Arsenic trioxide has been used in a variety of ways over the past 500 years, but most commonly in the treatment of cancer. The US Food and Drug Administration in 2000 approved this compound for the treatment of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia that is resistant to ATRA. It was also used as Fowler's solution in psoriasis. Recently new research has been done in locating tumors using arsenic-74 (a positron emitter). The advantages of using this isotope instead of the previously used iodine-124 is that the signal in the PET scan is clearer as the body tends to transport iodine to the thyroid gland producing a lot of noise. 

In subtoxic doses, soluble arsenic compounds act as stimulants, and were once popular in small doses as medicine by people in the mid-18th century. 

===Alloys===
The main use of metallic arsenic is for alloying with lead. Lead components in car batteries are strengthened by the presence of a few percent of arsenic. Dezincification can be strongly reduced by adding arsenic to brass, a copper-zinc alloy. "Phosphorus Deoxidized Arsenical Copper" with an arsenic content of 0.3% has an increased corrosion stability in certain environments. Gallium arsenide is an important semiconductor material, used in integrated circuits. Circuits made from GaAs are much faster (but also much more expensive) than those made in silicon. Unlike silicon it has a direct bandgap, and so can be used in laser diodes and LEDs to directly convert electricity into light. 

===Military===
After World War I, the United States built up a stockpile of 20,000 tonnes of lewisite (ClCH=CHAsCl2), a chemical weapon that is a vesicant (blister agent) and lung irritant. The stockpile was neutralized with bleach and dumped into the Gulf of Mexico after the 1950s. During the Vietnam War the United States used Agent Blue, a mixture of sodium cacodylate and its acid form, as one of the rainbow herbicides to deprive invading North Vietnamese soldiers of foliage cover and rice. 

===Other uses===
* Copper acetoarsenite was used as a green pigment known under many names, including 'Paris Green' and 'Emerald Green'. It caused numerous arsenic poisonings. Scheele's Green, a copper arsenate, was used in the 19th century as a coloring agent in sweets. 
* Also used in bronzing 
 and pyrotechnics.
* Up to 2% of arsenic is used in lead alloys for lead shots and bullets. 
* Arsenic is added in small quantities to alpha-brass to make it dezincification resistant. This grade of brass is used to make plumbing fittings or other items that are in constant contact with water. 
* Arsenic is also used for taxonomic sample preservation.
* Until recently arsenic was used in optical glass. Modern glass manufacturers, under pressure from environmentalists, have removed it, along with lead. 

==Biological role==

===Bacteria===
 Arsenobetaine
Some species of bacteria obtain their energy by oxidizing various fuels while reducing arsenate to arsenite. Under oxidative environmental conditions some bacteria use arsenite, which is oxidized to arsenate as fuel for their metabolism. The enzymes involved are known as arsenate reductases (Arr). 

In 2008, bacteria were discovered that employ a version of photosynthesis in the absence of oxygen with arsenites as electron donors, producing arsenates (just as ordinary photosynthesis uses water as electron donor, producing molecular oxygen). Researchers conjecture that, over the course of history, these photosynthesizing organisms produced the arsenates that allowed the arsenate-reducing bacteria to thrive. One strain PHS-1 has been isolated and is related to the gammaproteobacterium Ectothiorhodospira shaposhnikovii. The mechanism is unknown, but an encoded Arr enzyme may function in reverse to its known homologues. 

Although the arsenate and phosphate anions are similar structurally, no evidence exists for the replacement of phosphate in ATP or nucleic acids by arsenic. 

===Heredity===
Arsenic has been linked to epigenetic changes, heritable changes in gene expression that occur without changes in DNA sequence. These include DNA methylation, histone modification, and RNA interference. Toxic levels of arsenic cause significant DNA hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes p16 and p53, thus increasing risk of carcinogenesis. These epigenetic events have been studied in vitro using human kidney cells and in vivo using rat liver cells and peripheral blood leukocytes in humans. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is used to detect precise levels of intracellular arsenic and its other bases involved in epigenetic modification of DNA. Studies investigating arsenic as an epigenetic factor will help in developing precise biomarkers of exposure and susceptibility.

The Chinese brake fern (Pteris vittata) hyperaccumulates arsenic present in the soil into its leaves and has a proposed use in phytoremediation. 

===Biomethylation===

Inorganic arsenic and its compounds, upon entering the food chain, are progressively metabolized through a process of methylation. For example, the mold Scopulariopsis brevicaulis produces significant amounts of trimethylarsine if inorganic arsenic is present. The organic compound arsenobetaine is found in some marine foods such as fish and algae, and also in mushrooms in larger concentrations. The average person's intake is about 1050 g/day. Values about 1000 g are not unusual following consumption of fish or mushrooms, but there is little danger in eating fish because this arsenic compound is nearly non-toxic. 

==Environmental issues==

===Exposure===
Other naturally occurring pathways of exposure include volcanic ash, weathering of arsenic-containing minerals and ores, and dissolved in groundwater. It is also found in food, water, soil, and air. Arsenic is absorbed by all plants, but is more concentrated in leafy vegetables, rice, apple and grape juice, and seafood. An additional route of exposure is through inhalation. Arsenic. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (2009). 

===Occurrence in drinking water===

Widespread arsenic contamination of groundwater has led to a massive epidemic of arsenic poisoning in Bangladesh and neighboring countries. It is estimated that approximately 57 million people in the Bengal basin are drinking groundwater with arsenic concentrations elevated above the World Health Organization's standard of 10 parts per billion (ppb). However, a study of cancer rates in Taiwan suggested that significant increases in cancer mortality appear only at levels above 150 ppb. The arsenic in the groundwater is of natural origin, and is released from the sediment into the groundwater, owing to the anoxic conditions of the subsurface. This groundwater began to be used after local and western NGOs and the Bangladeshi government undertook a massive shallow tube well drinking-water program in the late twentieth century. This program was designed to prevent drinking of bacteria-contaminated surface waters, but failed to test for arsenic in the groundwater. Many other countries and districts in Southeast Asia, such as Vietnam and Cambodia have geological environments conducive to generation of high-arsenic groundwaters. poisoning#Arsenicosis: chronic arsenic poisoning from drinking water|Arsenicosis] was reported in Nakhon Si Thammarat, Thailand in 1987, and the Chao Phraya River is suspected of containing high levels of naturally occurring dissolved arsenic, but has not been a public health problem owing to the use of bottled water. 

In the United States, arsenic is most commonly found in the ground waters of the southwest. Parts of New England, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Dakotas are also known to have significant concentrations of arsenic in ground water. Increased levels of skin cancer have been associated with arsenic exposure in Wisconsin, even at levels below the 10 part per billion drinking water standard. According to a recent film funded by the US Superfund, millions of private wells have unknown arsenic levels, and in some areas of the US, over 20% of wells may contain levels that exceed established limits. 

Low-level exposure to arsenic at concentrations of 100 parts per billion (i.e., above the 10 parts per billion drinking water standard) compromises the initial immune response to H1N1 or swine flu infection according to NIEHS-supported scientists. The study, conducted in laboratory mice, suggests that people exposed to arsenic in their drinking water may be at increased risk for more serious illness or death in response to infection from the virus. 

Some Canadians are drinking water that contains inorganic arsenic. Private dug well waters are most at risk for containing inorganic arsenic. Preliminary well water analyses typically does not test for arsenic. Researchers at the Geological Survey of Canada have modelled relative variation in natural arsenic hazard potential for the province of New Brunswick. This study has important implications for potable water and health concerns relating to inorganic arsenic. 

Epidemiological evidence from Chile shows a dose-dependent connection between chronic arsenic exposure and various forms of cancer, in particular when other risk factors, such as cigarette smoking, are present. These effects have been demonstrated to persist below 50 ppb. 

Analyzing multiple epidemiological studies on inorganic arsenic exposure suggests a small but measurable risk increase for bladder cancer at 10 ppb. According to Peter Ravenscroft of the Department of Geography at the University of Cambridge, roughly 80 million people worldwide consume between 10 and 50 ppb arsenic in their drinking water. If they all consumed exactly 10 ppb arsenic in their drinking water, the previously cited multiple epidemiological study analysis would predict an additional 2,000 cases of bladder cancer alone. This represents a clear underestimate of the overall impact, since it does not include lung or skin cancer, and explicitly underestimates the exposure. Those exposed to levels of arsenic above the current WHO standard should weigh the costs and benefits of arsenic remediation.

Early (1973) evaluations of the removal of dissolved arsenic by drinking water treatment processes demonstrated that arsenic is very effectively removed by co-precipitation with either iron or aluminum oxides. The use of iron as a coagulant, in particular, was found to remove arsenic with efficiencies exceeding 90%. Several adsorptive media systems have been approved for point-of-service use in a study funded by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) and the National Science Foundation (NSF). A team of European and Indian scientists and engineers have set up six arsenic treatment plants in West Bengal based on in-situ remediation method (SAR Technology). This technology does not use any chemicals and arsenic is left as an insoluble form (+5 state) in the subterranean zone by recharging aerated water into the aquifer and thus developing an oxidation zone to support arsenic oxidizing micro-organisms. This process does not produce any waste stream or sludge and is relatively cheap. 

Another effective and inexpensive method to remove arsenic from contaminated well water is to sink wells 500 feet or deeper to reach purer waters. A recent 2011 study funded by the US National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences' Superfund Research Program shows that deep sediments can remove arsenic and take it out of circulation. Through this process called adsorption in which arsenic sticks to the surfaces of deep sediment particles, arsenic can be naturally removed from well water. 

Magnetic separations of arsenic at very low magnetic field gradients have been demonstrated in point-of-use water purification with high-surface-area and monodisperse magnetite (Fe3O4) nanocrystals. Using the high specific surface area of Fe3O4 nanocrystals the mass of waste associated with arsenic removal from water has been dramatically reduced. 

Epidemiological studies have suggested a correlation between chronic consumption of drinking water contaminated with arsenic and the incidence of all leading causes of mortality. The literature provides reason to believe arsenic exposure is causative in the pathogenesis of diabetes. 

Hungarian engineer Lszl Schremmer has recently discovered that by the use of chaff-based filters it is possible to reduce the arsenic content of water to 3 g/L. This is especially important in areas where the potable water is provided by filtering the water extracted from the underground aquifer. Newspaper article (in Hungarian) published by Magyar Nemzet on 15 April 2012. 

====San Pedro de Atacama====
For several centuries, the people of San Pedro de Atacama in Chile have been drinking water that is contaminated with arsenic, and it is believed that they may have developed some immunity to the ill effects of consuming it. 

===Wood preservation in the US===
As of 2002, US-based industries consumed 19,600 metric tons of arsenic. Ninety percent of this was used for treatment of wood with chromated copper arsenate (CCA). In 2007, 50% of the 5,280 metric tons of consumption was still used for this purpose. In the United States, the voluntary phasing-out of arsenic in production of consumer products and residential and general consumer construction products began on 31 December 2003, and alternative chemicals are now used, such as Alkaline Copper Quaternary, borates, copper azole, cyproconazole, and propiconazole. 

Although discontinued, this application is also one of the most concern to the general public. The vast majority of older pressure-treated wood was treated with CCA. CCA lumber is still in widespread use in many countries, and was heavily used during the latter half of the 20th century as a structural and outdoor building material. Although the use of CCA lumber was banned in many areas after studies showed that arsenic could leach out of the wood into the surrounding soil (from playground equipment, for instance), a risk is also presented by the burning of older CCA timber. The direct or indirect ingestion of wood ash from burnt CCA lumber has caused fatalities in animals and serious poisonings in humans; the lethal human dose is approximately 20 grams of ash. Scrap CCA lumber from construction and demolition sites may be inadvertently used in commercial and domestic fires. Protocols for safe disposal of CCA lumber do not exist evenly throughout the world; there is also concern in some quarters about the widespread landfill disposal of such timber.

===Mapping of industrial releases in the US===
One tool that maps releases of arsenic to particular locations in the United States and also provides additional information about such releases is TOXMAP. TOXMAP is a Geographic Information System (GIS) from the Division of Specialized Information Services of the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) that uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs. TOXMAP is a resource funded by the US Federal Government. TOXMAP's chemical and environmental health information is taken from NLM's Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET) TOXNET  Databases on toxicology, hazardous chemicals, environmental health, and toxic releases. Toxnet.nlm.nih.gov. Retrieved 2011-10-24. and PubMed, and from other authoritative sources.

==Toxicity and precautions==

Arsenic and many of its compounds are especially potent poisons. Many water supplies close to mines are contaminated by these poisons.

===Classification===
Elemental arsenic and arsenic compounds are classified as "toxic" and "dangerous for the environment" in the European Union under directive 67/548/EEC.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) recognizes arsenic and arsenic compounds as group 1 carcinogens, and the EU lists arsenic trioxide, arsenic pentoxide and arsenate salts as category 1 carcinogens.

Arsenic is known to cause poisoning#Arsenicosis: chronic arsenic poisoning from drinking water|arsenicosis] owing to its manifestation in drinking water, "the most common species being arsenate As(V) and arsenite As(III)".

===Legal limits, food, and drink===

In the United States, since 2006, the maximum concentration in drinking water allowed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is 10 ppb Adopted 22 January 2001; effective 23 January 2006. http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/rulesregs/sdwa/arsenic/regulations.cfm and the FDA set the same standard in 2005 for bottled water. The Department of Environmental Protection for New Jersey set a drinking water limit of 5 ppb in 2006. 

In 2008, based on its ongoing testing of a wide variety of American foods for toxic chemicals, Total Diet Study and Toxic Elements Program the U.S. Food and Drug Administration set 23 ppb as the "level of concern" for inorganic arsenic apple and pear juices based on non-carcinogenic effects, and began refusing imports and demanding recalls for domestic products exceeding this level. In 2011, the national Dr. Oz television show broadcast a program highlighting tests performed by an independent lab hired by the producers. Though the methodology was disputed (it did not distinguish between organic and inorganic arsenic) the tests showed levels of arsenic up to 36 ppb. In response, FDA testing of the worst brand from the Oz show showed much lower levels, and its ongoing testing found 95% of apple juice samples were below the level of concern. Later testing by Consumer Reports showed inorganic arsenic at levels slightly above 10 ppb, with the organization urging parents to reduce consumption. In July 2013, after taking into account consumption by children, chronic exposure, and carcinogenic effect, the FDA established an "action level" of 10 ppb for apple juice, the same as the drinking water standard. 

Concern about arsenic in rice in Bangladesh was raised in 2002, but at the time only Australia had a legal limit for the level found in food (one milligram per kilogram). The People's Republic of China has a food standard of 150 ppb for arsenic, as of 2011. Further concern was raised about people who were eating U.S. rice exceeding WHO standards for personal arsenic intake in 2005. 

In the United States in 2012, testing by separate groups of researchers at the Children's Environmental Health and Disease Prevention Research Center at Dartmouth College (early in the year, focusing on urinary levels in children) and Consumer Reports (in November) found levels of arsenic in rice which resulted in calls for the FDA to set limits. Lawmakers Urge FDA to Act on Arsenic Standards. Foodsafetynews.com (2012-02-24). Retrieved 2012-05-23. The FDA released some testing results in September 2012, and as of July 2013 is still collecting data in support of a new potential regulation. It has not recommended any changes in consumer behavior. Consumer Reports recommended that the EPA and FDA eliminate arsenic-containing fertilizer, drugs, and pesticides in food production; that the FDA establish a legal limit for food; that industry change production practices to lower arsenic levels, especially in food for children; and that consumers test home water supplies, eat a varied diet, and cook rice with excess water which is drained off (reducing inorganic arsenic by about one third along with a slight reduction in vitamin content). 

A 2014 World Health Organization advisory conference will consider limits of 200300 ppb for rice. 

===Biological mechanism===
The high affinity of arsenic(III) oxides for thiols is usually assigned as the cause of the high toxicity. Thiols, usually in the form of cysteine residues, but also in cofactors such as lipoic acid and coenzyme A, are situated at the active sites of many important enzymes. 

Arsenic disrupts ATP production through several mechanisms. At the level of the citric acid cycle, arsenic inhibits lipoic acid, which is a cofactor for pyruvate dehydrogenase. In addition, by competing with phosphate, arsenate uncouples oxidative phosphorylation, thus inhibiting energy-linked reduction of NAD+, mitochondrial respiration and ATP synthesis. Hydrogen peroxide production is also increased, which, it is speculated, has potential to form reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress. These metabolic interferences lead to death from multi-system organ failure. The organ failure is presumed to be from necrotic cell death, not apoptosis, since energy reserves have been too depleted for apoptosis to occur. 

Although arsenic causes toxicity, it can also play a protective role. 

===Exposure risks and remediation===
Occupational exposure and arsenic poisoning may occur in persons working in industries involving the use of inorganic arsenic and its compounds, such as wood preservation, glass production, nonferrous metal alloys, and electronic semiconductor manufacturing. Inorganic arsenic is also found in coke oven emissions associated with the smelter industry. 

The ability of arsenic to undergo redox conversion between As(III) and As(V) makes its availability in the environment more abundant. According to Croal, Gralnick, Malasarn and Newman, " understanding what stimulates As(III) oxidation and/or limits As(V) reduction is relevant for bioremediation of contaminated sites (Croal). The study of chemolithoautotrophic As(III) oxidizers and the heterotrophic As(V) reducers can help the understanding of the oxidation and/or reduction of arsenic. It has been proposed that As (III) which is more toxic than Arsenic (V) can be removed from the ground water using baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 

===Treatment===
Treatment of chronic arsenic poisoning is easily accomplished. British anti-lewisite (dimercaprol) is prescribed in doses of 5 mg/kg up to 300 mg every 4 hours for the first day, then every 6 hours for the second day, and finally every 8 hours for 8 additional days. However the USA's Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) states that the long-term effects of arsenic exposure cannot be predicted. Blood, urine, hair, and nails may be tested for arsenic; however, these tests cannot foresee possible health outcomes from the exposure. Excretion occurs in the urine and long-term exposure to arsenic has been linked to bladder and kidney cancer in addition to cancer of the liver, prostate, skin, lungs, and nasal cavity. The Tox Guide for Arsenic (2007). The US Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. 

==See also==

* Aqua Tofana
* Arsenic biochemistry
* Arsenic compounds
* Arsenic poisoning
* Arsenic toxicity
* Arsenic trioxide
* Fowler's solution
* GFAJ-1
* Grainger challenge
* Hypothetical types of biochemistry
* Organoarsenic chemistry
* White arsenic

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* CTD's Arsenic page and CTD's Arsenicals page from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database
* A Small Dose of Toxicology
* Arsenic in groundwater Book on arsenic in groundwater by IAH's Netherlands Chapter and the Netherlands Hydrological Society
* Contaminant Focus: Arsenic by the EPA.
* Environmental Health Criteria for Arsenic and Arsenic Compounds, 2001 by the WHO.
* Evaluation of the carcinogenicity of arsenic and arsenic compounds by the IARC.
* National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  Arsenic Page
* Arsenic at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)

 



[[Antimony]]

Antimony is a chemical element with symbol Sb (from ) and atomic number 51. A lustrous gray metalloid, it is found in nature mainly as the sulfide mineral stibnite (Sb2S3). Antimony compounds have been known since ancient times and were used for cosmetics; metallic antimony was also known, but it was erroneously identified as lead. It was first isolated by Vannoccio Biringuccio and described in 1540.

For some time, China has been the largest producer of antimony and its compounds, with most production coming from the Xikuangshan Mine in Hunan. The industrial methods to produce antimony are roasting and subsequent carbothermal reduction or direct reduction of stibnite with iron.

The largest applications for metallic antimony are as alloying material for lead and tin and for lead antimony plates in lead-acid batteries. Alloying lead and tin with antimony improves the properties of the alloys which are used in solders, bullets and plain bearings. Antimony compounds are prominent additives for chlorine- and bromine-containing fire retardants found in many commercial and domestic products. An emerging application is the use of antimony in microelectronics.

==Characteristics==

===Properties===
A vial containing the black allotrope of antimony
Native antimony with oxidation products
Crystal structure common to Sb, AsSb and gray As
Antimony is in the nitrogen group (group 15) and has an electronegativity of 2.05. As expected from periodic trends, it is more electronegative than tin or bismuth, and less electronegative than tellurium or arsenic. Antimony is stable in air at room temperature, but reacts with oxygen if heated, to form antimony trioxide, Sb2O3. 

Antimony is a silvery, lustrous gray metal that has a Mohs scale hardness of 3. Thus pure antimony is too soft to make hard objects; coins made of antimony were issued in China's Guizhou province in 1931, but because of their rapid wear, their minting was discontinued. Antimony is resistant to attack by acids.

Four allotropes of antimony are known: a stable metallic form and three metastable forms (explosive, black and yellow). Metallic antimony is a brittle, silver-white shiny metal. When slowly cooled, molten antimony crystallizes in a trigonal cell, isomorphic with the gray allotrope of arsenic. A rare explosive form of antimony can be formed from the electrolysis of antimony trichloride. When scratched with a sharp implement, an exothermic reaction occurs and white fumes are given off as metallic antimony is formed; when rubbed with a pestle in a mortar, a strong detonation occurs. Black antimony is formed upon rapid cooling of vapor derived from metallic antimony. It has the same crystal structure as red phosphorus and black arsenic, it oxidizes in air and may ignite spontaneously. At 100C, it gradually transforms into the stable form. The yellow allotrope of antimony is the most unstable. It has only been generated by oxidation of stibine (SbH3) at 90C. Above this temperature and in ambient light, this metastable allotrope transforms into the more stable black allotrope. 

Metallic antimony adopts a layered structure (space group Rm No. 166) in which layers consist of fused ruffled six-membered rings. The nearest and next-nearest neighbors form an irregular octahedral complex, with the three atoms in the same double layer being slightly closer than the three atoms in the next. This relatively close packing leads to a high density of 6.697 g/cm3, but the weak bonding between the layers leads to the low hardness and brittleness of antimony. 

===Isotopes===

Antimony has two stable isotopes: 121Sb with a natural abundance of 57.36% and 123Sb with a natural abundance of 42.64%. It also has 35 radioisotopes, of which the longest-lived is 125Sb with a half-life of 2.75 years. In addition, 29 metastable states have been characterized. The most stable of these is 120m1Sb with a half-life of 5.76 days. Isotopes that are lighter than the stable 123Sb tend to decay by + decay, and those that are heavier tend to decay by - decay, with some exceptions. 

===Occurrence===

Stibnite
The abundance of antimony in the Earth's crust is estimated at 0.2 to 0.5 parts per million, comparable to thallium at 0.5 parts per million and silver at 0.07 ppm. Even though this element is not abundant, it is found in over 100 mineral species. Antimony is sometimes found natively, but more frequently it is found in the sulfide stibnite (Sb2S3) which is the predominant ore mineral. 

==Compounds==

Antimony compounds are often classified according to their oxidation state: Sb(III) and Sb(V). Relative to its congener arsenic, the +5 oxidation state is more stable.

===Oxides and hydroxides===
Antimony trioxide () is formed when antimony is burnt in air. In the gas phase, this compound exists as , but it polymerizes upon condensing. Antimony pentoxide () can only be formed by oxidation by concentrated nitric acid. Antimony also forms a mixed-valence oxide, antimony tetroxide (), which features both Sb(III) and Sb(V). Unlike phosphorus and arsenic, these various oxides are amphoteric, do not form well-defined oxoacids and react with acids to form antimony salts.

Antimonous acid is unknown, but the conjugate base sodium antimonite () forms upon fusing sodium oxide and . Transition metal antimonites are also known. Antimonic acid exists only as the hydrate , forming salts containing the antimonate anion . Dehydrating metal salts containing this anion yields mixed oxides. 

Many antimony ores are sulfides, including stibnite (), pyrargyrite (), zinkenite, jamesonite, and boulangerite. Antimony pentasulfide is non-stoichiometric and features antimony in the +3 oxidation state and S-S bonds. Several thioantimonides are known, such as and . 

===Halides===
Antimony forms two series of halides: and . The trihalides trifluoride|], trichloride|], tribromide|], and triiodide|] are all molecular compounds having trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry.

The trifluoride trifluoride|] is prepared by the reaction of trioxide|] with HF: 
: + 6 HF  2 + 3 

It is Lewis acidic and readily accepts fluoride ions to form the complex anions and . Molten trifluoride|] is a weak electrical conductor. The trichloride trichloride|] is prepared by dissolving [[stibnite|]] in hydrochloric acid:
: + 6 HCl  2 + 3 
Structure of gaseous SbF5

The pentahalides pentafluoride|] and pentachloride|] have trigonal bipyramidal molecular geometry in the gas phase, but in the liquid phase, pentafluoride|] is polymeric, whereas pentachloride|] is monomeric. pentafluoride|] is a powerful Lewis acid used to make the superacid fluoroantimonic acid ("H2SbF7").

Oxyhalides are more common for antimony than arsenic and phosphorus. Antimony trioxide dissolves in concentrated acid to form oxoantimonyl compounds such as SbOCl and . 

===Antimonides, hydrides, and organoantimony compounds===
Compounds in this class generally are described as derivatives of Sb3-. Antimony forms antimonides with metals, such as indium antimonide (InSb) and silver antimonide (). The alkali metal and zinc antimonides, such as Na3Sb and Zn3Sb2, are more reactive. Treating these antimonides with acid produces the unstable gas stibine, : 
: + 3  
Stibine can also be produced by treating salts with hydride reagents such as sodium borohydride.Stibine decomposes spontaneously at room temperature. Because stibine has a positive heat of formation, it is thermodynamically unstable and thus antimony does not react with hydrogen directly. Greenwood, N. N.; & Earnshaw, A. (1997). Chemistry of the Elements (2nd Edn.), Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 0-7506-3365-4. 

Organoantimony compounds are typically prepared by alkylation of antimony halides with Grignard reagents. Elschenbroich, C. "Organometallics" (2006) Wiley-VCH: Weinheim. ISBN 3-527-29390-6 A large variety of compounds are known with both Sb(III) and Sb(V) centers, including mixed chloro-organic derivatives, anions, and cations. Examples include Sb(C6H5)3 (triphenylstibine), Sb2(C6H5)4 (with an Sb-Sb bond), and cyclic n. Pentacoordinated organoantimony compounds are common, examples being Sb(C6H5)5 and several related halides.

==History==
One of the alchemical symbols for antimony
Antimony(III) sulfide, Sb2S3, was recognized in predynastic Egypt as an eye cosmetic (kohl) as early as about 3100 BC, when the cosmetic palette was invented. 

An artifact, said to be part of a vase, made of antimony dating to about 3000 BC was found at Telloh, Chaldea (part of present-day Iraq), and a copper object plated with antimony dating between 2500 BC and 2200 BC has been found in Egypt. Austen, at a lecture by Herbert Gladstone in 1892 commented that "we only know of antimony at the present day as a highly brittle and crystalline metal, which could hardly be fashioned into a useful vase, and therefore this remarkable 'find' (artifact mentioned above) must represent the lost art of rendering antimony malleable." 

Moorey was unconvinced the artifact was indeed a vase, mentioning that Selimkhanov, after his analysis of the Tello object (published in 1975), "attempted to relate the metal to Transcaucasian natural antimony" (i.e. native metal) and that "the antimony objects from Transcaucasia are all small personal ornaments." This weakens the evidence for a lost art "of rendering antimony malleable." 

The Greek scholar Pliny the Elder described several ways of preparing antimony sulfide for medical purposes in his treatise Natural history. Pliny the Elder also made a distinction between 'male' and 'female' forms of antimony; the male form is probably the sulfide, while the female form, which is superior, heavier, and less friable, has been suspected to be native metallic antimony. Pliny, Natural history, 33.33; W.H.S. Jones, the Loeb Classical Library translator, supplies a note suggesting the identifications. 

The Roman naturalist Pedanius Dioscorides mentioned that antimony sulfide could be roasted by heating by a current of air. It is thought that this produced metallic antimony. 

The italian metallurgist Vannoccio Biringuccio described the first procedure of how to isolate antimony.

The first description of a procedure for isolating antimony is in the book De la pirotechnia of 1540 by Vannoccio Biringuccio; this predates the more famous 1556 book by Agricola, De re metallica. In this context Agricola has been often incorrectly credited with the discovery of metallic antimony. The book Currus Triumphalis Antimonii (The Triumphal Chariot of Antimony), describing the preparation of metallic antimony, was published in Germany in 1604. It was purported to have been written by a Benedictine monk, writing under the name Basilius Valentinus, in the 15th century; if it were authentic, which it is not, it would predate Biringuccio. s.v. "Basilius Valentinus." Harold Jantz was perhaps the only modern scholar to deny Thlde's authorship, but he too agrees the work dates from after 1550: see his catalogue of German Baroque literature. 

The metal antimony was known to German chemist Andreas Libavius in 1615 who obtained it by adding iron to a molten mixture of antimony sulfide, salt and potassium tartrate. This procedure produced antimony with a crystalline or starred surface. 

With the advent of challenges to phlogiston theory it was recognized that antimony is an element forming sulfides, oxides etc as is the case of other metals. 

The first natural occurrence of pure antimony in the Earth's crust was described by the Swedish scientist and local mine district engineer Anton von Swab in 1783; the type-sample was collected from the Sala Silver Mine in the Bergslagen mining district of Sala, Vstmanland, Sweden. 

===Etymology===
The ancient words for antimony mostly have, as their chief meaning, kohl, the sulfide of antimony. 

The Egyptians called antimony mdmt; in hieroglyphs, the vowels are uncertain, but there is an Arabic tradition that the word is  mesdemet. quotes Meyerhof, the translator of the book he is reviewing. The Greek word,  stimmi, is probably a loan word from Arabic or Egyptian sdm O34:D46-G17-F21:D4 and is used by Attic tragic poets of the 5th century BC; later Greeks also used  stibi, as did Celsus and Pliny, writing in Latin, in the first century AD. Pliny also gives the names stimi , larbaris, alabaster, and the "very common" platyophthalmos, "wide-eye" (from the effect of the cosmetic). Later Latin authors adapted the word to Latin as stibium. The Arabic word for the substance, as opposed to the cosmetic, can appear as  ithmid, athmoud, othmod, or uthmod. Littr suggests the first form, which is the earliest, derives from stimmida, an accusative for stimmi. LSJ, s.v., vocalisation, spelling, and declension vary; Endlich, p. 28; Celsus, 6.6.6 ff; Pliny Natural History 33.33; Lewis and Short: Latin Dictionary. OED, s. "antimony". 

The use of Sb as the standard chemical symbol for antimony is due to Jns Jakob Berzelius, who used this abbreviation of the name stibium. In his long article on chemical reactions and nomenclature  Jns Jacob Berzelius, "Essay on the cause of chemical proportions, and on some circumstances relating to them: together with a short and easy method of expressing them," Annals of Philosophy, vol. 2, pages 443454 (1813) and vol. 3, pages 5162, 93106, 244255, 353364 (1814)  on page 52, Berzelius lists the symbol for antimony as "St"; however, starting on page 248, Berzelius subsequently uses the symbol "Sb" for antimony. The medieval Latin form, from which the modern languages and late Byzantine Greek take their names for antimony, is antimonium. The origin of this is uncertain; all suggestions have some difficulty either of form or interpretation. The popular etymology, from  anti-monachos or French antimoine, still has adherents; this would mean "monk-killer", and is explained by many early alchemists being monks, and antimony being poisonous. The use of a symbol resembling an upside down "female" symbol for antimony could also hint at a satirical pun in this origin 

Another popular etymology is the hypothetical Greek word  antimonos, "against aloneness", explained as "not found as metal", or "not found unalloyed". Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 5th ed. 2004. Entry for antimony. Fernando even derives it from the story of how "Basil Valentine" and his fellow monastic alchemists poisoned themselves by working with antimony; antimonium is found two centuries before his time. "Popular etymology" from OED; as for antimonos, the pure negative would be more naturally expressed by a- "not". Lippmann conjectured a hypothetical Greek word  anthemonion, which would mean "floret", and cites several examples of related Greek words (but not that one) which describe chemical or biological efflorescence. Lippman, pp. 6435 

The early uses of antimonium include the translations, in 10501100, by Constantine the African of Arabic medical treatises. Lippman, p. 642, writing in 1919, says "zuerst". Several authorities believe antimonium is a scribal corruption of some Arabic form; Meyerhof derives it from ithmid; Meyerhof as quoted in Sarton, asserts that ithmid or athmoud became corrupted in the medieval "traductions barbaro-latines".; the OED asserts some Arabic form is the origin, and if ithmid is the root, posits athimodium, atimodium, atimonium, as intermediate forms. other possibilities include athimar, the Arabic name of the metalloid, and a hypothetical as-stimmi, derived from or parallel to the Greek. Endlich, p. 28; one of the advantages of as-stimmi would be that it has a whole syllable in common with antimonium. 

==Production==
World antimony output in 2010. 
World production trend of antimony.

===Top producers and production volumes===
The British Geological Survey reported that in 2005, the People's Republic of China was the top producer of antimony with an approximately 84% world share, followed at a distance by South Africa, Bolivia and Tajikistan. Xikuangshan Mine in Hunan province has the largest deposits in China with an estimated deposit of 2.1 million metric tons. 

In 2010, according to the US Geological Survey, China accounted for 88.9% of total antimony production with South Africa, Bolivia and Russia sharing the second place.

+Antimony production in 2010 Country Tonnes % of total 
 People's Republic of China 120,000 88.9 
 South Africa 3,000 2.2 
 Bolivia 3,000 2.2 
 Russia 3,000 2.2 
 Tajikistan 2,000 1.5 
 Top 5 131,000 97.0 
 Total world 135,000 100.0 

However, Roskill Consulting estimates for primary production show that in 2010 China held a 76.75% share of world's supply with 120,462 tonnes (90,000 tonnes of reported and 30,464 tonnes of un-reported production), followed by Russia (4.14% share, 6,500 tonnes of production), Myanmar (3.76% share, 5,897 tonnes), Canada (3.61% share, 5,660 tonnes), Tajikistan (3.42% share, 5,370 tonnes) and Bolivia (3.17% share, 4,980 tonnes). 

Roskill estimates that secondary production globally in 2010 was 39,540 tonnes. 

Antimony was ranked first in a Risk List published by the British Geological Survey in the second half 2011. The list provides an indication of the relative risk to the supply of chemical elements or element groups required to maintain the current British economy and lifestyle. 

Also, antimony was identified as one of 12 critical raw materials for the EU in a report published in 2011, primarily due to the lack of supply outside China. 

Reported production of antimony in China fell in 2010 and is unlikely to increase in the coming years, according to the Roskill report. No significant antimony deposits in China have been developed for about ten years, and the remaining economic reserves are being rapidly depleted. 

The world's largest antimony producers, according to Roskill, are listed below:

+Largest antimony producers in 2010. Antimony Uses, Production and Prices Primer. tri-starresources.com Country Company Capacity (tonnes per year) 
 Australia Mandalay Resources 2,750 
 Bolivia various 5,460 
 Canada Beaver Brook 6,000 
 China Hsikwangshan Twinkling Star 55,000 
 China Hunan Chenzhou Mining 20,000 
 China China Tin Group 20,000 
 China Shenyang Huachang Antimony 15,000 
 Kazakhstan Kazzinc 1,000 
 Kyrgyzstan Kadamdzhai 500 
 Laos SRS 500 
 Mexico US Antimony 70 
 Myanmar various 6,000 
 Russia GeoProMining 6,500 
 South Africa Consolidated Murchison 6,000 
 Tajikistan Unzob 5,500 
 Thailand unknown 600 
 Turkey Cengiz & zdemir Antimuan Madenleri 2,400 

===Reserves===
According to statistics from the US Geological Survey (USGS), current global reserves of antimony will be depleted in 13 years. However, the United States Geological Survey expects more resources will be found.

+World antimony reserves in 2010 Country Reserves (tonnes of antimony content) % of total 
 People's Republic of China 950,000 51.88 
 Russia 350,000 19.12 
 Bolivia 310,000 16.93 
 Tajikistan 50,000 2.73 
 South Africa 21,000 1.15 
 Other countries 150,000 8.19 
 Total world 1,831,000 100.0 

===Production process===
The extraction of antimony from ores depends on the quality of the ore and composition of the ore. Most antimony is mined as the sulfide; lower grade ores are concentrated by froth flotation, while higher grade ores are heated to 500600 C, the temperature at which stibnite melts and is separated from the gangue minerals. Antimony can be isolated from the crude antimony sulfide by a reduction with scrap iron: 

: + 3 Fe  2 Sb + 3 FeS

The sulfide is converted to an oxide and advantage is often taken of the volatility of antimony(III) oxide, which is recovered from roasting. This material is often used directly for the main applications, impurities being arsenic and sulfide. 
Isolating antimony from its oxide is performed by a carbothermal reduction: 

:2 + 3 C  4 Sb + 3 

The lower grade ores are reduced in blast furnaces while the higher grade ores are reduced in reverberatory furnaces. 

==Applications==
About 60% of antimony is consumed in flame retardants, and 20% is used in alloys for batteries, plain bearings and solders. 

===Flame retardants===
Antimony is mainly used as its trioxide in making flame-proofing compounds. It is nearly always used in combination with halogenated flame retardants, with the only exception being in halogen-containing polymers. The formation of halogenated antimony compounds is the cause for the flame retarding effect of antimony trioxide, due to reaction of these compounds with hydrogen atoms and probably also with oxygen atoms and OH radicals, thus inhibiting fire. Markets for these flame-retardant applications include children's clothing, toys, aircraft and automobile seat covers. It is also used in the fiberglass composites industry as an additive to polyester resins for such items as light aircraft engine covers. The resin will burn while a flame is held to it but will extinguish itself as soon as the flame is removed. Grund, Sabina C.; Hanusch, Kunibert; Breunig, Hans J.; Wolf, Hans Uwe (2006) "Antimony and Antimony Compounds" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. 

===Alloys===
Antimony forms a highly useful alloy with lead, increasing its hardness and mechanical strength. For most applications involving lead, varying amounts of antimony are used as alloying metal. In leadacid batteries, this addition improves the charging characteristics and reduces generation of unwanted hydrogen during charging. It is used in antifriction alloys (such as Babbitt metal), in bullets and lead shot, cable sheathing, type metal (for example, for linotype printing machines ), solder (some "lead-free" solders contain 5% Sb), in pewter, and in hardening alloys with low tin content in the manufacturing of organ pipes.

===Other applications===
Three other applications make up nearly all the rest of the consumption. One of these uses is as a stabilizer and a catalyst for the production of polyethyleneterephthalate. Another application is to serve as a fining agent to remove microscopic bubbles in glass, mostly for TV screens; this is achieved by the interaction of antimony ions with oxygen, interfering the latter from forming bubbles. The third major application is the use as pigment. 

Antimony is being increasingly used in the semiconductor industry as a dopant for heavily doped n-type silicon wafers in the production of diodes, infrared detectors, and Hall-effect devices. In the 1950s, tiny beads of a lead-antimony alloy were used to dope the emitters and collectors of n-p-n alloy junction transistors with antimony. Indium antimonide is used as a material for mid-infrared detectors. 

Few biological or medical applications exist for antimony. Treatments principally containing antimony are known as antimonials and are used as emetics. Antimony compounds are used as antiprotozoan drugs. Potassium antimonyl tartrate, or tartar emetic, was once used as an anti-schistosomal drug from 1919 on. It was subsequently replaced by praziquantel. Antimony and its compounds are used in several veterinary preparations like anthiomaline or lithium antimony thiomalate, which is used as a skin conditioner in ruminants. Antimony has a nourishing or conditioning effect on keratinized tissues, at least in animals.

Antimony-based drugs, such as meglumine antimoniate, are also considered the drugs of choice for treatment of leishmaniasis in domestic animals. Unfortunately, as well as having low therapeutic indices, the drugs are poor at penetrating the bone marrow, where some of the Leishmania amastigotes reside, and so cure of the disease  especially the visceral form  is very difficult. Elemental antimony as an antimony pill was once used as a medicine. It could be reused by others after ingestion and elimination. 

In the heads of some safety matches, antimony(III) sulfide is used. Antimony-124 is used together with beryllium in neutron sources; the gamma rays emitted by antimony-124 initiate the photodisintegration of beryllium. The emitted neutrons have an average energy of 24 keV. Antimony sulfides have been shown to help stabilize the friction coefficient in automotive brake pad materials. 

Antimony also is used in the making of bullets and bullet tracers. This element is also used in traditional cosmetics, event paint and glass art crafts. An application as an opacifier in enamel declined in use after the 1930s, after several intoxications were reported. 

==Precautions==
Antimony and many of its compounds are toxic, and the effects of antimony poisoning are similar to arsenic poisoning. The toxicity of antimony is far lower than that of arsenic; this might be caused by the significant differences of uptake, metabolism and excretion between arsenic and antimony. The uptake of antimony(III) or antimony(V) in the gastrointestinal tract is at most 20%. Antimony(V) is not quantitatively reduced to antimony(III) in the cell (in fact antimony(III) is oxidised to antimony(V) instead ).

Since methylation of antimony does not occur, the excretion of antimony(V) in urine is the main way of elimination. Like arsenic, the most serious effect of acute antimony poisoning is cardiotoxicity and the resulted myocarditis, however it can also manifest as AdamsStokes syndrome which arsenic doesn't. Reported cases of intoxication by antimony equivalent to 90 mg antimony potassium tartrate dissolved from enamel has been reported to show only short term effects. An intoxication with 6 g of antimony potassium tartrate was reported to result in death after 3 days. 

Inhalation of antimony dust is harmful and in certain cases may be fatal; in small doses, antimony causes headaches, dizziness, and depression. Larger doses such as prolonged skin contact may cause dermatitis, or damage the kidneys and the liver, causing violent and frequent vomiting, leading to death in a few days. 

Antimony is incompatible with strong oxidizing agents, strong acids, halogen acids, chlorine, or fluorine. It should be kept away from heat. Antimony MSDS. Baker 

Antimony leaches from polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles into liquids. While levels observed for bottled water are below drinking water guidelines, fruit juice concentrates (for which no guidelines are established) produced in the UK were found to contain up to 44.7 g/L of antimony, well above the EU limits for tap water of 5 g/L. The guidelines are:
* World Health Organization: 20 g/L
* Japan: 15 g/L Wakayama, Hiroshi, "Revision of Drinking Water Standards in Japan", Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (Japan), 2003; Table 2, p. 84 
* United States Environmental Protection Agency, Health Canada and the Ontario Ministry of Environment: 6 g/L
* German Federal Ministry of Environment: 5 g/L 

==See also==

* Phase change memory

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* Edmund Oscar von Lippmann (1919) Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Alchemie, teil 1. Berlin: Julius Springer (in German).
* Public Health Statement for Antimony

==External links==

* Chemistry in its element podcast (MP3) from the Royal Society of Chemistry's Chemistry World: Antimony
* Antimony at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* National Pollutant Inventory  Antimony and compounds
* CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards - Antimony

*



[[Actinium]]

Actinium is a radioactive chemical element with symbol Ac (not to be confused with the abbreviation for an acetyl group) and atomic number 89, which was discovered in 1899. It was the first non-primordial radioactive element to be isolated. Polonium, radium and radon were observed before actinium, but they were not isolated until 1902. Actinium gave the name to the actinide series, a group of 15 similar elements between actinium and lawrencium in the periodic table.

A soft, silvery-white radioactive metal, actinium reacts rapidly with oxygen and moisture in air forming a white coating of actinium oxide that prevents further oxidation. As with most lanthanides and actinides, actinium assumes oxidation state +3 in nearly all its chemical compounds. Actinium is found only in traces in uranium ores as the isotope 227Ac, which decays with a half-life of 21.772 years, predominantly emitting beta particles. One tonne of uranium ore contains about 0.2 milligrams of actinium. The close similarity of physical and chemical properties of actinium and lanthanum makes separation of actinium from the ore impractical. Instead, the element is prepared, in milligram amounts, by the neutron irradiation of 226 in a nuclear reactor. Owing to its scarcity, high price and radioactivity, actinium has no significant industrial use. Its current applications include a neutron source and an agent for radiation therapy targeting cancer cells in the body.

==History==
Andr-Louis Debierne, a French chemist, announced the discovery of a new element in 1899. He separated it from pitchblende residues left by Marie and Pierre Curie after they had extracted radium. In 1899, Debierne described the substance as similar to titanium and (in 1900) as similar to thorium. Friedrich Oskar Giesel independently discovered actinium in 1902 as a substance being similar to lanthanum and called it "emanium" in 1904. After a comparison of the substances half-lives determined by Debierne, Hariett Brooks in 1904, and Otto Hahn and Otto Sackur in 1905, Debierne's chosen name for the new element was retained because it had seniority. 

Articles published in the 1970s and later suggest that Debierne's results published in 1904 conflict with those reported in 1899 and 1900. This has led some authors to advocate that Giesel alone should be credited with the discovery. A less confrontational vision of scientific discovery is proposed by Adloff. He suggests that hindsight criticism of the early publications should be mitigated by the nascent state of radiochemistry: highlighting the prudence of Debierne's claims in the original papers, he notes that nobody can contend that Debierne's substance did not contain actinium. Debierne, who is now considered by the vast majority of historians as the discoverer, lost interest in the element and left the topic. Giesel, on the other hand, can rightfully be credited with the first preparation of radiochemically pure actinium and with the identification of its atomic number 89.

The name actinium originates from the Ancient Greek aktis, aktinos (, ), meaning beam or ray. Its symbol Ac is also used in abbreviations of other compounds that have nothing to do with actinium, such as acetyl, acetate and sometimes acetaldehyde. 

==Properties==
Actinium is a soft, silvery-white, Actinium, in Encyclopdia Britannica, 15th edition, 1995, p. 70 radioactive, metallic element. Its estimated shear modulus is similar to that of lead. Frederick Seitz, David Turnbull Solid state physics: advances in research and applications, Academic Press, 1964 ISBN 0-12-607716-9 pp. 289291 Owing to its strong radioactivity, actinium glows in the dark with a pale blue light, which originates from the surrounding air ionized by the emitted energetic particles. Actinium has similar chemical properties as lanthanum and other lanthanides, and therefore these elements are difficult to separate when extracting from uranium ores. Solvent extraction and ion chromatography are commonly used for the separation. 

The first element of the actinides, actinium gave the group its name, much as lanthanum had done for the lanthanides. The group of elements is more diverse than the lanthanides and therefore it was not until 1945 that Glenn T. Seaborg proposed the most significant change to Dmitri Mendeleev's periodic table, by introducing the actinides. 

Actinium reacts rapidly with oxygen and moisture in air forming a white coating of actinium oxide that prevents further oxidation. As with most lanthanides and actinides, actinium exists in the oxidation state +3, and the Ac3+ ions are colorless in solutions. The oxidation state +3 originates from the 6d17s2 electronic configuration of actinium, that is it easily donates 3 electrons assuming a stable closed-shell structure of the noble gas radon. The rare oxidation state +2 is only known for actinium dihydride (AcH2). 

==Chemical compounds==
Only a limited number of actinium compounds are known including AcF3, AcCl3, AcBr3, AcOF, AcOCl, AcOBr, Ac2S3, Ac2O3 and AcPO4. Except for AcPO4, they are all similar to the corresponding lanthanum compounds and contain actinium in the oxidation state +3. In particular, the lattice constants of the analogous lanthanum and actinium compounds differ by only a few percent. 

 Formula color symmetry space group No Pearson symbol a (pm) b (pm) c (pm) Z density, g/cm3 
 Ac silvery fcc Fmm 225 cF4 531.1 531.1 531.1 4 10.07 
 AcH2 cubic Fmm 225 cF12 567 567 567 4 8.35 
 Ac2O3 white trigonal Pm1 164 hP5 408 408 630 1 9.18 
 Ac2S3 cubic I3d 220 cI28 778.56 778.56 778.56 4 6.71 
 AcF3 white Meyer, p. 71 hexagonal Pc1 165 hP24 741 741 755 6 7.88 
 AcCl3 hexagonal P63/m 165 hP8 764 764 456 2 4.8 
 AcBr3 white hexagonal P63/m 165 hP8 764 764 456 2 5.85 
 AcOF white cubic Fmm 593.1 8.28 
 AcOCl tetragonal 424 424 707 7.23 
 AcOBr tetragonal 427 427 740 7.89 
 AcPO40.5H2O hexagonal 721 721 664 5.48 

Here a, b and c are lattice constants, No is space group number and Z is the number of formula units per unit cell. Density was not measured directly but calculated from the lattice parameters.

===Oxides===
Actinium oxide (Ac2O3) can be obtained by heating the hydroxide at 500 C or the oxalate at 1100 C, in vacuum. It crystal lattice is isotypic with the oxides of most trivalent rare-earth metals. 

===Halides===
Actinium trifluoride can be produced either in solution or in solid reaction. The former reaction is carried out at room temperature, by adding hydrofluoric acid to a solution containing actinium ions. In the latter method, actinium metal is treated with hydrogen fluoride vapors at 700 C in an all-platinum setup. Treating actinium trifluoride with ammonium hydroxide at 9001000 C yields oxyfluoride AcOF. Whereas lanthanum oxyfluoride can be easily obtained by burning lanthanum trifluoride in air at 800 C for an hour, similar treatment of actinium trifluoride yields no AcOF and only results in melting of the initial product. Meyer, pp. 8788 

:AcF3 + 2 NH3 + H2O  AcOF + 2 NH4F

Actinium trichloride is obtained by reacting actinium hydroxide or oxalate with carbon tetrachloride vapors at temperatures above 960 C. Similar to oxyfluoride, actinium oxychloride can be prepared by hydrolyzing actinium trichloride with ammonium hydroxide at 1000 C. However, in contrast to the oxyfluoride, the oxychloride could well be synthesized by igniting a solution of actinium trichloride in hydrochloric acid with ammonia. 

Reaction of aluminium bromide and actinium oxide yields actinium tribromide:
:Ac2O3 + 2 AlBr3  2 AcBr3 + Al2O3

and treating it with ammonium hydroxide at 500 C results in the oxybromide AcOBr. 

===Other compounds===
Actinium hydride was obtained by reduction of actinium trichloride with potassium at 300 C, and its structure was deduced by analogy with the corresponding LaH2 hydride. The source of hydrogen in the reaction was uncertain. Meyer, p. 43 

Mixing monosodium phosphate (NaH2PO4) with a solution of actinium in hydrochloric acid yields white-colored actinium phosphate hemihydrate (AcPO40.5H2O), and heating actinium oxalate with hydrogen sulfide vapors at 1400 C for a few minutes results in a black actinium sulfide Ac2S3. It may possibly be produced by acting with a mixture of hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide on actinium oxide at 1000 C. 

==Isotopes==

Naturally occurring actinium is composed of one radioactive isotope; . Thirty-six radioisotopes have been identified, the most stable being with a half-life of 21.772 years, with a half-life of 10.0 days and with a half-life of 29.37 hours. All remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 10 hours and the majority of them have half-lives shorter than one minute. The shortest-lived known isotope of actinium is (half-life of 69 nanoseconds) which decays through alpha decay and electron capture. Actinium also has two meta states. 

Purified comes into equilibrium with its decay products at the end of 185 days. It decays according to its 21.772-year half-life emitting mostly beta (98.8%) and some alpha particles (1.2%); Actinium, Great Soviet Encyclopedia (in Russian) the successive decay products are part of the actinium series. Owing to the low available amounts, low energy of its beta particles (46 keV) and low intensity of alpha radiation, is difficult to detect directly by its emission and it is therefore traced via its decay products. The isotopes of actinium range in atomic weight from 206 u () to 236 u (). 

Isotope Production Decay Half-life 
 221Ac 232Th(d,9n)225Pa()221Ac  52 ms 
 222Ac 232Th(d,8n)226Pa()222Ac  5.0 s 
 223Ac 232Th(d,7n)227Pa()223Ac  2.1 min 
 224Ac 232Th(d,6n)228Pa()224Ac  2.78 hours 
 225Ac 232Th(n,)233Th()233Pa()233U()229Th()225Ra()225Ac  10 days 
 226Ac 226Ra(d,2n)226Ac ,  electron capture 29.37 hours 
 227Ac 235U()231Th()231Pa()227Ac ,  21.77 years 
 228Ac 232Th()228Ra()228Ac  6.15 hours 
 229Ac 228Ra(n,)229Ra()229Ac  62.7 min 
 230Ac 232Th(d,)230Ac  122 s 
 231Ac 232Th(,p)231Ac  7.5 min 
 232Ac 232Th(n,p)232Ac  119 s 

==Occurrence and synthesis==
Uraninite ores have elevated concentrations of actinium.
Actinium is found only in traces in uranium ores as 227Ac  one tonne of ore contains about 0.2 milligrams of actinium. The actinium isotope 227Ac is a transient member of the actinium series decay chain, which begins with the parent isotope 235U (or 239Pu) and ends with the stable lead isotope 207Pb. Another actinium isotope (225Ac) is transiently present in the neptunium series decay chain, beginning with 237Np (or 233U) and ending with thallium (205Tl) and near-stable bismuth (209Bi).

The low natural concentration, and the close similarity of physical and chemical properties to those of lanthanum and other lanthanides, which are always abundant in actinium-bearing ores, render separation of actinium from the ore impractical, and complete separation was never achieved. Instead, actinium is prepared, in milligram amounts, by the neutron irradiation of 226 in a nuclear reactor. 

:

The reaction yield is about 2% of the radium weight. 227Ac can further capture neutrons resulting in small amounts of 228Ac. After the synthesis, actinium is separated from radium and from the products of decay and nuclear fusion, such as thorium, polonium, lead and bismuth. The extraction can be performed with thenoyltrifluoroacetone-benzene solution from an aqueous solution of the radiation products, and the selectivity to a certain element is achieved by adjusting the pH (to about 6.0 for actinium). An alternative procedure is anion exchange with an appropriate resin in nitric acid, which can result in a separation factor of 1,000,000 for radium and actinium vs. thorium in a two-stage process. Actinium can then be separated from radium, with a ratio of about 100, using a low cross-linking cation exchange resin and nitric acid as eluant. 

225Ac was first produced artificially at the Institute for Transuranium Elements (ITU) in Germany using a cyclotron and at St George Hospital in Sydney using a linac in 2000. This rare isotope has potential applications in radiation therapy and is most efficiently produced by bombarding a radium-226 target with 2030 MeV deuterium ions. This reaction also yields 226Ac which however decays with a half-life of 29 hours and thus does not contaminate 225Ac. Russell, Pamela J.; Jackson, Paul and Kingsley, Elizabeth Anne Prostate cancer methods and protocols, Humana Press, 2003, ISBN 0-89603-978-1, p. 336 

Actinium metal has been prepared by the reduction of actinium fluoride with lithium vapor in vacuum at a temperature between 1100 and 1300 C. Higher temperatures resulted in evaporation of the product and lower ones lead to an incomplete transformation. Lithium was chosen among other alkali metals because its fluoride is most volatile. Hammond, C. R. The Elements in 

==Applications==
Owing to its scarcity, high price and radioactivity, actinium currently has no significant industrial use. 

227Ac is highly radioactive and was therefore studied for use as an active element of radioisotope thermoelectric generators, for example in spacecraft. The oxide of 227Ac pressed with beryllium is also an efficient neutron source with the activity exceeding that of the standard americium-beryllium and radium-beryllium pairs. Russell, Alan M. and Lee, Kok Loong Structure-property relations in nonferrous metals, Wiley, 2005, ISBN 0-471-64952-X, pp. 470471 In all those applications, 227Ac (a beta source) is merely a progenitor which generates alpha-emitting isotopes upon its decay. Beryllium captures alpha particles and emits neutrons owing to its large cross-section for the (,n) nuclear reaction:

: 

The 227AcBe neutron sources can be applied in a neutron probe  a standard device for measuring the quantity of water present in soil, as well as moisture/density for quality control in highway construction. Majumdar, D. K. Irrigation Water Management: Principles and Practice, 2004 ISBN 81-203-1729-7 p. 108 Chandrasekharan, H. and Gupta, Navindu Fundamentals of Nuclear Science  Application in Agriculture, 2006 ISBN 81-7211-200-9 pp. 202 ff Such probes are also used in well logging applications, in neutron radiography, tomography and other radiochemical investigations. 

Chemical structure of the DOTA carrier for 225Ac in radiation therapy.
225Ac is applied in medicine to produce 213 in a reusable generator or can be used alone as an agent for radiation therapy, in particular targeted alpha therapy (TAT). This isotope has a half-life of 10 days that makes it much more suitable for radiation therapy than 213Bi (half-life 46 minutes). Not only 225Ac itself, but also its decay products emit alpha particles which kill cancer cells in the body. The major difficulty with application of 225Ac was that intravenous injection of simple actinium complexes resulted in their accumulation in the bones and liver for a period of tens of years. As a result, after the cancer cells were quickly killed by alpha particles from 225Ac, the radiation from the actinium and its decay products might induce new mutations. To solve this problem, 225Ac was bound to a chelating agent, such as citrate, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) or diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA). This reduced actinium accumulation in the bones, but the excretion from the body remained slow. Much better results were obtained with such chelating agents as HEHA(1,4,7,10,13,16-hexaazacyclohexadecane-N,N',N'`,N'``,N'``',N'``'`-hexaacetic acid) or DOTA (1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid) coupled to trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody that interferes with the HER2/neu receptor. The latter delivery combination was tested on mice and proved to be effective against leukemia, lymphoma, breast, ovarian, neuroblastoma and prostate cancers. 

The medium half-life of 227Ac (21.77 years) makes it very convenient radioactive isotope in modeling the slow vertical mixing of oceanic waters. The associated processes cannot be studied with the required accuracy by direct measurements of current velocities (of the order 50 meters per year). However, evaluation of the concentration depth-profiles for different isotopes allows estimating the mixing rates. The physics behind this method is as follows: oceanic waters contain homogeneously dispersed 235U. Its decay product, 231Pa, gradually precipitates to the bottom, so that its concentration first increases with depth and then stays nearly constant. 231Pa decays to 227Ac; however, the concentration of the latter isotope does not follow the 231Pa depth profile, but instead increases toward the sea bottom. This occurs because of the mixing processes which raise some additional 227Ac from the sea bottom. Thus analysis of both 231Pa and 227Ac depth profiles allows to model the mixing behavior. 

==Precautions==
227Ac is highly radioactive and experiments with it are carried out in a specially designed laboratory equipped with a glove box. When actinium trichloride is administered intravenously to rats, about 33% of actinium is deposited into the bones and 50% into the liver. Its toxicity is comparable to, but slightly lower than that of americium and plutonium. 

==See also==
* Actinium series

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Meyer, Gerd and Morss, Lester R. Synthesis of lanthanide and actinide compounds, Springer, 1991, ISBN 0-7923-1018-7

==External links==
* Actinium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* NLM Hazardous Substances Databank  Actinium, Radioactive
* Actinium in 



[[Americium]]

Americium (pronounced ) is a transuranic radioactive chemical element that has the symbol Am and atomic number 95. This transuranic element of the actinide series is located in the periodic table below the lanthanide element europium, and thus by analogy was named after another continent, America. 

Americium was first produced in 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg at the University of California, Berkeley. Although it is the third element in the transuranic series, it was discovered fourth, after the heavier curium. The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1945. Most americium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with neutrons in nuclear reactors  one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of americium. It is widely used in commercial ionization chamber smoke detectors, as well as in neutron sources and industrial gauges. Several unusual applications, such as a nuclear battery or fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion, have been proposed for the isotope 242mAm, but they are as yet hindered by the scarcity and high price of this nuclear isomer.

Americium is a relatively soft radioactive metal with silvery appearance. Its most common isotopes are 241Am and 243Am. In chemical compounds, they usually assume the oxidation state +3, especially in solutions. Several other oxidation states are known, which range from +2 to +7 and can be identified by their characteristic optical absorption spectra. The crystal lattice of solid americium and its compounds contains intrinsic defects, which are induced by self-irradiation with alpha particles and accumulate with time; this results in a drift of some material properties.

==History==
The 60-inch cyclotron at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, in August 1939.
The triangle in the glass tube contains the first sample of americium (as the hydroxide), produced in 1944. LBL NEWS Magazine, Vol.6, No.3, Fall 1981, p. 49 

Although americium was likely produced in previous nuclear experiments, it was first intentionally synthesized, isolated and identified in late autumn 1944, at the University of California, Berkeley, by Glenn T. Seaborg, Leon O. Morgan, Ralph A. James, and Albert Ghiorso. They used a 60-inch cyclotron at the University of California, Berkeley. Obituary of Dr. Leon Owen (Tom) Morgan (19192002), Retrieved 28 November 2010 The element was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory (now Argonne National Laboratory) of the University of Chicago. Following the lighter neptunium, plutonium, and heavier curium, americium was the fourth transuranium element to be discovered. At the time, the periodic table had been restructured by Seaborg to its present layout, containing the actinide row below the lanthanide one. This led to americium being located right below its twin lanthanide element europium; it was thus by analogy named after another continent, America: "The name americium (after the Americas) and the symbol Am are suggested for the element on the basis of its position as the sixth member of the actinide rare-earth series, analogous to europium, Eu, of the lanthanide series." Seaborg, G. T.; James, R.A. and Morgan, L. O.: "The New Element Americium (Atomic Number 95)", THIN PPR (National Nuclear Energy Series, Plutonium Project Record), Vol 14 B The Transuranium Elements: Research Papers, Paper No. 22.1, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1949. Abstract; Full text (January 1948), Retrieved 28 November 2010 Greenwood, p. 1252 

The new element was isolated from its oxides in a complex, multi-step process. First plutonium-239 nitrate (239PuNO3) solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0.5 cm2 area, the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium dioxide (PuO2) by annealing. After cyclotron irradiation, the coating was dissolved with nitric acid, and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution. The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid. Further separation was carried out by ion exchange, yielding a certain isotope of curium. The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that those elements were initially called by the Berkeley group as pandemonium (from Greek for all demons or hell) and delirium (from Latin for madness). 

Initial experiments yielded four americium isotopes: 241Am, 242Am, 239Am and 238Am. Americium-241 was directly obtained from plutonium upon absorption of one neutron. It decays by emission of a -particle to 237Np; the half-life of this decay was first determined as 510  20 years but then corrected to 432.2 years. 

:

: The times are half-lives

The second isotope 242Am was produced upon neutron bombardment of the already-created 241Am. Upon rapid -decay, 242Am converts into the isotope of curium 242Cm (which had been discovered previously). The half-life of this decay was initially determined at 17 hours, which was close to the presently accepted value of 16.02 h. 

: 

The discovery of americium and curium in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project; the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945. Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children, the Quiz Kids, five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on 11 November 1945, when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war. After the discovery of americium isotopes 241Am and 242Am, their production and compounds were patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor. Seaborg, Glenn T. "Element", Filing date: 23 August 1946, Issue date: 10 November 1964 The initial americium samples weighed a few micrograms; they were barely visible and were identified by their radioactivity. The first substantial amounts of metallic americium weighing 40200 micrograms were not prepared until 1951 by reduction of americium(III) fluoride with barium metal in high vacuum at 1100 C. 

==Occurrence==

Americium was detected in the fallout from the Ivy Mike nuclear test.
The longest-lived and most common isotopes of americium, 241Am and 243Am, have half-lives of 432.2 and 7,370 years, respectively. Therefore, all primordial americium (americium that was present on Earth during its formation) should have decayed by now.

Existing americium is concentrated in the areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests conducted between 1945 and 1980, as well as at the sites of nuclear incidents, such as the Chernobyl disaster. For example, the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, Ivy Mike, (1 November 1952, Enewetak Atoll), revealed high concentrations of various actinides including americium; due to military secrecy, this result was published only in 1956. Trinitite, the glassy residue left on the desert floor near Alamogordo, New Mexico, after the plutonium-based Trinity nuclear bomb test on 16 July 1945, contains traces of americium-241. Elevated levels of americium were also detected at the crash site of a US B-52 bomber, which carried four hydrogen bombs, in 1968 in Greenland. 

In other regions, the average radioactivity of surface soil due to residual americium is only about 0.01 picocuries/g (0.37 mBq/g). Atmospheric americium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles. Soil analysis revealed about 1,900 times higher concentration of americium inside sandy soil particles than in the water present in the soil pores; an even higher ratio was measured in loam soils. Human Health Fact Sheet on Americium, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Retrieved 28 November 2010 

Americium is produced mostly artificially in small quantities, for research purposes. A tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of various americium isotopes, mostly 241Am and 243Am. Hoffmann, Klaus Kann man Gold machen? Gauner, Gaukler und Gelehrte. Aus der Geschichte der chemischen Elemente (Can you make gold? Crooks, clowns and scholars. From the history of the chemical elements), Urania-Verlag, Leipzig, Jena, Berlin 1979, no ISBN, p. 233 Their prolonged radioactivity is undesirable for the disposal, and therefore americium, together with other long-lived actinides, have to be neutralized. The associated procedure may involve several steps, where americium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short-lived nuclides. This procedure is well known as nuclear transmutation, but it is still being developed for americium. Baetsl, L. Application of Partitioning/Transmutation of Radioactive Materials in Radioactive Waste Management, Nuclear Research Centre of Belgium Sck/Cen, Mol, Belgium, September 2001, Retrieved 28 November 2010 Fioni, Gabriele; Cribier, Michel and Marie, Frdric Can the minor actinide, americium-241, be transmuted by thermal neutrons?, Department of Astrophysics, CEA/Saclay, Retrieved 28 November 2010 

A few atoms of americium can be produced by neutron capture reactions and beta decay in very highly concentrated uranium-bearing deposits. 

==Synthesis and extraction==

===Isotope nucleosyntheses===
Chromatographic elution curves revealing the similarity between the lanthanides Tb, Gd, and Eu and the corresponding actinides Bk, Cm, and Am.

Americium has been produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors for decades, and kilograms of its 241Am and 243Am isotopes have been accumulated by now. Greenwood, p. 1262 Nevertheless, since it was first offered for sale in 1962, its price, about 1,500 USD per gram of 241Am, remains almost unchanged owing to the very complex separation procedure. Smoke detectors and americium, World Nuclear Association, January 2009, Retrieved 28 November 2010 The heavier isotope 243Am is produced in much smaller amounts; it is thus more difficult to separate, resulting in a higher cost of the order 100,000160,000 USD/g. Hammond C. R. "The elements" in 

Americium is not synthesized directly from uranium  the most common reactor material  but from the plutonium isotope 239Pu. The latter needs to be produced first, according to the following nuclear process:

: 

The capture of two neutrons by 239Pu (a so-called (n,) reaction), followed by a -decay, results in 241Am:

: 

The plutonium present in spent nuclear fuel contains about 12% of 241Pu. Because it spontaneously converts to 241Am, 241Pu can be extracted and may be used to generate further 241Am. However, this process is rather slow: half of the original amount of 241Pu decays to 241Am after about 15 years, and the 241Am amount reaches a maximum after 70 years. BREDL Southern Anti-Plutonium Campaign, Blue Ridge Environmental Defense League, Retrieved 28 November 2010 

The obtained 241Am can be used for generating heavier americium isotopes by further neutron capture inside a nuclear reactor. In a light water reactor (LWR), 79% of 241Am converts to 242Am and 10% to its nuclear isomer 242mAm: The "metastable" state is marked by the letter m. article/200410/000020041004A0333355.php Abstract 

:79%: 

:10%: 

Americium-242 has a half-life of only 16 hours, which makes its further up-conversion to 243Am, extremely inefficient. The latter isotope is produced instead in a process where 239Pu captures four neutrons under high neutron flux:

: 

=== Metal generation ===
Most synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes in oxide forms, from which isotopes of americium need to be separated. In a typical procedure, the spent reactor fuel (e.g. MOX fuel) is dissolved in nitric acid, and the bulk of uranium and plutonium is removed using a PUREX-type extraction (Plutonium URanium EXtraction) with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon. The lanthanides and remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue (raffinate) by a diamide-based extraction, to give, after stripping, a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides. Americium compounds are then selectively extracted using multi-step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques Penneman, pp. 3448 with an appropriate reagent. A large amount of work has been done on the solvent extraction of americium. For example, a recent EU funded project codenamed "EUROPART" studied triazines and other compounds as potential extraction agents. Bis-triazinyl bipyridine complex has been recently proposed as such reagent as highly selective to americium (and curium). Separation of americium from the highly similar curium can be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone, at elevated temperatures. Both Am and Cm are mostly present in solutions in the +3 valence state; whereas curium remains unchanged, americium oxidizes to soluble Am(IV) complexes which can be washed away. Penneman, p. 25 

Metallic americium is obtained by reduction from its compounds. Americium(III) fluoride was first used for this purpose. The reaction was conducted using elemental barium as reducing agent in a water- and oxygen-free environment inside an apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten. Gmelin Handbook of Inorganic Chemistry, System No. 71, transuranics, Part B 1, pp. 5767. Penneman, p. 3 

: 

An alternative is the reduction of americium dioxide by metallic lanthanum or thorium: 

: 

==Physical properties==
Double-hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC in the crystal structure of -americium (A: green, B: blue, C: red).

In the periodic table, americium is located to the right of plutonium, to the left of curium, and below the lanthanide europium, with which it shares many similarities in physical and chemical properties. Americium is a highly radioactive element. When freshly prepared, it has a silvery-white metallic lustre, but then slowly tarnishes in air. With a density of 12 g/cm3, americium is less dense than both curium (13.52 g/cm3) and plutonium (19.8 g/cm3); but has a higher density than europium (5.264 g/cm3)mostly because of its higher atomic mass. Americium is relatively soft and easily deformable and has a significantly lower bulk modulus than the actinides before it: Th, Pa, U, Np and Pu. Its melting point of 1173 C is significantly higher than that of plutonium (639 C) and europium (826 C), but lower than for curium (1340 C). 

At ambient conditions, americium is present in its most stable  form which has a hexagonal crystal symmetry, and a space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 346.8 pm and c = 1124 pm, and four atoms per unit cell. The crystal consists of a double-hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with -lanthanum and several actinides such as -curium. The crystal structure of americium changes with pressure and temperature. When compressed at room temperature to 5 GPa, -Am transforms to the  modification, which has a face-centered cubic (fcc) symmetry, space group Fmm and lattice constant a = 489 pm. This fcc structure is equivalent to the closest packing with the sequence ABC. Upon further compression to 23 GPa, americium transforms to an orthorhombic -Am structure similar to that of -uranium. There are no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa, except for an appearance of a monoclinic phase at pressures between 10 and 15 GPa. There is no consistency on the status of this phase in the literature, which also sometimes lists the ,  and  phases as I, II and III. The - transition is accompanied by a 6% decrease in the crystal volume; although theory also predicts a significant volume change for the - transition, it is not observed experimentally. The pressure of the - transition decreases with increasing temperature, and when -americium is heated at ambient pressure, at 770 C it changes into an fcc phase which is different from -Am, and at 1075 C it converts to a body-centered cubic structure. The pressure-temperature phase diagram of americium is thus rather similar to those of lanthanum, praseodymium and neodymium. 

As with many other actinides, self-damage of the crystal lattice due to alpha-particle irradiation is intrinsic to americium. It is especially noticeable at low temperatures, where the mobility of the produced lattice defects is relatively low, by broadening of X-ray diffraction peaks. This effect makes somewhat uncertain the temperature of americium and some of its properties, such as electrical resistivity. So for americium-241, the resistivity at 4.2 K increases with time from about 2 Ohmcm to 10 Ohmcm after 40 hours, and saturates at about 16 Ohmcm after 140 hours. This effect is less pronounced at room temperature, due to annihilation of radiation defects; also heating to room temperature the sample which was kept for hours at low temperatures restores its resistivity. In fresh samples, the resistivity gradually increases with temperature from about 2 Ohmcm at liquid helium to 69 Ohmcm at room temperature; this behavior is similar to that of neptunium, uranium, thorium and protactinium, but is different from plutonium and curium which show a rapid rise up to 60 K followed by saturation. The room temperature value for americium is lower than that of neptunium, plutonium and curium, but higher than for uranium, thorium and protactinium. 

Americium is paramagnetic in a wide temperature range, from that of liquid helium, to room temperature, and above. This behavior is markedly different from that of its neighbor curium which exhibit antiferromagnetic transition at 52 K. The thermal expansion coefficient of americium is slightly anisotropic and amounts to (7.5  0.2)/C along the shorter a axis and (6.2  0.4)/C for the longer c hexagonal axis. The enthalpy of dissolution of americium metal in hydrochloric acid at standard conditions is 620.6  1.3 kJ/mol, from which the standard enthalpy change of formation (fH) of aqueous Am3+ ion is 621.2  2.0 kJ/mol1. The standard potential Am3+/Am0 is 2.08  0.01 V. 

==Chemical properties==
Americium ions in solution: Am3+ (left) and Am4+ (right). Am3+ is colorless at low and reddish at higher concentrations.
Americium readily reacts with oxygen and dissolves well in acids. The most common oxidation state for americium is +3, Penneman, p. 4 in which americium compounds are rather stable against oxidation and reduction. In this sense, americium is chemically similar to most lanthanides. The trivalent americium forms insoluble fluoride, oxalate, iodate, hydroxide, phosphate and other salts. Other oxidation states have been observed between +2 and +7, which is the widest range among the actinide elements. Their color in aqueous solutions varies as follows: Am3+ (colorless to yellow-reddish), Am4+ (yellow-reddish), AmV; (yellow), AmVI (brown) and AmVII (dark green). Americium, Das Periodensystem der Elemente fr den Schulgebrauch (The periodic table of elements for schools) chemie-master.de (in German), Retrieved 28 November 2010 Greenwood, p. 1265 All oxidation states have their characteristic optical absorption spectra, with a few sharp peaks in the visible and mid-infrared regions, and the position and intensity of these peaks can be converted into the concentrations of the corresponding oxidation states. Penneman, pp. 1014 For example, Am(III) has two sharp peaks at 504 and 811 nm, Am(V) at 514 and 715 nm, and Am(VI) at 666 and 992 nm. 

Americium compounds with oxidation state +4 and higher are strong oxidizing agents, comparable in strength to the permanganate ion () in acidic solutions. Holleman, p. 1956 Whereas the Am4+ ions are unstable in solutions and readily convert to Am3+, the +4 oxidation state occurs well in solids, such as americium dioxide (AmO2) and americium(IV) fluoride (AmF4).

All pentavalent and hexavalent americium compounds are complex salts such as KAmO2F2, Li3AmO4 and Li6AmO6, Ba3AmO6, AmO2F2. These high oxidation states Am(IV), Am(V) and Am(VI) can be prepared from Am(III) by oxidation with ammonium persulfate in dilute nitric acid, with silver(I) oxide in perchloric acid, or with ozone or sodium persulfate in sodium carbonate solutions. The pentavalent oxidation state of americium was first observed in 1951. It is present in aqueous solution in the form of ions (acidic) or ions (alkaline) which are however unstable and subject to several rapid disproportionation reactions: Greenwood, p. 1275 

: 

: 

==Chemical compounds==

===Oxygen compounds===
Two americium oxides are known, with the oxidation states +3 (Am2O3) and +4 (AmO2). Americium(III) oxide is a red-brown solid with a melting point of 2205 C. Holleman, p. 1972 Americium(IV) oxide is the main form of solid americium which is used in nearly all its applications. As most other actinide dioxides, it is a black solid with a cubic (fluorite) crystal structure. Greenwood, p. 1267 

The oxalate of americium(III), vacuum dried at room temperature, has the chemical formula Am2(C2O4)37H2O. Upon heating in vacuum, it loses water at 240 C and starts decomposing into AmO2 at 300 C, the decomposition completes at about 470 C. The initial oxalate dissolves in nitric acid with the maximum solubility of 0.25 g/L. Penneman, p. 5 

===Halides===
Halides of americium are known for the oxidation states +2, +3 and +4, Holleman, p. 1969 where the +3 is most stable, especially in solutions. 

 Oxidation state F Cl Br I 
 +4 Americium(IV) fluoride AmF4 pale pink 
 +3 Americium(III) fluoride AmF3 pink Americium(III) chloride AmCl3 pink Americium(III) bromide AmBr3 light yellow Americium(III) iodide AmI3 light yellow 
 +2 Americium(II) chloride AmCl2 black Americium(II) bromide AmBr2 black Americium(II) iodide AmI2 black 

Reduction of Am(III) compounds with sodium amalgam yields Am(II) salts  the black halides AmCl2, AmBr2 and AmI2. They are very sensitive to oxygen and oxidize in water, releasing hydrogen and converting back to the Am(III) state. Specific lattice constants are:
* Orthorhombic AmCl2: a = 896.3  0.8 pm, b = 757.3  0.8 pm and c = 453.2  0.6 pm
* Tetragonal AmBr2: a = 1159.2  0.4 and c = 712.1  0.3 pm. 
They can also be prepared by reacting metallic americium with an appropriate mercury halide HgX2, where X = Cl, Br or I: Greenwood, p. 1272 
: 

Americium(III) fluoride (AmF3) is poorly soluble and precipitates upon reaction of Am3+ and fluoride ions in weak acidic solutions:

: 

The tetravalent americium(IV) fluoride (AmF4) is obtained by reacting solid americium(III) fluoride with molecular fluorine: Greenwood, p. 1271 

: 

Another known form of solid tetravalent americium chloride is KAmF5. Penneman, p. 6 Tetravalent americium has also been observed in the aqueous phase. For this purpose, black Am(OH)4 was dissolved in 15-M NH3F with the americium concentration of 0.01 M. The resulting reddish solution had a characteristic optical absorption spectrum which is similar to that of AmF4 but differed from other oxidation states of americium. Heating the Am(IV) solution to 90 C did not result in its disproportionation or reduction, however a slow reduction was observed to Am(III) and assigned to self-irradiation of americium by alpha particles. 

Most americium(III) halides form hexagonal crystals with slight variation of the color and exact structure between the halogens. So, chloride (AmCl3) is reddish and has a structure isotypic to uranium(III) chloride (space group P63/m) and the melting point of 715 C. The fluoride is isotypic to LaF3 (space group P63/mmc) and the iodide to BiI3 (space group R). The bromide is an exception with the orthorhombic PuBr3-type structure and space group Cmcm. Crystals of americium hexahydrate (AmCl36H2O) can be prepared by dissolving americium dioxide in hydrochloric acid and evaporating the liquid. Those crystals are hygroscopic and have yellow-reddish color and a monoclinic crystal structure. 

Oxyhalides of americium in the form AmVIO2X2, AmVO2X, AmIVOX2 and AmIIIOX can be obtained by reacting the corresponding americium halide with oxygen or Sb2O3, and AmOCl can also be produced by vapor phase hydrolysis: 
: 

===Chalcogenides and pnictides===
The known chalcogenides of americium include the sulfide AmS2, selenides AmSe2 and Am3Se4, and tellurides Am2Te3 and AmTe2. The pnictides of americium (243Am) of the AmX type are known for the elements phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and bismuth. They crystallize in the rock-salt lattice. 

===Silicides and borides===
Americium monosilicide (AmSi) and "disilicide" (nominally AmSix with: 1.87 < x < 2.0) were obtained by reduction of americium(III) fluoride with elementary silicon in vacuum at 1050 C (AmSi) and 11501200 C (AmSix). AmSi is a black solid isomorphic with LaSi, it has an orthorhombic crystal symmetry. AmSix has a bright silvery lustre and a tetragonal crystal lattice (space group I41/amd), it is isomorphic with PuSi2 and ThSi2. Borides of americium include AmB4 and AmB6. The tetraboride can be obtained by heating an oxide or halide of americium with magnesium diboride in vacuum or inert atmosphere. Lupinetti, A. J. et al. "Low-temperature synthesis of actinide tetraborides by solid-state metathesis reactions", Filed 4 Apr 2002, Issued 14 Dec 2004 

===Organoamericium compounds===
(8-C8H8)2Am structure
Analogous to uranocene, americium forms an organometallic compound with two cyclooctatetraene ligands, that is (8-C8H8)2Am. It also makes trigonal (5-C5H5)3Am complexes with three cyclopentadienyl rings. 

Formation of the complexes of the type Am(n-C3H7-BTP)3, where BTP stands for 2,6-di(1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)pyridine, in solutions containing n-C3H7-BTP and Am3+ ions has been confirmed by EXAFS. Some of these BTP-type complexes selectively interact with americium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides. 

==Biological aspects==
Americium is an artificial element, and thus a biological function involving the element would be impossible. Toeniskoetter, Steve; Dommer, Jennifer and Dodge, Tony The Biochemical Periodic Tables  Americium, University of Minnesota, Retrieved 28 November 2010 It has been proposed to use bacteria for removal of americium and other heavy metals from rivers and streams. Thus, Enterobacteriaceae of the genus Citrobacter precipitate americium ions from aqueous solutions, binding them into a metal-phosphate complex at their cell walls. Several studies have been reported on the biosorption and bioaccumulation of americium by bacteria and fungi. 

==Fission==
The isotope 242m1Am (half-life 141 years) has the largest cross sections for absorption of thermal neutrons (5,700 barns), Pfennig, G.; Klewe-Nebenius, H and Seelmann Eggebert, W. (Eds.): Karlsruhe nuclide, 7 Edition 2006. that results in a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction. The critical mass for a bare 242m1Am sphere is about 914 kg (the uncertainty results from insufficient knowledge of its material properties). It can be lowered to 35 kg with a metal reflector and should become even smaller with a water reflector. Abstract Such small critical mass is favorable for portable nuclear weapons, but those based on 242m1Am are not known yet, probably because of its scarcity and high price. The critical masses of two other readily available isotopes, 241Am and 243Am, are relatively high  57.6 to 75.6 kg for 241Am and 209 kg for 243Am. Institut de Radioprotection et de Sret Nuclaire, "Evaluation of nuclear criticality safety data and limits for actinides in transport", p. 16. Scarcity and high price yet hinder application of americium as a nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors. 

There are proposals of very compact 10-kW high-flux reactors using as little as 20 grams of 242m1Am. Such low-power reactors would be relatively safe to use as neutron sources for radiation therapy in hospitals. 

==Isotopes==

About 19 isotopes and 8 nuclear isomers are known for americium. There are two long-lived alpha-emitters, 241Am and 243Am with half-lives of 432.2 and 7,370 years, respectively, and the nuclear isomer 242m1Am has a long half-life of 141 years. The half-lives of other isotopes and isomers range from 0.64 microseconds for 245m1Am to 50.8 hours for 240Am. As with most other actinides, the isotopes of americium with odd number of neutrons have relatively high rate of nuclear fission and low critical mass. 

Americium-241 decays to 237Np emitting alpha particles of 5 different energies, mostly at 5.486 MeV (85.2%) and 5.443 MeV (12.8%). Because many of the resulting states are metastable, they also emit gamma rays with the discrete energies between 26.3 and 158.5 keV. 

Americium-242 is a short-lived isotope with a half-life of 16.02 h. It mostly (82.7%) converts by -decay to 242Cm, but also by electron capture to 242Pu (17.3%). Both 242Cm and 242Pu transform via nearly the same decay chain through 238Pu down to 234U.

Nearly all (99.541%) of 242m1Am decays by internal conversion to 242Am and the remaining 0.459% by -decay to 238Np. The latter breaks down to 238Pu and then to 234U. 

Americium-243 transforms by -emission into 239Np, which converts by -decay to 239Pu, and the 239Pu changes into 235U by emitting an -particle.

==Applications==

===Ionization detectors===

Americium is the only synthetic element to have found its way into the household, where one common type of smoke detector uses 241Am in the form of americium dioxide as its source of ionizing radiation. Smoke Detectors and Americium, Nuclear Issues Briefing Paper 35, May 2002. (Internet Archive), Retrieved 28 November 2010 This isotope is preferred over 226Ra because it emits 5 times more alpha particles and relatively little harmful gamma radiation. The amount of americium in a typical new smoke detector is 1 microcurie (37 kBq) or 0.28 microgram. This amount declines slowly as the americium decays into neptunium-237, a different transuranic element with a much longer half-life (about 2.14 million years). With its half-life of 432.2 years, the americium in a smoke detector includes about 3% neptunium after 19 years, and about 5% after 32 years. The radiation passes through an ionization chamber, an air-filled space between two electrodes, and permits a small, constant current between the electrodes. Any smoke that enters the chamber absorbs the alpha particles, which reduces the ionization and affects this current, triggering the alarm. Compared to the alternative optical smoke detector, the ionization smoke detector is cheaper and can detect particles which are too small to produce significant light scattering; however, it is more prone to false alarms. Residential Smoke Alarm Performance, Thomas Cleary. Building and Fire Research Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology; UL Smoke and Fire Dynamics Seminar. November 2007 Bukowski, R. W. et al. (2007) Performance of Home Smoke Alarms Analysis of the Response of Several Available Technologies in Residential Fire Settings, NIST Technical Note 1455-1 

===Radionuclide===
As 241Am has a significantly longer half-life than 238Pu (432.2 years vs. 87 years), it has been proposed as an active element of radioisotope thermoelectric generators, for example in spacecraft. Basic elements of static RTGs, G.L. Kulcinski, NEEP 602 Course Notes (Spring 2000), Nuclear Power in Space, University of Wisconsin Fusion Technology Institute (see last page) Although americium produces less heat and electricity  the power yield is 114.7 mW/g for 241Am and 6.31 mW/g for 243Am (cf. 390 mW/g for 238Pu)  and its radiation poses more threat to humans owing to neutron emission, the European Space Agency is planning to use americium for its space probes. Space agencies tackle waning plutonium stockpiles, Spaceflight now, 9 July 2010 

Another proposed space-related application of americium is a fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion. It relies on the very high rate of nuclear fission of 242mAm, which can be maintained even in a micrometer-thick foil. Small thickness avoids the problem of self-absorption of emitted radiation. This problem is pertinent to uranium or plutonium rods, in which only surface layers provide alpha-particles. The fission products of 242mAm can either directly propel the spaceship or they can heat up a thrusting gas; they can also transfer their energy to a fluid and generate electricity through a magnetohydrodynamic generator. 

One more proposal which utilizes the high nuclear fission rate of 242mAm is a nuclear battery. Its design relies not on the energy of the emitted by americium alpha particles, but on their charge, that is the americium acts as the self-sustaining "cathode". A single 3.2 kg 242mAm charge of such battery could provide about 140 kW of power over a period of 80 days. Genuth, Iddo Americium Power Source, The Future of Things, 3 October 2006, Retrieved 28 November 2010 With all the potential benefits, the current applications of 242mAm are as yet hindered by the scarcity and high price of this nuclear isomer. 

===Neutron source===
The oxide of 241Am pressed with beryllium is an efficient neutron source. Here americium acts as the alpha source, and beryllium produces neutrons owing to its large cross-section for the (,n) nuclear reaction:

: 

: 

The most widespread use of 241AmBe neutron sources is a neutron probe  a device used to measure the quantity of water present in soil, as well as moisture/density for quality control in highway construction. 241Am neutron sources are also used in well logging applications, as well as in neutron radiography, tomography and other radiochemical investigations. 

===Production of other elements===
Americium is a starting material for the production of other transuranic elements and transactinides  for example, 82.7% of 242Am decays to 242Cm and 17.3% to 242Pu. In the nuclear reactor, 242Am is also up-converted by neutron capture to 243Am and 244Am, which transforms by -decay to 244Cm:

: 

Irradiation of 241Am by 12C or 22Ne ions yields the isotopes 247Es (einsteinium) or 260Db (dubnium), respectively. Furthermore, the element berkelium (243Bk isotope) had been first intentionally produced and identified by bombarding 241Am with alpha particles, in 1949, by the same Berkeley group, using the same 60-inch cyclotron. Similarly, nobelium was produced at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Russia, in 1965 in several reactions, one of which included irradiation of 243Am with 15N ions. Besides, one of the synthesis reactions for lawrencium, discovered by scientists at Berkeley and Dubna, included bombardment of 243Am with 18O. 

===Spectrometer===
Americium-241 has been used as a portable source of both gamma rays and alpha particles for a number of medical and industrial uses. The 60-keV gamma ray emissions from 241Am in such sources can be used for indirect analysis of materials in radiography and X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, as well as for quality control in fixed nuclear density gauges and nuclear densometers. For example, the element has been employed to gauge glass thickness to help create flat glass. Americium-241 is also suitable for calibration of gamma-ray spectrometers in the low-energy range, since its spectrum consists of nearly a single peak and negligible Compton continuum (at least three orders of magnitude lower intensity). Nuclear Data Viewer 2.4, NNDC Americium-241 gamma rays were also used to provide passive diagnosis of thyroid function. This medical application is however obsolete.

==Health concerns==
As a highly radioactive element, americium and its compounds must be handled only in an appropriate laboratory under special arrangements. Although most americium isotopes predominantly emit alpha particles which can be blocked by thin layers of common materials, many of the daughter products emit gamma-rays and neutrons which have a long penetration depth. Public Health Statement for Americium Section 1.5., Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, April 2004, Retrieved 28 November 2010 

If consumed, americium is excreted within a few days and only 0.05% is absorbed in the blood. From there, roughly 45% of it goes to the liver and 45% to the bones, and the remaining 10% is excreted. The uptake to the liver depends on the individual and increases with age. In the bones, americium is first deposited over cortical and trabecular surfaces and slowly redistributes over the bone with time. The biological half-life of 241Am is 50 years in the bones and 20 years in the liver, whereas in the gonads (testicles and ovaries) it remains permanently; in all these organs, americium promotes formation of cancer cells as a result of its radioactivity. Frisch, Franz Crystal Clear, 100 x energy, Bibliographisches Institut AG, Mannheim 1977, ISBN 3-411-01704-X, p. 184 

Americium often enters landfills from discarded smoke detectors. The rules associated with the disposal of smoke detectors are relaxed in most jurisdictions. In the U.S., the "Radioactive Boy Scout" David Hahn was able to concentrate americium from smoke detectors after managing to buy a hundred of them at remainder prices and also stealing a few. Ken Silverstein, The Radioactive Boy Scout: When a teenager attempts to build a breeder reactor. Harper's Magazine, November 1998 There have been cases of humans being contaminated with americium, the worst case being that of Harold McCluskey, who at the age of 64 was exposed to 500 times the occupational standard for americium-241 as a result of an explosion in his lab. McCluskey died at the age of 75, not as a result of exposure, but of a heart disease which he had before the accident. 

==See also==

* Actinides in the environment
* compounds]

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* Penneman, R. A. and Keenan T. K. The radiochemistry of americium and curium, University of California, Los Alamos, California, 1960

==Further reading==
* Nuclides and Isotopes  14th Edition, GE Nuclear Energy, 1989.
* 
* 

==External links==

* Americium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* ATSDR  Public Health Statement: Americium
* World Nuclear Association  Smoke Detectors and Americium 



[[Astatine]]

Astatine is a radioactive chemical element with the chemical symbol At and atomic number 85. It occurs on Earth only as the result of the radioactive decay of certain heavier elements. All of its isotopes are short-lived; the most stable is astatine-210, with a half-life of 8.1 hours. Accordingly, much less is known about astatine than most other elements. The observed properties are consistent with it being a heavier analog of iodine; many other properties have been estimated based on this resemblance.

Elemental astatine has never been viewed, because a mass large enough to be seen (by the naked human eye) would be immediately vaporized by the heat generated by its own radioactivity. Astatine may be dark, or it may have a metallic appearance and be a semiconductor, or it may even be a metal. It is likely to have a much higher melting point than iodine, on par with those of bismuth and polonium. Chemically, astatine behaves more or less as a halogen (the group including chlorine and fluorine), being expected to form ionic astatides with alkali or alkaline earth metals; it is known to form covalent compounds with nonmetals, including other halogens. It does, however, also have a notable cationic chemistry that distinguishes it from the lighter halogens. The second longest-lived isotope of astatine, astatine-211, is the only one currently having any commercial application, being employed in medicine to diagnose and treat some diseases via its emission of alpha particles (helium-4 nuclei). Only extremely small quantities are used, however, due to its intense radioactivity.

The element was first produced by Dale R. Corson, Kenneth Ross MacKenzie, and Emilio Segr at the University of California, Berkeley in 1940. They named the element "astatine", a name coming from the great instability of the synthesized matter (the source Greek word  (astatos) means "unstable"). Three years later it was found in nature, although it is the least abundant element in the Earth's crust among the non-transuranic elements, with a total existing amount of much less than one gram at any given time. Six astatine isotopes, with mass numbers of 214 to 219, are present in nature as the products of various decay routes of heavier elements, but neither the most stable isotope of astatine (with mass number 210) nor astatine-211 (which is used in medicine) is produced naturally.

==Characteristics==
Astatine is an extremely radioactive element; all its isotopes have half-lives of less than 12 hours, decaying into bismuth, polonium, radon, or other astatine isotopes. Among the first 101 elements in the periodic table, only francium is less stable. 

The bulk properties of astatine are not known with any great degree of certainty. Research is limited by its short half-life, which prevents the creation of weighable quantities. A visible piece of astatine would be immediately and completely vaporized due to the heat generated by its intense radioactivity. Astatine is usually classified as either a nonmetal or a metalloid. However, metal formation for condensed-phase astatine has also been suggested. 

===Physical===
Most of the physical properties of astatine have been estimated (by interpolation or extrapolation), using various theoretically-grounded or empirically-derived methods. As an example, heavier halogens are darker than are halogens of lesser atomic weight  fluorine is nearly colorless, chlorine is bright green, bromine is brown, and iodine is dark gray/violet. Astatine is sometimes described as being a black solid (assuming that it follows this trend), or as having a metallic appearance (if it is a metalloid or a metal). The melting and boiling points of astatine are also expected to follow the trend seen in the halogen series, increasing with atomic number. On this basis, the melting and boiling points are estimated to be 575 and, respectively. However, some experimental evidence suggests astatine may have lower melting and boiling points than those implied by the halogen trend. Astatine sublimes less readily than does iodine, having a lower vapor pressure. Even so, half of a given amount of astatine will vaporize in an hour if put on a clean glass surface at room temperature.

The crystalline structure of solid astatine is unknown. Evidence for (or against) the existence of diatomic astatine (At2) is sparse and inconclusive. Some sources state that At2 does not exist, or at least has never been observed, while other sources assert or imply its existence. Despite this controversy, many properties of diatomic astatine have been predicted; for example, its density would be 6.26.5 g/cm3. 

===Chemical===
Many chemical properties of astatine have been determined using tracer studies on extremely dilute astatine solutions. Most known properties  such as anion formation  are in line with other halogens. However, astatine has a few metallic characteristics as well, such as plating out on a cathode, coprecipitating with metal sulfides in hydrochloric acid, and forming a cation in strong acidic solutions.

Astatine has an electronegativity of 2.2 on the revised Pauling scale. This is lower than that of iodine (2.66) and the same as that of hydrogen. However, in hydrogen astatide (HAt) the negative charge is predicted to be on the hydrogen atom, implying that this compound should instead be referred to as astatine hydride because the electronegativity of astatine on the Allred-Rochow scale (1.9) is less than that of hydrogen (2.2). 

==Compounds==
Astatine is the least reactive of the halogens, being less reactive than iodine; however, multiple compounds of astatine have been synthesized in microscopic amounts and studied as intensively as possible before their inevitable radioactive disintegration. The reactions involved are normally tested with dilute solutions of astatine mixed with larger amounts of iodine. The iodine acts as a carrier, ensuring that there is sufficient material for laboratory techniques (such as filtration and precipitation) to work. 

Hydrogen astatide space-filling model

The formation of an astatine compound with hydrogen  usually referred to as hydrogen astatide  was noted by the pioneers of astatine chemistry. As mentioned earlier, there are grounds for referring to this compound as astatine hydride instead  astatine is easily oxidized, acidification by (dilute) nitric acid gives the At0 or At+ forms, and the addition of silver(I) then precipitates astatine, only partially as silver(I) astatide (AgAt) (or not at all). Iodine, in contrast, is not oxidized, and precipitates readily as silver(I) iodide. 

Only a few metal astatides have been reported, including those of sodium, palladium, silver, and lead. Some characteristic properties of silver astatide, and the known and hypothetical alkali and alkaline earth astatides, have been estimated by extrapolation from other silver or alkali or alkaline earth halides.

Structure of astatine monoiodide, one of the astatine interhalogens and the heaviest known diatomic interhalogen.

Astatine is known to react with its lighter homologues iodine, bromine, and chlorine in the vapor state; these reactions produce diatomic interhalogen compounds with formulas AtI, AtBr, and AtCl. The first two compounds may also be produced in water  astatine reacts with iodine/iodide solution to form AtI, whereas AtBr requires (aside from astatine) an iodine/iodine monobromide/bromide solution. The excess of iodides or bromides may lead to and ions, or in a chloride solution, they may produce species like or via equilibrium-balanced reactions with the chlorides. Oxidation of the element with dichromate (in nitric acid solution) showed that adding chloride turned the astatine into a molecule likely to be either AtCl or AtOCl. Similarly, or may be produced. In a plasma ion source mass spectrometer, the similar ions +, +, and + have been formed by introducing lighter halogen vapors into a helium-filled cell containing astatine, supporting the existence of stable neutral molecules in the plasma ion state. No astatine fluorides have been discovered as yet. Their absence has been speculatively attributed to the extreme reactivity of such compounds, including the reaction of an initially-formed fluoride with the walls of the glass container to form a non-volatile product. Thus, although the synthesis of an astatine fluoride is thought to be possible, it may require a liquid halogen fluoride solvent, as has already been used for the characterization of radon fluorides.

With oxygen, there is evidence for the existence of the species AtO, , and AtO+ in aqueous solution, formed by the reaction of astatine with an oxidant such as elemental bromine or (in the last case) by sodium persulfate in a solution of perchloric acid. The well characterized anion can be obtained by, for example, the oxidation of astatine with potassium hypochlorite in a solution of potassium hydroxide. Further oxidation, such as by xenon difluoride (in a hot alkaline solution) or periodate (in a neutral or alkaline solution), yields the perastatate ion ; however, this is only stable in neutral or alkaline solutions. Astatine is also thought to be capable of forming cationic salts with oxyanions such as iodate or dichromate; this is based on the observation that, in acidic solutions, monovalent or intermediate positive states of astatine coprecipitate with the insoluble salts of metal cations such as silver(I) iodate or thallium(I) dichromate.

Astatine may form bonds to the other chalcogens; these include S7At+ and with sulfur, a coordination selenourea compound with selenium, and an astatinetellurium colloid with tellurium. Additionally, astatine is known to bind to nitrogen, lead, and boron under the proper conditions.

Carbon tetraastatide (CAt4) is known. Astatine can replace a hydrogen atom in benzene to form C6H5At; this may be oxidized to C6H5AtCl2 by chlorine. By treating this compound with an alkaline solution of hypochlorite, C6H5AtO2 can be produced.

==History==
Mendeleev's table of 1871, with an empty space at the eka-iodine position
In 1869, when Dmitri Mendeleev published his periodic table, the space under iodine was empty; after Niels Bohr established the physical basis of the classification of chemical elements, it was suggested that the fifth halogen belonged there. Before its officially recognized discovery, it was called "eka-iodine" (from Sanskrit eka  "one") to imply it was one space under iodine (in the same manner as eka-silicon, eka-boron, and others). Scientists tried to find it in nature; given its rarity, these attempts resulted in a number of false discoveries.

The first claimed discovery of eka-iodine was made by Fred Allison and his associates at the Alabama Polytechnic Institute (now Auburn University) in 1931. The discoverers named element 85 "alabamine", and assigned it the symbol Ab, designations that were used for a few years afterward. In 1934, however, H. G. MacPherson of University of California, Berkeley disproved Allison's method and the validity of his discovery. This erroneous discovery was followed by another claim in 1937, by the chemist Rajendralal De. Working in Dacca in British India (now Dhaka in Bangladesh), he chose the name "dakin" for element 85, which he claimed to have isolated as the thorium series equivalent of Radium F (polonium-210) in the radium series. The properties he reported for dakin do not correspond to those of astatine, and the true identity of dakin is not known. 

Emilio Segr, one of the discoverers of astatine

In 1940, the Swiss chemist Walter Minder announced the discovery of element 85 as the beta decay product of Radium A (polonium-218), choosing the name "helvetium" (from , "Switzerland"). However, Berta Karlik and Traude Bernert were unsuccessful in reproducing his experiments, and subsequently attributed Minder's results to contamination of his radon stream (radon-222 is the parent isotope of polonium-218). In 1942, Minder, in collaboration with the English scientist Alice Leigh-Smith, announced the discovery of another isotope of element 85, presumed to be the product of Thorium A (polonium-216) beta decay. They named this substance "anglo-helvetium", but Karlik and Bernert were again unable to reproduce these results. 

In 1940, Dale R. Corson, Kenneth Ross MacKenzie, and Emilio Segr finally isolated the element at the University of California, Berkeley. Instead of searching for the element in nature, the scientists created it by bombarding bismuth-209 with alpha particles in a cyclotron (particle accelerator) to produce, after emission of two neutrons, astatine-211. The name "astatine" comes from the Greek word  (statos, meaning "unstable"), due to its propensity for radioactive decay (later, all isotopes of the element were shown to be unstable), together with the ending "-ine", found in the names of the four previously discovered halogens. Three years later, astatine was found as a product of naturally occurring decay chains by Karlik and Bernert. Since then, astatine has been determined to be in three out of the four natural decay chains. 

==Isotopes==

There are 32 known isotopes of astatine, with atomic masses (mass numbers) of 191 and 193223. No stable or even long-lived astatine isotope is known, and no such isotope is expected to exist.

:

 Alpha decay characteristics for sample astatine isotopes Mass number Mass excess Mass excess of daughter Average energy of alpha decay Half-life Probability of alpha decay Alpha half-life 
 207 13.243 MeV 19.116 MeV 5.873 MeV 1.80 h 8.6% 20.9 h 
 208 12.491 MeV 18.243 MeV 5.752 MeV 1.63 h 0.55% 12.3 d 
 209 12.880 MeV 18.638 MeV 5.758 MeV 5.41 h 4.1% 5.5 d 
 210 11.972 MeV 17.604 MeV 5.632 MeV 8.1 h 0.175% 193 d 
 211 11.647 MeV 17.630 MeV 5.983 MeV 7.21 h 41.8% 17.2 h 
 212 8.621 MeV 16.436 MeV 7.825 MeV 0.31 s 100% 0.31 s 
 213 6.579 MeV 15.834 MeV 9.255 MeV 125 ns 100% 125 ns 
 214 3.380 MeV 12.366 MeV 8.986 MeV 558 ns 100% 558 ns 
 219 10.397 MeV 4.073 MeV 6.324 MeV 56 s 97% 58 s 
 220 14.350 MeV 8.298 MeV 6.052 MeV 3.71 min 8% 46.4 min 
 221 16.810 MeV 11.244 MeV 5.566 MeV 2.3 min experimentally alpha stable  

Astatine has 23 nuclear isomers, which are nuclei with one or more nucleons (protons or neutrons) in an excited state. A nuclear isomer may also be called a "meta-state", meaning the system has more internal energy than the "ground state" (the state with the lowest possible internal energy), making the former likely to decay into the latter. There may be more than one isomer for each isotope. The most stable of these nuclear isomers is astatine-202m1, which has a half-life of about 3 minutes, longer than those of all the ground states except for those of isotopes 203211 and 220. The least stable one is astatine-214m1; its half-life of 265 nanoseconds is shorter than those of all ground states except that of astatine-213. 

Astatine's alpha decay energies follow the same trend as for other heavy elements. Lighter astatine isotopes have quite high energies of alpha decay, which become lower as the nuclei become heavier. Astatine-211, however, has a significantly higher energy than the previous isotope, because it has a nucleus with 126 neutrons, and 126 is a magic number corresponding to a filled neutron shell. Despite having a similar half-life to the previous isotope (8.1 hours for astatine-210 and 7.2 hours for astatine-211), the alpha decay probability is much higher for the latter: 41.81% against only 0.18%. The two following isotopes release even more energy, with astatine-213 releasing the highest amount of energy of all astatine isotopes. For this reason, it is the shortest-lived astatine isotope. Even though heavier astatine isotopes release less energy, no long-lived astatine isotope exists, due to the increasing role of beta decay (electron emission). This decay mode is especially important for astatine; as early as 1950 it was postulated that the element has no beta-stable isotopes (i.e., ones that do not beta decay at all). Beta decay modes have been found for all astatine isotopes except astatine-213, astatine-214, astatine-215, and astatine-216m. Astatine-210 and lighter isotopes exhibit beta plus decay (positron emission), astatine-216 and heavier isotopes exhibit beta (minus) decay, and astatine-212 decays via both modes, while astatine-211 undergoes electron capture instead. 

The most stable isotope is astatine-210, which has a half-life of 8.1 hours. This isotope's primary decay mode is beta plus decay to the relatively long-lived (in comparison to astatine isotopes) alpha emitter polonium-210. In total, only five isotopes have half-lives exceeding one hour (those with mass numbers between 207 and 211). The least stable ground state isotope is astatine-213, with a half-life of 125 nanoseconds. It alpha decays to the extremely long-lived (in practice, stable) bismuth-209. 

==Natural occurrence==
Astatine is the rarest naturally occurring element that is not a transuranic element, with the total amount in Earth's crust estimated to be less than one gram at any given time. Any astatine that was present at the Earth's formation has long since decayed, and the minute amounts of astatine existing currently have formed through the decay of heavier elements. While it was previously thought to be the rarest element occurring on the Earth, astatine has lost this status to berkelium, atoms of which can be produced by neutron capture reactions and beta decay in very highly concentrated uranium-bearing deposits. 

Six astatine isotopes occur naturally (astatine-214 to astatine-219). Because of their short half-lives, they are found only in trace amounts. There is no data indicating that astatine occurs in stars.

Neptunium series, showing the decay products, including astatine-217, formed from neptunium-237

Four out of these isotopes (astatine-215, astatine-217, astatine-218, and astatine-219) are found due to their production in major natural decay chains. Francium-223, the father isotope of astatine-219, alpha decays with a probability of only 0.006%, making this astatine isotope extremely rare even compared to the other astatine isotopes; this is in spite of its half-life being the longest of the natural astatine isotopes (56 seconds). Astatine-219 decays to polonium-215, which itself beta decays to astatine-215 with an even smaller probability of 0.00023%. The entirety of North and South America combined, considered to a depth of 16 kilometers (10 miles), contain only about one trillion astatine-215 atoms at any given time. Astatine-218 is found in nature as a result of polonium-218 beta decay; as with francium-223 and polonium-215, decay to an astatine isotope is not the primary decay mode. However, the astatine-217 isotope has a straight chain leading directly to astatine; its father isotope (francium-221) decays exclusively to this nuclide. Given that its fathers, grandfathers, and so on each decay exclusively to only one nuclide, this gives only one possible way for the starting nuclide in the neptunium series (neptunium-237) to decay  via eventual production of astatine-217. 

The isotopes with mass numbers 214 through 216 are found as the result of triple alpha decay of the naturally present protactinium isotopes protactinium-226, protactinium-227, and protactinium-228. However, these isotopes are extremely rare, so much so that they are often not cited as natural astatine isotopes. 

==Synthesis==

===Formation===

:

 Possible reactions after bombarding bismuth-209 with alpha particles Reaction Energy of alpha particle 
 +  + 2 26 MeV 
 +  + 3 40 MeV 
 +  + 4 60 MeV 

Astatine was first produced by bombarding bismuth-209 with energetic alpha particles, and this is still the major route used to create the relatively long-lived isotopes astatine-209 through astatine-211. Astatine is only produced in microscopic quantities, with modern techniques allowing production runs of 2 terabecquerels (about 25 micrograms). 

The most important isotope is astatine-211, the only one to currently have a commercial use. To produce the bismuth target, the metal is sputtered onto a gold, copper, or aluminium surface at 50 to 100 milligrams per square centimeter. The bismuth layer, or alternatively bismuth oxide, is forcibly fused with a copper plate. The target is kept under a chemically neutral nitrogen atmosphere, and is cooled with water to prevent premature astatine vaporization. In a particle accelerator, such as a cyclotron, alpha particles (helium-4 nuclei) are collided with the bismuth. Even though there is only one bismuth isotope used (bismuth-209), the reaction may occur in three possible ways, producing astatine-209, astatine-210, or astatine-211. In order to eliminate undesired nuclides, the maximum energy of the particle accelerator is set to any value (such as 30 MeV) above that for the reaction producing astatine-211 (to produce the desired isotope) and below the one producing astatine-210 (to avoid producing other astatine isotopes).

===Separation===

Since the element is the main product of the synthesis, after its formation it must only be separated from the target and traces of other radioisotopes. The astatine-containing target is heated to 270 C to vaporize away volatile traces of radioisotopes, after which the temperature is raised to 800 C. Although 80% of astatine may vaporize at this temperature, bismuth begins to vaporize as well. Astatine's vaporization does not occur at an adequate rate at temperatures below 600 C, but at temperatures above 800 C, astatine's volatility from a bismuth surface increases significantly. The condensed vapor (distillate) is collected on a water-cooled platinum surface, which is later moved into a U-like quartz vessel. The quartz container vessel is heated to 130 C to remove further traces of impurities (typically polonium) and then to 500 C to remove astatine, which is collected on a cold finger. The purified element is then washed off the cold finger with a weak nitric acid solution. Using this technique, yields of astatine of up to 30% may be achieved.

==Uses and precautions==

:

 Several 211At-containing molecules and their uses Agent Applications 
 astatine-tellurium colloids Compartmental tumors 
 6-astato-2-methyl-1,4-naphtaquinol diphosphate Adenocarcinomas 
 211At-labeled methylene blue Melanomas 
 Meta-astatobenzyl guanidine Neuroendocrine tumors 
 5-astato-2'-deoxyuridine Various 
 211At-labeled biotin conjugates Various pretargeting 
 211At-labeled octreotide Somatostatin receptor 
 211At-labeled mAbs and fragments Various 
 211At-labeled bisphosphonates Bone metastases 

The newly formed astatine-211 is important in nuclear medicine. Once produced, astatine must be used quickly, as it decays with a half-life of 7.2 hours; this is, however, long enough to permit multi-step labeling strategies. Astatine-211 can be used for targeted alpha particle radiotherapy, since it decays either via emission of an alpha particle (to bismuth-207), or via electron capture (to an extremely short-lived nuclide of polonium-211, which itself undergoes further alpha decay). 

In a manner similar to iodine, astatine is preferentially concentrated in the thyroid gland, although to a lesser extent. However, it tends to concentrate in the liver in the form of a radiocolloid if it is released into the systemic circulation. The principal medicinal difference between astatine-211 and iodine-131 (a radioactive iodine isotope also used in medicine) is that astatine does not emit high energy beta particles (electrons), as does iodine-131. Beta particles have considerably greater penetrating power through tissues than do the much heavier alpha particles. While an average energy alpha particle released by decay of astatine-211 can travel up to 70 m through the surrounding tissues, an average energy beta particle emitted by iodine-131 can travel nearly 30 times as far, to about 2 mm. Thus, using astatine-211 instead of iodine-131 enables the thyroid to be dosed appropriately, while the neighboring parathyroid gland is spared. The short half-life and limited penetrating power of its radiation through tissues renders astatine generally preferable to iodine-131 when used in diagnosis as well.

Experiments in rats and monkeys, however, suggest that astatine causes much greater damage to the thyroid gland than does iodine-131, with repetitive injection of the nuclide resulting in necrosis and cell dysplasia within the gland. These experiments also suggest that astatine could cause damage to the thyroid of any organism. Early research suggested that injection of lethal quantities of astatine caused morphological changes in breast tissue (although not other tissues); however, this conclusion currently remains controversial. 

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Astatine at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)

 



[[Atom]]

The atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a dense central nucleus surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons. The atomic nucleus contains a mix of positively charged protons and electrically neutral neutrons (except in the case of hydrogen-1, which is the only stable nuclide with no neutrons). The electrons of an atom are bound to the nucleus by the electromagnetic force. Likewise, a group of atoms can remain bound to each other by chemical bonds based on the same force, forming a molecule. An atom containing an equal number of protons and electrons is electrically neutral, otherwise it is positively or negatively charged and is known as an ion. An atom is classified according to the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus: the number of protons determines the chemical element, and the number of neutrons determines the isotope of the element. 

Chemical atoms, which in science now carry the simple name of "atom," are minuscule objects with diameters of a few tenths of a nanometer and tiny masses proportional to the volume implied by these dimensions. Atoms can only be observed individually using special instruments such as the scanning tunneling microscope. Over 99.94% of an atom's mass is concentrated in the nucleus, In the case of hydrogen-1, with a single electron and nucleon, the proton is , or 99.946% of the total atomic mass. All other nuclides (isotopes of hydrogen and all other elements) have more nucleons than electrons, so the fraction of mass taken by the nucleus is significantly closer to 100% for all of these types of atoms, than for hydrogen-1. with protons and neutrons having roughly equal mass. Each element has at least one isotope with an unstable nucleus that can undergo radioactive decay. This can result in a transmutation that changes the number of protons or neutrons in a nucleus. Electrons that are bound to atoms possess a set of stable energy levels, or orbitals, and can undergo transitions between them by absorbing or emitting photons that match the energy differences between the levels. The electrons determine the chemical properties of an element, and strongly influence an atom's magnetic properties. The principles of quantum mechanics have been successfully used to model the observed properties of the atom.

==Etymology==
The name atom comes from the Greek  (atomos, "indivisible") from - (a-, "not") and  (temn, "I cut"), which means uncuttable, or indivisible, something that cannot be divided further. 

==History of atomic theory==

===Atoms in philosophy===

The idea that matter is made up of discrete units is a very old one, appearing in many ancient cultures such as Greece and India. The word "atom", in fact, was coined by ancient Greek philosophers. However, these ideas were founded in philosophical and theological reasoning rather than evidence and experimentation. As a result, their views on what atoms look like and how they behave were very incorrect. They also couldn't convince everybody, so atomism was but one of a number of competing theories on the nature of matter. It wasn't until the 19th century that the idea was embraced and refined by scientists, when the blossoming science of chemistry produced discoveries that only the concept of atoms could explain.

===First evidence-based theory===
Various atoms and molecules as depicted in John Dalton's A New System of Chemical Philosophy (1808).
In the early 1800s, John Dalton used the concept of atoms to explain why elements always react in ratios of small whole numbers (the law of multiple proportions). For instance: there are two types of tin oxideone is 88.1% tin and 11.9% oxygen and the other is 78.7% tin and 21.3% oxygen (tin(II) oxide and tin dioxide respectively). This means that 100g of tin will combine either with 13.5g or 27g of oxygen. 13.5 and 27 form a ratio of 1:2. This common pattern in chemistry suggested to Dalton that elements react in whole number multiples of discrete unitsin other words, atoms. In the case of tin oxides, one tin atom will combine with either one or two oxygen atoms. 

Dalton also believed atomic theory could explain why water absorbs different gases in different proportions. For example, he found that water absorbs carbon dioxide far better than it absorbs nitrogen. Dalton, John. "On the Absorption of Gases by Water and Other Liquids", in Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester. 1803. Retrieved on August 29, 2007. Dalton hypothesized this was due to the differences in mass and complexity of the gases' respective particles. Indeed, carbon dioxide molecules (CO2) are heavier and larger than nitrogen molecules (N2).

In 1827, botanist Robert Brown used a microscope to look at dust grains floating in water and discovered that they moved about erratically, a phenomenon that became known as "Brownian motion". This was thought to be caused by water molecules knocking the grains about. In 1905 Albert Einstein produced the first mathematical analysis of the motion. French physicist Jean Perrin used Einstein's work to experimentally determine the mass and dimensions of atoms, thereby conclusively verifying Dalton's atomic theory. 

===The structure of atoms===
The gold foil experiment Top: Expected results: alpha particles passing through the plum pudding model of the atom with negligible deflection. Bottom: Observed results: a small portion of the particles were deflected by the concentrated positive charge of the nucleus.
The physicist J. J. Thomson, through his work on cathode rays in 1897, discovered the electron, and concluded that they were a component of every atom. Thus he overturned the belief that atoms are the indivisible, ultimate particles of matter. Thomson postulated that the low mass, negatively charged electrons were distributed throughout the atom in a uniform sea of positive charge. This became known as the plum pudding model.

In 1909, Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden, under the direction of Ernest Rutherford, bombarded a metal foil with alpha particles to observe how they scattered. Going by Thomson's plum pudding model, all the alpha particles should have passed straight through the foil with little deflection, because the positive charge of its atoms should have been too dilute to affect them much. They instead observed a small fraction of alpha particles being deflected by angles greater than 90. To explain this, Rutherford proposed that each atom has a nucleus where the positive charge and most of the mass are concentrated, and these were what were deflecting those alpha particles so strongly. 

While experimenting with the products of radioactive decay, in 1913 radiochemist Frederick Soddy discovered that there appeared to be more than one type of atom at each position on the periodic table. The term isotope was coined by Margaret Todd as a suitable name for different atoms that belong to the same element. J.J. Thomson created a technique for separating atom types through his work on ionized gases, which subsequently led to the discovery of stable isotopes. 

The Bohr model of the atom, with an electron making instantaneous "quantum leaps" from one orbit to another. This model is obsolete.

Meanwhile, in 1913, physicist Niels Bohr suggested that the electrons were confined into clearly defined, quantized orbits, and could jump between these, but could not freely spiral inward or outward in intermediate states like satellites orbiting a planet. An electron must absorb or emit specific amounts of energy to transition between these fixed orbits. This explained why the electrons don't spiral down into the nucleus, and why elements absorb and emit light in discrete spectra. 

Later in the same year Henry Moseley provided additional experimental evidence in favor of Niels Bohr's theory. These results refined Ernest Rutherford's and Antonius Van den Broek's model, which proposed that the atom contains in its nucleus a number of positive nuclear charges that is equal to its (atomic) number in the periodic table. Until these experiments, atomic number was not known to be a physical and experimental quantity. That it is equal to the atomic nuclear charge remains the accepted atomic model today.

Chemical bonds between atoms were now explained, by Gilbert Newton Lewis in 1916, as the interactions between their constituent electrons. As the chemical properties of the elements were known to largely repeat themselves according to the periodic law, in 1919 the American chemist Irving Langmuir suggested that this could be explained if the electrons in an atom were connected or clustered in some manner. Groups of electrons were thought to occupy a set of electron shells about the nucleus. 

The SternGerlach experiment of 1922 provided further evidence of the quantum nature of the atom. When a beam of silver atoms was passed through a specially shaped magnetic field, the beam was split based on the direction of an atom's angular momentum, or spin. As this direction is random, the beam could be expected to spread into a line. Instead, the beam was split into two parts, depending on whether the atomic spin was oriented up or down. 

In 1924, Louis de Broglie proposed that all particles behave to an extent like waves. In 1926, Erwin Schrdinger used this idea to develop a mathematical model of the atom that described the electrons as three-dimensional waveforms rather than point particles. A consequence of using waveforms to describe particles is that it is mathematically impossible to obtain precise values for both the position and momentum of a particle at the same time; this became known as the uncertainty principle, formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1926. In this concept, for a given accuracy in measuring a position one could only obtain a range of probable values for momentum, and vice versa. This model was able to explain observations of atomic behavior that previous models could not, such as certain structural and spectral patterns of atoms larger than hydrogen. Thus, the planetary model of the atom was discarded in favor of one that described atomic orbital zones around the nucleus where a given electron is most likely to be observed. 

The development of the mass spectrometer allowed the exact mass of atoms to be measured. The device uses a magnet to bend the trajectory of a beam of ions, and the amount of deflection is determined by the ratio of an atom's mass to its charge. The chemist Francis William Aston used this instrument to show that isotopes had different masses. The atomic mass of these isotopes varied by integer amounts, called the whole number rule. The explanation for these different isotopes awaited the discovery of the neutron, a neutral-charged particle with a mass similar to the proton, by the physicist James Chadwick in 1932. Isotopes were then explained as elements with the same number of protons, but different numbers of neutrons within the nucleus. 

===Fission, high-energy physics and condensed matter===
In 1938, the German chemist Otto Hahn, a student of Rutherford, directed neutrons onto uranium atoms expecting to get transuranium elements. Instead, his chemical experiments showed barium as a product. A year later, Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch verified that Hahn's result were the first experimental nuclear fission. In 1944, Hahn received the Nobel prize in chemistry. Despite Hahn's efforts, the contributions of Meitner and Frisch were not recognized. 

In the 1950s, the development of improved particle accelerators and particle detectors allowed scientists to study the impacts of atoms moving at high energies. Neutrons and protons were found to be hadrons, or composites of smaller particles called quarks. The standard model of particle physics was developed that so far has successfully explained the properties of the nucleus in terms of these sub-atomic particles and the forces that govern their interactions. 

==Structure==
===Subatomic particles===

Though the word atom originally denoted a particle that cannot be cut into smaller particles, in modern scientific usage the atom is composed of various subatomic particles. The constituent particles of an atom are the electron, the proton and the neutron; all three are fermions. However, the hydrogen-1 atom has no neutrons and the hydron ion has no electrons.

The electron is by far the least massive of these particles at , with a negative electrical charge and a size that is too small to be measured using available techniques. It is the lightest particle with a positive rest mass measured. Under ordinary conditions, electrons are bound to the positively charged nucleus by the attraction created from opposite electric charges. If an atom have more or fewer electrons than its atomic number, then is become respectively negatively or positively charged as a whole; a charged atom is called ion. Electrons are known since the late 19th century, mostly thanks to J.J. Thomson; see history of subatomic physics for details.

Protons have a positive charge and a mass 1,836 times that of the electron, at . The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. Ernest Rutherford (1919) observed that nitrogen under alpha-particle bombardment ejects what appeared to be hydrogen nuclei. By 1920 he had accepted that the hydrogen nucleus is a distinct particle within the atom and named it proton.

Neutrons have no electrical charge and have a free mass of 1,839 times the mass of the electron, or , the heaviest of the three constituent particles, but it can be reduced by the nuclear binding energy. Neutrons and protons (collectively known as nucleons) have comparable dimensionson the order of although the 'surface' of these particles is not sharply defined. The neutron was discovered in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick.

In the Standard Model of physics, electrons are truly elementary particles with no internal structure. However, both protons and neutrons are composite particles composed of elementary particles called quarks. There are two types of quarks in atoms, each having a fractional electric charge. Protons are composed of two up quarks (each with charge +) and one down quark (with a charge of ). Neutrons consist of one up quark and two down quarks. This distinction accounts for the difference in mass and charge between the two particles. 

The quarks are held together by the strong interaction (or strong force), which is mediated by gluons. The protons and neutrons, in turn, are held to each other in the nucleus by the nuclear force, which is a residuum of the strong force that has somewhat different range-properties (see the article on the nuclear force for more). The gluon is a member of the family of gauge bosons, which are elementary particles that mediate physical forces. 

===Nucleus===

The binding energy needed for a nucleon to escape the nucleus, for various isotopes

All the bound protons and neutrons in an atom make up a tiny atomic nucleus, and are collectively called nucleons. The radius of a nucleus is approximately equal to 1.07 fm, where A is the total number of nucleons. This is much smaller than the radius of the atom, which is on the order of 105 fm. The nucleons are bound together by a short-ranged attractive potential called the residual strong force. At distances smaller than 2.5 fm this force is much more powerful than the electrostatic force that causes positively charged protons to repel each other.

Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, called the atomic number. Within a single element, the number of neutrons may vary, determining the isotope of that element. The total number of protons and neutrons determine the nuclide. The number of neutrons relative to the protons determines the stability of the nucleus, with certain isotopes undergoing radioactive decay. 

The proton, the electron, and the neutron are classified as fermions. Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle which prohibits identical fermions, such as multiple protons, from occupying the same quantum state at the same time. Thus, every proton in the nucleus must occupy a quantum state different from all other protons, and the same applies to all neutrons of the nucleus and to all electrons of the electron cloud. However, a proton and a neutron are allowed to occupy the same quantum state. 

For atoms with low atomic numbers, a nucleus that has more neutrons than protons tends to drop to a lower energy state through radioactive decay so that the neutron-proton ratio is closer to one. However, as the atomic number increases, a higher proportion of neutrons is required to offset the mutual repulsion of the protons. Thus, there are no stable nuclei with equal proton and neutron numbers above atomic number Z = 20 (calcium) and as Z increases, the neutron-proton ratio of stable isotopes increases. The stable isotope with the highest proton-neutron ration is lead-208 (about 1.5).

Illustration of a nuclear fusion process that forms a deuterium nucleus, consisting of a proton and a neutron, from two protons. A positron (e+)an antimatter electronis emitted along with an electron neutrino.

The number of protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus can be modified, although this can require very high energies because of the strong force. Nuclear fusion occurs when multiple atomic particles join to form a heavier nucleus, such as through the energetic collision of two nuclei. For example, at the core of the Sun protons require energies of 310 keV to overcome their mutual repulsionthe coulomb barrierand fuse together into a single nucleus. Nuclear fission is the opposite process, causing a nucleus to split into two smaller nucleiusually through radioactive decay. The nucleus can also be modified through bombardment by high energy subatomic particles or photons. If this modifies the number of protons in a nucleus, the atom changes to a different chemical element. 

If the mass of the nucleus following a fusion reaction is less than the sum of the masses of the separate particles, then the difference between these two values can be emitted as a type of usable energy (such as a gamma ray, or the kinetic energy of a beta particle), as described by Albert Einstein's massenergy equivalence formula, E = mc2, where m is the mass loss and c is the speed of light. This deficit is part of the binding energy of the new nucleus, and it is the non-recoverable loss of the energy that causes the fused particles to remain together in a state that requires this energy to separate.

The fusion of two nuclei that create larger nuclei with lower atomic numbers than iron and nickela total nucleon number of about 60is usually an exothermic process that releases more energy than is required to bring them together. It is this energy-releasing process that makes nuclear fusion in stars a self-sustaining reaction. For heavier nuclei, the binding energy per nucleon in the nucleus begins to decrease. That means fusion processes producing nuclei that have atomic numbers higher than about 26, and atomic masses higher than about 60, is an endothermic process. These more massive nuclei can not undergo an energy-producing fusion reaction that can sustain the hydrostatic equilibrium of a star. 

===Electron cloud===

A potential well, showing, according to classical mechanics, the minimum energy V(x) needed to reach each position x. Classically, a particle with energy E is constrained to a range of positions between x1 and x2.
The electrons in an atom are attracted to the protons in the nucleus by the electromagnetic force. This force binds the electrons inside an electrostatic potential well surrounding the smaller nucleus, which means that an external source of energy is needed for the electron to escape. The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the greater the attractive force. Hence electrons bound near the center of the potential well require more energy to escape than those at greater separations.

Electrons, like other particles, have properties of both a particle and a wave. The electron cloud is a region inside the potential well where each electron forms a type of three-dimensional standing wavea wave form that does not move relative to the nucleus. This behavior is defined by an atomic orbital, a mathematical function that characterises the probability that an electron appears to be at a particular location when its position is measured. Only a discrete (or quantized) set of these orbitals exist around the nucleus, as other possible wave patterns rapidly decay into a more stable form. Orbitals can have one or more ring or node structures, and they differ from each other in size, shape and orientation. 

Wave functions of the first five atomic orbitals. The three 2p orbitals each display a single angular node that has an orientation and a minimum at the center. How atoms are constructed from electron orbitals and link to the periodic table

Each atomic orbital corresponds to a particular energy level of the electron. The electron can change its state to a higher energy level by absorbing a photon with sufficient energy to boost it into the new quantum state. Likewise, through spontaneous emission, an electron in a higher energy state can drop to a lower energy state while radiating the excess energy as a photon. These characteristic energy values, defined by the differences in the energies of the quantum states, are responsible for atomic spectral lines. 

The amount of energy needed to remove or add an electronthe electron binding energyis far less than the binding energy of nucleons. For example, it requires only 13.6 eV to strip a ground-state electron from a hydrogen atom, compared to 2.23 million eV for splitting a deuterium nucleus. Atoms are electrically neutral if they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Atoms that have either a deficit or a surplus of electrons are called ions. Electrons that are farthest from the nucleus may be transferred to other nearby atoms or shared between atoms. By this mechanism, atoms are able to bond into molecules and other types of chemical compounds like ionic and covalent network crystals.

==Properties==

===Nuclear properties===

By definition, any two atoms with an identical number of protons in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element. Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of neutrons are different isotopes of the same element. For example, all hydrogen atoms admit exactly one proton, but isotopes exist with no neutrons (hydrogen-1, by far the most common form, also called protium), one neutron (deuterium), two neutrons (tritium) and more than two neutrons. The known elements form a set of atomic numbers, from the single proton element hydrogen up to the 118-proton element ununoctium. All known isotopes of elements with atomic numbers greater than 82 are radioactive. 

About 339 nuclides occur naturally on Earth, of which 254 (about 75%) have not been observed to decay, and are referred to as "stable isotopes". However, only 90 of these nuclides are stable to all decay, even in theory. Another 164 (bringing the total to 254) have not been observed to decay, even though in theory it is energetically possible. These are also formally classified as "stable". An additional 34 radioactive nuclides have half-lives longer than 80 million years, and are long-lived enough to be present from the birth of the solar system. This collection of 288 nuclides are known as primordial nuclides. Finally, an additional 51 short-lived nuclides are known to occur naturally, as daughter products of primordial nuclide decay (such as radium from uranium), or else as products of natural energetic processes on Earth, such as cosmic ray bombardment (for example, carbon-14). For more recent updates see Interactive Chart of Nuclides (Brookhaven National Laboratory). 

For 80 of the chemical elements, at least one stable isotope exists. As a rule, there is only a handful of stable isotopes for each of these elements, the average being 3.2 stable isotopes per element. Twenty-six elements have only a single stable isotope, while the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten, for the element tin. Elements 43, 61, and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes. CRC Handbook (2002). 

Stability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons, and also by the presence of certain "magic numbers" of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells. These quantum shells correspond to a set of energy levels within the shell model of the nucleus; filled shells, such as the filled shell of 50 protons for tin, confers unusual stability on the nuclide. Of the 254 known stable nuclides, only four have both an odd number of protons and odd number of neutrons: hydrogen-2 (deuterium), lithium-6, boron-10 and nitrogen-14. Also, only four naturally occurring, radioactive odd-odd nuclides have a half-life over a billion years: potassium-40, vanadium-50, lanthanum-138 and tantalum-180m. Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay, because the decay products are even-even, and are therefore more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects. 

===Mass===

The large majority of an atom's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up. The total number of these particles (called "nucleons") in a given atom is called the mass number. The mass number is a simple whole number, and has units of "nucleons." An example of use of a mass number is "carbon-12," which has 12 nucleons (six protons and six neutrons).

The actual mass of an atom at rest is often expressed using the unified atomic mass unit (u), which is also called a dalton (Da). This unit is defined as a twelfth of the mass of a free neutral atom of carbon-12, which is approximately . Hydrogen-1, the lightest isotope of hydrogen and the atom with the lowest mass, has an atomic weight of 1.007825 u. The value of this number is called the atomic mass. A given atom has an atomic mass approximately equal (within 1%) to its mass number times the mass of the atomic mass unit. However, this number will not be an exact whole number except in the case of carbon-12 (see below). The heaviest stable atom is lead-208, with a mass of . 

As even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly, chemists instead use the unit of moles. One mole of atoms of any element always has the same number of atoms (about constant|]). This number was chosen so that if an element has an atomic mass of 1 u, a mole of atoms of that element has a mass close to one gram. Because of the definition of the unified atomic mass unit, each carbon-12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12 u, and so a mole of carbon-12 atoms weighs exactly 0.012 kg. Mills et al. (1993). 

===Shape and size===

Atoms lack a well-defined outer boundary, so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius. This is a measure of the distance out to which the electron cloud extends from the nucleus. However, this assumes the atom to exhibit a spherical shape, which is only obeyed for atoms in vacuum or free space. Atomic radii may be derived from the distances between two nuclei when the two atoms are joined in a chemical bond. The radius varies with the location of an atom on the atomic chart, the type of chemical bond, the number of neighboring atoms (coordination number) and a quantum mechanical property known as spin. On the periodic table of the elements, atom size tends to increase when moving down columns, but decrease when moving across rows (left to right). Consequently, the smallest atom is helium with a radius of 32 pm, while one of the largest is caesium at 225 pm. Zumdahl (2002). 

When subjected to external fields, like an electrical field, the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry. The deformation depends on the field magnitude and the orbital type of outer shell electrons, as shown by group-theoretical considerations. Aspherical deviations might be elicited for instance in crystals, where large crystal-electrical fields may occur at low-symmetry lattice sites. Significant ellipsoidal deformations have recently been shown to occur for sulfur ions in pyrite-type compounds. 

Atomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light (400700 nm) so they can not be viewed using an optical microscope. However, individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope. To visualize the minuteness of the atom, consider that a typical human hair is about 1 million carbon atoms in width. A single drop of water contains about 2 sextillion () atoms of oxygen, and twice the number of hydrogen atoms. Padilla et al. (2002:32)"There are 2,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 (that's 2 sextillion) atoms of oxygen in one drop of waterand twice as many atoms of hydrogen." A single carat diamond with a mass of contains about 10 sextillion (1022) atoms of carbon. A carat is 200 milligrams. By definition, carbon-12 has 0.012 kg per mole. The Avogadro constant defines atoms per mole. If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth, then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple.

===Radioactive decay===

This diagram shows the half-life (T) of various isotopes with Z protons and N neutrons.

Every element has one or more isotopes that have unstable nuclei that are subject to radioactive decay, causing the nucleus to emit particles or electromagnetic radiation. Radioactivity can occur when the radius of a nucleus is large compared with the radius of the strong force, which only acts over distances on the order of 1 fm. 

The most common forms of radioactive decay are: 
* Alpha decay: this process is caused when the nucleus emits an alpha particle, which is a helium nucleus consisting of two protons and two neutrons. The result of the emission is a new element with a lower atomic number.
* Beta decay (and electron capture): these processes are regulated by the weak force, and result from a transformation of a neutron into a proton, or a proton into a neutron. The neutron to proton transition is accompanied by the emission of an electron and an antineutrino, while proton to neutron transition (except in electron capture) causes the emission of a positron and a neutrino. The electron or positron emissions are called beta particles. Beta decay either increases or decreases the atomic number of the nucleus by one. Electron capture is more common than positron emission, because it requires less energy. In this type of decay, an electron is absorbed by the nucleus, rather than a positron emitted from the nucleus. A neutrino is still emitted in this process, and a proton changes to a neutron.
* Gamma decay: this process results from a change in the energy level of the nucleus to a lower state, resulting in the emission of electromagnetic radiation. The excited state of a nucleus which results in gamma emission usually occurs following the emission of an alpha or a beta particle. Thus, gamma decay usually follows alpha or beta decay.

Other more rare types of radioactive decay include ejection of neutrons or protons or clusters of nucleons from a nucleus, or more than one beta particle. An analog of gamma emission which allows excited nuclei to lose energy in a different way, is internal conversion a process that produces high-speed electrons that are not beta rays, followed by production of high-energy photons that are not gamma rays. A few large nuclei explode into two or more charged fragments of varying masses plus several neutrons, in a decay called spontaneous nuclear fission.

Each radioactive isotope has a characteristic decay time periodthe half-lifethat is determined by the amount of time needed for half of a sample to decay. This is an exponential decay process that steadily decreases the proportion of the remaining isotope by 50% every half-life. Hence after two half-lives have passed only 25% of the isotope is present, and so forth. 

===Magnetic moment===

Elementary particles possess an intrinsic quantum mechanical property known as spin. This is analogous to the angular momentum of an object that is spinning around its center of mass, although strictly speaking these particles are believed to be point-like and cannot be said to be rotating. Spin is measured in units of the reduced Planck constant (), with electrons, protons and neutrons all having spin  , or "spin-". In an atom, electrons in motion around the nucleus possess orbital angular momentum in addition to their spin, while the nucleus itself possesses angular momentum due to its nuclear spin. 

The magnetic field produced by an atomits magnetic momentis determined by these various forms of angular momentum, just as a rotating charged object classically produces a magnetic field. However, the most dominant contribution comes from spin. Due to the nature of electrons to obey the Pauli exclusion principle, in which no two electrons may be found in the same quantum state, bound electrons pair up with each other, with one member of each pair in a spin up state and the other in the opposite, spin down state. Thus these spins cancel each other out, reducing the total magnetic dipole moment to zero in some atoms with even number of electrons. 

In ferromagnetic elements such as iron, an odd number of electrons leads to an unpaired electron and a net overall magnetic moment. The orbitals of neighboring atoms overlap and a lower energy state is achieved when the spins of unpaired electrons are aligned with each other, a process known as an exchange interaction. When the magnetic moments of ferromagnetic atoms are lined up, the material can produce a measurable macroscopic field. Paramagnetic materials have atoms with magnetic moments that line up in random directions when no magnetic field is present, but the magnetic moments of the individual atoms line up in the presence of a field. 

The nucleus of an atom can also have a net spin. Normally these nuclei are aligned in random directions because of thermal equilibrium. However, for certain elements (such as xenon-129) it is possible to polarize a significant proportion of the nuclear spin states so that they are aligned in the same directiona condition called hyperpolarization. This has important applications in magnetic resonance imaging. 

===Energy levels===
These electron's energy levels (not to scale) are sufficient for ground states of atoms up to cadmium (5s2 4d10) inclusively. Do not forget that even the top of the diagram is lower than an unbound electron state.
The potential energy of an electron in an atom is negative, its dependence of its position reaches the minimum (the most absolute value) inside the nucleus, and vanishes when the distance from the nucleus goes to infinity, roughly in an inverse proportion to the distance. In the quantum-mechanical model, a bound electron can only occupy a set of states centered on the nucleus, and each state corresponds to a specific energy level; see time-independent Schrdinger equation for theoretical explanation. An energy level can be measured by the amount of energy needed to unbind the electron from the atom, and is usually given in units of electronvolts (eV). The lowest energy state of a bound electron is called the ground state, i.e. stationary state, while an electron transition to a higher level results in an excited state. The electron's energy raises when n increases because the (average) distance to the nucleus increases. Dependence of the energy on quantum number|] is caused not by electrostatic potential of the nucleus, but by interaction between electrons.

For an electron to transition between two different states, e.g. grounded state to first excited level (ionization), it must absorb or emit a photon at an energy matching the difference in the potential energy of those levels, according to Niels Bohr model, what can be precisely calculated by the Schrdinger equation.
Electrons jump between orbitals in a particle-like fashion. For example, if a single photon strikes the electrons, only a single electron changes states in response to the photon; see Electron properties.

The energy of an emitted photon is proportional to its frequency, so these specific energy levels appear as distinct bands in the electromagnetic spectrum. Fowles (1989:227233). Each element has a characteristic spectrum that can depend on the nuclear charge, subshells filled by electrons, the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and other factors. 

An example of absorption lines in a spectrum

When a continuous spectrum of energy is passed through a gas or plasma, some of the photons are absorbed by atoms, causing electrons to change their energy level. Those excited electrons that remain bound to their atom spontaneously emit this energy as a photon, traveling in a random direction, and so drop back to lower energy levels. Thus the atoms behave like a filter that forms a series of dark absorption bands in the energy output. (An observer viewing the atoms from a view that does not include the continuous spectrum in the background, instead sees a series of emission lines from the photons emitted by the atoms.) Spectroscopic measurements of the strength and width of atomic spectral lines allow the composition and physical properties of a substance to be determined. 

Close examination of the spectral lines reveals that some display a fine structure splitting. This occurs because of spinorbit coupling, which is an interaction between the spin and motion of the outermost electron. When an atom is in an external magnetic field, spectral lines become split into three or more components; a phenomenon called the Zeeman effect. This is caused by the interaction of the magnetic field with the magnetic moment of the atom and its electrons. Some atoms can have multiple electron configurations with the same energy level, which thus appear as a single spectral line. The interaction of the magnetic field with the atom shifts these electron configurations to slightly different energy levels, resulting in multiple spectral lines. The presence of an external electric field can cause a comparable splitting and shifting of spectral lines by modifying the electron energy levels, a phenomenon called the Stark effect.

If a bound electron is in an excited state, an interacting photon with the proper energy can cause stimulated emission of a photon with a matching energy level. For this to occur, the electron must drop to a lower energy state that has an energy difference matching the energy of the interacting photon. The emitted photon and the interacting photon then move off in parallel and with matching phases. That is, the wave patterns of the two photons are synchronized. This physical property is used to make lasers, which can emit a coherent beam of light energy in a narrow frequency band. 

===Valence and bonding behavior===

The outermost electron shell of an atom in its uncombined state is known as the valence shell, and the electrons in
that shell are called valence electrons. The number of valence electrons determines the bonding
behavior with other atoms. Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills (or empties) their outer valence shells. For example, a transfer of a single electron between atoms is a useful approximation for bonds that form between atoms with one-electron more than a filled shell, and others that are one-electron short of a full shell, such as occurs in the compound sodium chloride and other chemical ionic salts. However, many elements display multiple valences, or tendencies to share differing numbers of electrons in different compounds. Thus, chemical bonding between these elements takes many forms of electron-sharing that are more than simple electron transfers. Examples include the element carbon and the organic compounds. 

The chemical elements are often displayed in a periodic table that is laid out to display recurring chemical properties, and elements with the same number of valence electrons form a group that is aligned in the same column of the table. (The horizontal rows correspond to the filling of a quantum shell of electrons.) The elements at the far right of the table have their outer shell completely filled with electrons, which results in chemically inert elements known as the noble gases. 

===States===

Snapshots illustrating the formation of a BoseEinstein condensate
Quantities of atoms are found in different states of matter that depend on the physical conditions, such as temperature and pressure. By varying the conditions, materials can transition between solids, liquids, gases and plasmas.
 Within a state, a material can also exist in different allotropes. An example of this is solid carbon, which can exist as graphite or diamond. Gaseous allotropes exist as well, such as dioxygen and ozone.

At temperatures close to absolute zero, atoms can form a BoseEinstein condensate, at which point quantum mechanical effects, which are normally only observed at the atomic scale, become apparent on a macroscopic scale. This super-cooled collection of atoms
then behaves as a single super atom, which may allow fundamental checks of quantum mechanical behavior. 

==Identification==
Scanning tunneling microscope image showing the individual atoms making up this gold (100) surface. Reconstruction causes the surface atoms to deviate from the bulk crystal structure and arrange in columns several atoms wide with pits between them.
The scanning tunneling microscope is a device for viewing surfaces at the atomic level. It uses the quantum tunneling phenomenon, which allows particles to pass through a barrier that would normally be insurmountable. Electrons tunnel through the vacuum between two planar metal electrodes, on each of which is an adsorbed atom, providing a tunneling-current density that can be measured. Scanning one atom (taken as the tip) as it moves past the other (the sample) permits plotting of tip displacement versus lateral separation for a constant current. The calculation shows the extent to which scanning-tunneling-microscope images of an individual atom are visible. It confirms that for low bias, the microscope images the space-averaged dimensions of the electron orbitals across closely packed energy levelsthe Fermi level local density of states. 

An atom can be ionized by removing one of its electrons. The electric charge causes the trajectory of an atom to bend when it passes through a magnetic field. The radius by which the trajectory of a moving ion is turned by the magnetic field is determined by the mass of the atom. The mass spectrometer uses this principle to measure the mass-to-charge ratio of ions. If a sample contains multiple isotopes, the mass spectrometer can determine the proportion of each isotope in the sample by measuring the intensity of the different beams of ions. Techniques to vaporize atoms include inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, both of which use a plasma to vaporize samples for analysis. 

A more area-selective method is electron energy loss spectroscopy, which measures the energy loss of an electron beam within a transmission electron microscope when it interacts with a portion of a sample. The atom-probe tomograph has sub-nanometer resolution in 3-D and can chemically identify individual atoms using time-of-flight mass spectrometry. 

Spectra of excited states can be used to analyze the atomic composition of distant stars. Specific light wavelengths contained in the observed light from stars can be separated out and related to the quantized transitions in free gas atoms. These colors can be replicated using a gas-discharge lamp containing the same element. Helium was discovered in this way in the spectrum of the Sun 23 years before it was found on Earth. 

==Origin and current state==
Atoms form about 4% of the total energy density of the observable Universe, with an average density of about 0.25 atoms/m3. Within a galaxy such as the Milky Way, atoms have a much higher concentration, with the density of matter in the interstellar medium (ISM) ranging from 105 to 109 atoms/m3. The Sun is believed to be inside the Local Bubble, a region of highly ionized gas, so the density in the solar neighborhood is only about 103 atoms/m3. Stars form from dense clouds in the ISM, and the evolutionary processes of stars result in the steady enrichment of the ISM with elements more massive than hydrogen and helium. Up to 95% of the Milky Way's atoms are concentrated inside stars and the total mass of atoms forms about 10% of the mass of the galaxy. (The remainder of the mass is an unknown dark matter.) 

===Formation===
Electrons are thought to exist in the Universe since early stages of the Big Bang. Atomic nuclei forms in nucleosynthesis reactions. In about three minutes Big Bang nucleosynthesis produced most of the helium, lithium, and deuterium in the Universe, and perhaps some of the beryllium and boron. 

Ubiquitousness and stability of atoms relies on their binding energy, which means that an atom has a lower energy than an unbound system of the nucleus and electrons. Where the temperature is much higher than ionization potential, the matter exists in the form of plasma a gas of positively-charged ions (possibly, bare nuclei) and electrons. When the temperature drops below the ionization potential, atoms become statistically favorable. Atoms (complete with bound electrons) became to dominate over charged particles 380,000 years after the Big Bangan epoch called recombination, when the expanding Universe cooled enough to allow electrons to become attached to nuclei. 

Since the Big Bang, which produced no carbon or heavier elements, atomic nuclei have been combined in stars through the process of nuclear fusion to produce more of the element helium, and (via the triple alpha process) the sequence of elements from carbon up to iron; see stellar nucleosynthesis for details.

Isotopes such as lithium-6, as well as some beryllium and boron are generated in space through cosmic ray spallation. This occurs when a high-energy proton strikes an atomic nucleus, causing large numbers of nucleons to be ejected.

Elements heavier than iron were produced in supernovae through the r-process and in AGB stars through the s-process, both of which involve the capture of neutrons by atomic nuclei. Elements such as lead formed largely through the radioactive decay of heavier elements. 

===Earth===
Most of the atoms that make up the Earth and its inhabitants were present in their current form in the nebula that collapsed out of a molecular cloud to form the Solar System. The rest are the result of radioactive decay, and their relative proportion can be used to determine the age of the Earth through radiometric dating. Most of the helium in the crust of the Earth (about 99% of the helium from gas wells, as shown by its lower abundance of helium-3) is a product of alpha decay. 

There are a few trace atoms on Earth that were not present at the beginning (i.e., not "primordial"), nor are results of radioactive decay. Carbon-14 is continuously generated by cosmic rays in the atmosphere. Some atoms on Earth have been artificially generated either deliberately or as by-products of nuclear reactors or explosions. Of the transuranic elementsthose with atomic numbers greater than 92only plutonium and neptunium occur naturally on Earth. Transuranic elements have radioactive lifetimes shorter than the current age of the Earth and thus identifiable quantities of these elements have long since decayed, with the exception of traces of plutonium-244 possibly deposited by cosmic dust. Natural deposits of plutonium and neptunium are produced by neutron capture in uranium ore. 

The Earth contains approximately atoms. Although small numbers of independent atoms of noble gases exist, such as argon, neon, and helium, 99% of the atmosphere is bound in the form of molecules, including carbon dioxide and diatomic oxygen and nitrogen. At the surface of the Earth, an overwhelming majority of atoms combine to form various compounds, including water, salt, silicates and oxides. Atoms can also combine to create materials that do not consist of discrete molecules, including crystals and liquid or solid metals. This atomic matter forms networked arrangements that lack the particular type of small-scale interrupted order associated with molecular matter.

===Rare and theoretical forms===

====Superheavy elements====

While isotopes with atomic numbers higher than lead (82) are known to be radioactive, an "island of stability" has been proposed for some elements with atomic numbers above 103. These superheavy elements may have a nucleus that is relatively stable against radioactive decay. The most likely candidate for a stable superheavy atom, unbihexium, has 126 protons and 184 neutrons. 

==== Exotic matter ====

Each particle of matter has a corresponding antimatter particle with the opposite electrical charge. Thus, the positron is a positively charged antielectron and the antiproton is a negatively charged equivalent of a proton. When a matter and corresponding antimatter particle meet, they annihilate each other. Because of this, along with an imbalance between the number of matter and antimatter particles, the latter are rare in the universe. The first causes of this imbalance are not yet fully understood, although theories of baryogenesis may offer an explanation. As a result, no antimatter atoms have been discovered in nature. However, in 1996 the antimatter counterpart of the hydrogen atom (antihydrogen) was synthesized at the CERN laboratory in Geneva. 

Other exotic atoms have been created by replacing one of the protons, neutrons or electrons with other particles that have the same charge. For example, an electron can be replaced by a more massive muon, forming a muonic atom. These types of atoms can be used to test the fundamental predictions of physics. 

==See also==

* History of quantum mechanics
* Infinite divisibility
* List of basic chemistry topics
* Timeline of atomic and subatomic physics

* Vector model of the atom
* Nuclear model
* Radioactive isotope

==Notes==

==References==

Encyclopdia Britannica

===Book references===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* a guide to the atom for teens.
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Arable land]]

Modern arable agriculture typically uses large fields like this one in Dorset, England

In geography and agriculture, arable land (from Latin arre; To plough, To farm) is land ploughed or tilled regularly, generally under a system of crop rotation. 

According to definitions and survey recommendations by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), used by for example Eurostat and the World Bank, arable land is agricultural land occupied by crops both sown and harvested during the same agricultural year, sometimes more than once. Land is also considered arable if used as temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, market and kitchen gardens; as well as temporarily fallow land  not seeded for one or more growing seasons, yet not left idle for more than five years. 

Permanent crops that occupy the land for a number of years, and don't need replanting after each annual harvest  like coffee, rubber, flowering shrubs, fruit, nut trees and vines  are not counted as existing on arable land, but as existing on permanent cropland. 

Permanent pastures and meadows used for grazing, land mowed for hay or silage not included in a crop rotation scheme, and abandoned land resulting from shifting cultivation is also not counted as arable, along with lands with built-on and barren areas, forests and woodlands. 

==Arable land area==

Although constrained by land mass and topography, the amount of arable land, both regionally and globally, fluctuates due to human and climatic factors such as irrigation, deforestation, desertification, terracing, land reclamation and urban sprawl. In 2008, the world's arable land amounted to 1,386 M ha, out of a total 4,883 M ha land used for agriculture. 

 Arable land area ('000 km2) Country or region 2008 2009 2010 2011 USA 1,631 1,605 1,598 1,602 India 1,579 1,578 1,575 1,574 Russia 1,216 1,218 1,200 1,215 China 1,086 1,100 1,114 1,116 Brazil 702 704 703 719 Australia 440 471 426 477 Canada 443 438 434 430 Argentina 351 338 372 380 Nigeria 370 340 360 360 Ukraine 325 325 325 325 EU 1,091 1,089 1,074 1,074 World 13,866 13,873 13,880 13,962 World map of arable land, percentage by country 

==Non-arable land==

Water Buffalo ploughing rice fields near Salatiga, Central Java, Indonesia

Land which is unsuitable for arable farming usually has at least one of the following deficiencies: no source of fresh water; too hot (desert); too cold (Arctic); too rocky; too mountainous; too salty; too rainy; too snowy; too polluted; or too nutrient poor. Clouds may block the sunlight plants need for photosynthesis, reducing productivity. Starvation and nomadism often exists on marginally arable land. Non-arable land is sometimes called wasteland, badlands, worthless or no man's land.

However, non-arable land can sometimes be converted into arable land. New arable land makes more food, and can reduce starvation. This outcome also makes a country more self-sufficient and politically independent, because food importation is reduced. Making non-arable land arable often involves digging new irrigation canals and new wells, aqueducts, desalination plants, planting trees for shade in the desert, hydroponics, fertilizer, nitrogen fertilizer, pesticides, reverse osmosis water processors, PET film insulation or other insulation against heat and cold, digging ditches and hills for protection against the wind, and greenhouses with internal light and heat for protection against the cold outside and to provide light in cloudy areas. This process is often extremely expensive. An alternative is the Seawater Greenhouse which desalinates water through evaporation and condensation using solar energy as the only energy input. This technology is optimized to grow crops on desert land close to the sea.

Some examples of infertile non-arable land being turned into fertile arable land are:
* Aran Islands: These islands off the west coast of Ireland, (not to be confused with the Isle of Arran in Scotland's Firth of Clyde), were unsuitable for arable farming because they were too rocky. The people covered the islands with a shallow layer of seaweed and sand from the ocean. This made it arable. Today, crops are grown there.
* Israel: Israel's land primarily consisted of desert until the construction of desalination plants along the country's coast. The desalination plants, which remove the salt from ocean water, have created a new source of water for farming, drinking, and washing.
* Slash and burn agriculture uses nutrients in wood ash, but these expire within a few years

* Terra preta, fertile tropical soils created by adding charcoal.

Some examples of fertile arable land being turned into infertile land are:
* Droughts like the 'dust bowl' of the Great Depression in the U.S. turned farmland into desert.
* Rainforest Deforestation: The fertile tropical forests are converted into infertile desert land. For example, Madagascar's central highland plateau has become virtually totally barren (about ten percent of the country), as a result of slash-and-burn deforestation, an element of shifting cultivation practiced by many natives.
* Each year, arable land is lost due to desertification and human-induced erosion. Improper irrigation of farm land can wick the sodium, calcium, and magnesium from the soil and water to the surface. This process steadily concentrates salt in the root zone, decreasing productivity for crops that are not salt-tolerant.

==See also==
* Soil fertility
* Land use statistics by country
* List of environment topics

==References==

==External links==
* Surface area of the Earth
* Article from Technorati on Shrinking Arable Farmland in the world



[[Aluminium]]

Aluminium (or aluminum; see spelling differences) is a chemical element in the boron group with symbol Al and atomic number 13. It is a silvery white, soft, ductile metal. Aluminium is the third most abundant element (after oxygen and silicon), and the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust. It makes up about 8% by weight of the Earth's solid surface. Aluminium metal is so chemically reactive that native specimens are rare and limited to extreme reducing environments. Instead, it is found combined in over 270 different minerals. 
 The chief ore of aluminium is bauxite.

Aluminium is remarkable for the metal's low density and for its ability to resist corrosion due to the phenomenon of passivation. Structural components made from aluminium and its alloys are vital to the aerospace industry and are important in other areas of transportation and structural materials. The most useful compounds of aluminium, at least on a weight basis, are the oxides and sulfates.

Despite its prevalence in the environment, no known form of life uses aluminium salts metabolically. In keeping with its pervasiveness, aluminium is well tolerated by plants and animals. Owing to their prevalence, potential beneficial (or otherwise) biological roles of aluminium compounds are of continuing interest.

==Characteristics==
Etched surface from a high purity (99.9998%) aluminium bar, size 5537 mm

===Physical===
Aluminium is a relatively soft, durable, lightweight, ductile and malleable metal with appearance ranging from silvery to dull gray, depending on the surface roughness. It is nonmagnetic and does not easily ignite. A fresh film of aluminium serves as a good reflector (approximately 92%) of visible light and an excellent reflector (as much as 98%) of medium and far infrared radiation. The yield strength of pure aluminium is 711 MPa, while aluminium alloys have yield strengths ranging from 200 MPa to 600 MPa. 
 Aluminium has about one-third the density and stiffness of steel. It is easily machined, cast, drawn and extruded.

Aluminium atoms are arranged in a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure. Aluminium has a stacking-fault energy of approximately 200 mJ/m2. 
 

Aluminium is a good thermal and electrical conductor, having 59% the conductivity of copper, both thermal and electrical, while having only 30% of copper's density. Aluminium is capable of being a superconductor, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2 Kelvin and a critical magnetic field of about 100 gauss (10 milliteslas). 
 

===Chemical===
Corrosion resistance can be excellent due to a thin surface layer of aluminium oxide that forms when the metal is exposed to air, effectively preventing further oxidation. The strongest aluminium alloys are less corrosion resistant due to galvanic reactions with alloyed copper. This corrosion resistance is also often greatly reduced by aqueous salts, particularly in the presence of dissimilar metals.

Owing to its resistance to corrosion, aluminium is one of the few metals that retain silvery reflectance in finely powdered form, making it an important component of silver-colored paints. Aluminium mirror finish has the highest reflectance of any metal in the 200400 nm (UV) and the 3,00010,000 nm (far IR) regions; in the 400700 nm visible range it is slightly outperformed by tin and silver and in the 7003000 (near IR) by silver, gold, and copper. 
 

Aluminium is oxidized by water to produce hydrogen and heat:
:2 Al + 3 H2O  Al2O3 + 3 H2
This conversion is of interest for the production of hydrogen. Challenges include circumventing the formed oxide layer, which inhibits the reaction and the expenses associated with the storage of energy by regeneration of the Al metal. 

===Isotopes===

Aluminium has many known isotopes, whose mass numbers range from 21 to 42; however, only 27Al (stable isotope) and 26Al (radioactive isotope, t1/2 = 7.2105 y) occur naturally. 27Al has a natural abundance above 99.9%. 26Al is produced from argon in the atmosphere by spallation caused by cosmic-ray protons. Aluminium isotopes have found practical application in dating marine sediments, manganese nodules, glacial ice, quartz in rock exposures, and meteorites. The ratio of 26Al to 10Be has been used to study the role of transport, deposition, sediment storage, burial times, and erosion on 105 to 106 year time scales. 
 Cosmogenic 26Al was first applied in studies of the Moon and meteorites. Meteoroid fragments, after departure from their parent bodies, are exposed to intense cosmic-ray bombardment during their travel through space, causing substantial 26Al production. After falling to Earth, atmospheric shielding drastically reduces 26Al production, and its decay can then be used to determine the meteorite's terrestrial age. Meteorite research has also shown that 26Al was relatively abundant at the time of formation of our planetary system. Most meteorite scientists believe that the energy released by the decay of 26Al was responsible for the melting and differentiation of some asteroids after their formation 4.55 billion years ago. 
 

===Natural occurrence===

Stable aluminium is created when hydrogen fuses with magnesium either in large stars or in supernovae. 
 

In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant (8.3% by weight) metallic element and the third most abundant of all elements (after oxygen and silicon). Because of its strong affinity to oxygen, it is almost never found in the elemental state; instead it is found in oxides or silicates. Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates. Native aluminium metal can only be found as a minor phase in low oxygen fugacity environments, such as the interiors of certain volcanoes. 
 Native aluminium has been reported in cold seeps in the northeastern continental slope of the South China Sea and Chen et al. (2011) have proposed a theory of its origin as resulting by reduction from tetrahydroxoaluminate Al(OH)4 to metallic aluminium by bacteria. 
 

It also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel and turquoise. Impurities in Al2O3, such as chromium or iron yield the gemstones ruby and sapphire, respectively.

Although aluminium is an extremely common and widespread element, the common aluminium minerals are not economic sources of the metal. Almost all metallic aluminium is produced from the ore bauxite (AlOx(OH)32x). Bauxite occurs as a weathering product of low iron and silica bedrock in tropical climatic conditions. 
 Large deposits of bauxite occur in Australia, Brazil, Guinea and Jamaica and the primary mining areas for the ore are in Australia, Brazil, China, India, Guinea, Indonesia, Jamaica, Russia and Suriname.

==Production and refinement==

Bauxite, a major aluminium ore. The red-brown colour is due to the presence of iron minerals.

Aluminium forms strong chemical bonds with oxygen. Compared to most other metals, it is difficult to extract from ore, such as bauxite, due to the high reactivity of aluminium and the high melting point of most of its ores. For example, direct reduction with carbon, as is used to produce iron, is not chemically possible because aluminium is a stronger reducing agent than carbon. Indirect carbothermic reduction can be carried out using carbon and Al2O3, which forms an intermediate Al4C3 and this can further yield aluminium metal at a temperature of 19002000 C. This process is still under development; it requires less energy and yields less CO2 than the Hall-Hroult process, the major industrial process for aluminium extraction. 
 Electrolytic smelting of alumina was originally cost-prohibitive in part because of the high melting point of alumina, or aluminium oxide, (about 2000 C). Many minerals, however, dissolve into a second already molten mineral, even if the temperature of the melt is significantly lower than the melting point of the first mineral. Molten cryolite was discovered to dissolve alumina at temperatures significantly lower than the melting point of pure alumina without interfering in the smelting process. In the Hall-Hroult process, alumina is first dissolved into molten cryolite with calcium fluoride and then electrolytically reduced to aluminium at a temperature between 950 and. Cryolite is a chemical compound of aluminium and sodium fluorides: (Na3AlF6). Although cryolite is found as a mineral in Greenland, its synthetic form is used in the industry. The aluminium oxide itself is obtained by refining bauxite in the Bayer process.

The electrolytic process replaced the Whler process, which involved the reduction of anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium. Both of the electrodes used in the electrolysis of aluminium oxide are carbon. Once the refined alumina is dissolved in the electrolyte, it disassociates and its ions are free to move around. The reaction at the cathode is:

: Al3+ + 3 e  Al

Here the aluminium ion is being reduced. The aluminium metal then sinks to the bottom and is tapped off, usually cast into large blocks called aluminium billets for further processing.

At the anode, oxygen is formed:
: 2 O2  O2 + 4 e

To some extent, the carbon anode is consumed by subsequent reaction with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. The anodes in a reduction cell must therefore be replaced regularly, since they are consumed in the process. The cathodes do erode, mainly due to electrochemical processes and metal movement. After five to ten years, depending on the current used in the electrolysis, a cell must be rebuilt because of cathode wear.

World production trend of aluminium

Aluminium electrolysis with the Hall-Hroult process consumes a lot of energy, but alternative processes were always less viable economically or ecologically. The worldwide average specific energy consumption is approximately 150.5 kilowatt-hours per kilogram of aluminium produced (52 to 56 MJ/kg). The most modern smelters achieve approximately 12.8 kWh/kg (46.1 MJ/kg). (Compare this to the heat of reaction, 31 MJ/kg, and the Gibbs free energy of reaction, 29 MJ/kg.) Reduction line currents for older technologies are typically 100 to 200 kiloamperes; state-of-the-art smelters operate at about 350 kA. Trials have been reported with 500 kA cells.

The Hall-Heroult process produces aluminium with a purity of above 99%. Further purification can be done by the Hoopes process. The process involves the electrolysis of molten aluminium with a sodium, barium and aluminium fluoride electrolyte. The resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99%. 
 
 

Electric power represents about 20% to 40% of the cost of producing aluminium, depending on the location of the smelter. Aluminium production consumes roughly 5% of electricity generated in the U.S. Aluminium producers tend to locate smelters in places where electric power is both plentiful and inexpensivesuch as the United Arab Emirates with its large natural gas supplies, and Iceland and Norway with energy generated from renewable sources. The world's largest smelters of alumina are People's Republic of China, Russia, and Quebec and British Columbia in Canada. 
 
 
 

Aluminium spot price 19872012
In 2005, the People's Republic of China was the top producer of aluminium with almost a one-fifth world share, followed by Russia, Canada, and the USA, reports the British Geological Survey.

Over the last 50 years, Australia has become the world's top producer of bauxite ore and a major producer and exporter of alumina (before being overtaken by China in 2007). 
 Australia produced 77 million tonnes of bauxite in 2013. 
 The Australian deposits have some refining problems, some being high in silica, but have the advantage of being shallow and relatively easy to mine. 
 

===Recycling===
Aluminium recycling code

Aluminium is theoretically 100% recyclable without any loss of its natural qualities. According to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of aluminium in use in society (i.e. in cars, buildings, electronics etc.) is 80 kg. Much of this is in more-developed countries (350500 kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (35 kg per capita). Knowing the per capita stocks and their approximate lifespans is important for planning recycling.

Recovery of the metal via recycling has become an important use of the aluminium industry. Recycling was a low-profile activity until the late 1960s, when the growing use of aluminium beverage cans brought it to the public awareness.

Recycling involves melting the scrap, a process that requires only 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore, though a significant part (up to 15% of the input material) is lost as dross (ash-like oxide). 
 An aluminium stack melter produces significantly less dross, with values reported below 1%. 
 The dross can undergo a further process to extract aluminium.

In Europe aluminium experiences high rates of recycling, ranging from 42% of beverage cans, 85% of construction materials and 95% of transport vehicles. 
 

Recycled aluminium is known as secondary aluminium, but maintains the same physical properties as primary aluminium. Secondary aluminium is produced in a wide range of formats and is employed in 80% of alloy injections. Another important use is for extrusion.

White dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling operations still contains useful quantities of aluminium that can be extracted industrially. 
 The process produces aluminium billets, together with a highly complex waste material. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, among others, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which spontaneously ignites on contact with air; 
 contact with damp air results in the release of copious quantities of ammonia gas. Despite these difficulties, the waste has found use as a filler in asphalt and concrete. 
 

==Compounds==

===Oxidation state +3===
The vast majority of compounds, including all Al-containing minerals and all commercially significant aluminium compounds, feature aluminium in the oxidation state 3+. The coordination number of such compounds varies, but generally Al3+ is six-coordinate or tetracoordinate. Almost all compounds of aluminium(III) are colorless. 

====Halides====
All four trihalides are well known. Unlike the structures of the three heavier trihalides, aluminium fluoride (AlF3) features six-coordinate Al. The octahedral coordination environment for AlF3 is related to the compactness of fluoride ion, six of which can fit around the small Al3+ centre. AlF3 sublimes (with cracking) at 1291 C. With heavier halides, the coordination numbers are lower. The other trihalides are dimeric or polymeric with tetrahedral Al centers. These materials are prepared by treating aluminium metal with the halogen, although other methods exist. Acidification of the oxides or hydroxides affords hydrates. In aqueous solution, the halides often form mixtures, generally containing six-coordinate Al centres, which are feature both halide and aquo ligands. When aluminium and fluoride are together in aqueous solution, they readily form complex ions such as , , and . In the case of chloride, polyaluminium clusters are formed such as 7+.

====Oxide and hydroxides====
Aluminium forms one stable oxide, known by its mineral name corundum. Sapphire and ruby are impure corundum contaminated with trace amounts of other metals. The two oxide-hydroxides, AlO(OH), are boehmite and diaspore. There are three trihydroxides: bayerite, gibbsite, and nordstrandite, which differ in their crystalline structure (polymorphs). Most are produced from ores by a variety of wet processes using acid and base. Heating the hydroxides leads to formation of corundum. These materials are of central importance to the production of aluminium and are themselves extremely useful.

====Carbide, nitride, and related materials====
Aluminium carbide (Al4C3) is made by heating a mixture of the elements above 1000 C. The pale yellow crystals consist of tetrahedral aluminium centres. It reacts with water or dilute acids to give methane. The acetylide, Al2(C2)3, is made by passing acetylene over heated aluminium.

Aluminium nitride (AlN) is the only nitride known for aluminium. Unlike the oxides it features tetrahedral Al centres. It can be made from the elements at 800 C. It is air-stable material with a usefully high thermal conductivity. Aluminium phosphide (AlP) is made similarly, and hydrolyses to give phosphine:

: AlP + 3 H2O  Al(OH)3 + PH3

===Organoaluminium compounds and related hydrides===

Structure of trimethylaluminium, a compound that features five-coordinate carbon.

A variety of compounds of empirical formula AlR3 and AlR1.5Cl1.5 exist. 
 These species usually feature tetrahedral Al centers, e.g. "trimethylaluminium" has the formula Al2(CH3)6 (see figure). With large organic groups, triorganoaluminium exist as three-coordinate monomers, such as triisobutylaluminium. Such compounds are widely used in industrial chemistry, despite the fact that they are often highly pyrophoric. Few analogues exist between organoaluminium and organoboron compounds except for large organic groups.

The important aluminium hydride is lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), which is used in as a reducing agent in organic chemistry. It can be produced from lithium hydride and aluminium trichloride:

: 4 LiH + AlCl3  LiAlH4 + 3 LiCl

Several useful derivatives of LiAlH4 are known, e.g. sodium bis(2-methoxyethoxy)dihydridoaluminate. The simplest hydride, aluminium hydride or alane, remains a laboratory curiosity. It is a polymer with the formula (AlH3)n, in contrast to the corresponding boron hydride with the formula (BH3)2.

===Oxidation states +1 and +2===
Although the great majority of aluminium compounds feature Al3+ centers, compounds with lower oxidation states are known and sometime of significance as precursors to the Al3+ species.

====Aluminium(I)====
AlF, AlCl and AlBr exist in the gaseous phase when the trihalide is heated with aluminium. The composition AlI is unstable at room temperature with respect to the triiodide: 

: 3 AlI  AlI3 + 2 Al

A stable derivative of aluminium monoiodide is the cyclic adduct formed with triethylamine, Al4I4(NEt3)4. Also of theoretical interest but only of fleeting existence are Al2O and Al2S. Al2O is made by heating the normal oxide, Al2O3, with silicon at 1800 C in a vacuum. 
 Such materials quickly disproportionates to the starting materials.

====Aluminium(II)====
Very simple Al(II) compounds are invoked or observed in the reactions of Al metal with oxidants. For example, aluminium monoxide, AlO, has been detected in the gas phase after explosion 
 and in stellar absorption spectra. 
 More thoroughly investigated are compounds of the formula R4Al2 where R is a large organic ligand. 
 

===Analysis===
The presence of aluminium can be detected in qualitative analysis using aluminon.

==Applications==

===General use===
Aluminium is the most widely used non-ferrous metal. 
 Global production of aluminium in 2005 was 31.9 million tonnes. It exceeded that of any other metal except iron (837.5 million tonnes). 
 Forecast for 2012 is 4245 million tonnes, driven by rising Chinese output. 
 

Aluminium is almost always alloyed, which markedly improves its mechanical properties, especially when tempered. For example, the common aluminium foils and beverage cans are alloys of 92% to 99% aluminium. 
 The main alloying agents are copper, zinc, magnesium, manganese, and silicon (e.g., duralumin) and the levels of these other metals are in the range of a few percent by weight. 
 

Household aluminium foil
Aluminium-bodied Austin "A40 Sports" (c. 1951)
Aluminium slabs being transported from a smelter

Some of the many uses for aluminium metal are in:
* Transportation (automobiles, aircraft, trucks, railway cars, marine vessels, bicycles, etc.) as sheet, tube, castings, etc.
* Packaging (cans, foil, frame of etc.)
* Construction (windows, doors, siding, building wire, etc.). 
 
* A wide range of household items, from cooking utensils to baseball bats, watches. 
 
* Street lighting poles, sailing ship masts, walking poles, etc.
* Outer shells of consumer electronics, also cases for equipment e.g. photographic equipment, MacBook Pro's casing
* Electrical transmission lines for power distribution
* MKM steel and Alnico magnets
* Super purity aluminium (SPA, 99.980% to 99.999% Al), used in electronics and CDs.
* Heat sinks for electronic appliances such as transistors and CPUs.
* Substrate material of metal-core copper clad laminates used in high brightness LED lighting.
* Powdered aluminium is used in paint, and in pyrotechnics such as solid rocket fuels and thermite.
* Aluminium can be reacted with hydrochloric acid or with sodium hydroxide to produce hydrogen gas.
* A variety of countries, including France, Italy, Poland, Finland, Romania, Israel, and the former Yugoslavia, have issued coins struck in aluminium or aluminium-copper alloys. 
 
 
* Some guitar models sport aluminium diamond plates on the surface of the instruments, usually either chrome or black. Kramer Guitars and Travis Bean are both known for having produced guitars with necks made of aluminium, which gives the instrument a very distinct sound.

Aluminium is usually alloyed  it is used as pure metal only when corrosion resistance and/or workability is more important than strength or hardness. A thin layer of aluminium can be deposited onto a flat surface by physical vapour deposition or (very infrequently) chemical vapour deposition or other chemical means to form optical coatings and mirrors.

===Aluminium compounds===
Because aluminium is abundant and most of its derivatives exhibit low toxicity, the compounds of aluminium enjoy wide and sometimes large-scale applications.

====Alumina====

Aluminium oxide (Al2O3) and the associated oxy-hydroxides and trihydroxides are produced or extracted from minerals on a large scale. The great majority of this material is converted to metallic aluminium. About 10% of the production capacity is used for other applications. A major use is as an absorbent. For example, alumina removes water from hydrocarbons, which enables subsequent processes that are poisoned by moisture. Aluminium oxides are common catalysts for industrial processes, e.g. the Claus process for converting hydrogen sulfide to sulfur in refineries and for the alkylation of amines. Many industrial catalysts are "supported", meaning generally that an expensive catalyst (e.g., platinum) is dispersed over a high surface area material such as alumina. Being a very hard material (Mohs hardness 9), alumina is widely used as an abrasive and the production of applications that exploit its inertness, e.g., in high pressure sodium lamps.

====Sulfates====
Several sulfates of aluminium find applications. Aluminium sulfate (Al2(SO4)3(H2O)18) is produced on the annual scale of several billions of kilograms. About half of the production is consumed in water treatment. The next major application is in the manufacture of paper. It is also used as a mordant, in fire extinguisher, as a food additive, in fireproofing, and in leather tanning. Aluminium ammonium sulfate, which is also called ammonium alum, (NH4)Al(SO4)212H2O, is used as a mordant and in leather tanning. 
 Aluminium potassium sulfate ((SO4)2)(H2O)12 is used similarly. The consumption of both alums is declining.

====Chlorides====
Aluminium chloride (AlCl3) is used in petroleum refining and in the production of synthetic rubber and polymers. Although it has a similar name, aluminium chlorohydrate has fewer and very different applications, e.g. as a hardening agent and an antiperspirant. It is an intermediate in the production of aluminium metal.

====Niche compounds====
Given the scale of aluminium compounds, a small scale application could still involve thousands of tonnes. One of the many compounds used at this intermediate level include aluminium acetate, a salt used in solution as an astringent. Aluminium borate (Al2O3B2O3) is used in the production of glass and ceramics. Aluminium fluorosilicate (Al2(SiF6)3) is used in the production of synthetic gemstones, glass and ceramic. Aluminium phosphate (AlPO4) is used in the manufacture: of glass and ceramic, pulp and paper products, cosmetics, paints and varnishes and in making dental cement. Aluminium hydroxide (Al(OH)3) is used as an antacid, as a mordant, in water purification, in the manufacture of glass and ceramic and in the waterproofing of fabrics. Lithium aluminium hydride is a powerful reducing agent used in organic chemistry. Organoaluminiums are used as Lewis acids and cocatalysts. For example, methylaluminoxane is a cocatalyst for Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization to produce vinyl polymers such as polyethene.

===Aluminium alloys in structural applications===

Aluminium foam

Aluminium alloys with a wide range of properties are used in engineering structures. Alloy systems are classified by a number system (ANSI) or by names indicating their main alloying constituents (DIN and ISO).

The strength and durability of aluminium alloys vary widely, not only as a result of the components of the specific alloy, but also as a result of heat treatments and manufacturing processes. A lack of knowledge of these aspects has from time to time led to improperly designed structures and gained aluminium a bad reputation.

One important structural limitation of aluminium alloys is their fatigue strength. Unlike steels, aluminium alloys have no well-defined fatigue limit, meaning that fatigue failure eventually occurs, under even very small cyclic loadings. This implies that engineers must assess these loads and design for a fixed life rather than an infinite life.

Another important property of aluminium alloys is their sensitivity to heat. Workshop procedures involving heating are complicated by the fact that aluminium, unlike steel, melts without first glowing red. Forming operations where a blow torch is used therefore require some expertise, since no visual signs reveal how close the material is to melting. Aluminium alloys, like all structural alloys, also are subject to internal stresses following heating operations such as welding and casting. The problem with aluminium alloys in this regard is their low melting point, which make them more susceptible to distortions from thermally induced stress relief. Controlled stress relief can be done during manufacturing by heat-treating the parts in an oven, followed by gradual coolingin effect annealing the stresses.

The low melting point of aluminium alloys has not precluded their use in rocketry; even for use in constructing combustion chambers where gases can reach 3500 K. The Agena upper stage engine used a regeneratively cooled aluminium design for some parts of the nozzle, including the thermally critical throat region.

Another alloy of some value is aluminium bronze (Cu-Al alloy).

==History==
The statue of the Anteros (commonly mistaken for either The Angel of Christian Charity or Eros) in Piccadilly Circus, London, was made in 1893 and is one of the first statues cast in aluminium.

Ancient Greeks and Romans used aluminium salts as dyeing mordants and as astringents for dressing wounds; alum is still used as a styptic.

In 1761, Guyton de Morveau suggested calling the base alum alumine. In 1808, Humphry Davy identified the existence of a metal base of alum, which he at first termed alumium and later aluminum (see etymology section, below).

The metal was first produced in 1825 in an impure form by Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian rsted. He reacted anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin. 
 Friedrich Whler was aware of these experiments and cited them, but after redoing the experiments of rsted he concluded that this metal was pure potassium. He conducted a similar experiment in 1827 by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and yielded aluminium. Whler is generally credited with isolating aluminium (Latin alumen, alum). Further, Pierre Berthier discovered aluminium in bauxite ore and successfully extracted it. 
 Frenchman Henri Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville improved Whler's method in 1846, and described his improvements in a book in 1859, chief among these being the substitution of sodium for the considerably more expensive potassium. 
 Deville likely also conceived the idea of the electrolysis of aluminium oxide dissolved in cryolite; Charles Martin Hall and Paul Hroult might have developed the more practical process after Deville.

Prior to commercial electrical generation in the early 1880s, and the Hall-Hroult process in the mid 1880s, aluminium was exceedingly difficult to extract from its various ores. This made pure aluminium more valuable than gold. 
 Bars of aluminium were exhibited at the Exposition Universelle of 1855. 
 Napoleon III of France is reputed to have given a banquet where the most honoured guests were given aluminium utensils, while the others made do with gold. 
 
 

Aluminium was selected as the material to use for the 100 oz capstone of the Washington Monument in 1884, a time when one ounce (30 grams) cost the daily wage of a common worker on the project. 
 The capstone, which was set in place on 6 December 1884, in an elaborate dedication ceremony, was the largest single piece of aluminium cast at the time, when aluminium was as expensive as silver. 

The Cowles companies supplied aluminium alloy in quantity in the United States and England using smelters like the furnace of Carl Wilhelm Siemens by 1886. 
 
 
 Charles Martin Hall of Ohio in the U.S. and Paul Hroult of France independently developed the Hall-Hroult electrolytic process that made extracting aluminium from minerals cheaper and is now the principal method used worldwide. Hall's process, 
 in 1888 with the financial backing of Alfred E. Hunt, started the Pittsburgh Reduction Company today known as Alcoa. Hroult's process was in production by 1889 in Switzerland at Aluminium Industrie, now Alcan, and at British Aluminium, now Luxfer Group and Alcoa, by 1896 in Scotland. 
 

By 1895, the metal was being used as a building material as far away as Sydney, Australia in the dome of the Chief Secretary's Building.

With the explosive expansion of the airplane industry during World War I (1914-1917), major governments demanded large shipments of aluminium for light, strong airframes. They often subsidized factories and the necessary electrical supply systems. Mats Ingulstad, We Want Aluminum, No Excuses: Business-Government Relations in the American Aluminum Industry, 19171957, in From Warfare to Welfare: Business-Government Relations in the Aluminium Industry, ed. Mats Ingulstad and Hans Otto Frland, 3368. (Oslo: Tapir Academic Press, 2012.) 

Many navies have used an aluminium superstructure for their vessels; the 1975 fire aboard USS Belknap that gutted her aluminium superstructure, as well as observation of battle damage to British ships during the Falklands War, led to many navies switching to all steel superstructures.

Aluminium wire was once widely used for domestic electrical wiring. Owing to corrosion-induced failures, a number of fires resulted.

==Etymology==
Two variants of the metal's name are in current use, aluminium () and aluminum ()&mdash;besides the obsolete alumium. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted aluminium as the standard international name for the element in 1990 but, three years later, recognized aluminum as an acceptable variant. Hence their periodic table includes both. IUPAC Periodic Table of the Elements. iupac.org IUPAC prefers the use of aluminium in its internal publications, although nearly as many IUPAC publications use the spelling aluminum. IUPAC Web site publication search for 'aluminum'. 

Most countries use the spelling aluminium. In the United States and Canada, the spelling aluminum predominates. Bremner, John Words on Words: A Dictionary for Writers and Others Who Care about Words, pp. 2223. ISBN 0-231-04493-3. The Canadian Oxford Dictionary prefers aluminum, whereas the Australian Macquarie Dictionary prefers aluminium. In 1926, the American Chemical Society officially decided to use aluminum in its publications; American dictionaries typically label the spelling aluminium as "chiefly British". 

 

The various names all derive from its status as a base of alum. It is borrowed from Old French; its ultimate source, alumen, in turn is a Latin word that literally means "bitter salt". 

The earliest citation given in the Oxford English Dictionary for any word used as a name for this element is alumium, which British chemist and inventor Humphry Davy employed in 1808 for the metal he was trying to isolate electrolytically from the mineral alumina. The citation is from the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: "Had I been so fortunate as to have obtained more certain evidences on this subject, and to have procured the metallic substances I was in search of, I should have proposed for them the names of silicium, alumium, zirconium, and glucium." "alumium", Oxford English Dictionary. Ed. J.A. Simpson and E.S.C. Weiner, second edition Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989. OED Online Oxford University Press. Accessed 29 October 2006. Citation is listed as "1808 SIR H. DAVY in Phil. Trans. XCVIII. 353". The ellipsis in the quotation is as it appears in the OED citation. 
 

Davy settled on aluminum by the time he published his 1812 book Chemical Philosophy: "This substance appears to contain a peculiar metal, but as yet Aluminum has not been obtained in a perfectly free state, though alloys of it with other metalline substances have been procured sufficiently distinct to indicate the probable nature of alumina." 
 But the same year, an anonymous contributor to the Quarterly Review, a British political-literary journal, in a review of Davy's book, objected to aluminum and proposed the name aluminium, "for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound." 
 

The -ium suffix conformed to the precedent set in other newly discovered elements of the time: potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium, and strontium (all of which Davy isolated himself). Nevertheless, -um spellings for elements were not unknown at the time, as for example platinum, known to Europeans since the 16th century, molybdenum, discovered in 1778, and tantalum, discovered in 1802. The -um suffix is consistent with the universal spelling alumina for the oxide (as opposed to aluminia), as lanthana is the oxide of lanthanum, and magnesia, ceria, and thoria are the oxides of magnesium, cerium, and thorium respectively.

The spelling used throughout the 19th century by most U.S. chemists was aluminium, but common usage is less clear. , "In the USA, the position was more complicated. Noah Webster's Dictionary of 1828 has only aluminum, though the standard spelling among US chemists throughout most of the 19th century was aluminium; it was the preferred version in The Century Dictionary of 1889 and is the only spelling given in the Webster Unabridged Dictionary of 1913." The aluminum spelling is used in the Webster's Dictionary of 1828. In his advertising handbill for his new electrolytic method of producing the metal in 1892, Charles Martin Hall used the -um spelling, despite his constant use of the -ium spelling in all the patents he filed between 1886 and 1903. It has consequently been suggested that the spelling reflects an easier-to-pronounce word with one fewer syllable, or that the spelling on the flyer was a mistake. Hall's domination of production of the metal ensured that the spelling aluminum became the standard in North America.

==Health concerns==
Schematic of Al absorption by human skin. 
There are five major Al forms absorbed by human body: the free solvated trivalent cation (Al3+(aq)); low-molecular-weight, neutral, soluble complexes (LMW-Al0(aq)); high-molecular-weight, neutral, soluble complexes (HMW-Al0(aq)); low-molecular-weight, charged, soluble complexes (LMW-Al(L)n+/(aq)); nano and micro-particulates (Al(L)n(s)). They are transported across cell membranes or cell epi-/endothelia through five major routes: (1) paracellular; (2) transcellular; (3) active transport; (4) channels; (5) adsorptive or receptor-mediated endocytosis. 

Despite its natural abundance, aluminium has no known function in biology. It is remarkably nontoxic, aluminium sulfate having an LD50 of 6207 mg/kg (oral, mouse), which corresponds to 500 grams for an 80 kg person. The extremely low acute toxicity notwithstanding, the health effects of aluminium are of interest in view of the widespread occurrence of the element in the environment and in commerce.

Some toxicity can be traced to deposition in bone and the central nervous system, which is particularly increased in patients with reduced renal function. Because aluminium competes with calcium for absorption, increased amounts of dietary aluminium may contribute to the reduced skeletal mineralization (osteopenia) observed in preterm infants and infants with growth retardation. In very high doses, aluminium can cause neurotoxicity, and is associated with altered function of the bloodbrain barrier. A small percentage of people are allergic to aluminium and experience contact dermatitis, digestive disorders, vomiting or other symptoms upon contact or ingestion of products containing aluminium, such as antipersperants or antacids. In those without allergies, aluminium is not as toxic as heavy metals, but there is evidence of some toxicity if it is consumed in excessive amounts. Although the use of aluminium cookware has not been shown to lead to aluminium toxicity in general, excessive consumption of antacids containing aluminium compounds and excessive use of aluminium-containing antiperspirants provide more significant exposure levels. Studies have shown that consumption of acidic foods or liquids with aluminium significantly increases aluminium absorption, and maltol has been shown to increase the accumulation of aluminium in nervous and osseus tissue. Furthermore, aluminium increases estrogen-related gene expression in human breast cancer cells cultured in the laboratory. The estrogen-like effects of these salts have led to their classification as a metalloestrogen.

The effects of aluminium in antiperspirants have been examined over the course of decades with little evidence of skin irritation. Nonetheless, its occurrence in antiperspirants, dyes (such as aluminium lake), and food additives has caused concern. Although there is little evidence that normal exposure to aluminium presents a risk to healthy adults, Gitelman, H. J. "Physiology of Aluminum in Man", in Aluminum and Health, CRC Press, 1988, ISBN 0-8247-8026-4, p. 90 some studies point to risks associated with increased exposure to the metal. Aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water. Some researchers have expressed concerns that the aluminium in antiperspirants may increase the risk of breast cancer, and aluminium has controversially been implicated as a factor in Alzheimer's disease. The Camelford water pollution incident involved a number of people consuming aluminium sulfate. Investigations of the long-term health effects are still ongoing, but elevated brain aluminium concentrations have been found in post-mortem examinations of victims, and further research to determine if there is a link with cerebral amyloid angiopathy has been commissioned. 

According to the Alzheimer's Society, the medical and scientific opinion is that studies have not convincingly demonstrated a causal relationship between aluminium and Alzheimer's disease. Aluminium and Alzheimer's disease, The Alzheimer's Society. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Nevertheless, some studies, such as those on the PAQUID cohort, cite aluminium exposure as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Some brain plaques have been found to contain increased levels of the metal. Research in this area has been inconclusive; aluminium accumulation may be a consequence of the disease rather than a causal agent. In any event, if there is any toxicity of aluminium, it must be via a very specific mechanism, since total human exposure to the element in the form of naturally occurring clay in soil and dust is enormously large over a lifetime. Scientific consensus does not yet exist about whether aluminium exposure could directly increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease. 

In case of suspected sudden intake of large amount of aluminium, deferoxamine mesylate may be given to help eliminate it from the body by chelation. Aluminum Toxicity from NYU Langone Medical Center. Last reviewed November 2012 by Igor Puzanov, MD 

==Effect on plants==

Aluminium is primary among the factors that reduce plant growth on acid soils. Although it is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils, the concentration in acid soils of toxic Al3+ cations increases and disturbs root growth and function. 

Most acid soils are saturated with aluminium rather than hydrogen ions. The acidity of the soil is therefore a result of hydrolysis of aluminium compounds. This concept of "corrected lime potential" to define the degree of base saturation in soils became the basis for procedures now used in soil testing laboratories to determine the "lime requirement" of soils. Applying lime to soils reduces the Aluminum toxicity to plants.

 

Wheat's adaptation to allow aluminium tolerance is such that the aluminium induces a release of organic compounds that bind to the harmful aluminium cations. Sorghum is believed to have the same tolerance mechanism. The first gene for aluminium tolerance has been identified in wheat. It was shown that sorghum's aluminium tolerance is controlled by a single gene, as for wheat. This is not the case in all plants.

== Biodegradation ==

The fungi Geotrichum candidum has been found to consume the aluminium in compact discs. The bacteria Ps. Acruginosa and the fungi C. resinae are commonly detected in aircraft engines, and can degrade aluminium in cultures. 

==See also==

* 
* Aluminiumair battery
* Aluminium alloy
* Aluminium foil
* Aluminium granules
* Aluminium hydroxide
* Aluminium in Russia
* Beverage can
* Institute for the History of Aluminium
* Panel edge staining
* The Aluminum Association
* Quantum clock
* List of countries by aluminium production

==References==

==External links==

* Aluminium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards - Aluminum
* Electrolytic production
* World production of primary aluminium, by country
* Price history of aluminum, according to the IMF
* History of Aluminium  from the website of the International Aluminium Institute
* Emedicine  Aluminium
* 

 
Aluminium



[[Advanced Chemistry]]

Advanced Chemistry is a German hip hop group from Heidelberg, a scenic city in Baden-Wrttemberg, South Germany. Advanced Chemistry was founded in 1987 by Toni L, Linguist, Gee-One, DJ Mike MD (Mike Dippon) and MC Torch. Each member of the group holds German citizenshhip, and Toni L, Linguist, and Torch are of Italian, Ghanaian, and Haitian backgrounds, respectively. Pennay, Mark "Rap in Germinay" in Mitchell, Tony ed. Global Noise. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2001. 

Influenced by North American socially conscious rap and the Native tongues movement, Advanced Chemistry is regarded as one of the main pioneers in German hip hop. They were one of the first groups to rap in German (although their name is in English). Furthermore, their songs tackled controversial social and political issues, distinguishing them from early German hip hop group "Die Fantastischen Vier" (The Fantastic Four), which had a more light-hearted, playful, party image. 

The rivalry between Advanced Chemistry and Die Fantastischen Vier has served to highlight a dichotomy in the routes that hip hop has taken in becoming a part of the German soundscape. While Die Fantastischen Vier may be said to view hip hop primarily as an aesthetic art form, Advanced Chemistry understand hip hop as being inextricably linked to the social and political circumstances under which it is created. For Advanced Chemistry, hip hop is a vehicle of general human emancipation,. Brown, Timothy S. "'Keeping it Real' in a Different 'Hood:(African-) Americanization and Hip-hop in Germany." In The Vinyl Ain'tFinal: Hip Hop and the Globalization of Black Popular Culture, ed. by Dipannita Basu and Sidney J. Lemelle, 137-50. London In their undertaking of social and political issues, the band introduced the term "Afro-German" into the context of German hip hop, and the theme of race is highlighted in much of their music. projekt migration 

With the release of the single Fremd im eigenen Land, Advanced Chemistry separated itself from the rest of the rap being produced in Germany. This single was the first of its kind to go beyond simply imitating US rap and addressed the current issues of the time. Fremd im eigenen Land which translates to foreign in my own country dealt with the widespread racism that non-white German citizens faced. This change from simple imitation to political commentary was the start of German identification with rap. Hip hop in Germany : Nomadic Wax The sound of Fremd im eigenen Land was influenced by the 'wall of noise' created by Public Enemy's producers, The Bomb Squad. The Bomb Squad 

After the reunification of Germany, an abundance of anti-immigrant sentiment emerged, as well as attacks on the homes of refugees in the early 90's. Advanced Chemistry came to prominence in the wake of these actions because of their pro-multicultural society stance in their music. Advanced Chemistry's attitudes revolve around their attempts to create a distinct "Germanness" in hip hop, as opposed to imitating American hip hop as other groups had done. Torch has said, "What the Americans do is exotic for us because we don't live like they do. What they do seems to be more interesting and newer. But not for me. For me it's more exciting to experience my fellow Germans in new contexts...For me, it's interesting to see what the kids try to do that's different from what I know." Brown, Timothy S. Keeping it Real in a Different Hood: (African-) Americanization and Hip-hop in Germany. In The Vinyl Aint Final: Hip Hop and the Globalization of Black Popular Culture, ed. by Dipannita Basu and Sidney J. Lemelle, 137-50. London; A Advanced Chemistry were the first to use the term "Afro-German" in a hip hop context. This was part of the pro-immigrant political message they sent via their music. deutschrap.com: Classic German Hip-Hop 

While Advanced Chemistry's use of the German language in their rap allows them to make claims to authenticity and true German heritage, bolstering pro-immigration sentiment, their style can also be problematic for immigrant notions of any real ethnic roots. Indeed, part of the Turkish ethnic minority of Frankfurt views Advanced Chemistry's appeal to the German image as a "symbolic betrayal of the right of ethnic minorities to 'roots' or to any expression of cultural heritage." In this sense, their rap represents a complex social discourse internal to the German soundscape in which they attempt to negotiate immigrant assimilation into a xenophobic German culture with the maintenance of their own separate cultural traditions. It is quite possibly the feelings of alienation from the pure-blooded German demographic that drive Advanced Chemistry to attack nationalistic ideologies by asserting their "Germanness" as a group composed primarily of ethnic others. The response to this pseudo-German authenticity can be seen in what Andy Bennett refers to as "alternative forms of local hip hop culture which actively seek to rediscover and, in many cases, reconstruct notions of identity tied to cultural roots." Bennett, Andy. "Hip-Hop am Main, Rappin' on the Tyne: Hip-hop Culture as a Local Construct in Two European Cities." In That's the Joint!: The Hip-hop Studies Reader, 177-200. New York; London: Routledge, 2004. These alternative local hip hop cultures include Oriental hip hop, the members of which cling to their Turkish heritage and are confused by Advanced Chemistry's elicitation of a German identity politics to which they technically do not belong. This cultural binary illustrates that rap has taken different routes in Germany and that, even among an already isolated immigrant population, there is still disunity and, especially, disagreement on the relative importance of assimilation versus cultural defiance. According to German hip hop enthusiast 9@home, Advanced Chemistry is part of a "hip-hop movement took a clear stance for the minorities and against the of immigrants who...might be German on paper, but not in real life," 9@home. "German Hip Hop 1: Advanced Chemistry." Leave Your Nine at Home. 13 Oct. 2007. Vanila Mist. 27 Mar. 2008 which speaks to the group's hope of actually being recognized as German citizens and not foreigners, despite their various other ethnic and cultural ties.

==Market conditions for rap==
One of the first issues that confronts us when we move outside the English-speaking market for recorded music is to establish whether or not the discrete musical genres we know from that market are fully congruent with similar divisions in other pop worlds. This is important in two ways. First, although no single country comes close to matching the amounts spent on recorded music in the United States, these markets are nonetheless economically significant. Germany, for instance, is the largest single market in western Europe, with estimated annual sales of U.S. $3.74 billion in 1996. This represents around 30 percent of reported U.S. sales and makes Germany the third biggest music market in the world. Michell, Tony Global Noise (Rap and Hip-Hop outside the USA) Published by Wesleyan University Press, Middletown CT. 06549 (C)2001 

Advanced Chemistry frequently rapped about their lives and experiences as children of immigrants, The Atlantic Times :: Archive exposing the marginalization experienced by most ethnic minorities in Germany, and the feelings of frustration and resentment that being denied a German identity can cause. Bennett, Andy. "Hip-Hop am Main, Rappin' on the Tyne: Hip-hop Culture as a Local Construct in Two European Cities." In That's the Joint!: The Hip-hop Studies Reader, 177-200. New York; London: Routledge, 2004, p. 183-184 The song "Fremd im eigenem Land" (Foreign in your own nation) was released by Advanced Chemistry in November 1992. Advanced Chemistry Discography The single became a staple in the German hip hop scene. It made a strong statement about the status of immigrants throughout Germany, as the group was composed of multi-national and multi-racial members. The video shows several members brandishing their German passports as a demonstration of their German citizenship to skeptical and unaccepting 'ethnic' Germans. 

This idea of national identity is important, as many rap artists in Germany have been of foreign origin. These so-called Gastarbeiter (guest workers) children saw breakdance, graffiti, rap music, and hip hop culture as a means of expressing themselves. Schmidt, Johannes. Die Unterrichtspraxis/Teaching German>Vol. 36, No. 1. (Spring, 2003) pp. 1-14. Since the release of "Fremd im eigenen Land", many other German-language rappers have also tried to confront anti-immigrant ideas and develop themes of citizenship. However, though many ethnic minority youth in Germany find the these German identity themes appealing, others view the desire of immigrants to be seen as German negatively, and they have actively sought to revive and recreate concepts of identity in connection to traditional ethnic origins. 

Advanced Chemistry helped to found the German chapter of the Zulu nation. http://leaveyournineathome.wordpress.com/2007/10/13/german-hip-hop-1-advanced-chemistry/. Accessed March 26. Last updated October 13, 2007. 

==Discography==
* 1992 - "Fremd im eigenen Land" (12"/MCD, MZEE)
* 1993 - "Welcher Pfad fhrt zur Geschichte" (12"/MCD, MZEE)
* 1994 - "Operation  3" (12"/MCD)
* 1994 - "Dir fehlt der Funk!" (12"/MCD)
* 1995 - Advanced Chemistry (2xLP/CD)

==External links==
*Official Website of MC Torch
*Website of Toni L.
*Official Website of Linguist
*Official Website DJ Mike MD (Mike Dippon)
*Website of 360 Records

==Bibliography==
El-Tayeb, Fatima If You Cannot Pronounce My Name, You Can Just Call Me 
Pride. Afro-German Activism, Gender, and Hip Hop, Gender & History15/3(2003):459-485.

Felbert, Oliver von. Die Unbestechlichen. Spex (March 1993): 50-53.

Weheliye, Alexander G. Phonographies:Grooves in Sonic Afro-Modernity, Duke University Press, 2005.

==References==



[[Anglican Communion]]

The Anglican Communion is an international association of churches consisting of the Church of England and of national and regional Anglican churches in full communion with it. The status of full communion means, ideally, that there is mutual agreement on essential doctrines and that full participation in the sacramental life of each church is available to all communicant Anglicans.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of All England, has a precedence of honour over the other archbishops of the Anglican Communion. He is recognized as primus inter pares, or first among equals. The archbishop does not exercise direct authority in the provinces outside England, but instead acts as a focus of unity.

The Anglican Communion considers itself to be part of the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church and to be both Catholic and Reformed. For some adherents it represents a non-papal Catholicism, for others a form of Protestantism though without a dominant guiding figure such as Luther, Knox, Calvin, Zwingli or Wesley. For others, their self-identity represents some combination of the two. The communion encompasses a wide spectrum of belief and practice including evangelical, liberal, and Catholic.

With a membership currently estimated at around 80 million members worldwide, the Anglican Communion is the third largest Christian communion in the world, after the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church. Some of these churches are known as Anglican, such as the Anglican Church of Canada, due to their historical link to England (Ecclesia Anglicana means "English Church"). Some, for example the Church of Ireland, the Scottish and American Episcopal churches, and some other associated churches have a separate name. Each church has its own doctrine and liturgy, based in most cases on that of the Church of England; and each church has its own legislative process and overall episcopal polity, under the leadership of a local primate.

==Ecclesiology, polity and ethos==

The Anglican Communion has no official legal existence nor any governing structure which might exercise authority over the member churches. There is an Anglican Communion Office in London, under the aegis of the Archbishop of Canterbury, but it only serves in a supporting and organisational role. The Communion is held together by a shared history, expressed in its ecclesiology, polity and ethos and also by participation in international consultative bodies.

Three elements have been important in holding the Communion together: first, the shared ecclesial structure of the component churches, manifested in an episcopal polity maintained through the apostolic succession of bishops and synodical government; second, the principle of belief expressed in worship, investing importance in approved prayer books and their rubrics; and third, the historical documents and the writings of early Anglican divines that have influenced the ethos of the Communion.

Originally, the Church of England was self-contained and relied for its unity and identity on its own history, its traditional legal and episcopal structure and its status as an established church of the state. As such Anglicanism was, from the outset, a movement with an explicitly episcopal polity, a characteristic which has been vital in maintaining the unity of the Communion by conveying the episcopate's role in manifesting visible catholicity and ecumenism.

Early in its development, Anglicanism developed a vernacular prayer book, called the Book of Common Prayer. Unlike other traditions, Anglicanism has never been governed by a magisterium nor by appeal to one founding theologian, nor by an extra-credal summary of doctrine (such as the Westminster Confession of the Presbyterian Church). Instead, Anglicans have typically appealed to the Book of Common Prayer (1662) and its offshoots as a guide to Anglican theology and practice. This had the effect of inculcating the principle of Lex orandi, lex credendi (Latin loosely translated as "the law of praying the law of believing") as the foundation of Anglican identity and confession.

Protracted conflict through the seventeenth century with more radical Protestants on the one hand and Roman Catholics who still recognised the primacy of the Pope on the other, resulted in an association of churches that were both deliberately vague about doctrinal principles, yet bold in developing parameters of acceptable deviation. These parameters were most clearly articulated in the various rubrics of the successive prayer books, as well as the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion. These Articles (though no longer binding) have had an influence on the ethos of the Communion, an ethos reinforced by their interpretation and expansion by such influential early theologians as Richard Hooker, Lancelot Andrewes, John Cosin, and others.

With the expansion of the British Empire, and hence the growth of Anglicanism outside Great Britain and Ireland, the Communion sought to establish new vehicles of unity. The first major expression of this were the Lambeth Conferences of the communion's bishops, first convened by Archbishop of Canterbury Charles Longley in 1869. From the beginning, these were not intended to displace the autonomy of the emerging provinces of the Communion, but to "discuss matters of practical interest, and pronounce what we deem expedient in resolutions which may serve as safe guides to future action."

==Chicago Lambeth Quadrilateral==
One of the enduringly influential early resolutions of the conference was the so-called Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888. Its intent was to provide the basis for discussions of reunion with the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches, but it had the ancillary effect of establishing parameters of Anglican identity. It establishes four principles with these words:

:That, in the opinion of this Conference, the following Articles supply a basis on which approach may be by God's blessing made towards Home Reunion:

:(a) The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, as "containing all things necessary to salvation," and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith.
:(b) The Apostles' Creed, as the Baptismal Symbol; and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the Christian faith.
:(c) The two Sacraments ordained by Christ Himself - Baptism and the Supper of the Lord - ministered with unfailing use of Christ's Words of Institution, and of the elements ordained by Him.
:(d) The Historic Episcopate, locally adapted in the methods of its administration to the varying needs of the nations and peoples called of God into the Unity of His Church. The Book of Common Prayer of the Episcopal Church, Seabury Press, 1979, p. 877 

==Instruments of communion==

As mentioned above, the Anglican Communion has no international juridical organisation. The Archbishop of Canterbury's role is strictly symbolic and unifying and the Communion's three international bodies are consultative and collaborative, their resolutions having no legal effect on the autonomous provinces of the Communion. Taken together, however, the four do function as "instruments of communion", since all churches of the communion participate in them. In order of antiquity, they are:

The Chair of St Augustine (the episcopal throne in Canterbury Cathedral, Kent), seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury in his role as head of the Anglican Communion The Chair of St Augustine is the seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury in his role as head of the Anglican Communion. Archbishops of Canterbury are enthroned twice: firstly as diocesan Ordinary (and Metropolitan and Primate of the Church of England) in the archbishop's throne, by the Archdeacon of Canterbury; and secondly as leader of the worldwide church in the Chair of St Augustine by the senior (by length of service) Archbishop of the Anglican Communion. The stone chair is therefore of symbolic significance throughout Anglicanism. 
# The Archbishop of Canterbury (ab origine) functions as the spiritual head of the Communion. He is the focus of unity, since no church claims membership in the Communion without being in communion with him. The present incumbent is Justin Welby.
# The Lambeth Conference (first held in 1867) is the oldest international consultation. It is a forum for bishops of the Communion to reinforce unity and collegiality through manifesting the episcopate, to discuss matters of mutual concern, and to pass resolutions intended to act as guideposts. It is held roughly every ten years and invitation is by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
# The Anglican Consultative Council (first met in 1971) was created by a 1968 Lambeth Conference resolution, and meets usually at three-yearly intervals. The council consists of representative bishops, clergy, and laity chosen by the thirty-eight provinces. The body has a permanent secretariat, the Anglican Communion Office, of which the Archbishop of Canterbury is president.
# The Primates' Meeting (first met in 1979) is the most recent manifestation of international consultation and deliberation, having been first convened by Archbishop Donald Coggan as a forum for "leisurely thought, prayer and deep consultation".

Since there is no binding authority in the Communion, these international bodies are a vehicle for consultation and persuasion. In recent years, persuasion has tipped over into debates over conformity in certain areas of doctrine, discipline, worship, and ethics. The most notable example has been the objection of many provinces of the Communion (particularly in Africa and Asia) to the changing role of homosexuals in the North American churches (e.g., by blessing same-sex unions and ordaining and consecrating gays and lesbians in same-sex relationships), and to the process by which changes were undertaken.

Those who objected condemned these actions as unscriptural, unilateral, and without the agreement of the Communion prior to these steps being taken. In response, the American Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada answered that the actions had been undertaken after lengthy scriptural and theological reflection, legally in accordance with their own canons and constitutions and after extensive consultation with the provinces of the Communion.

The Primates' Meeting voted to request the two churches to withdraw their delegates from the 2005 meeting of the Anglican Consultative Council. Canada and the United States decided to attend the meeting but without exercising their right to vote. They have not been expelled or suspended, since there is no mechanism in this voluntary association to suspend or expel an independent province of the Communion. Since membership is based on a province's communion with Canterbury, expulsion would require the Archbishop of Canterbury's refusal to be in communion with the affected jurisdiction(s). In line with the suggestion of the Windsor Report, Rowan Williams (the previous Archbishop of Canterbury) recently established a working group to examine the feasibility of an Anglican covenant which would articulate the conditions for communion in some fashion. Archbishop of Canterbury: address to General Synod on the Anglican Communion, ACNS 4164, 7 July 2006 

==Provinces==
}
Note that the Church of Ireland serves both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, the Episcopal Church of the Sudan serves both Sudan and South Sudan and the Anglican Church of Korea serves South Korea and, theoretically, North Korea. India is divided into a Church of North India and a Church of South India. The diocese of Gibraltar is also present in Portugal and Spain. The Episcopal Church, USA affiliated Convocation of Episcopal Churches in Europe has affiliates in France, Belgium, Austria, Switzerland, Italy and Kazakhstan.

All 38 provinces of the Anglican Communion are autonomous, each with its own primate and governing structure. These provinces may take the form of national churches (such as in Canada, Uganda, or Japan) or a collection of nations (such as the West Indies, Central Africa, or Southeast Asia). They are, in alphabetical order:

In addition, there are six extraprovincial churches, five of which are under the metropolitical authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
* Anglican Church of Bermuda (extraprovincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
* Iglesia Episcopal de Cuba (Episcopal Church of Cuba) (under a metropolitan council)
* Parish of the Falkland Islands (extraprovincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
* Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church (extraprovincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
* Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church (extraprovincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
* Church of Ceylon (extraprovincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)

In addition to other member churches, the churches of the Anglican Communion are in full communion with the Old Catholic churches of the Union of Utrecht and the Scandinavian Lutheran churches of the Porvoo Communion in Europe, the India-based Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian and Malabar Independent Syrian churches and the Philippine Independent Church, also known as the Aglipayan Church.

==History==

The Anglican Communion traces much of its growth to the older mission organisations of the Church of England such as the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (founded 1698), the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (founded 1701) and the Church Missionary Society (founded 1799). "The Church Missionary Society, originally called the Society for Missions to Africa and the East, was founded in 1799... Though later in date than the S.P.C.K. and the S.P.G. it became the first effective organ of the C. of E. for missions to the heathen... Its theology has been consistently Evangelical."--Cross, F. L., ed. (1957) The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. London: Oxford University Press; p. 305 The Church of England (which until the 20th century included the Church in Wales) initially separated from the Roman Catholic Church in 1538 in the reign of King Henry VIII, reunited in 1555 under Queen Mary I and then separated again in 1570 under Queen Elizabeth I (the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated Elizabeth I in 1570 in response to the Act of Supremacy 1559).

The Church of England has always thought of itself not as a new foundation but rather as a reformed continuation of the ancient "English Church" (Ecclesia Anglicana) and a reassertion of that church's rights. As such it was a distinctly national phenomenon. The Church of Scotland separated from the Roman Catholic Church with the Scottish Reformation in 1560 and the split from it of the Scottish Episcopal Church began in 1582 in the reign of James VI of Scotland over disagreements about the role of bishops.

The oldest-surviving Anglican church outside of the British Isles (Britain and Ireland) is St Peter's Church in St. George's, Bermuda, established in 1612 (though the actual building had to be rebuilt several times over the following century). This is also the oldest surviving non-Roman Catholic church in the New World. It remained part of the Church of England until 1978 when the Anglican Church of Bermuda separated. The Church of England was the established church not only in England, but in its trans-Oceanic colonies.

Thus the only member churches of the present Anglican Communion existing by the mid-18th century were the Church of England, its closely linked sister church, the Church of Ireland (which also separated from Roman Catholicism under Henry VIII) and the Scottish Episcopal Church which for parts of the 17th and 18th centuries was partially underground (it was suspected of Jacobite sympathies).

=== Global spread of Anglicanism ===
The enormous expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries of the British Empire brought Anglicanism along with it. At first all these colonial churches were under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. After the American Revolution, the parishes in the newly independent country found it necessary to break formally from a church whose Supreme Governor was (and remains) the British monarch. Thus they formed their own dioceses and national church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, in a mostly amicable separation.

At about the same time, in the colonies which remained linked to the crown, the Church of England began to appoint colonial bishops. In 1787 a bishop of Nova Scotia was appointed with a jurisdiction over all of British North America; in time several more colleagues were appointed to other cities in present-day Canada. In 1814 a bishop of Calcutta was made; in 1824 the first bishop was sent to the West Indies and in 1836 to Australia. By 1840 there were still only ten colonial bishops for the Church of England; but even this small beginning greatly facilitated the growth of Anglicanism around the world. In 1841 a "Colonial Bishoprics Council" was set up and soon many more dioceses were created.

In time, it became natural to group these into provinces and a metropolitan was appointed for each province. Although it had at first been somewhat established in many colonies, in 1861 it was ruled that, except where specifically established, the Church of England had just the same legal position as any other church. Thus a colonial bishop and colonial diocese was by nature quite a different thing from their counterparts back home. In time bishops came to be appointed locally rather than from England and eventually national synods began to pass ecclesiastical legislation independent of England.

A crucial step in the development of the modern communion was the idea of the Lambeth Conferences (discussed above). These conferences demonstrated that the bishops of disparate churches could manifest the unity of the church in their episcopal collegiality despite the absence of universal legal ties. Some bishops were initially reluctant to attend, fearing that the meeting would declare itself a council with power to legislate for the church; but it agreed to pass only advisory resolutions. These Lambeth Conferences have been held roughly every 10 years since 1878 (the second such conference) and remain the most visible coming-together of the whole Communion.

==Ecumenical relations==

==Historic episcopate==
The churches of the Anglican Communion have traditionally held that ordination in the historic episcopate is a core element in the validity of clerical ordinations. The Roman Catholic Church does not recognise most Anglican orders (see Apostolicae Curae). Some Eastern Orthodox Churches have issued statements to the effect that Anglican orders could be accepted, yet have still reordained former Anglican clergy; other Orthodox churches have rejected Anglican orders altogether. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware explains this apparent discrepancy as follows:

Anglican clergy who join the Orthodox Church are reordained; but Orthodox Churches hold that if Anglicanism and Orthodoxy were to reach full unity in the faith, perhaps such reordination might not be found necessary. It should be added, however, that a number of individual Orthodox theologians hold that under no circumstances would it be possible to recognise the validity of Anglican Orders. 

==Controversies==

One effect of the Communion's dispersed authority has been that conflict and controversy can arise over the effect divergent practices and doctrines in one part of the Communion have on others. McKinnon, A.; Trzebiatowska, M. & Brittain, C. (2011). 'Bourdieu, Capital and Conflict in a Religious Field: The Case of the Anglican Communion'. Journal of Contemporary Religion; vol 26, no. 3, pp. 355-370. Disputes that had been confined to the Church of England could be dealt with legislatively in that realm, but as the Communion spread out into new nations and disparate cultures, such controversies multiplied and intensified. These controversies have generally been of two types: liturgical and social. Chapman, M. Anglicanism: a very short introduction, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2006) 

;Anglo-Catholicism
The first such controversy of note concerned that of the growing influence of the Catholic Revival manifested in the tractarian and so-called ritualism controversies of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Pickering, W. S. F. (1989) Anglo-Catholicism: a study in religious ambiguity. London: Routledge This controversy produced the Free Church of England and, in the United States and Canada, the Reformed Episcopal Church.

;Social changes
Later, rapid social change and the dissipation of British cultural hegemony over its former colonies contributed to disputes over the role of women, the parameters of marriage and divorce, and the practices of contraception and abortion. In the late 1970s, the Continuing Anglican movement produced a number of new church bodies in opposition to women's ordination, prayer book changes, and the new understandings concerning marriage.

More recently, disagreements over homosexuality have strained the unity of the Communion as well as its relationships with other Christian denominations, leading to another round of withdrawals from the Anglican Communion. "Homosexuality and the Construction of Anglican Orthodoxy: The Symbolic Politics of the Anglican Communion", C. Brittain and A. McKinnon, Sociology of Religion, vol. 72, no.3, pp. 351-373 (2011). Some churches founded outside the Anglican Communion in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, largely in opposition to the ordination of openly homosexual bishops and other clergy are usually referred to as belonging to the Anglican realignment movement, or else as "orthodox" Anglicans. 

In some ways they represent a stronger opposition because they have the backing of many member provinces of the Anglican Communion and, in some cases, are or have been missionary jurisdictions of such provinces of the Communion as the Churches of Nigeria, Kenya, Rwanda, and the Southern Cone of America. Such debates about social theology and ethics, have occurred at the same time as debates on prayer book revision and the acceptable grounds for achieving full communion with non-Anglican churches. Ward, Keith A Global History of Anglicanism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2006). 

==See also==
* Affirming Catholicism
* Anglican Communion Network
* Anglican ministry
* Anglican sacraments
* Anglicans online
* Anglo-Catholicism
* Church Mission Society
* Church's Ministry Among Jewish People
* Compasrose Flag of the Anglican Communion
* Continuing Anglican movement
* Historical development of Church of England dioceses
* Liberal Anglo-Catholicism
* Reform (Anglican)

==Further reading==
*D'Arcy, Charles F., Abp., et al. Anglican Essays: a Collective Review of the Principles and Special Opportunities of the Anglican Communion as Catholic and Reformed. London: Macmillan and Co., 1923.
*Hebert, A.G. The Form of the Church. London: Faber and Faber, 1944.
*Staples, Peter. "Anglican Communion." In The Encyclopedia of Christianity, edited by Erwin Fahlbusch and Geoffrey William Bromiley, 57-59. Vol. 1. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1999. ISBN 0802824137
*Wild, John. What is the Anglican Communion?, in series, The Advent Papers. Cincinnati, Ohio: Forward Movement Publications, . Note.: Expresses the "Anglo-Catholic" viewpoint.

==References==

==External links==
* Official website
* Anglicans Online
* Decentralised nature of worldwide Anglicanism
* Project Canterbury Anglican historical documents from around the world



[[Arne Kaijser]]

Arne Kaijser (born 1950) is a professor of History of Technology at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and the head of the university's department of History of science and technology. Eurocrit: Arne Kaijser, accessed on 2010-05-07 

Kaijser has published two books in Swedish: Stadens ljus. Etableringen av de frsta svenska gasverken and I fdrens spr. Den svenska infrastrukturens historiska utveckling och framtida utmaningar, and has co-edited several anthologies. Kaijser is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences since 2007 and also a member of the editorial board of two scientific journals: Journal of Urban Technology and Centaurus. Lately, he has been occupied with the history of Large Technical Systems.

== References ==

== External links ==
* Homepage
* Extended homepage



[[Archipelago]]

The Mergui Archipelago in Burma (Myanmar).
The Ksamil Archipelago in Albania.
The archipelago of Fernando de Noronha in Brazil.

An archipelago ( ), sometimes called an island group or island chain, is a chain, cluster or collection of islands. The word archipelago is derived from the Greek -  arkhi- ("chief") and   plagos ("sea") through the Italian arcipelago. In Italian, possibly following a tradition of antiquity, the Arcipelago (from medieval Greek *) was the proper name for the Aegean Sea and, later, usage shifted to refer to the Aegean Islands (since the sea is remarkable for its large number of islands). It is now used to refer to any island group or, sometimes, to a sea containing a large number of scattered islands.

== Types ==
Archipelagos may be found isolated in bodies of water or neighboring a large land mass. For example, Scotland has more than 700 islands surrounding its mainland which constitute an archipelago. Archipelagos are often volcanic, forming along island arcs generated by subduction zones or hotspots, but may also be the result of erosion, deposition, and land elevation.
It really means a broad area of water containing several islands.
Depending on their geological origin, islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as oceanic islands, continental fragments, and continental islands. Whittaker R. J. & Fernndez-Palacios J. M. (2007) Island Biogeography: Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation. New York, Oxford University Press Oceanic islands are mainly of volcanic origin. Continental fragments correspond to land masses that have separated from a continental mass due to tectonic displacement. Finally, sets of islands formed close to the coast of a continent are considered continental archipelagos when they form part of the same continental shelf so islands are just exposed continental shelf.

The five main archipelagos are Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, New Zealand, and the British Isles. The largest archipelagic state in the world, by area and population, is Indonesia. The archipelago with the most islands is the Archipelago Sea in Finland.

== See also ==

* Island arc
* Geography
* Earth science
* Geomorphology
* List of landforms
* Plate tectonics
* Island country
* Earthsea
* The World (archipelago)
* List of archipelagos by number of islands
* List of archipelagos
* List of islands

== References ==

== External links ==

* 
* 30 Most Incredible Island Archipelagos

 



[[Author]]

Toni Morrison is a prominent American author who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1993 for her vivid representation of American culture, particularly the cultures of African Americans. Authors often have both political and social impacts through their works, placing their work into the public sphere as a testament to their ideas.
An author is broadly defined as "the person who originated or gave existence to anything" and whose authorship determines responsibility for what was created. Narrowly defined, an author is the originator of any written work and can also be described as a writer. compilation of the bibliographies and short biographies of notable authors up to 1974. 

==Author of a written or legally copied work==

===Legal significance===
A copyright certificate certifying the authorship for a proof of the Fermat theorem, issued by the State Department of Intellectual Property of Ukraine.
In copyright law, there is a necessity for little flexibility as to what constitutes authorship. The United States Copyright Office defines copyright as "a form of protection provided by the laws of the United States (title 17, U.S. Code) to authors of "original works of authorship". Holding the title of "author" over any "literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, certain other intellectual works" give rights to this person, the owner of the copyright, exclusive right to do or authorize any production or distribution of their work. Any person or entity wishing to use intellectual property held under copyright must receive permission from the copyright holder to use this work, and often will be asked to pay for the use of copyrighted material. After a fixed amount of time, the copyright expires on intellectual work and it enters the public domain, where it can be used without limit. Copyright law has been amended time and time again since the inception of the law to extend the length of this fixed period where the work is exclusively controlled by the copyright holder. However, copyright is merely the legal reassurance that one owns his/her work. Technically, someone owns their work from the time it's created. An interesting aspect of authorship emerges with copyright in that it can be passed down to another upon one's death. The person who inherits the copyright is not the author, but enjoys the same legal benefits.

Questions arise as to the application of copyright law. How does it, for example, apply to the complex issue of fan fiction? If the media agency responsible for the authorized production allows material from fans, what is the limit before legal constraints from actors, music, and other considerations, come into play? As well, how does copyright apply to fan-generated stories for books? What powers do the original authors, as well as the publishers, have in regulating or even stopping the fan fiction?

===Literary significance===
Mark Twain was a prominent American author in multiple genres including fiction and journalism during the 19th century.
In literary theory, critics find complications in the term "author" beyond what constitutes authorship in a legal setting. In the wake of postmodern literature, critics such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault have examined the role and relevance of authorship to the meaning or interpretation of a text.

Barthes challenges the idea that a text can be attributed to any single author. He writes, in his essay "Death of the Author" (1968), that "it is language which speaks, not the author". The words and language of a text itself determine and expose meaning for Barthes, and not someone possessing legal responsibility for the process of its production. Every line of written text is a mere reflection of references from any of a multitude of traditions, or, as Barthes puts it, "the text is a tissue of quotations drawn from the innumerable centres of culture"; it is never original. With this, the perspective of the author is removed from the text, and the limits formerly imposed by the idea of one authorial voice, one ultimate and universal meaning, are destroyed. The explanation and meaning of a work does not have to be sought in the one who produced it, "as if it were always in the end, through the more or less transparent allegory of the fiction, the voice of a single person, the author 'confiding' in us". The psyche, culture, fanaticism of an author can be disregarded when interpreting a text, because the words are rich enough themselves with all of the traditions of language. To expose meanings in a written work without appealing to the celebrity of an author, their tastes, passions, vices, is, to Barthes, to allow language to speak, rather than author.

Michel Foucault argues in his essay "What is an author?" (1969), that all authors are writers, but not all writers are authors. He states that "a private letter may have a signatory&mdash;it does not have an author". For a reader to assign the title of author upon any written work is to attribute certain standards upon the text which, for Foucault, are working in conjunction with the idea of "the author function". Foucault's author function is the idea that an author exists only as a function of a written work, a part of its structure, but not necessarily part of the interpretive process. The author's name "indicates the status of the discourse within a society and culture", and at one time was used as an anchor for interpreting a text, a practice which Barthes would argue is not a particularly relevant or valid endeavor. 

Expanding upon Foucault's position, Alexander Nehamas writes that Foucault suggests "an author is whoever can be understood to have produced a particular text as we interpret it", not necessarily who penned the text. It is this distinction between producing a written work and producing the interpretation or meaning in a written work that both Barthes and Foucault are interested in. Foucault warns of the risks of keeping the author's name in mind during interpretation, because it could affect the value and meaning with which one handles an interpretation.

Literary critics Barthes and Foucault suggest that readers should not rely on or look for the notion of one overarching voice when interpreting a written work, because of the complications inherent with a writer's title of "author." They warn of the dangers interpretations could suffer from when associating the subject of inherently meaningful words and language with the personality of one authorial voice. Instead, readers should allow a text to be interpreted in terms of the language as "author."

==Relationship between author and publisher==
The publisher of a work might receive a percentage calculated on a wholesale or a specific price and or a fixed amount on each book that is sold. Publishers, at times, reduced the risk of this type of arrangement, by agreeing only to pay this after a certain amount of copies had sold. In Canada this practice occurred during the 1890s, but was not commonplace until the 1920s.

*Commissioned: Publishers made publication arrangements, and authors covered all expenses (today the practice of authors self-publishing or paying for their publications is sometimes called vanity publishing, and is looked down upon by many publishers, even though it may have been a common and accepted practice in the past). Publishers would receive a percentage on the sale of every copy of a book, and the author would receive the rest of the money made.

==Relationship between author and editor==
Ezra Pound (pictured as a young man in 1913) made significant editing suggestions to T.S. Eliot's "The Waste Land," helping transform the original drafts into the work known today for its representation of postmodernity.
The relationship between the author and the editor, often the author's only liaison to the publishing company, is often characterized as the site of tension. For the author to reach his or her audience, the work usually must attract the attention of the editor. The idea of the author as the sole meaning-maker of necessity changes to include the influences of the editor and the publisher in order to engage the audience in writing as a social act.

Pierre Bourdieu's essay "The Field of Cultural Production" depicts the publishing industry as a "space of literary or artistic position-takings," also called the "field of struggles," which is defined by the tension and movement inherent among the various positions in the field. Bourdieu, Pierre. "The Field of Cultural Production, or: The Economic World Reversed." The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993, 30. Bourdieu claims that the "field of position-takings is not the product of coherence-seeking intention or objective consensus," meaning that an industry characterized by position-takings is not one of harmony and neutrality. Bourdieu, Pierre. "The Field of Cultural Production, or: The Economic World Reversed." The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993, 34 In particular for the writer, their authorship in their work makes their work part of their identity, and there is much at stake personally over the negotiation of authority over that identity. However, it is the editor who has "the power to impose the dominant definition of the writer and therefore to delimit the population of those entitled to take part in the struggle to define the writer". Bourdieu, Pierre. "The Field of Cultural Production, or: The Economic World Reversed." The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993, 42 As "cultural investors," publishers rely on the editor position to identify a good investment in "cultural capital" which may grow to yield economic capital across all positions. Bourdieu, Pierre. "The Field of Cultural Production, or: The Economic World Reversed." The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993, 68 

According to the studies of James Curran, the system of shared values among editors in Britain has generated a pressure among authors to write to fit the editors' expectations, removing the focus from the reader-audience and putting a strain on the relationship between authors and editors and on writing as a social act. Even the book review by the editors has more significance than the readership's reception. Curran, James. "Literary Editors, Social Networks and Cultural Tradition." Media Organizations in Society. James Curran, ed. London: Arnold, 2000, 230 

== Compensation ==
A standard contract for an author will usually include provision for payment in the form of an advance and royalties. An advance is a lump sum paid in advance of publication. An advance must be earned out before royalties are payable. An advance may be paid in two lump sums: the first payment on contract signing, and the second on delivery of the completed manuscript or on publication.

An author's contract may specify, for example, that they will earn 10% of the retail price of each book sold. Some contracts specify a scale of royalties payable (for example, where royalties start at 10% for the first 10,000 sales, but then increase to a higher percentage rate at higher sale thresholds).

An author's book must earn out their advance before any further royalties are paid. For example, if an author is paid a modest advance of $2000, and their royalty rate is 10% of a book priced at $20 - that is, $2 per book - the book will need to sell 1000 copies before any further payment will be made. Publishers typically withhold payment of a percentage of royalties earned against returns.

In some countries, authors also earn income from a government scheme such as the ELR (Educational Lending Right) and PLR (Public Lending Right) schemes in Australia. Under these schemes, authors are paid a fee for the number of copies of their books in educational and/or public libraries.

These days, many authors supplement their income from book sales with public speaking engagements, school visits, residencies, grants, and teaching positions.

Ghostwriters, technical writers, and textbooks writers are typically paid in a different way: usually a set fee or a per word rate rather than on a percentage of sales.

==See also==
*Academic authorship
*Auteur
*Lead author
*Authors' editor
*Novelist
*Lists of poets
*List of novelists
*Lists of writers
*Professional writing

==References==



[[Andrey Markov]]

Andrey (Andrei) Andreyevich Markov (, in older works also spelled Markoff E.g. ) (14 June 1856 N.S.  20 July 1922) was a Russian mathematician. He is best known for his work on stochastic processes. A primary subject of his research later became known as Markov chains and Markov processes.

Markov and his younger brother Vladimir Andreevich Markov (18711897) proved Markov brothers' inequality.
His son, another Andrei Andreevich Markov (19031979), was also a notable mathematician, making contributions to constructive mathematics and recursive function theory.

== Biography ==
Andrey Andreyevich Markov was born in Ryazan as the son of the secretary of the public forest management of Ryazan, Andrey Grigorevich Markov, and his first wife Nadezhda Petrovna Markova.

In the beginning of the 1860s Andrey Grigorevich moved to St. Petersburg to become an asset manager of Ekaterina Aleksandrovna Valvatyeva.

In 1866, Andrey Andreevich's school life began with his entrance into St. Petersburg's fifth grammar school. Already during his school time Andrey was intensely engaged in higher mathematics. As a 17-year-old grammar school student, he informed Viktor Bunyakovsky, Aleksandr Korkin, and Yegor Ivanovich Zolotarev about an apparently new method to solve linear ordinary differential equations, and he was invited to the so-called Korkin Saturdays, where Korkin's students regularly met. In 1874, he finished the school and began his studies at the physico-mathematical department of St. Petersburg University.

Among his teachers were Yulian Sokhotski (differential calculus, higher algebra), Konstantin Posse (analytic geometry), Yegor Zolotarev (integral calculus), Pafnuty Chebyshev (number theory and probability theory), Aleksandr Korkin (ordinary and partial differential equations), Mikhail Okatov (mechanism theory), Osip Somov (mechanics), and Nikolai Budaev (descriptive and higher geometry).

In 1877, Markov was awarded a gold medal for his outstanding solution of the problem

About Integration of Differential Equations by Continuous Fractions with an Application to the Equation .

During the following year, he passed the candidate's examinations, and he remained at the university to prepare for a lecturer's position.

In April 1880, Markov defended his master's thesis "About Binary Quadratic Forms with Positive Determinant", which was encouraged by Aleksandr Korkin and Yegor Zolotarev.

Five years later, in January 1885, there followed his doctoral thesis "About Some Applications of Algebraic Continuous Fractions".

His pedagogical work began after the defense of his master's thesis in autumn 1880. As a privatdozent he lectured on differential and integral calculus. Later he lectured alternately on "introduction to analysis", probability theory (succeeding Chebyshev, who had left the university in 1882) and the calculus of differences. From 1895 through 1905 he also lectured in differential calculus.

Markov in 1886
One year after the defense of his doctoral thesis, Markov was appointed extraordinary professor (1886) and in the same year he was elected adjunct to the Academy of Sciences. In 1890, after the death of Viktor Bunyakovsky, Markov became an extraordinary member of the academy. His promotion to an ordinary professor of St. Petersburg University followed in the fall of 1894.

In 1896, Markov was elected an ordinary member of the academy as the successor of Chebyshev. In 1905, he was appointed merited professor and was granted the right to retire, which he did immediately. Until 1910, however, he continued to lecture in the calculus of differences.

In connection with student riots in 1908, professors and lecturers of St. Petersburg University were ordered to monitor their students. Markov refused to accept this decree, and he wrote an explanation in which he declined to be an "agent of the governance". Markov was removed from further teaching duties at St. Petersburg University, and hence he decided to retire from the university.

Markov was an atheist. In 1912 he protested Leo Tolstoy's excommunication from the Russian Orthodox Church by requesting his own excommunication. The Church complied with his request. "Of course, Markov, an atheist and eventual excommunicate of the Church quarreled endlessly with his equally outspoken counterpart Nekrasov. The disputes between Markov and Nekrasov were not limited to mathematics and religion, they quarreled over political and philosophical issues as well." Gely P. Basharin, Amy N. Langville, Valeriy A. Naumov, The Life and Work of A. A. Markov, page 6. 

Markov's headstone
In 1913, the council of St. Petersburg elected nine scientists honorary members of the university. Markov was among them, but his election was not affirmed by the minister of education. The affirmation only occurred four years later, after the February Revolution in 1917. Markov then resumed his teaching activities and lectured on probability theory and the calculus of differences until his death in 1922.

== See also ==

* ChebyshevMarkovStieltjes inequalities
* GaussMarkov theorem
* GaussMarkov process
* Hidden Markov model
* Markov blanket
* Markov chain Monte Carlo
* Markov decision process
* Markov's inequality
* Markov information source
* Markov network
* Markov number
* Markov property
* Markov process
* Subjunctive possibility

== Notes ==

== References ==
* . . . "     ,    ". " -    ", 2- ,  15, . 135156, 1906.
* A.A. Markov. "Extension of the limit theorems of probability theory to a sum of variables connected in a chain". reprinted in Appendix B of: R. Howard. Dynamic Probabilistic Systems, volume 1: Markov Chains. John Wiley and Sons, 1971.

== External links ==

*
*
* Biography of A.A. Markov by his son, A.A. Markov-jnr 
*

Markov, Andrei Andreevich
Markov, Andrei Andreevich



[[Angst]]

Edvard Munch tried to represent "an infinite scream passing through nature" in The Scream (1893)

Angst means fear or anxiety (anguish is its Latinate equivalent, and anxious, anxiety are of similar origin). The word angst was introduced into English from the Danish and Dutch word angst and the German word Angst. It is attested since the 19th century in English translations of the works of Kierkegaard and Freud. merriam-webster.com, "angst" dictionary.com "angst" Online Etymology Dictionary, "angst" It is used in English to describe an intense feeling of apprehension, anxiety, or inner turmoil.
In other languages such as Danish, Dutch and German the word angst is not a loanword as it is in English, but has been in existence long, and is used regularly to express fear.

In German, the technical terminology of psychology and philosophy distinguishes between Angst and Furcht in that Furcht is a negative anticipation regarding a concrete threat, while Angst is a non-directional and unmotivated emotion. In common language, however, Angst is the normal word for "fear", while Furcht is an elevated synonym. "Furcht" and "Angst" in the DUDEN 

In other languages having the meaning of the Latin word pavor, the derived words differ in meaning, e.g. as in the French anxit and peur. The word Angst has existed since the 8th century, from the Proto-Indo-European root *anghu-, "restraint" from which Old High German angust developed. http://www.thefreedictionary.com/angst It is pre-cognate with the Latin angustia, "tensity, tightness" and angor, "choking, clogging"; compare to the Ancient Greek  (ankho) "strangle".

== Existentialism ==
In Existentialist philosophy the term angst carries a specific conceptual meaning. The use of the term was first attributed to Danish philosopher Sren Kierkegaard (1813&ndash;1855). In The Concept of Anxiety (also known as The Concept of Dread, depending on the translation), Kierkegaard used the word Angest (in common Danish, angst, meaning "dread" or "anxiety") to describe a profound and deep-seated condition. Where animals are guided solely by instinct, said Kierkegaard, human beings enjoy a freedom of choice that we find both appealing and terrifying. Kierkegaard's concept of angst reappeared in the works of existentialist philosophers who followed, such as Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre and Martin Heidegger, each of whom developed the idea further in individual ways. While Kierkegaard's angst referred mainly to ambiguous feelings about moral freedom within a religious personal belief system, later existentialists discussed conflicts of personal principles, cultural norms, and existential despair.
Ludger Gerdes, Angst, 1989

== Music ==
Existential angst makes its appearance in classical musical composition in the early twentieth century as a result of both philosophical developments and as a reflection of the war-torn times. Notable composers whose works are often linked with the concept include Gustav Mahler, Richard Strauss (operas Elektra and Salome), Claude-Achille Debussy (opera Pelleas et Melisande, ballet Jeux, other works), Jean Sibelius (especially the Fourth Symphony), Arnold Schoenberg (A Survivor from Warsaw, other works), Alban Berg, Francis Poulenc (opera Dialogues of the Carmelites), Dmitri Shostakovich (opera Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District, symphonies and chamber music), Bla Bartk (opera Bluebeard's Castle, other works), and Krzysztof Penderecki (especially Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima).
 
Angst began to be discussed in reference to popular music in the mid- to late 1950s amid widespread concerns over international tensions and nuclear proliferation. Jeff Nuttall's book Bomb Culture (1968) traced angst in popular culture to Hiroshima. Dread was expressed in works of folk rock such as Bob Dylan's Masters of War (1963) and A Hard Rain's a-Gonna Fall. The term often makes an appearance in reference to heavy metal, punk rock, grunge, nu metal, emo, and works of alternative rock where expressions of melancholy, existential despair or nihilism predominate.

== See also ==

*Anger
*Anguish
*Anxiety
*Byronic hero
*Emotion
*Existentialism
*Kafkaesque
*List of emotions
*Fear of death
*Sehnsucht
*Alienation
*Sturm und Drang
*Terror management theory
*The Mean Reds
*Weltschmerz

==References==
 

==External links==
*



[[Anxiety]]

Anxiety is an unpleasant state of inner turmoil, often accompanied by nervous behavior, such as pacing back and forth, somatic complaints and rumination. It is the subjectively unpleasant feelings of dread over something unlikely to happen, such as the feeling of imminent death. Anxiety is not the same as fear, which is a response to a real or perceived immediate threat; whereas anxiety is the expectation of future threat. Anxiety is a feeling of fear, worry, and uneasiness, usually generalized and unfocused as an overreaction to a situation that is only subjectively seen as menacing. It is often accompanied by muscular tension, restlessness, fatigue, and problems in concentration. Anxiety can be appropriate, but when it is too much and continues too long, the individual may suffer from an anxiety disorder. 

==Descriptions==
A job applicant with a worried facial expression
Anxiety is distinguished from fear, which is an appropriate cognitive and emotional response to a perceived threat and is related to the specific behaviors of fight-or-flight responses, defensive behavior or escape. Anxiety occurs in situations only perceived as uncontrollable or unavoidable, but not realistically so. David Barlow defines anxiety as "a future-oriented mood state in which one is ready or prepared to attempt to cope with upcoming negative events," and that it is a distinction between future and present dangers which divides anxiety and fear. Another description of anxiety is agony, dread, terror, or even apprehension. In positive psychology, anxiety is described as the mental state that results from a difficult challenge for which the subject has insufficient coping skills. 

Fear and anxiety can be differentiated in four domains: (1) duration of emotional experience, (2) temporal focus, (3) specificity of the threat, and (4) motivated direction. Fear is defined as short lived, present focused, geared towards a specific threat, and facilitating escape from threat; while anxiety is defined as long acting, future focused, broadly focused towards a diffuse threat, and promoting excessive caution while approaching a potential threat and interferes with constructive coping. 
Symptoms of anxiety can range in number, intensity, and frequency, depending on the person. While almost everyone has experienced anxiety at some point in their lives, most do not develop long-term problems with anxiety.

Nervous habits such as biting fingernails
The behavioral effects of anxiety may include withdrawal from situations which have provoked anxiety in the past. Anxiety can also be experienced in ways which include changes in sleeping patterns, nervous habits, and increased motor tension like foot tapping. 

The emotional effects of anxiety may include "feelings of apprehension or dread, trouble concentrating, feeling tense or jumpy, anticipating the worst, irritability, restlessness, watching (and waiting) for signs (and occurrences) of danger, and, feeling like your mind's gone blank" Smith, Melinda (2008, June). Anxiety attacks and disorders: Guide to the signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Retrieved March 3, 2009, from Helpguide Web site: http://www.helpguide.org/mental/anxiety_types_symptoms_treatment.htm as well as "nightmares/bad dreams, obsessions about sensations, deja vu, a trapped in your mind feeling, and feeling like everything is scary." (19872008). Anxiety Symptoms, Anxiety Attack Symptoms (Panic Attack Symptoms), Symptoms of Anxiety. Retrieved March 3, 2009, from Anxiety Centre Web site: http://www.anxietycentre.com/anxiety-symptoms.shtml 
 
The cognitive effects of anxiety may include thoughts about suspected dangers, such as fear of dying. "You may ... fear that the chest pains are a deadly heart attack or that the shooting pains in your head are the result of a tumor or aneurysm. You feel an intense fear when you think of dying, or you may think of it more often than normal, or can't get it out of your mind." (19872008). Anxiety symptoms - Fear of dying. Retrieved March 3, 2009, from Anxiety Centre Web site: http://www.anxietycentre.com/anxiety-symptoms/fear-of-dying.shtml 

==Types==

===Existential===

The philosopher Sren Kierkegaard, in The Concept of Anxiety, described anxiety or dread associated with the "dizziness of freedom" and suggested the possibility for positive resolution of anxiety through the self-conscious exercise of responsibility and choosing. In Art and Artist (1932), the psychologist Otto Rank wrote that the psychological trauma of birth was the pre-eminent human symbol of existential anxiety and encompasses the creative person's simultaneous fear of  and desire for  separation, individuation and differentiation.

The theologian Paul Tillich characterized existential anxiety as "the state in which a being is aware of its possible nonbeing" and he listed three categories for the nonbeing and resulting anxiety: ontic (fate and death), moral (guilt and condemnation), and spiritual (emptiness and meaninglessness). According to Tillich, the last of these three types of existential anxiety, i.e. spiritual anxiety, is predominant in modern times while the others were predominant in earlier periods. Tillich argues that this anxiety can be accepted as part of the human condition or it can be resisted but with negative consequences. In its pathological form, spiritual anxiety may tend to "drive the person toward the creation of certitude in systems of meaning which are supported by tradition and authority" even though such "undoubted certitude is not built on the rock of reality". 

According to Viktor Frankl, the author of Man's Search for Meaning, when a person is faced with extreme mortal dangers, the most basic of all human wishes is to find a meaning of life to combat the "trauma of nonbeing" as death is near.

===Test and performance===

According to Yerkes-Dodson law, an optimal level of arousal is necessary to best complete a task such as an exam, performance, or competitive event. However, when the anxiety or level of arousal exceeds that optimum, the result is a decline in performance. 

Test anxiety is the uneasiness, apprehension, or nervousness felt by students who have a fear of failing an exam. Students who have test anxiety may experience any of the following: the association of grades with personal worth; fear of embarrassment by a teacher; fear of alienation from parents or friends; time pressures; or feeling a loss of control. Sweating, dizziness, headaches, racing heartbeats, nausea, fidgeting, uncontrollable crying or laughing and drumming on a desk are all common. Because test anxiety hinges on fear of negative evaluation, debate exists as to whether test anxiety is itself a unique anxiety disorder or whether it is a specific type of social phobia. The DSM-IV classifies test anxiety as a type of social phobia. 

While the term "test anxiety" refers specifically to students, many workers share the same experience with regard to their career or profession. The fear of failing at a task and being negatively evaluated for failure can have a similarly negative effect on the adult. Management of test anxiety focuses on achieving relaxation and developing mechanisms to manage anxiety. 

===Stranger, social, and intergroup===

Humans generally require social acceptance and thus sometimes dread the disapproval of others. Apprehension of being judged by others may cause anxiety in social environments. 

Anxiety during social interactions, particularly between strangers, is common among young people. It may persist into adulthood and become social anxiety or social phobia. "Stranger anxiety" in small children is not considered a phobia. In adults, an excessive fear of other people is not a developmentally common stage; it is called social anxiety. According to Cutting, social phobics do not fear the crowd but the fact that they may be judged negatively.

Social anxiety varies in degree and severity. For some people it is characterized by experiencing discomfort or awkwardness during physical social contact (e.g. embracing, shaking hands, etc.), while in other cases it can lead to a fear of interacting with unfamiliar people altogether. Those suffering from this condition may restrict their lifestyles to accommodate the anxiety, minimizing social interaction whenever possible. Social anxiety also forms a core aspect of certain personality disorders, including Avoidant Personality Disorder. 

To the extent that a person is fearful of social encounters with unfamiliar others, some people may experience anxiety particularly during interactions with outgroup members, or people who share different group memberships (i.e., by race, ethnicity, class, gender, etc.). Depending on the nature of the antecedent relations, cognitions, and situational factors, intergroup contact may stressful, and lead to feelings of anxiety. This apprehension or fear of contact with outgroup members is often called interracial or intergroup anxiety. 

As is the case in the more generalized forms of social anxiety, intergroup anxiety has behavioral, cognitive, and affective effects. For instance, increases in schematic processing and simplified information processing can occur when anxiety is high. Indeed, such is consistent with related work on attentional bias in implicit memory. Additionally recent research has found that implicit racial evaluations (i.e. automatic prejudiced attitudes) can be amplified during intergroup interaction. Negative experiences have been illustrated in producing not only negative expectations, but also avoidant, or otherwise antagonistic, behavior such as hostility. Furthermore, when compared to anxiety levels and cognitive effort (e.g., impression management and self-presentation) in intragroup contexts, levels and depletion of resources may be exacerbated in the intergroup situation.

===Trait===
Anxiety can be either a short term 'state' or a long term "trait". Trait anxiety reflects a stable tendency to respond with state anxiety in the anticipation of threatening situations. It is closely related to the personality trait of neuroticism. Such anxiety may be conscious or unconscious. 

===Choice or decision===
Anxiety induced by the need to choose between similar options is increasingly being recognized as a problem for individuals and for organizations. "Today we're all faced with greater choice, more competition and less time to consider our options or seek out the right advice." Is choice anxiety costing british 'blue chip' business?, Capgemini, Aug 16, 2004 

In a decision context, unpredictability or uncertainty may trigger emotional responses in anxious individuals that systematically alter decision-making. There are primarily two forms of this anxiety type. The first form refers to a choice in which there are multiple potential outcomes with known or calculable probabilities. The second form refers to the uncertainty and ambiguity related to a decision context in which there are multiple possible outcomes with unknown probabilities. 

In some Buddhist meditation literature, this effect is described as something which arises naturally and should be turned toward and mindfully explored in order to gain insight into the nature of emotion, and more profoundly, the nature of self. 

===Psychiatric===
Anxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by feelings of anxiety and fear, where anxiety is a worry about future events and fear is a reaction to current events. These feelings may cause physical symptoms, such as a racing heart and shakiness. There are various forms of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, phobic disorder, and panic disorder. While each has its own characteristics and symptoms, they all include symptoms of anxiety. Psychiatry, Michael Gelder, Richard Mayou, John Geddes 3rd ed. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, c 2005 p. 75 

Anxiety disorders are partly genetic but may also be due to drug use including alcohol and caffeine, as well as withdrawal from certain drugs. They often occur with other mental disorders, particularly major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, certain personality disorders, and eating disorders. The term anxiety covers four aspects of experiences that an individual may have: mental apprehension, physical tension, physical symptoms and dissociative anxiety. David Healy, Drugs Explained, Section 5: Management of Anxiety, Elsevier Health Sciences, 2008, pp. 136137 The emotions present in anxiety disorders range from simple nervousness to bouts of terror. There are other psychiatric and medical problems that may mimic the symptoms of an anxiety disorder, such as hyperthyroidism.

Common treatment options include lifestyle changes, therapy, and medications. Medications are typically recommended only if other measures are not effective. Anxiety disorders occur about twice as often in females as males, and generally begin during childhood. As many as 18% of Americans and 14% of Europeans may be affected by one or more anxiety disorders. 

==Causes==

===Early life experiences===
Anxiety risk factors include family history (e.g. of anxiety) and parenting factors including parental rejection, lack of parental warmth, high hostility, harsh discipline, high maternal negative affect, anxious childrearing, modelling of dysfunctional and drug-abusing behaviour, and child abuse (emotional, physical and sexual). 

===Biological vulnerabilities===
Research upon adolescents who as infants had been highly apprehensive, vigilant, and fearful finds that their nucleus accumbens is more sensitive than that in other people when deciding to make an action that determined whether they received a reward. This suggests a link between circuits responsible for fear and also reward in anxious people. As researchers note, "a sense of 'responsibility', or self agency, in a context of uncertainty (probabilistic outcomes) drives the neural system underlying appetitive motivation (i.e., nucleus accumbens) more strongly in temperamentally inhibited than noninhibited adolescents". Anxiety is also linked and perpetuated by the person's own pessimistic outcome expectancy and how they cope with feedback negativity. Temperament and attitudes (e.g. pessimism) have been found to be risk factors for anxiety. 

Some writers believe that excessive anxiety can lead to an overpotentiation of the limbic system, giving increased future anxiety, but this does not appear to have been proven. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Iz_kWnfcExoC&pg=PA172&lpg=PA172&dq=overpotentiated+amygdala&source=bl&ots=GCXrq8Q52E&sig=tHPXH0lGImXHYxn1HDu0S-3-ZIo&hl=en&sa=X&ei=LpdSU_v-KoOwOfbEgJgK&ved=0CDAQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=overpotentiated%20amygdala&f=false http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ErU92jetUTMC&pg=PA284&lpg=PA284&dq=overpotentiated+amygdala&source=bl&ots=1ug7hyct_j&sig=Xz4xmE6g41MamEzW8DKPszobaAM&hl=en&sa=X&ei=LpdSU_v-KoOwOfbEgJgK&ved=0CDMQ6AEwAQ 

===Social issues - gender===
Contextual factors that are thought to contribute to anxiety include gender socialization and learning experiences. In particular, learning mastery (the degree to which people perceive their lives to be under their own control) and instrumentality, which includes such traits as self-confidence, independence, and competitiveness fully mediate the relation between gender and anxiety. That is, though gender differences in anxiety exist, with higher levels of anxiety in women compared to men, gender socialization and learning mastery explain these gender differences. Research has demonstrated the ways in which facial prominence in photographic images differs between men and women. More specifically, in official online photographs of politicians around the world, women's faces are less prominent than men's. Interestingly enough, the difference in these images actually tended to be greater in cultures with greater institutional gender equality. 

===Evolutionary psychology===
An evolutionary psychology explanation is that increased anxiety serves the purpose of increased vigilance regarding potential threats in the environment as well as increased tendency to take proactive actions regarding such possible threats. This may cause false positive reactions but an individual suffering from anxiety may also avoid real threats. This may explain why anxious people are less likely to die due to accidents. 

Neural circuitry involving the amygdala and hippocampus is thought to underlie anxiety. When people are confronted with unpleasant and potentially harmful stimuli such as foul odors or tastes, PET-scans show increased bloodflow in the amygdala. In these studies, the participants also reported moderate anxiety. This might indicate that anxiety is a protective mechanism designed to prevent the organism from engaging in potentially harmful behaviors.

===Genes===
Although single genes have little effect on complex traits and interact heavily both between themselves and with the external factors, research is under-way to unravel possible molecular mechanisms underlying anxiety and comorbid conditions. One candidate gene with polymorphisms that influence anxiety is PLXNA2. 

===Medical===
Anxiety can be a symptom of an underlying health problems such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart failure, or heart arrythmia. 

==See also==

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 
* 

 


[[A. A. Milne]]

Alan Alexander Milne (; 18 January 1882  31 January 1956) was a British author, best known for his books about the teddy bear Winnie-the-Pooh and for various children's poems. Milne was a noted writer, primarily as a playwright, before the huge success of Pooh overshadowed all his previous work.

==Biography==
A. A. Milne was born in Hampstead, London "Births search results". to parents John Vince Milne, who was Scottish, and Sarah Marie Milne (ne Heginbotham) and grew up at Henley House School, 6/7 Mortimer Road (now Crescent), Kilburn, a small public school run by his father. One of his teachers was H. G. Wells, who taught there in 188990. Milne attended Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge where he studied on a mathematics scholarship, graduating with a B.A. in Mathematics in 1903. While there, he edited and wrote for Granta, a student magazine. He collaborated with his brother Kenneth and their articles appeared over the initials AKM. Milne's work came to the attention of the leading British humour magazine Punch, where Milne was to become a contributor and later an assistant editor.

Milne joined the British Army in World War I and served as an officer in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment and later, after a debilitating illness, the Royal Corps of Signals. He was recruited into Military Intelligence to write propaganda articles for MI 7b between 1916 and 1918. He was discharged on 14 February 1919, and settled in Mallord Street, Chelsea. 

After the war, he wrote a denunciation of war titled Peace with Honour (1934), which he retracted somewhat with 1940's War with Honour. Capitalization as in the British Library Catalogue During World War II, Milne was one of the most prominent critics of English writer P. G. Wodehouse, who was captured at his country home in France by the Nazis and imprisoned for a year. Wodehouse made radio broadcasts about his internment, which were broadcast from Berlin. Although the light-hearted broadcasts made fun of the Germans, Milne accused Wodehouse of committing an act of near treason by cooperating with his country's enemy. Wodehouse got some revenge on his former friend (e.g., in The Mating Season) by creating fatuous parodies of the Christopher Robin poems in some of his later stories, and claiming that Milne "was probably jealous of all other writers.... But I loved his stuff." 

Milne married Dorothy "Daphne" de Slincourt in 1913, and their only son, Christopher Robin Milne, was born in 1920. In 1925, A. A. Milne bought a country home, Cotchford Farm, in Hartfield, East Sussex. 

During World War II, A. A. Milne was Captain of the Home Guard in Hartfield & Forest Row, insisting on being plain "Mr. Milne" to the members of his platoon. He retired to the farm after a stroke and brain surgery in 1952 left him an invalid, and by August 1953 "he seemed very old and disenchanted". Milne died in January 1956, aged 74.

==Literary career==

===1903 to 1925===
After graduating from Cambridge in 1903, A. A. Milne contributed humorous verse and whimsical essays to Punch, joining the staff in 1906 and becoming an assistant editor. 

During this period he published 18 plays and 3 novels, including the murder mystery The Red House Mystery (1922). His son was born in August 1920 and in 1924 Milne produced a collection of children's poems When We Were Very Young, which were illustrated by Punch staff cartoonist E. H. Shepard. A collection of short stories for children Gallery of Children, and other stories that became part of the Winnie-the-Pooh books, were first published in 1925.

Milne was an early screenwriter for the nascent British film industry, writing four stories filmed in 1920 for the company Minerva Films (founded in 1920 by the actor Leslie Howard and his friend and story editor Adrian Brunel). These were The Bump, starring Aubrey Smith; Twice Two; Five Pound Reward; and Bookworms Some of these films survive in the archives of the British Film Institute. Milne had met Howard when the actor starred in Milnes play Mr Pim Passes By in London. 

Looking back on this period (in 1926), Milne observed that when he told his agent that he was going to write a detective story, he was told that what the country wanted from a "Punch humorist" was a humorous story; when two years later he said he was writing nursery rhymes, his agent and publisher were convinced he should write another detective story; and after another two years, he was being told that writing a detective story would be in the worst of taste given the demand for children's books. He concluded that "the only excuse which I have yet discovered for writing anything is that I want to write it; and I should be as proud to be delivered of a Telephone Directory con amore as I should be ashamed to create a Blank Verse Tragedy at the bidding of others." 

==1926 to 1928==
Milne with his son Christopher Robin and Pooh Bear, at Cotchford Farm, their home in Sussex. Photo by Howard Coster, 1926.
The real stuffed toys owned by Christopher Robin Milne and featured in the Winnie-the-Pooh stories. They are on display in the Stephen A. Schwarzman Building (formerly the New York Public Library Main Branch) in New York.
Milne is most famous for his two Pooh books about a boy named Christopher Robin after his son, Christopher Robin Milne, and various characters inspired by his son's stuffed animals, most notably the bear named Winnie-the-Pooh. Christopher Robin Milne's stuffed bear, originally named "Edward", Winnie-the-Pooh at the New York Public Library was renamed "Winnie-the-Pooh" after a Canadian black bear named Winnie (after Winnipeg), which was used as a military mascot in World War I, and left to London Zoo during the war. "The pooh" comes from a swan called "Pooh". E. H. Shepard illustrated the original Pooh books, using his own son's teddy, Growler ("a magnificent bear"), as the model. The rest of Christopher Robin Milne's toys, Piglet, Eeyore, Kanga, Roo and Tigger, were incorporated into A. A. Milne's stories, two more characters - Rabbit and Owl - were created by Milne's imagination. Christopher Robin Milne's own toys are now under glass in New York.

The fictional Hundred Acre Wood of the Pooh stories derives from Five Hundred Acre Wood in Ashdown Forest in East Sussex, South East England, where the Pooh stories were set. Milne lived on the northern edge of the forest at Cotchford Farm, , and took his son walking there. E. H. Shepard drew on the landscapes of Ashdown Forest as inspiration for many of the illustrations he provided for the Pooh books. The adult Christopher Robin commented: "Pooh's Forest and Ashdown Forest are identical". The wooden Pooh Bridge in Ashdown Forest, where Pooh and Piglet invented Poohsticks, is a tourist attraction. Plans to improve access to Pooh Bridge unveiled BBC. Retrieved 15 October 2011 

Not yet known as Pooh, he made his first appearance in a poem, "Teddy Bear", published in the British magazine Punch in February 1924. Pooh first appeared in the London Evening News on Christmas Eve, 1925, in a story called "The Wrong Sort Of Bees". "Pooh celebrates his 80th birthday". BBC. Retrieved 11 November 2012 Winnie-the-Pooh was published in 1926, followed by The House at Pooh Corner in 1928. A second collection of nursery rhymes, Now We Are Six, was published in 1927. All three books were illustrated by E. H. Shepard. Milne also published four plays in this period. He also "gallantly stepped forward" to contribute a quarter of the costs of dramatising P. G. Wodehouse's A Damsel in Distress. His book The World of Pooh won the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1958.

===1929 onwards===
The success of his children's books was to become a source of considerable annoyance to Milne, whose self-avowed aim was to write whatever he pleased and who had, until then, found a ready audience for each change of direction: he had freed pre-war Punch from its ponderous facetiousness; he had made a considerable reputation as a playwright (like his idol J. M. Barrie) on both sides of the Atlantic; he had produced a witty piece of detective writing in The Red House Mystery (although this was severely criticised by Raymond Chandler for the implausibility of its plot). But once Milne had, in his own words, "said goodbye to all that in 70,000 words" (the approximate length of his four principal children's books), he had no intention of producing any reworkings lacking in originality, given that one of the sources of inspiration, his son, was growing older.

His reception remained warmer in America than Britain, and he continued to publish novels and short stories, but by the late 1930s, the audience for Milne's grown-up writing had largely vanished: he observed bitterly in his autobiography that a critic had said that the hero of his latest play (God help it) was simply "Christopher Robin grown up...what an obsession with me children are become!".

Even his old literary home, Punch, where the When We Were Very Young verses had first appeared, was ultimately to reject him, as Christopher Milne details in his autobiography The Enchanted Places, although Methuen continued to publish whatever Milne wrote, including the long poem 'The Norman Church' and an assembly of articles entitled Year In, Year Out (which Milne likened to a benefit night for the author).

He also adapted Kenneth Grahame's novel The Wind in the Willows for the stage as Toad of Toad Hall. The title was an implicit admission that such chapters as Chapter 7, "The Piper at the Gates of Dawn", could not survive translation to the theatre. A special introduction written by Milne is included in some editions of Grahame's novel.

==Legacy and commemoration==
A. A. Milne memorial plaque at Ashdown Forest, East Sussex, England, the setting for Winnie the Pooh, shared with E.H. Shepard
The rights to A. A. Milne's Pooh books were left to four beneficiaries: his family, the Royal Literary Fund, Westminster School and the Garrick Club. After Milne's death in 1956, his widow sold her rights to the Pooh characters to Stephen Slesinger, whose widow sold the rights after Slesinger's death to the Walt Disney Company, which has made many Pooh cartoon movies, a Disney Channel television show, as well as Pooh-related merchandise. In 2001, the other beneficiaries sold their interest in the estate to the Disney Corporation for $350m. Previously Disney had been paying twice-yearly royalties to these beneficiaries. The estate of E. H. Shepard also received a sum in the deal. The copyright on Pooh expires in 2026. In 2008, a collection of original illustrations featuring Winnie-the-Pooh and his animal friends sold for more than 1.2 million at auction in Sotheby's, London. "Pooh pictures sell for 1.2m at auction". Metro (London). 18 December 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2012 Forbes magazine ranks Winnie the Pooh the most valuable fictional character; in 2002 Winnie the Pooh merchandising products alone had annual sales of more than $5.9 billion. "Top-Earning Fictional Characters". Forbes (New York). 25 September 2003. Retrieved 11 November 2012. 

A memorial plaque in Ashdown Forest, unveiled by Christopher Robin in 1979, commemorates the work of A. A. Milne and Shepard in creating the world of Pooh. Milne once wrote of Ashdown Forest: "In that enchanted place on the top of the forest a little boy and his bear will always be playing". Ford, Rebecca (28 February 2007) "Happy Birthday Pooh", Daily Express. Retrieved 15 October 2011 In 2003, Winnie the Pooh was listed at number 7 on the BBC's survey The Big Read. "The Big Read", BBC, April 2003. Retrieved 18 October 2012. 

Several of Milne's children's poems were set to music by the composer Harold Fraser-Simson. 

His poems have been parodied many times, including with the books When We Were Rather Older and Now We Are Sixty.

==Religious views==
Milne did not speak out much on the subject of religion, although he used religious terms to explain his decision, while remaining a pacifist, to join the army: "In fighting Hitler", he wrote, "we are truly fighting the Devil, the Anti-Christ ... Hitler was a crusader against God." 

His best known comment on the subject was recalled on his death:

He also wrote the poem "Explained":
::Elizabeth Ann
::Said to her Nan:
::"Please will you tell me how God began?
::Somebody must have made Him. So
::Who could it be, 'cos I want to know?" 

==Works==

===Novels===
* Lovers in London (1905. Some consider this more of a short story collection; Milne did not like it and considered The Day's Play as his first book.)
* Once on a Time (1917)
* Mr. Pim (1921) (A novelisation of his play Mr. Pim Passes By (1919))
* The Red House Mystery (1922)
* Two People (1931) (Inside jacket claims this is Milne's first attempt at a novel.)
* Four Days' Wonder (1933)
* Chloe Marr (1946)

===Non-fiction===
* Peace With Honour (1934)
* It's Too Late Now: The Autobiography of a Writer (1939)
* War With Honour (1940)
* War Aims Unlimited (1941)
* Year In, Year Out (1952) (illustrated by E. H. Shepard)

====Punch articles====
* The Day's Play (1910)
* Once A Week (1914)
* The Holiday Round (1912)
* The Sunny Side (1921)
* Those Were the Days (1929) four volumes above, compiled

===Newspaper articles and book introductions===
* The Chronicles of Clovis by "Saki" (1911) to
* Not That It Matters (1920)
* By Way of Introduction (1929)

===Story collections for children===
* A Gallery of Children (1925)
* Winnie-the-Pooh (1926) (illustrated by Ernest H. Shepard)
* The House at Pooh Corner (1928) (illustrated by E. H. Shepard)
* Short Stories

===Poetry collections for children===
* When We Were Very Young (1924)
* Now We Are Six (1927)

===Story collections===
* The Secret and other stories (1929)
* The Birthday Party (1948)
* A Table Near the Band (1950)

===Poetry===
* For the Luncheon Interval from Punch
* When We Were Very Young (1924) (illustrated by E. H. Shepard)
* Now We Are Six (1927) (illustrated by E. H. Shepard)
* Behind the Lines (1940)
* The Norman Church (1948)

===Screenplays and Plays===
* Wurzel-Flummery (1917)
* Belinda (1918)
* The Boy Comes Home (1918)
* Make-Believe (1918) (children's play)
* The Camberley Triangle (1919)
* Mr. Pim Passes By (1919)
* The Red Feathers (1920)
* The Bump (1920, Minerva Films), starring Aubrey Smith
* Twice Two (1920, Minerva Films)
* Five Pound Reward (1920, Minerva Films)
* Bookworms (1920, Minerva Films)
* The Dover Road (1921)
* The Lucky One (1922)
* The Artist: A Duologue (1923)
* Give Me Yesterday (1923) (a.k.a. Success in the UK)
* Ariadne (1924)
* The Man in the Bowler Hat: A Terribly Exciting Affair (1924)
* To Have the Honour (1924)
* Portrait of a Gentleman in Slippers (1926)
* Success (1926)
* Miss Marlow at Play (1927)
* The Fourth Wall or The Perfect Alibi (1928)
* The Ivory Door (1929)
* Toad of Toad Hall (1929) (adaptation of The Wind in the Willows)
* Michael and Mary (1930)
* Other People's Lives (1933) (a.k.a. They Don't Mean Any Harm)
* Miss Elizabeth Bennet (1936) on Pride and Prejudice
* Sarah Simple (1937)
* Gentleman Unknown (1938)
* The General Takes Off His Helmet (1939) in The Queen's Book of the Red Cross
* The Ugly Duckling (1941)
* Before the Flood (1951)

==Films==
Michael and Mary was adapted to cinema in 1931.

The 1963 film The King's Breakfast was based on Milne's poem of the same name.

==References==

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* 
* Portraits of A. A. Milne in the National Portrait Gallery
* Essays by Milne at Quotidiana.org
* Milne extract in The Guardian
* 
* Profile at Just-Pooh.com



[[Asociacin Alumni]]

Asociacin Alumni, usually just Alumni, is a rugby union and former football club located in Tortuguitas, Greater Buenos Aires, Argentina.

==History==

===The beginning===

The club was originally founded as a football team in 1891, with the name "English High School" (the school where they came from) although it was obliged to change its name to "Alumni Athletic Club" (the name was proposed by a former student of the English High School) in 1901.

Alumni was the most successful team in the amateur era of Argentine football, winning 10 of the 14 league championships contested, being considered the first great football team. "En el nombre del ftbol", Clarn newspaper, 2003-04-24 Alumni was reorganised in 1908, "in order to encourage people to practise all kind of sports, specially football". This was the last try to develop itself as a sports club rather than just a football team, such as Lomas, Belgrano and Quilmes had successfully done in the past, but the efforts were not enough. Alumni played its last game in 1911 and was definitely dissolved on April 24, 1913.

===Rebirth through rugby===
In 1951 a group of English High School alumni asked the school for permission to re-establish the name "Alumni" for a rugby team. This request was immediately approved in a meeting presided by Carlos Bowers, who had proposed the name "Alumni" to the original football team 50 years before. "Los comienzos de Alumni" - club's official website 

The team achieved good results and in 1960 the club presented a team that won the third division of the Buenos Aires league, reaching the second division. Since then, Alumni has played at the highest level of Argentinian rugby and its rivalry with Belgrano Athletic Club is one of the fiercest local derbies in Buenos Aires. Alumni would later climb up to first division winning 5 titles: 4 consecutive between 1989 and 1992, and the other in 2001.

In 2002, Alumni won its first Nacional de Clubes title, defeating Jockey Club de Rosario 23-21 in the final.

==Honours==
*Nacional de Clubes (1): 2002
*Torneo de la URBA (5): 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 2001

==References==

==External links==
*Official website



[[Axiom]]

An axiom, or postulate, is a premise or starting point of reasoning. As classically conceived, an axiom is a premise so evident as to be accepted as true without controversy. 
"A proposition that commends itself to general acceptance; a well-established or universally conceded principle; a maxim, rule, law" axiom, n., definition 1a. Oxford English Dictionary Online, accessed 2012-04-28. Cf. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics I.2.72a18-b4. 
The word comes from the Greek  (xoma) 'that which is thought worthy or fit' or 'that which commends itself as evident.' Cf. axiom, n., etymology. Oxford English Dictionary, accessed 2012-04-28. Oxford American College Dictionary: "n. a statement or proposition that is regarded as being established, accepted, or self-evidently true. ORIGIN: late 15th cent.: ultimately from Greek axima 'what is thought fitting,' from axios 'worthy.' http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1O997-axiom.html 
As used in modern logic, an axiom is simply a premise or starting point for reasoning. "A proposition (whether true or false)" axiom, n., definition 2. Oxford English Dictionary Online, accessed 2012-04-28. Axioms define and delimit the realm of analysis; the relative truth of an axiom is taken for granted within the particular domain of analysis, and serves as a starting point for deducing and inferring other relative truths. No explicit view regarding the absolute truth of axioms is ever taken in the context of modern mathematics, as such a thing is considered to be an irrelevant and impossible contradiction in terms.

In mathematics, the term axiom is used in two related but distinguishable senses: "logical axioms" and "non-logical axioms". Logical axioms are usually statements that are taken to be true within the system of logic they define (e.g., (A and B) implies A), while non-logical axioms (e.g., 1= a + b = b + a) are actually defining properties for the domain of a specific mathematical theory (such as arithmetic). When used in the latter sense, "axiom," "postulate", and "assumption" may be used interchangeably. In general, a non-logical axiom is not a self-evident truth, but rather a formal logical expression used in deduction to build a mathematical theory. As modern mathematics admits multiple, equally "true" systems of logic, precisely the same thing must be said for logical axioms - they both define and are specific to the particular system of logic that is being invoked. To axiomatize a system of knowledge is to show that its claims can be derived from a small, well-understood set of sentences (the axioms). There are typically multiple ways to axiomatize a given mathematical domain.

In both senses, an axiom is any mathematical statement that serves as a starting point from which other statements are logically derived. Within the system they define, axioms (unless redundant) cannot be derived by principles of deduction, nor are they demonstrable by mathematical proofs, simply because they are starting points; there is nothing else from which they logically follow otherwise they would be classified as theorems. However, an axiom in one system may be a theorem in another, and vice versa.

==Etymology==
The word "axiom" comes from the Greek word (axioma), a verbal noun from the verb (axioein), meaning "to deem worthy", but also "to require", which in turn comes from (axios), meaning "being in balance", and hence "having (the same) value (as)", "worthy", "proper". Among the ancient Greek philosophers an axiom was a claim which could be seen to be true without any need for proof.

The root meaning of the word 'postulate' is to 'demand'; for instance, Euclid demands of us that we agree that some things can be done, e.g. any two points can be joined by a straight line, etc. Wolff, P. Breakthroughs in Mathematics, 1963, New York: New American Library, pp 478 

Ancient geometers maintained some distinction between axioms and postulates. While commenting Euclid's books Proclus remarks that "Geminus held that this Postulate should not be classed as a postulate but as an axiom, since it does not, like the first three Postulates, assert the possibility of some construction but expresses an essential property". Heath, T. 1956. The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements. New York: Dover. p200 Boethius translated 'postulate' as petitio and called the axioms notiones communes but in later manuscripts this usage was not always strictly kept.

==Historical development==

===Early Greeks===
The logico-deductive method whereby conclusions (new knowledge) follow from premises (old knowledge) through the application of sound arguments (syllogisms, rules of inference), was developed by the ancient Greeks, and has become the core principle of modern mathematics. Tautologies excluded, nothing can be deduced if nothing is assumed. Axioms and postulates are the basic assumptions underlying a given body of deductive knowledge. They are accepted without demonstration. All other assertions (theorems, if we are talking about mathematics) must be proven with the aid of these basic assumptions. However, the interpretation of mathematical knowledge has changed from ancient times to the modern, and consequently the terms axiom and postulate hold a slightly different meaning for the present day mathematician, than they did for Aristotle and Euclid.

The ancient Greeks considered geometry as just one of several sciences, and held the theorems of geometry on par with scientific facts. As such, they developed and used the logico-deductive method as a means of avoiding error, and for structuring and communicating knowledge. Aristotle's posterior analytics is a definitive exposition of the classical view.

An "axiom", in classical terminology, referred to a self-evident assumption common to many branches of science. A good example would be the assertion that When an equal amount is taken from equals, an equal amount results.

At the foundation of the various sciences lay certain additional hypotheses which were accepted without proof. Such a hypothesis was termed a postulate. While the axioms were common to many sciences, the postulates of each particular science were different. Their validity had to be established by means of real-world experience. Indeed, Aristotle warns that the content of a science cannot be successfully communicated, if the learner is in doubt about the truth of the postulates. Aristotle, Metaphysics Bk IV, Chapter 3, 1005b "Physics also is a kind of Wisdom, but it is not the first kind.  And the attempts of some of those who discuss the terms on which truth should be accepted, are due to want of training in logic; for they should know these things already when they come to a special study, and not be inquiring into them while they are listening to lectures on it." W.D. Ross translation, in The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon, (Random House, New York, 1941)|date=June 2011 

The classical approach is well-illustrated by Euclid's Elements, where a list of postulates is given (common-sensical geometric facts drawn from our experience), followed by a list of "common notions" (very basic, self-evident assertions).

:;Postulates
:# It is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any other point.
:# It is possible to extend a line segment continuously in both directions.
:# It is possible to describe a circle with any center and any radius.
:# It is true that all right angles are equal to one another.
:# ("Parallel postulate") It is true that, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, intersect on that side on which are the angles less than the two right angles.

:;Common notions:
:# Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
:# If equals are added to equals, the wholes are equal.
:# If equals are subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.
:# Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.
:# The whole is greater than the part.

===Modern development===
A lesson learned by mathematics in the last 150 years is that it is useful to strip the meaning away from the mathematical assertions (axioms, postulates, propositions, theorems) and definitions. One must concede the need for primitive notions, or undefined terms or concepts, in any study. Such abstraction or formalization makes mathematical knowledge more general, capable of multiple different meanings, and therefore useful in multiple contexts. Alessandro Padoa, Mario Pieri, and Giuseppe Peano were pioneers in this movement.

Structuralist mathematics goes further, and develops theories and axioms (e.g. field theory, group theory, topology, vector spaces) without any particular application in mind. The distinction between an "axiom" and a "postulate" disappears. The postulates of Euclid are profitably motivated by saying that they lead to a great wealth of geometric facts. The truth of these complicated facts rests on the acceptance of the basic hypotheses. However, by throwing out Euclid's fifth postulate we get theories that have meaning in wider contexts, hyperbolic geometry for example. We must simply be prepared to use labels like "line" and "parallel" with greater flexibility. The development of hyperbolic geometry taught mathematicians that postulates should be regarded as purely formal statements, and not as facts based on experience.

When mathematicians employ the field axioms, the intentions are even more abstract. The propositions of field theory do not concern any one particular application; the mathematician now works in complete abstraction. There are many examples of fields; field theory gives correct knowledge about them all.

It is not correct to say that the axioms of field theory are "propositions that are regarded as true without proof." Rather, the field axioms are a set of constraints. If any given system of addition and multiplication satisfies these constraints, then one is in a position to instantly know a great deal of extra information about this system.

Modern mathematics formalizes its foundations to such an extent that mathematical theories can be regarded as mathematical objects, and mathematics itself can be regarded as a branch of logic. Frege, Russell, Poincar, Hilbert, and Gdel are some of the key figures in this development.

In the modern understanding, a set of axioms is any collection of formally stated assertions from which other formally stated assertions follow by the application of certain well-defined rules. In this view, logic becomes just another formal system. A set of axioms should be consistent; it should be impossible to derive a contradiction from the axiom. A set of axioms should also be non-redundant; an assertion that can be deduced from other axioms need not be regarded as an axiom.

It was the early hope of modern logicians that various branches of mathematics, perhaps all of mathematics, could be derived from a consistent collection of basic axioms. An early success of the formalist program was Hilbert's formalization of Euclidean geometry, and the related demonstration of the consistency of those axioms.

In a wider context, there was an attempt to base all of mathematics on Cantor's set theory. Here the emergence of Russell's paradox, and similar antinomies of nave set theory raised the possibility that any such system could turn out to be inconsistent.

The formalist project suffered a decisive setback, when in 1931 Gdel showed that it is possible, for any sufficiently large set of axioms (Peano's axioms, for example) to construct a statement whose truth is independent of that set of axioms. As a corollary, Gdel proved that the consistency of a theory like Peano arithmetic is an unprovable assertion within the scope of that theory.

It is reasonable to believe in the consistency of Peano arithmetic because it is satisfied by the system of natural numbers, an infinite but intuitively accessible formal system. However, at present, there is no known way of demonstrating the consistency of the modern ZermeloFraenkel axioms for set theory. Furthermore, using techniques of forcing (Cohen) one can show that the continuum hypothesis (Cantor) is independent of the ZermeloFraenkel axioms. Thus, even this very general set of axioms cannot be regarded as the definitive foundation for mathematics.

===Other sciences===
Axioms play a key role not only in mathematics, but also in other sciences, notably in theoretical physics. In particular, the monumental work of Isaac Newton is essentially based on Euclid's axioms, augmented by a postulate on the non-relation of spacetime and the physics taking place in it at any moment.

In 1905, Newton's axioms were replaced by those of Albert Einstein's special relativity, and later on by those of general relativity.

Another paper of Albert Einstein and coworkers (see EPR paradox), almost immediately contradicted by Niels Bohr, concerned the interpretation of quantum mechanics. This was in 1935. According to Bohr, this new theory should be probabilistic, whereas according to Einstein it should be deterministic. Notably, the underlying quantum mechanical theory, i.e. the set of "theorems" derived by it, seemed to be identical. Einstein even assumed that it would be sufficient to add to quantum mechanics "hidden variables" to enforce determinism. However, thirty years later, in 1964, John Bell found a theorem, involving complicated optical correlations (see Bell inequalities), which yielded measurably different results using Einstein's axioms compared to using Bohr's axioms. And it took roughly another twenty years until an experiment of Alain Aspect got results in favour of Bohr's axioms, not Einstein's. (Bohr's axioms are simply: The theory should be probabilistic in the sense of the Copenhagen interpretation.)

As a consequence, it is not necessary to explicitly cite Einstein's axioms, the more so since they concern subtle points on the "reality" and "locality" of experiments.

Regardless, the role of axioms in mathematics and in the above-mentioned sciences is different. In mathematics one neither "proves" nor "disproves" an axiom for a set of theorems; the point is simply that in the conceptual realm identified by the axioms, the theorems logically follow. In contrast, in physics a comparison with experiments always makes sense, since a falsified physical theory needs modification.

==Mathematical logic==
In the field of mathematical logic, a clear distinction is made between two notions of axioms: logical and non-logical (somewhat similar to the ancient distinction between "axioms" and "postulates" respectively).

===Logical axioms===
These are certain formulas in a formal language that are universally valid, that is, formulas that are satisfied by every assignment of values. Usually one takes as logical axioms at least some minimal set of tautologies that is sufficient for proving all tautologies in the language; in the case of predicate logic more logical axioms than that are required, in order to prove logical truths that are not tautologies in the strict sense.

====Examples====

=====Propositional logic=====
In propositional logic it is common to take as logical axioms all formulae of the following forms, where , , and can be any formulae of the language and where the included primitive connectives are only "" for negation of the immediately following proposition and "" for implication from antecedent to consequent propositions:

#
#
#

Each of these patterns is an axiom schema, a rule for generating an infinite number of axioms. For example, if , , and are propositional variables, then and are both instances of axiom schema 1, and hence are axioms. It can be shown that with only these three axiom schemata and modus ponens, one can prove all tautologies of the propositional calculus. It can also be shown that no pair of these schemata is sufficient for proving all tautologies with modus ponens.

Other axiom schemas involving the same or different sets of primitive connectives can be alternatively constructed. Mendelson, "6. Other Axiomatizations" of Ch. 1 

These axiom schemata are also used in the predicate calculus, but additional logical axioms are needed to include a quantifier in the calculus. Mendelson, "3. First-Order Theories" of Ch. 2 

=====First-order logic=====

Axiom of Equality. Let be a first-order language. For each variable , the formula

is universally valid.

This means that, for any variable symbol the formula can be regarded as an axiom. Also, in this example, for this not to fall into vagueness and a never-ending series of "primitive notions", either a precise notion of what we mean by (or, for that matter, "to be equal") has to be well established first, or a purely formal and syntactical usage of the symbol has to be enforced, only regarding it as a string and only a string of symbols, and mathematical logic does indeed do that.

Another, more interesting example axiom scheme, is that which provides us with what is known as Universal Instantiation:

Axiom scheme for Universal Instantiation. Given a formula in a first-order language , a variable and a term that is substitutable for in , the formula

is universally valid.

Where the symbol stands for the formula with the term substituted for . (See Substitution of variables.) In informal terms, this example allows us to state that, if we know that a certain property holds for every and that stands for a particular object in our structure, then we should be able to claim . Again, we are claiming that the formula is valid, that is, we must be able to give a "proof" of this fact, or more properly speaking, a metaproof. Actually, these examples are metatheorems of our theory of mathematical logic since we are dealing with the very concept of proof itself. Aside from this, we can also have Existential Generalization:

Axiom scheme for Existential Generalization. Given a formula in a first-order language , a variable and a term that is substitutable for in , the formula

is universally valid.

===Non-logical axioms===
Non-logical axioms are formulas that play the role of theory-specific assumptions. Reasoning about two different structures, for example the natural numbers and the integers, may involve the same logical axioms; the non-logical axioms aim to capture what is special about a particular structure (or set of structures, such as groups). Thus non-logical axioms, unlike logical axioms, are not tautologies. Another name for a non-logical axiom is postulate. Mendelson, "3. First-Order Theories: Proper Axioms" of Ch. 2 

Almost every modern mathematical theory starts from a given set of non-logical axioms, and it was thought that in principle every theory could be axiomatized in this way and formalized down to the bare language of logical formulas.

Non-logical axioms are often simply referred to as axioms in mathematical discourse. This does not mean that it is claimed that they are true in some absolute sense. For example, in some groups, the group operation is commutative, and this can be asserted with the introduction of an additional axiom, but without this axiom we can do quite well developing (the more general) group theory, and we can even take its negation as an axiom for the study of non-commutative groups.

Thus, an axiom is an elementary basis for a formal logic system that together with the rules of inference define a deductive system.

====Examples====
This section gives examples of mathematical theories that are developed entirely from a set of non-logical axioms (axioms, henceforth). A rigorous treatment of any of these topics begins with a specification of these axioms.

Basic theories, such as arithmetic, real analysis and complex analysis are often introduced non-axiomatically, but implicitly or explicitly there is generally an assumption that the axioms being used are the axioms of ZermeloFraenkel set theory with choice, abbreviated ZFC, or some very similar system of axiomatic set theory like Von NeumannBernaysGdel set theory, a conservative extension of ZFC. Sometimes slightly stronger theories such as Morse-Kelley set theory or set theory with a strongly inaccessible cardinal allowing the use of a Grothendieck universe are used, but in fact most mathematicians can actually prove all they need in systems weaker than ZFC, such as second-order arithmetic.

The study of topology in mathematics extends all over through point set topology, algebraic topology, differential topology, and all the related paraphernalia, such as homology theory, homotopy theory. The development of abstract algebra brought with itself group theory, rings and fields, Galois theory.

This list could be expanded to include most fields of mathematics, including measure theory, ergodic theory, probability, representation theory, and differential geometry.

Combinatorics is an example of a field of mathematics which does not, in general, follow the axiomatic method.

=====Arithmetic=====
The Peano axioms are the most widely used axiomatization of first-order arithmetic. They are a set of axioms strong enough to prove many important facts about number theory and they allowed Gdel to establish his famous second incompleteness theorem. Mendelson, "5. The Fixed Point Theorem. Gdel's Incompleteness Theorem" of Ch. 2 

We have a language where is a constant symbol and is a unary function and the following axioms:

# 
# 
# for any formula with one free variable.

The standard structure is where is the set of natural numbers, is the successor function and is naturally interpreted as the number 0.

=====Euclidean geometry=====
Probably the oldest, and most famous, list of axioms are the 4 + 1 Euclid's postulates of plane geometry. The axioms are referred to as "4 + 1" because for nearly two millennia the fifth (parallel) postulate ("through a point outside a line there is exactly one parallel") was suspected of being derivable from the first four. Ultimately, the fifth postulate was found to be independent of the first four. Indeed, one can assume that exactly one parallel through a point outside a line exists, or that infinitely many exist. This choice gives us two alternative forms of geometry in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to exactly 180 degrees or less, respectively, and are known as Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries. If one also removes the second postulate ("a line can be extended indefinitely") then elliptic geometry arises, where there is no parallel through a point outside a line, and in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to more than 180 degrees.

=====Real analysis=====
The object of study is the real numbers. The real numbers are uniquely picked out (up to isomorphism) by the properties of a Dedekind complete ordered field, meaning that any nonempty set of real numbers with an upper bound has a least upper bound. However, expressing these properties as axioms requires use of second-order logic. The Lwenheim-Skolem theorems tell us that if we restrict ourselves to first-order logic, any axiom system for the reals admits other models, including both models that are smaller than the reals and models that are larger. Some of the latter are studied in non-standard analysis.

===Role in mathematical logic===

====Deductive systems and completeness====
A deductive system consists of a set of logical axioms, a set of non-logical axioms, and a set of rules of inference. A desirable property of a deductive system is that it be complete. A system is said to be complete if, for all formulas ,

that is, for any statement that is a logical consequence of there actually exists a deduction of the statement from . This is sometimes expressed as "everything that is true is provable", but it must be understood that "true" here means "made true by the set of axioms", and not, for example, "true in the intended interpretation". Gdel's completeness theorem establishes the completeness of a certain commonly used type of deductive system.

Note that "completeness" has a different meaning here than it does in the context of Gdel's first incompleteness theorem, which states that no recursive, consistent set of non-logical axioms of the Theory of Arithmetic is complete, in the sense that there will always exist an arithmetic statement such that neither nor can be proved from the given set of axioms.

There is thus, on the one hand, the notion of completeness of a deductive system and on the other hand that of completeness of a set of non-logical axioms. The completeness theorem and the incompleteness theorem, despite their names, do not contradict one another.

===Further discussion===
Early mathematicians regarded axiomatic geometry as a model of physical space, and obviously there could only be one such model. The idea that alternative mathematical systems might exist was very troubling to mathematicians of the 19th century and the developers of systems such as Boolean algebra made elaborate efforts to derive them from traditional arithmetic. Galois showed just before his untimely death that these efforts were largely wasted. Ultimately, the abstract parallels between algebraic systems were seen to be more important than the details and modern algebra was born. In the modern view axioms may be any set of formulas, as long as they are not known to be inconsistent.

==See also==

* Axiomatic system
* Dogma
* List of axioms
* Model theory
* Regul Juris
* Theorem

==References==
 
* Mendelson, Elliot (1987). Introduction to mathematical logic. Belmont, California: Wadsworth & Brooks. ISBN 0-534-06624-0

==External links==

* 
* 
* Metamath axioms page

*



[[Alpha]]

Alpha (uppercase , lowercase ; lpha) is the first letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 1. It was derived from the Phoenician letter aleph Aleph. Letters that arose from alpha include the Latin A and the Cyrillic letter .

In English, the noun "alpha" is used as a synonym for "beginning", or "first" (in a series), reflecting its Greek roots. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/alpha 

==Uses==

===Greek===
In Ancient Greek, alpha was pronounced when short and when long. Where there is ambiguity, long and short alpha are sometimes written with a macron and breve today: , .
* =  hr "a time"
* =  glssa "tongue"

In Modern Greek, vowel length has been lost, and all instances of alpha represent the short .

In the polytonic orthography of Greek, alpha, like other vowel letters, can occur with several diacritic marks: any of three accent symbols (), and either of two breathing marks (), as well as combinations of these. It can also combine with the iota subscript ().

====Greek grammar====
In the Attic-Ionic dialect of Ancient Greek, long alpha fronted to (eta). In Ionic, the shift took place in all positions. In Attic, the shift did not take place after epsilon, iota, and rho (, , ; e, i, r). In Doric and Aeolic, long alpha is preserved in all positions. Herbert Weir Smyth. Greek grammar for colleges. paragraph 30 and note. 
*Doric, Aeolic, Attic  Ionic , "country"
*Doric, Aeolic  Attic, Ionic , "report"

Privative a is the Ancient Greek prefix - or - a-, an-, added to words to negate them. It originates from the Proto-Indo-European* (syllabic nasal) and is cognate with English un-.

Copulative a is the Greek prefix - or - ha-, a-. It comes from Proto-Indo-European *.

===Math and science===

The letter alpha represents various concepts in physics and chemistry, including alpha radiation, angular acceleration, alpha particles, alpha carbon and strength of electromagnetic interaction (as Fine-structure constant). Alpha also stands for thermal expansion coefficient of a compound in physical chemistry. It is also commonly used in mathematics in algebraic solutions representing quantities such as angles. Furthermore, in mathematics, the letter alpha is used to denote the area underneath a normal curve in statistics to denote significance level when proving null and alternative hypotheses. In zoology, it is used to name the dominant individual in a wolf or dog pack.

The proportionality operator "" (in Unicode: U+221D) is sometimes mistaken for alpha. 

The uppercase letter alpha is not generally used as a symbol because it tends to be rendered identically to the uppercase Latin A.

===International Phonetic Alphabet===
In the International Phonetic Alphabet, a letter based on the lower case of alpha represents the open back unrounded vowel.

==History and symbolism==

===Etymology===
Alpha was derived from aleph, which in Phoenician means "ox". alpha on the Online Etymology Dictionary 

===Plutarch===
Plutarch, in Moralia, Symposiacs, Book IX, questions II & III On-line text at Adelaide library presents a discussion on why the letter alpha stands first in the alphabet. Ammonius asks Plutarch what he, being a Boeotian, has to say for Cadmus, the Phoenician who reputedly settled in Thebes and introduced the alphabet to Greece, placing alpha first because it is the Phoenician name for ox  which, unlike Hesiod, Hesiod, in Works and Days (see on Perseus Project), advises the early Greek farmers, "First of all, get a house, then a woman and third, an ox for the plough." the Phoenicians considered not the second or third, but the first of all necessities. "Nothing at all," Plutarch replied. He then added that he would rather be assisted by Lamprias, his own grandfather, than by Dionysus' grandfather, i.e. Cadmus. For Lamprias had said that the first articulate sound made is "alpha", because it is very plain and simple  the air coming off the mouth does not require any motion of the tongue  and therefore this is the first sound that children make.

According to Plutarch's natural order of attribution of the vowels to the planets, alpha was connected with the Moon.

===Alpha and Omega===
Memorial Stained Glass window, Royal Military College of Canada features Alpha and Omega
Alpha, both as a symbol and term, is used to refer to or describe a variety of things, including the first or most significant occurrence of something. The New Testament has God declaring himself to be the "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last." (Revelation 22:13, KJV, and see also 1:8).

===Language===
The term "alpha" has been used to denote position in social hierarchy, an example being "alpha male".

==Computer encodings==
* Greek alpha / Coptic alfa 

For accented Greek characters, see diacritics#Computer encoding|Greek diacritics: Computer encoding].

* Latin / IPA alpha

* Mathematical / Technical alpha

==References==



[[Alvin Toffler]]

Alvin Toffler (born October 4, 1928) is an American writer and futurist, known for his works discussing the digital revolution, communication revolution and technological singularity.

Toffler is a former associate editor of Fortune magazine. In his early works he focused on technology and its impact through effects like information overload. He moved on to examining the reaction to changes in society. His later focus has been on the increasing power of 21st-century military hardware, the proliferation of new technologies, and capitalism.

He founded Toffler Associates, a management consulting company, and was a visiting scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation, visiting professor at Cornell University, faculty member of the New School for Social Research, a White House correspondent, an editor of Fortune magazine, and a business consultant. Alvin Toffler Speaker BiographyMilken Institute, 2003. 

Toffler is married to Heidi Toffler, also a writer and futurist. They live in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles, California, just north of Sunset Boulevard.

The couples only child, Karen Toffler, (19542000), died at the age of 46 after more than a decade suffering from GuillainBarr syndrome. http://www.flickr.com/photos/urbanphotos/2415309182/ 

==Early life and career==
Alvin Toffler was born in New York city in 1928. He met his future wife, Heidi, at New York University where he was an English major and she was starting a graduate course in linguistics. Being radical students, they decided against further graduate work, moved to the Midwestern United States, and married, spending the next five years as blue-collar workers on assembly lines while studying industrial mass production in their daily work. Heidi became a union shop steward in the aluminum foundry where she worked. Alvin became a millwright and welder. Alvin and Heidi Toffler: PartnershipToffler website 

Their hands-on practical labor experience got Toffler a position on a union-backed newspaper, a transfer to its Washington bureau, then three years as a White House Correspondent covering Congress and the White House for a Pennsylvania daily. Meanwhile, his wife worked at a specialized library for business and behavioral science. 

They returned to New York City when Fortune magazine invited Alvin to become its labor columnist, later having him write about business and management. 

After leaving Fortune magazine, Alvin Toffler was hired by IBM to do research and write a paper on the social and organizational impact of computers, leading to his contact with the earliest computer "gurus" and artificial intelligence researchers and proponents. Xerox invited him to write about its research laboratory and AT&T consulted him for strategic advice. This AT&T work led to a study of telecommunications which advised its top management for the company to break up more than a decade before the government forced AT&T to break up. 

In the mid-60s, the Tofflers began work on what would later become Future Shock. 

In 1996, with Tom Johnson, an American business consultant, they co-founded Toffler Associates, an advisory firm designed to implement many of the ideas the Tofflers had written on. The firm worked with businesses, NGOs, and governments in the U.S., South Korea, Mexico, Brazil, Singapore, Australia, and other countries. 

==His ideas==
Toffler explains, "Society needs people who take care of the elderly and who know how to be compassionate and honest. Society needs people who work in hospitals. Society needs all kinds of skills that are not just cognitive; theyre emotional, theyre affectional. You cant run the society on data and computers alone." Alvin Toffler interviewed by Norman Swann, Australian Broadcasting Corporation Radio National, "Life Matters, March 5, 1998. Toffler is also frequently cited as stating: "Tomorrow's illiterate will not be the man who can't read; he will be the man who has not learned how to learn." The words came from Herbert Gerjuoy, whom Toffler cites in full as follows: "The new education must teach the individual how to classify and reclassify information, how to evaluate its veracity, how to change categories when necessary, how to move from the concrete to the abstract and back, how to look at problems from a new direction  how to teach himself." 

In his book The Third Wave, Toffler describes three types of societies, based on the concept of "waves"each wave pushes the older societies and cultures aside.
* First Wave is the society after agrarian revolution and replaced the first hunter-gatherer cultures.
* Second Wave is the society during the Industrial Revolution (ca. late 17th century through the mid-20th century). The main components of the Second Wave society are nuclear family, factory-type education system, and the corporation. Toffler writes: The Second Wave Society is industrial and based on mass production, mass distribution, mass consumption, mass education, mass media, mass recreation, mass entertainment, and weapons of mass destruction. You combine those things with standardization, centralization, concentration, and synchronization, and you wind up with a style of organization we call bureaucracy.
* Third Wave is the post-industrial society. According to Toffler, since the late 1950s, most nations have been moving away from a Second Wave Society into what he would call a Third Wave Society, one based on actionable knowledge as a primary resource. His description of this (super-industrial society) dovetails into other writers' concepts (like the Information Age, Space Age, Electronic Era, Global Village, technetronic age, scientific-technological revolution), which to various degrees predicted demassification, diversity, knowledge-based production, and the acceleration of change (one of Tofflers key maxims is "change is non-linear and can go backwards, forwards and sideways").

In this post-industrial society, there is a wide diversity of lifestyles (subcultures). Adhocracies (fluid organizations) adapt quickly to changes. Information can substitute most of the material resources (see ersatz) and becomes the main material for workers (cognitarians instead of proletarians), who are loosely affiliated. Mass customization offers the possibility of cheap, personalized, production catering to small niches (see just-in-time production).

The gap between producer and consumer is bridged by technology using a so-called configuration system. Prosumers" can fill their own needs (see open source, assembly kit, freelance work). This was the notion that new technologies are enabling the radical fusion of the producer and consumer into the prosumer. In some cases, prosuming entails a "third job" where the corporation "outsources" its labor not to other countries, but to the unpaid consumer, such as when we do our own banking through an ATM instead of a teller that the bank must employ, or trace our own postal packages on the internet instead of relying on a paid clerk.

Since the 1960s, people have been trying to make sense out of the impact of new technologies and social change. Tofflers writings have been influential beyond the confines of scientific, economic, and public policy discussions. Techno music pioneer Juan Atkins cites Tofflers phrase "techno rebels" in The Third Wave as inspiring him to use the word "techno" to describe the musical style he helped to create 
Tofflers works and ideas have been subject to various criticisms, usually with the same argumentation used against futurology: that foreseeing the future is nigh impossible. In the 1990s, his ideas were publicly lauded by Newt Gingrich.

The development Toffler believes may go down as this eras greatest turning point is the creation of wealth in outer space. Wealth today, he argues, is created everywhere (globalisation), nowhere (cyberspace), and out there (outer space). Global positioning satellites are key to synchronising precision time and data streams for everything from cellphone calls to ATM withdrawals. They allow just-in-time (JIT) productivity because of precise tracking. GPS is also becoming central to air traffic control. And satellites increase agricultural productivity through tracking weather, enabling more accurate forecasts.

==Critical acclaim==
Accenture, the management consultancy firm, has dubbed him the third most influential voice among business leaders, after Bill Gates and Peter Drucker. In the 2002 Accenture list of Top 50 business intellectuals, he was ranked eighth. He has also been described in the Financial Times as the "worlds most famous futurologist." People's Daily classes him among the 50 foreigners that shaped modern China. 50 foreigners shaping Chinas modern development, August 30, 2006. Coverage at the Tofflers site One author characterizes him as an important early influence on radical centrist political thought. Satin, Mark (2004). Radical Middle: The Politics We Need Now. Westview Press and Basic Books, p. 30. ISBN 978-0-8133-4190-3. 

==Selected awards==
He is the recipient of several prestigious prizes, including the McKinsey Foundation Book Award for Contributions to Management Literature, Officier de LOrdre des Arts et Lettres, and appointments, including Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the International Institute for Strategic Studies. 

In late 2006, the Tofflers were recipients of Brown Universitys Independent Award. Bios and AffiliationsToffler website 

==Bibliography==
Alvin Toffler co-wrote his books with his wife Heidi.
* The Culture Consumers (1964) St. Martin's Press ISBN 1199154814
* The Schoolhouse in the City (1968) Praeger (editors) ASIN: B000HUAUGW
* Future Shock (1970) Bantam Books ISBN 0-553-27737-5
* The Futurists (1972) Random House (editors) ISBN 0394317130
* Learning for Tomorrow (1974) Random House (editors) ISBN 0394719808
* The Eco-Spasm Report (1975) Bantam Books ISBN 0-553-14474-X
* The Third Wave (1980) Bantam Books ISBN 0-553-24698-4
* Previews & Premises (1983) William Morrow & Co ISBN 0-688-01910-2
* The Adaptive Corporation (1985) McGraw-Hill ISBN 0-553-25383-2
* (1990) Bantam Books ISBN 0-553-29215-3
* Creating a New Civilization (1995) Turner Pub ISBN 1570362246
* War and Anti-War (1995) Warner Books ISBN 0-446-60259-0
* Revolutionary Wealth (2006) Knopf ISBN 0-375-40174-1

==See also==

* Daniel Bell
* Norman Swan
* Human nature
* Future Shock

==References==

==External links==

* 
* Toffler Associates, the executive advisory firm formed by Alvin and Heidi Toffler.
* After Words: Alvin Toffler interviewed by Newt Gingrich (Real Audio format)
* Alvin Toffler interview on The Gregory Mantell Show
* BookTalk.org: discuss Alvin Tofflers Future Shock with other readers
* 
*Booknotes interview with Alvin and Heidi Toffler on Creating a New Civilization: The Politics of the Third Wave, April 16, 1995.



[[The Amazing Spider-Man]]

The Amazing Spider-Man is an American comic book series published by Marvel Comics, featuring the adventures of the fictional superhero Spider-Man. Being the mainstream continuity of the franchise, it began publication in 1963 as a monthly periodical and was published continuously, with a brief interruption in 1995, until its relaunch with a new numbering order in 1999. In 2003 the series reverted to the numbering order of the first volume. The title has occasionally been published biweekly, and was published three times a month from 2008 to 2010. A film named after the comic was released July 3, 2012.

After DC Comics' relaunch of Action Comics and Detective Comics with new #1 issues in 2011, it had been the highest-numbered American comic still in circulation until it was cancelled. The title ended its 50-year run as a continuously published comic with issue #700 in December 2012. It was replaced by The Superior Spider-Man as part of the Marvel NOW! relaunch of Marvel's comic lines. 
The title was relaunched in April 2014, starting fresh from issue #1, after the "Goblin Nation" story arc published in The Superior Spider-Man and Superior Spider-Man Team-Up.

==Publication history==
Amazing Fantasy vol. 1 #15 (August 1962), was Spider-Man's first appearance Art by Jack Kirby
The character was created by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist and co-plotter Steve Ditko, and the pair produced 38 issues from March 1963 to July 1966. Ditko left after the 38th issue, while Lee remained as writer until issue 100. Since then, many writers and artists have taken over the monthly comic through the years, chronicling the adventures of Marvel's most identifiable hero.

The Amazing Spider-Man has been the character's flagship series for his first fifty years in publication, and was the only monthly series to star Spider-Man until Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man in 1976 (although 1972 saw the debut of Marvel Team-Up, with the vast majority of issues featuring Spider-Man along with a rotating cast of other Marvel characters). Most of the major characters and villains of the Spider-Man saga have been introduced in Amazing, and with few exceptions, it is where most key events in the character's history have occurred. The title was published continuously until #441 (Nov. 1998) The Amazing Spider-Man at the Grand Comics Database when Marvel Comics relaunched it as vol. 2, #1 (Jan. 1999), The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 2 at the Grand Comics Database but on Spider-Man's 40th anniversary, this new title reverted to using the numbering of the original series, beginning again with issue #500 (Dec. 2003) and lasting until the final issue, #700 (Dec. 2012). The Amazing Spider-Man (continuation of volume 1) at the Grand Comics Database 

===The 1960s===
Due to strong sales on the character's first appearance in Amazing Fantasy #15, Spider-Man was given his own ongoing series in March 1963. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 91: "Thanks to a flood of fan mail, Spider-Man was awarded his own title six months after his first appearance. Amazing Spider-Man began as a bimonthly title, but was quickly promoted to a monthly." The initial years of the series, under Lee and Ditko, chronicled Spider-Man's nascent career with his civilian life as hard-luck yet perpetually good-humored teenager Peter Parker. Peter balanced his career as Spider-Man with his job as a freelance photographer for The Daily Bugle under the bombastic editor-publisher J. Jonah Jameson to support himself and his frail Aunt May. At the same time, Peter dealt with public hostility towards Spider-Man and the antagonism of his classmates Flash Thompson and Liz Allan at Midtown High School, while embarking on a tentative, ill-fated romance with Jameson's secretary, Betty Brant.

By focusing on Parker's everyday problems, Lee and Ditko created a groundbreakingly flawed, self-doubting superhero, and the first major teenaged superhero to be a protagonist and not a sidekick. Ditko's quirky art provided a stark contrast to the more cleanly dynamic stylings of Marvel's most prominent artist, Jack Kirby, and combined with the humor and pathos of Lee's writing to lay the foundation for what became an enduring mythos.

Most of Spider-Man's key villains and supporting characters were introduced during this time. Issue #1 (March 1963) featured the first appearances of J. Jonah Jameson DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 91 and his astronaut son John Jameson, and the supervillain the Chameleon. It included the hero's first encounter with the superhero team The Fantastic Four. Issue #2 (May 1963) featured the first appearance of the Vulture DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 92: "Introduced in the lead story of The Amazing Spider-Man #2 and created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, the Vulture was the first in a long line of animal-inspired super-villains that were destined to battle everyone's favorite web-slinger." and the beginning of Parker's freelance photography career at the newspaper The Daily Bugle. 

The Lee-Ditko era continued to usher in a significant number of villains and supporting characters, including Doctor Octopus in #3 (July 1963); DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 93: "Dr. Octopus shared many traits with Peter Parker. They were both shy, both interested in science, and both had trouble relating to women...Otto Octavius even looked like a grown up Peter Parker. Lee and Ditko intended Otto to be the man Peter might have become if he hadn't been raised with a sense of responsiblity" the Sandman and Betty Brant in #4 (Sept. 1963); the Lizard in #6 (Nov. 1963); DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 95 Living Brain in (#8, January, 1964); Electro in #9 (March 1964); DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 98 Mysterio in #13 (June 1964); the Green Goblin in #14 (July 1964); DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 101: "When the Green Goblin soared into the webhead's life, Stan Lee and Steve Ditko didn't bother to discuss his secret identity. They just knew they had an interesting character to add to Spider-Man's growing gallery of villains." Kraven The Hunter in #15 (Aug. 1964); reporter Ned Leeds in #18 (Nov. 1964); and the Scorpion in #20 (Jan. 1965). The Molten Man was introduced in #28 (Sept. 1965) which also featured Parker's graduation from high school. Peter began attending Empire State University in #31 (Dec. 1965), the issue which featured the first appearances of friends and classmates Gwen Stacy DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 111: "Gwen Stacy, the platinum blonde ex-beauty queen of Standard High, met Peter Parker on his first day in college in this issue." and Harry Osborn. Harry's father, Norman Osborn first appeared in #23 (April 1965) as a member of Jameson's country club but is not named nor revealed as Harry's father until #37 (June 1966). One of the most celebrated issues of the Lee-Ditko run is #33 (Feb. 1966), the third part of the story arc "If This Be My Destiny...!", and featuring the dramatic scene of Spider-Man, through force of will and thoughts of family, escaping from being pinned by heavy machinery. Comics historian Les Daniels noted that "Steve Ditko squeezes every ounce of anguish out of Spider-Man's predicament, complete with visions of the uncle he failed and the aunt he has sworn to save." Peter David observed that "After his origin, this two-page sequence from Amazing Spider-Man #33 is perhaps the best-loved sequence from the Stan Lee/Steve Ditko era." Steve Saffel stated the "full page Ditko image from The Amazing Spider-Man #33 is one of the most powerful ever to appear in the series and influenced writers and artists for many years to come." and Matthew K. Manning wrote that "Ditko's illustrations for the first few pages of this Lee story included what would become one of the most iconic scenes in Spider-Man's history." The story was chosen as #15 in the 100 Greatest Marvels of All Time poll of Marvel's readers in 2001. Editor Robert Greenberger wrote in his introduction to the story that "These first five pages are a modern-day equivalent to Shakespeare as Parker's soliloquy sets the stage for his next action. And with dramatic pacing and storytelling, Ditko delivers one of the great sequences in all comics." 

The Amazing Spider-Man #23 (April 1965), featuring nemesis the Green Goblin. Cover art by co-creator Steve Ditko.
Although credited only as artist for most of his run, Ditko would eventually plot the stories as well as draw them, leaving Lee to script the dialogue. A rift between Ditko and Lee developed, and the two men were not on speaking terms long before Ditko completed his last issue, The Amazing Spider-Man #38 (July 1966). The exact reasons for the Ditko-Lee split have never been fully explained. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 117: "To this day, no one really knows why Ditko quit. Bullpen sources reported he was unhappy with the way Lee scripted some of his plots, using a tongue-in-cheek approach to stories Ditko wanted handled seriously." Spider-Man successor artist John Romita, Sr., in a 2010 deposition, recalled that Lee and Ditko "ended up not being able to work together because they disagreed on almost everything, cultural, social, historically, everything, they disagreed on characters..." 

In successor penciler Romita Sr.'s first issue, #39 (Aug. 1966), nemesis the Green Goblin discovers Spider-Man's secret identity and reveals his own to the captive hero. Romita's Spider-Man  more polished and heroic-looking than Ditko's  became the model for two decades. The Lee-Romita era saw the introduction of such characters as Daily Bugle managing editor Robbie Robertson in #52 (Sept. 1967) and NYPD Captain George Stacy, father of Parker's girlfriend Gwen Stacy, in #56 (Jan. 1968). The most important supporting character to be introduced during the Romita era was Mary Jane Watson, who made her first full appearance in #42, (Nov. 1966), DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 119: "After teasing the readers for more than two years, Stan Lee finally allowed Peter Parker to meet Mary Jane Watson." although she first appeared in #25 (June 1965) with her face obscured and had been mentioned since #15 (Aug. 1964). Peter David wrote in 2010 that Romita "made the definitive statement of his arrival by pulling Mary Jane out from behind the oversized potted plant blocked the readers' view of her face in issue #25 and placing her on panel in what would instantly become an iconic moment." David and Greenberger, p. 38 Romita has stated that in designing Mary Jane, he "used Ann-Margret from the movie Bye Bye Birdie as a guide, using her coloring, the shape of her face, her red hair and her form-fitting short skirts." Saffel "A Legend is Born", p. 27 

Lee and Romita toned down the prevalent sense of antagonism in Parker's world by improving Parker's relationship with the supporting characters and having stories focused as much on the social and college lives of the characters as they did on Spider-Man's adventures. The stories became more topical, Manning "1960s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 46: "Stan Lee tackled the issues of the day again when, with artists John Romita and Jim Mooney, he dealt with social unrest at Empire State University." addressing issues such as civil rights, racism, prisoners' rights, the Vietnam War, and political elections.

Issue #50 (June 1967) introduced the highly enduring criminal mastermind the Kingpin, DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 122: "Stan Lee wanted to create a new kind of crime boss. Someone who treated crime as if it were a business...He pitched this idea to artist John Romita and it was Wilson Fisk who emerged in The Amazing Spider-Man #50." who would become a major force as well in the superhero series Daredevil. Other notable first appearances in the Lee-Romita era include the Rhino in #41 (Oct. 1966), DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 119: "The first original super-villain produced by the new Spider-Man team of Stan Lee and John Romita was the Rhino." the Shocker in #46 (March 1967), DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 121 the Prowler in #78 (Nov. 1969), and the Kingpin's son, Richard Fisk, in #83 (April 1970). 

===The 1970s===

Several spin-off series debuted in the 1970s: Marvel Team-Up in 1972, Sanderson, Peter "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 155: "Marvel Team-Up #1 inaugurated a new series in which Spider-Man teamed with a different hero in each issue."" and The Spectacular Spider-Man in 1976. Sanderson "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 177: "Spider-Man already starred in two monthly series: The Amazing Spider-Man and Marvel Team-Up. Now Marvel added a third, Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man, initially written by Gerry Conway with art by Sal Buscema and Mike Esposito." A short-lived series titled Giant-Size Spider-Man began in July 1974 and ran six issues through 1975. Giant-Size Spider-Man at the Grand Comics Diiiuatabase Spidey Super Stories, a series aimed at children ages 610, ran for 57 issues from October 1974 through 1982. Spidey Super Stories at the Grand Comics Database 
The flagship title's second decade took a grim turn with a story in #89-90 (Oct.-Nov. 1970) featuring the death of Captain George Stacy. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 55: "Captain George Stacy had always believed in Spider-Man and had given him the benefit of the doubt whenever possible. So in Spider-Man's world, there was a good chance that he would be destined to die." This was the first Spider-Man story to be penciled by Gil Kane, Gil Kane's run on The Amazing Spider-Man at the Grand Comics Database who would alternate drawing duties with Romita for the next year-and-a-half and would draw several landmark issues.

One such story took place in the controversial issues #96-98 (MayJuly 1971). Writer-editor Lee defied the Comics Code Authority with this story, in which Parker's friend Harry Osborn, was hospitalized after tripping on LSD. Lee wrote this story upon a request from the U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare for a story about the dangers of drugs. Citing its dictum against depicting drug use, even in an anti-drug context, the CCA refused to put its seal on these issues. With the approval of Marvel publisher Martin Goodman, Lee had the comics published without the seal. The comics sold well and Marvel won praise for its socially conscious efforts. Saffel "Bucking the Establishment, Marvel Style", p. 60: "The stories received widespread mainstream publicity, and Marvel was hailed for sticking to its guns." The CCA subsequently loosened the Code to permit negative depictions of drugs, among other new freedoms. Daniels, pp. 152 and 154: "As a result of Marvel's successful stand, the Comics Code had begun to look just a little foolish. Some of its more ridiculous restrictions were abandoned because of Lee's decision." 

The "The Six Arms Saga" of #100-102 (Sept.Nov. 1971) introduced Morbius, the Living Vampire. The second installment was the first Amazing Spider-Man story not written by co-creator Lee, Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 59: "In the first issue of The Amazing Spider-Man to be written by someone other than Stan Lee, Roy Thomas was faced with the mammoth task of not only filling the vaunted writer's shoes but also solving the bizarre cliffhanger from the last issue." with Roy Thomas taking over writing the book for several months before Lee returned to write #105-110 (Feb.-July 1972). Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 61: "Stan Lee had returned to The Amazing Spider-Man for a handful of issues after leaving following issue #100 (September 1971). With issue #110. Lee once again departed the title into which he had infused so much of his own personality over his near 10-year stint as regular writer." Lee, who was going on to become Marvel Comics' publisher, with Thomas becoming editor-in-chief, then turned writing duties over to 19-year-old wunderkind Gerry Conway, Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 62: "Amazing Spider-Man #111 marked the dawning of a new era: writer Gerry Conway came on board as Stan Lee's replacement. Alongside artist John Romita, Conway started his run by picking up where Lee left off." who scripted the series through 1975. Romita penciled Conway's first half-dozen issues, which introduced the gangster Hammerhead in #113 (Oct. 1972). Kane then succeeded Romita as penciler, although Romita would continue inking Kane for a time.

The most memorable work of the Conway/Kane/Romita team was #121-122 (JuneJuly 1973), which featured the death of Gwen Stacy at the hands of the Green Goblin in "The Night Gwen Stacy Died" in issue #121. Sanderson "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 159: "In June , Marvel embarked on a story that would have far-reaching effects. The Amazing Spider-Man artist John Romita, Sr. suggested killing off Spider-Man's beloved Gwen Stacy in order to shake up the book's status quo." Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 68: "This story by writer Gerry Conway and penciler Gil Kane would go down in history as one of the most memorable events of Spider-Man's life." David and Greenberger p. 49: "The idea of beloved supporting characters meeting their deaths may be standard operating procedure now but in 1973 it was unprecedented...Gwen's death took villainy and victimhood to an entirely new level." Her demise and the Goblin's apparent death one issue later formed a story arc widely considered as the most defining in the history of Spider-Man. Saffel "Death and the Spider", p. 65: "Death struck again, with repercussions that would ripple through comics from that day forward." The aftermath of the story deepened both the characterization of Mary Jane Watson and her relationship with Parker.

In 1973, Gil Kane was succeeded by Ross Andru, whose run lasted from issue #125 (October 1973) to #185 (October 1978). Ross Andru's run on The Amazing Spider-Man at the Grand Comics Database Issue #129 (Feb. 1974) introduced the Punisher, Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 72: "Writer Gerry Conway and artist Ross Andru introduced two major new characters to Spider-Man's world and the Marvel Universe in this self-contained issue. Not only would the vigilante known as the Punisher go on to be one of the most important and iconic Marvel creations of the 1970s, but his instigator, the Jackal, would become the next big threat in Spider-Man's life." who would become one of Marvel Comics' most popular characters. The Conway-Andru era featured the first appearances of the Man-Wolf in #124-125 (Sept.-Oct. 1973); the near-marriage of Doctor Octopus and Aunt May in #131 (April 1974); Harry Osborn stepping into his father's role as the Green Goblin in #135-137 (Aug.-Oct.1974); and the original "Clone Saga", containing the introduction of Spider-Man's clone, in #147-149 (Aug.-Oct. 1975).
Archie Goodwin and Gil Kane produced the title's 150th issue (Nov. 1975) before Len Wein became writer with issue #151. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 85: "To signify the start of this new era Spider-Man's new regular chronicler writer Len Wein would come onboard with this issue." During Wein's tenure, Harry Osborn and Liz Allen dated and became engaged, J. Jonah Jameson was introduced to his eventual second wife, Marla Madison, and Aunt May suffered a heart attack. Wein's last story on Amazing was a five-issue arc in #176-180 (Jan.-May 1978) featuring a third Green Goblin (Harry Osborns psychiatrist, Bart Hamilton). Marv Wolfman, Marvel's editor-in-chief from 1975 to 1976, succeeded Wein as writer, and in his first issue, #182 (July 1978), had Parker propose marriage to Watson who refused, in the following issue. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 103: "As new regular writer Marv Wolfman took over the scripting duties from Len Wein and partnered with artist Ross Andru, Peter Parker decided to make a dramatic change in his personal life." Keith Pollard succeeded Ross Andru as artist shortly afterward, and with Wolfman introduced the likable rogue the Black Cat (Felicia Hardy) in #194 (July 1979). Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 107: "Spider-Man wasn't exactly sure what to think about his luck when he met a beautiful new thief on the prowl named the Black Cat, courtesy of a story by writer Marv Wolfman and artist Keith Pollard." As a love interest for Spider-Man, the Black Cat would go on to be an important supporting character for the better part of the next decade, and remain a friend and occasional lover into the 2010s.

===The 1980s===
The Amazing Spider-Man #252 (May 1984): Spider-Man's black costume debuts. Cover art by Ron Frenz and Klaus Janson.
The Amazing Spider-Man #200 (Jan. 1980) featured the return and death of the burglar who killed Spider-Man's Uncle Ben. Writer Marv Wolfman and penciler Keith Pollard both left the title by mid-year, succeeded by Dennis O'Neil, a writer known for groundbreaking 1970s work at rival DC Comics, Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 115: "Acclaimed writer Denny O'Neil had returned to Marvel and...took over as the regular writer on The Amazing Spider-Man from issue #207 (August ) until the end of 1981." and penciler John Romita, Jr.. O'Neil wrote two issues of The Amazing Spider-Man Annual which were both drawn by Frank Miller. The 1980 Annual featured a team-up with Doctor Strange Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 114: "Writer Denny O'Neil and artist Frank Miller...used their considerable talents in this rare collaboration that teamed two other legends - Dr. Strange and Spider-Man." while the 1981 Annual showcased a meeting with the Punisher. Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 120: "Writer Denny O'Neil teamed with artist Frank Miller to concoct a Spider-Man annual that played to both their strengths. Miller and O'Neil seemed to flourish in the gritty world of street crime so tackling a Spider/Punisher fight was a natural choice." Roger Stern, who had written nearly 20 issues of sister title The Spectacular Spider-Man, took over Amazing with issue #224 (January 1982). Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 126: "Writer Roger Stern moved from the helm of Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man to sit behind the wheel as the new regular writer of The Amazing Spider-Man with this issue." During his two years on the title, Stern augmented the backgrounds of long-established Spider-Man villains, and with Romita Jr. created the mysterious supervillain the Hobgoblin in #238-239 (MarchApril 1983). Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 133: "Writer Roger Stern and artists John Romita, Jr. and John Romita, Sr. introduced a new - and frighteningly sane - version of the Goblin concept with the debut of the Hobgoblin." Fans engaged with the mystery of the Hobgoblin's secret identity, which continued throughout #244-245 and 249-251 (Sept.-Oct. 1983 and Feb.-April 1984). One lasting change was the reintroduction of Mary Jane Watson as a more serious, mature woman who becomes Peter's confidante after she reveals that she knows his secret identity. Stern wrote "The Kid Who Collects Spider-Man" in The Amazing Spider-Man #248 (January 1984), a story which ranks among his most popular. David and Greenberger, pp. 68-69: "Writer Roger Stern is primarily remembered for two major contributions to the world of Peter Parker. One was a short piece entitled 'The Kid Who Collects Spider-Man'... other major contribution was the introduction of the Hobgoblin." 

By mid-1984, Tom DeFalco and Ron Frenz took over scripting and penciling. DeFalco helped establish Parker and Watson's mature relationship, laying the foundation for the characters' wedding in 1987. Notably, in #257 (Oct. 1984), Watson tells Parker that she knows he is Spider-Man, and in #259 (Dec. 1984), she reveals to Parker the extent of her troubled childhood. Other notable issues of the DeFalco-Frenz era include #252 (May 1984), with the first appearance of Spider-Man's black costume, which the hero would wear almost exclusively for the next four years' worth of comics; the debut of criminal mastermind the Rose, in #253 (June 1984); the revelation in #258 (Nov. 1984) that the black costume is a living being, a symbiote; and the introduction of the female mercenary Silver Sable in #265 (June 1985).

Tom DeFalco and Ron Frenz were both removed from The Amazing Spider-Man in 1986 by editor Owsley under acrimonious circumstances. A succession of artists including Alan Kupperberg, John Romita, Jr., and Alex Saviuk penciled the book from 1987 to 1988; Owsley wrote the book for the first half of 1987, scripting the five-part "Gang War" story (#284-288) that DeFalco plotted. Former Spectacular Spider-Man writer Peter David scripted #289 (June 1987), which revealed Ned Leeds as being the Hobgoblin although this was retconned in 1996 by Roger Stern into Leeds not being the original Hobgoblin after all.

David Michelinie took over as writer in the next issue, for a story arc in #290-292 (July-Sept. 1987) that led to the marriage of Peter Parker and Mary Jane Watson in Amazing Spider-Man Annual #21. The "Kraven's Last Hunt" storyline by writer J.M. DeMatteis and artists Mike Zeck and Bob McLeod crossed over into The Amazing Spider-Man #293 and 294. DeFalco "1980s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 231: "The six-issue story arc...ran through all the Spider-Man titles for two months." Issue #298 (March 1988) was the first Spider-Man comic to be drawn by future industry star Todd McFarlane, the first regular artist on The Amazing Spider-Man since Frenz's departure. McFarlane revolutionized Spider-Man's look. His depiction  large-eyed, with wiry, contorted limbs, and messy, knotted, convoluted webbing  influenced the way virtually all subsequent artists would draw the character. McFarlane's other significant contribution to the Spider-Man canon was the design for what would become one of Spider-Man's most wildly popular antagonists, the supervillain Venom. Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 169: "In this landmark installment #298, one of the most popular characters in the wall-crawler's history would begin to step into the spotlight courtesy of one of the most popular artists to ever draw the web-slinger." Issue #299 (April 1988) featured Venom's first appearance (a last-page cameo) before his first full appearance in #300 (May 1988). The latter issue featured Spider-Man reverting to his original red-and-blue costume.

Other notable issues of the Michelinie-McFarlane era include #312 (Feb. 1989), featuring the Green Goblin vs. the Hobgoblin; and #315-317 (MayJuly 1989), with the return of Venom. In July 2012, Todd McFarlane's original cover art for The Amazing Spider-Man #328 sold for a bid of $657,250, making it the most expensive American comic book art ever sold at auction. 

===The 1990s===
With a civilian life as a married man, the Spider-Man of the 1990s was different from the superhero of the previous three decades. McFarlane left the title in 1990 to write and draw a new series titled simply Parker: Spider-Man|Spider-Man]. His successor, Erik Larsen, penciled the book from early 1990 to mid-1991. After issue #350, Larsen was succeeded by Mark Bagley, who had won the 1986 Marvel Tryout Contest Saffel "Taking Stock: The 1990s" pp. 185-186 and was assigned a number of low-profile penciling jobs followed by a run on New Warriors in 1990. Bagley penciled the flagship Spider-Man title from 1991 to 1996. Mark Bagley's run on The Amazing Spider-Man at the Grand Comics Database 

Issues #361-363 (AprilJune 1992) introduced Carnage, Cowsill, Alan "1990s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 197: "Artist Mark Bagley's era of The Amazing Spider-Man hit its stride as Carnage revealed the true face of his evil. Carnage was a symbiotic offspring produced when Venom bonded to psychopath Cletus Kasady." a second symbiote nemesis for Spider-Man. The series' 30th-anniversary issue, #365 (Aug. 1992), was a double-sized, hologram-cover issue Cowsill "1990s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 199 with the cliffhanger ending of Peter Parker's parents, long thought dead, reappearing alive. It would be close to two years before they were revealed to be impostors, who are killed in #388 (April 1994), scripter Michelinie's last issue. His 19871994 stint gave him the second-longest run as writer on the title, behind Stan Lee.

Issue #375 was released with a gold foil cover. Cowsill "1990s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 203 There was an error affecting some issues and which are missing the majority of the foil. 

With #389, writer J. M. DeMatteis, whose Spider-Man credits included the 1987 "Kraven's Last Hunt" story arc and a 19911993 run on The Spectacular Spider-Man, took over the title. From October 1994 to June 1996, Amazing stopped running stories exclusive to it, and ran installments of multi-part stories that crossed over into all the Spider-Man books. One of the few self-contained stories during this period was in #400 (April 1995), which featured the death of Aunt May &mdash; later revealed to have been faked (although the death still stands in the MC2 continuity). The "Clone Saga" culminated with the revelation that the Spider-Man who had appeared in the previous 20 years of comics was a clone of the real Spider-Man. This plot twist was massively unpopular with many readers, and was later reversed in the "Revelations" story arc that crossed over the Spider-Man books in late 1996.

The Clone Saga tied into a publishing gap after #406 (Oct. 1995), when the title was temporarily replaced by The Amazing Scarlet Spider #1-2 (Nov.-Dec. 1995), featuring Ben Reilly. The series picked up again with #407 (Jan. 1996), with Tom DeFalco returning as writer. Bagley completed his 5-year run by September 1996. A succession of artists, including Ron Garney, Steve Skroce, Joe Bennett, and Rafael Kayanan, penciled the book until the final issue, #441 (Nov. 1998), after which Marvel rebooted the title with vol. 2, #1 (Jan. 1999).

===Relaunch and the 2000s===
Marvel began The Amazing Spider-Man anew with vol. 2, #1 (Jan. 1999). Cowsill "1990s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 246: "This new series heralded a fresh start for the web-slinger's adventures." Howard Mackie wrote the first 29 issues. The relaunch included the Sandman being regressed to his criminal ways and the "death" of Mary Jane, which was ultimately reversed. Other elements included the introduction of a new Spider-Woman (who was spun off into her own short-lived series) and references to John Byrne's , which launched at the same time as the reboot. Mackie's run ended with The Amazing Spider-Man Annual 2001, which saw the return of Mary Jane, who then left Parker upon reuniting with him.

With #30 (June 2001), J. Michael Straczynski took over as writer Cowsill "2000s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 262: "J. Michael Straczynski and artist John Romita, Jr. took the helm in this issue to create some of the best Spider-Man stories of the decade." and oversaw additional storylines &mdash; most notably his lengthy "Spider-Totem" arc, which raised the issue of whether Spider-Man's powers were magic-based, rather than as the result of a radioactive spider's bite. Additionally, Straczynski resurrected the plot point of Aunt May discovering her nephew was Spider-Man, and returned Mary Jane, with the couple reuniting in The Amazing Spider-Man #50. Straczynski gave Spider-Man a new profession, having Parker teach at his former high school.

Issue #30 began a dual numbering system, with the original series numbering (#471) returned and placed alongside the volume-two number on the cover. Other longtime, rebooted Marvel Comics titles, including Fantastic Four, likewise were given the dual numbering around this time. In October 2000, John Romita, Jr. succeeded John Byrne as artist. After vol. 2, #58 (Nov. 2003), the title reverted completely to its original numbering for #500 (Dec. 2003). Mike Deodato, Jr. penciled the series from mid-2004 until 2006.

That year Peter Parker revealed his Spider-Man identity on live television in the company-crossover storyline "Civil War", in which the superhero community is split over whether to conform to the federal government's new Superhuman Registration Act. This knowledge was erased from the world with the event of the four-part, crossover story arc, "One More Day", written partially by J. Michael Straczynski and illustrated by Joe Quesada, running through The Amazing Spider-Man #544-545 (Nov.-Dec. 2007), Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man #24 (Nov. 2007) and The Sensational Spider-Man #41 (Dec. 2007), the final issues of those two titles. Here, the demon Mephisto makes a Faustian bargain with Parker and Mary Jane, offering to save Parker's dying Aunt May if the couple will allow their marriage to have never existed, rewriting that portion of their pasts. This story arc marked the end of Straczynski's tenure as writer.

Following this, Marvel made The Amazing Spider-Man the company's sole Spider-Man title, increasing its frequency of publication to three issues monthly, and inaugurating the series with a sequence of "back to basics" story arcs under the banner of "Brand New Day". Parker now exists in a changed world where he and Mary Jane had never married, and Parker has no memory of being married to her, with domino effect differences in their immediate world. The most notable of these revisions to Spider-Man continuity are the return of Harry Osborn, whose death in The Spectacular Spider-Man #200 (May 1993) is erased; and the reestablishment of Spider-Man's secret identity, with no one except Mary Jane able to recall that Parker is Spider-Man (although he soon reveals his secret identity to the New Avengers and the Fantastic Four). The alternating regular writers were initially Dan Slott, Bob Gale, Marc Guggenheim, Fred Van Lente, and Zeb Wells, joined by a rotation of artists that included Chris Bachalo, Phil Jimenez, Mike McKone, John Romita, Jr. and Marcos Martn. Joe Kelly, Mark Waid and Roger Stern later joined the writing team and Barry Kitson the artist roster. Waid's work on the series included a meeting between Spider-Man and Stephen Colbert in The Amazing Spider-Man #573 (Dec. 2008). Cowsill "2000s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 316: "The issue also saw TV star Stephen Colbert team up with Spider-Man in a back-up story written by Mark Waid and drawn by Patrick Olliffe." 
Issue #583 (March 2009) included a back-up story in which Spider-Man meets President Barack Obama. Cowsill "2000s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 319: "With President Obama about to be inaugurated, Marvel produced a special variant issue of The Amazing Spider-Man complete with...a five-page back-up strip co-starring the President, written by Zeb Wells and drawn by Todd Nauck." 

===2010s and temporary end of publication===
Mark Waid scripted the opening of the "The Gauntlet" storyline in issue #612 (Jan. 2010). Cowsill "2010s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 327: "Written by Mark Waid and drawn by Paul Azaceta, the two-part opening mixed the real-world drama of the economic meltdown with some Spidey action." With issue #648 (Jan. 2011), the series became a twice-monthly title with Dan Slott as sole writer. Cowsill "2010s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 334: "Spidey's adventures were about to take an exciting new direction as Dan Slott became the title's sole writer." Archive requires scrolldown Eight additional pages were added per issue. This publishing format lasted until issue #700, which concluded the "Dying Wish" storyline, in which Parker and Doctor Octopus swapped bodies, and the latter taking on the mantle of Spider-Man when Parker apparently died in Doctor Octopus' body. The Amazing Spider-Man ended with this issue, with the story continuing in the new series The Superior Spider-Man. In December 2013, the series returned for five issues, numbered 700.1 through 700.5, with the first two written by David Morrell and drawn by Klaus Janson. 

===2014 relaunch===
In January 2014, Marvel confirmed that The Amazing Spider-Man would be relaunched on April 30, 2014, starting from issue #1, with Peter Parker once again as Spider-Man. 

==References==

==External links==

*
*
*The Amazing Spider-Man comic book sales figures from 1966present at The Comics Chronicles
*Spider-Man at Marvel Comics wikia
*The Amazing Spider-Man cover gallery
*Spiderman Videos



[[AM]]

AM or similar may refer to:

==People==
* A. M., pseudonym of Matthew Arnold (1822-1888)

==Timekeeping==
* ante meridiem, Latin for "before noon"
* Anno Mundi, a calendar era based on the Biblical creation of the world
* Anno Martyrum, a method of numbering years in the Coptic calendar

==Technology==
* Amplitude modulation, an electronic communication technique
* Additive Manufacturing, a process of making a three-dimensional solid object of virtually any shape from a digital model.
* AM broadcasting, radio broadcasting using amplitude modulation
* Automated Mathematician, an artificial intelligence program
* .am, Internet domain for Armenia
* .am, a file extension associated with Automake

==Science and education==
* Americium, a chemical element
* Attometre, a unit of length
* Adrenomedullin, a protein
* Air mass (astronomy)
* Am, a Kppen climate classification code
* AM, a complexity class related to ArthurMerlin protocol
* Master of Arts, an academic degree
* Arts et Mtiers ParisTech, a French engineering school

==Media and entertainment==
* AM (musician), American musician
* A.M. (musician), Canadian musician
* DJ AM, American DJ and producer
* A.M. (Wilco album)
* A.M. (Chris Young album)
* AM (Arctic Monkeys album)
* AM (ABC Radio), an Australian radio programme
* American Morning, an American television programme
* A minor, a minor scale in music
* Am, Antes del Mediodia, Argentine TV program

==Transportation==
* A.M. (automobile), a 1906 French car
* Aeromxico, IATA airline code AM
* Arkansas and Missouri Railroad
* All-mountain, a discipline of mountain biking

==Military==
* AM, the United States Navy hull classification symbol for "minesweeper"
* Air marshal, a senior air officer rank used in Commonwealth countries
* Anti-materiel rifle
* Aviation Structural Mechanic, a U.S. Navy occupational rating

==Other uses==
* Member of the Order of Australia, postnominal letters which can be used by a Member of the Order
* Assembly Member (disambiguation), a political office
** Member of the National Assembly for Wales
** Member of the London Assembly
* Amharic language, ISO 639-1 language code am
* Armenia, ISO country code AM
* Attacking midfielder, a position in association football

== See also ==
* `am (disambiguation)
* A&M (disambiguation)
* AM2 (disambiguation)
* 
* 



[[Antigua and Barbuda]]

Antigua and Barbuda (; ; Spanish for "ancient" and "bearded") is a twin-island nation lying between the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean. It consists of two major inhabited islands, Antigua and Barbuda, and a number of smaller islands (including Great Bird, Green, Guinea, Long, Maiden and York Islands and further south, the island of Redonda). The permanent population numbers about 81,800 (at the 2011 Census) and the capital and largest port and city is St. John's, on Antigua.

Separated by a few nautical miles, Antigua and Barbuda are in the middle of the Leeward Islands, part of the Lesser Antilles, roughly at 17N of the equator. The country is nicknamed "Land of 365 Beaches" due to the many beaches surrounding the islands. Its governance, language, and culture have all been strongly influenced by the British Empire, of which the country was formerly a part.

==History==

Antigua was first settled by Archaic Age hunter-gatherer Amerindians called the Siboney or Ciboney. Carbon dating has established the earliest settlements started around 3100 BC. They were succeeded by the Ceramic Age pre-Columbian Arawak-speaking Saladoid people who migrated from the lower Orinoco River.

The Arawaks introduced agriculture, raising, among other crops, the famous Antigua black pineapple (Moris cultivar of Ananas comosus), corn, sweet potatoes (white with firmer flesh than the bright orange "sweet potato" used in the United States), chiles, guava, tobacco, and cotton.

The indigenous West Indians made excellent seagoing vessels which they used to sail the Atlantic and the Caribbean. As a result, Caribs and Arawaks were able to colonize much of South America and the Caribbean Islands. Their descendants still live there, notably in Brazil, Venezuela, and Colombia.

Most Arawaks left Antigua around 1100 AD; those who remained were later raided by the Caribs. According to the Catholic Encyclopedia, the Caribs' superior weapons and seafaring prowess allowed them to defeat most of the West Indian Arawak nations, enslaving some and possibly cannibalizing others.

The Catholic Encyclopedia does make it clear that the European invaders had some difficulty differentiating between the native peoples they encountered. As a result, the number and types of ethnic/tribal groups in existence at that time may have been much more varied and numerous than just the two mentioned in this article.

European and African diseases, malnutrition, and slavery eventually killed most of the Caribbean's native population, although no researcher has conclusively proven any of these causes as the real reason for these deaths. Smallpox was probably the greatest killer. 
 In fact, some historians believe that the psychological stress of slavery may also have played a part in the massive number of deaths amongst enslaved natives. Others believe the reportedly abundant, but starchy, low-protein diet may have contributed to severe malnutrition of the Amerindians, who were used to a diet fortified with protein from the sea. 

The island of Antigua, originally called Wa'ladli by Arawaks, is today called Wadadli by locals. Caribs possibly called it Wa'omoni. Christopher Columbus, while sailing by in 1493, may have named it Santa Maria la Antigua after an icon in the Spanish Seville Cathedral. The Spaniards did not colonize Antigua because it lacked fresh water but not aggressive Caribs.

The English settled on Antigua in 1632; Sir Christopher Codrington settled on Barbuda in 1684. Slavery, established to run sugar plantations around 1684, was abolished in 1834. The British ruled from 1632 to 1981, with a brief French interlude in 1666.

The islands became an independent state within the Commonwealth of Nations on 1 November 1981, with Elizabeth II as the first Queen of Antigua and Barbuda. The Right Honourable Vere Cornwall Bird Sr became the first Prime Minister.

==Governance==

===Political system===

A map of Antigua and Barbuda
The politics of Antigua and Barbuda take place within a framework of a unitary, parliamentary, representative democratic monarchy, in which the Head of State is the Monarch who appoints the Governor General as vice-regal representative. Elizabeth II is the present Queen of Antigua and Barbuda, having served in that position since the islands' independence from the United Kingdom in 1981. The Queen is currently represented by Governor General Dame Louise Lake-Tack (1944), who became the first woman to hold this position. A Council of Ministers is appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister, currently Winston Baldwin Spencer (1948). The Prime Minister is the Head of Government.

Executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in both the government and the two Chambers of Parliament. The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (17 members appointed by members of the government and the opposition party, and approved by the Governor-General), and the House of Representatives (17 members elected by first past the post) to serve five-year terms. The Speaker of the House is author and former St. John's University professor (New York) D. Giselle Isaac-Arrindell, while the President of the Senate is educator Hazelyn Francis-Mason.

The current Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition is Antigua Labour Party Member of Parliament (MP), the Honourable Gaston Alphonso Browne. Browne defeated his predecessor Lester Bryant Bird at the party's biennial convention in November 2012 held to elect a political leader and other party officers. Gaston Alphonso Browne renamed the Antigua Labour Party , to the Antigua & Barbuda Labour Party, ABLP. This was done to officially include the party's presence on the sister isle of Barbuda in its organization, the only political party on the mainland to have a physical branch in Barbuda.

The last elections held were on 12 March 2009, during which the Antigua Labour Party won seven seats, the United Progressive Party nine, and the Barbuda People's Movement one.

Since 1949, the party system had been dominated by the populist Antigua Labour Party. However, the Antigua and Barbuda legislative election of 2004 saw the defeat of the longest-serving elected government in the Caribbean. Prime Minister Lester Bryant Bird, who had succeeded his father Vere Cornwall Bird Sr., and Deputy Robin Yearwood had been in office since 1994.

The elder Bird was Prime Minister from 1981 to 1994 and Chief Minister of Antigua from 1960 to 1981, except for the 19711976 period when the Progressive Labour Movement (PLM) defeated his party. Vere Cornwall Bird, the nation's first Prime Minister, is credited with having brought Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean into a new era of independence.

The Judicial Branch is the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint Lucia; one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the High Court of Justice). In addition, Antigua is a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice. The Supreme Court of Appeal was the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council up until 2001, when the nations of the Caribbean Community voted to abolish the right of appeal to the Privy Council in favor of a Caribbean Court of Justice. Some debate between member countries repeatedly delayed the court's date of inauguration. As of March 2005, only Barbados was set to replace appeals to the Privy Council with appeals the Caribbean Court of Justice, which by then had come into operation.

===Administration===

Antigua and Barbuda is divided into six parishes and two dependencies:
Parishes of Antigua

 * Parishes *# Saint George *# Saint John *# Saint Mary *# Saint Paul *# Saint Peter *# Saint Philip * Dependencies *# Barbuda *# Redonda 

St. John's
Note: Though Barbuda and Redonda are called dependencies, they are integral parts of the state, making them essentially administrative divisions. Dependency is simply a title.

===Foreign relations===

Downtown St. John's
Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the United Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Organization of American States, the World Trade Organization and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System.

Antigua and Barbuda is also a member of the International Criminal Court (with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of Protection for the US military as covered under Article 98).

In 2013, Antigua and Barbuda called for reparations for slavery at the United Nations. "We have recently seen a number of leaders apologising," said the prime minister Baldwin Spencer. They should now "match their words with concrete and material benefits". 

===Military===

The Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force has around 260 members dispersed between the line infantry regiment, service and support unit and coast guard. There is also the Antigua and Barbuda Cadet Corps made up of 200 teenagers between the ages of 12 to 18.

==Geography==

===Islands===

* Antigua  largest island
* Barbuda
* Bird Island
* Bishop Island
* Blake Island
* Cinnamon Island
* Codrington Island
* Crump Island
* Dulcina Island
* Exchange Island

* Five Islands
* Great Bird Island
* Green Island
* Guiana Island
* Hale Gate Island
* Hawes Island
* Henry Island
* Johnson Island
* Kid Island
* Laviscounts Island

* Lobster Island
* Long Island
* Maid Island
* Moor Island
* Nanny Island
* Pelican Island
* Prickly Pear Island
* Rabbit Island
* Rat Island
* Red Head Island

* Redonda
* Sandy Island
* Smith Island
* The Sisters
* Vernon Island
* Wicked Will Island
* York Island

==Economy==

2009 export percentages
Tourism dominates the economy, accounting for more than half of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Antigua is famous for its many luxury resorts. Weak tourist activity since early 2000 has slowed the economy, however, and squeezed the government into a tight fiscal corner.

Investment banking and financial services also make up an important part of the economy. Major world banks with offices in Antigua include the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) and Scotiabank. Financial-services corporations with offices in Antigua include PriceWaterhouseCoopers. The US Securities and Exchange Commission has accused the Antigua-based Stanford International Bank, owned by Texas billionaire Allen Stanford, of orchestrating a huge fraud which may have bilked investors of some $8 billion. (check status 20100312)

The twin-island nation's agricultural production is focused on its domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a labor shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and construction work.

Manufacturing is made up of enclave-type assembly for export, the major products being bedding, handicrafts and electronic components. Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialized world, especially in the United States, from which about one-third of all tourists come.

Following the opening of the American University of Antigua College of Medicine by investor and attorney Neil Simon in 2003, a new source of revenue was established. The university employs many local Antiguans and the approximate 1000 students consume a large amount of the goods and services.

==Demographics==

Population of Antigua and Barbuda, Data of FAO, year 2005. Number of inhabitants in thousands.

===Ethnicity===
Antigua has a population of 85,632, mostly made up of people of West African, British, and Madeiran descent. The ethnic distribution consists of 91% Black or Mulatto, 4.4% mixed race, 1.7% White, and 2.9% other (primarily East Indian and Asian). Most Whites are of Irish or British descent. Christian Levantine Arabs, and a small number of Asians and Sephardic Jews make up the remainder of the population.

Behind the late 20th-century revival and redefinition of the role of Afro-Antiguans and Barbudans in the society's cultural life is a history of racial/ethnic tensions which systematically excluded non-Whites. Within the colonial framework established by the British soon after their initial settlement of Antigua in 1623, five distinct and carefully ranked racial/ethnic groups emerged.

At the top of this social structure were the British rulers. Amongst them were divisions between British Antiguans and non-creolized Britons, with the latter coming out on top. In short, this was a racial/ethnic hierarchy which gave maximum recognition to people and cultural practices of Anglican origin.

Immediately below the British were the mulattos, a mixed-race group of Afro-European origin. Mulattos, lighter in shade than most Africans, developed a complex system based on skin shade to distinguish themselves from the latter and to legitimate their claims to higher status. In many ways, they paralleled the British White Supremacy ideology.

In the middle of this social stratification were the Madeirans, 2,500 of whom migrated as workers from Madeira (a Portuguese archipelago in the North Atlantic, to the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula) between 1847 and 1852 because of a severe famine there. Many established small businesses and joined the ranks of the mulatto class. The British never really considered the Madeirans as Whites and did not allow them into their ranks. Amongst Antiguans and Barbudans of Madeiran descent, status differences were based on the varying degrees of assimilation into the dominant group's Anglicized practices.

Next to the bottom were Middle Easterners who began migrating to Antigua and Barbuda around the turn of the 20th century. Starting as itinerant traders, they soon worked their way into the social mix. Although Middle Easterners came from a variety of areas, as a group they are usually referred to as Syrians.

Afro-Antiguans and Afro-Barbudans were at the bottom. Forced into slavery, Africans started arriving in Antigua and Barbuda in large numbers during the 1670s. Very quickly, they grew into the largest racial/ethnic group. Their entry into the local social structure was marked by a profound racialization: They ceased being Yoruba, Igbo, or Akan and became Negroes or Blacks.

In the 20th century, the colonial social structure gradually started to be phased out with the introduction of universal education and better economic opportunities. This process allowed Blacks to rise to the highest echelons of society and government.

In the last decade, Spanish-speaking immigrants from the Dominican Republic and Afro-Caribbean immigrants from Guyana and Dominica were added to this ethnic mosaic. They have entered at the social structure's bottom; it is still too early to predict their patterns of assimilation and social mobility.

Today, an increasingly large percentage of the population lives abroad, most notably in the United Kingdom (Antiguan Britons), United States and Canada. A minority of Antiguan residents are immigrants from other countries, particularly from Dominica, Guyana and Jamaica, and, increasing, from the Dominican Republic, St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Nigeria. An estimated 4,500 American citizens also make their home in Antigua and Barbuda, making their numbers one of the largest American populations in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean. 

===Religion===
St. John's Cathedral, St. John's

Seventy-four percent of Antiguans are Christians, with the Anglican denomination (about 44%) being the largest. Other Christian denominations present are Baptists, [http://www.bwanet.org/default.aspx?pid=1118 ] Presbyterians An Introduction to Southern Presbyterian History (1611-2001) and Catholics.

Non-Christian religions practiced in the islands include the Rastafari Movement, Islam, Judaism and the Bah' Faith.

===Languages===
English is the official language, but many of the locals speak Antiguan Creole. The Barbudan accent is slightly different from the Antiguan.

In the years before Antigua and Barbuda's independence, Standard English was widely spoken in preference to Antiguan Creole, but afterwards Antiguans began treating Antiguan Creole as a respectable aspect of their culture. Generally, the upper and middle classes shun Antiguan Creole. The educational system dissuades the use of Antiguan Creole and instruction is done in Standard (British) English.

Many of the words used in the Antiguan dialect are derived from British as well as African languages. This can be easily seen in phrases such as: "Me nah go" meaning "I am not going". Another example is: "Ent it?" meaning "Ain't it?" which is itself dialectal and means "Isn't it?". Common island proverbs can often be traced to Africa.

Spanish is spoken by around 10,000 inhabitants of the country. Bernadette Farquhar - The Spanish Language in Antigua and Barbuda: Implications for Language Planning and Language Research 

===Largest cities===

==Media==
Up until April 2010 there were two daily newspapers: Daily Observer, and the Antigua Sun, which also published newspapers on other Caribbean islands. The Antigua Sun ceased operation in April 2010 after having been in circulation for 13 years. Besides most American television networks, the local channel ABS TV 10 is available (it is the only station which shows exclusively local programs). There are also several local and regional radio stations, such as V2C-AM 620, ZDK-AM 1100, VYBZ-FM 92.9, and ZDK-FM 97.1.

==Education==
The people of Antigua & Barbuda enjoy a more-than-90% literacy rate. In 1998, Antigua and Barbuda adopted a national mandate to become the pre-eminent provider of medical services in the Caribbean. As part of this mission, Antigua and Barbuda built the most technologically advanced hospital in the Caribbean, the Mt. St. John Medical Centre. The island of Antigua currently has two medical schools, the American University of Antigua (AUA), founded in 2004, and The University of Health Sciences Antigua (UHSA), founded in 1982.

There is also a government owned state college in Antigua as well as the Antigua and Barbuda Institute of Information Technology (ABIIT) and the Antigua and Barbuda Hospitality Training Institute (ABHTI). The University of the West Indies has a branch in Antigua for locals to continue university studies.

Antigua has two international primary/secondary schools Including CCSET International, which offers the Ontario Secondary School Diploma, and Island Academy, which offers the International Baccalaureate. There are also many other private schools but these institutions tend to follow the same local curriculum (CXCs) as government schools. Both international schools are relatively inexperienced with offering international degrees. CCSET international has existed for several years but only began offering an International Degree in 2007. While CCSET's graduating classes have consistently been awarded the OSSD, this is somewhat controversial because CCSET students receive their diplomas from one of CCSET's (constantly changing) partner schools based in Ontario.

==Culture==

The culture is predominantly a mixture of West African and British cultural influences. 

Cricket is the national sport and Antigua has produced several famous cricket players including Sir Vivian Richards, Anderson "Andy" Roberts, and Richard "Richie" Richardson. Other popular sports include football, boat racing and surfing. (Antigua Sailing Week attracts locals and visitors from all over the world).

American popular culture and fashion also have a heavy influence. Most of the country's media is made up of major United States networks. Many Antiguans prefer to make a special shopping trip to San Juan, Puerto Rico.

Family and religion play an important roles in the lives of Antiguans. Most attend religious services on Sunday, although there is a growing number of Seventh-day Adventists who observe the Sabbath on Saturday.

The national Carnival held each August commemorates the abolition of slavery in the British West Indies, although on some islands, Carnival may celebrate the coming of Lent. Its festive pageants, shows, contests and other activities are a major tourist attraction.

Calypso and soca music, both originating primarily out of Trinidad, are important in Antigua and Barbuda.

===Cuisine===
Corn and sweet potatoes play an important role in Antiguan cuisine. For example, a popular Antiguan dish, Dukuna is a sweet, steamed dumpling made from grated sweet potatoes, flour and spices. One of the Antiguan staple foods, fungi , is a cooked paste made of cornmeal and water.

===Sports===
thumb

Like many Commonwealth countries, cricket is the most popular sport. The Antigua and Barbuda national cricket team represented the country at the 1998 Commonwealth Games, but Antiguan cricketers otherwise play for the Leeward Islands cricket team in domestic matches and the West Indies cricket team internationally. The 2007 Cricket World Cup was hosted in the West Indies from 11 March to 28 April 2007. Antigua hosted eight matches at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium, which was completed on 11 February 2007 and can hold up to 20,000 people.
Antigua is a Host of Stanford Twenty20  Twenty20 Cricket, a version started by Allen Stanford in 2006 as a regional cricket game with almost all Caribbean islands taking part. Antiguan Viv Richards scored the fastest Test Century and Brian Lara twice scored the World Test Record at the Antigua Recreation Ground.

Association football, or soccer, is also a very popular sport. Antigua has a national football team which entered World Cup qualification for the 1974 tournament and for 1986 and onwards. A professional team was formed in 2011, Antigua Barracuda FC, which plays in the, USL Pro, a lower professional league in the USA. The nation's team had a major achievement in 2012, getting out of its preliminary group for the 2014 World Cup, notably due to a victory over powerful Haiti. In its first game in the next CONCACAF group play on 8 June 2012 in Tampa, FL, Antigua and Barbuda, comprising 17 Barracuda players and 7 from the lower English professional leagues, scored a goal against the United States, authored by Peter Byers; however, the team lost 3:1 to the US.

Athletics are popular. Talented athletes are trained from a young age, and Antigua and Barbuda has produced a few fairly adept athletes. Janill Williams, a young athlete with much promise comes from Gray's Farm, Antigua. Sonia Williams and Heather Samuel represented Antigua and Barbuda at the Olympic Games. Other prominent rising stars include Brendan Christian (100 m, 200 m), Daniel Bailey (100 m, 200 m) and James Grayman (high jump).

==See also==

* Outline of Antigua and Barbuda
* Legislative council
* Index of Antigua and Barbuda-related articles
* Bibliography of Antigua and Barbuda
* 
* List of Antiguans and Barbudans
* 
* 

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* Antigua and Barbuda, United States Library of Congress
* 
* Antigua and Barbuda from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* 
* Antigua and Barbuda from the BBC News
* World Bank's country data profile for Antigua and Barbuda
* ArchaeologyAntigua.org  2010March13 source of archaeological information for Antigua and Barbuda

 



[[Azincourt]]

Azincourt (; historically, Agincourt in English) is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in northern France.

==Geography==
Situated 12 mi north-west of Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise on the D71 road between Hesdin and Fruges

==Etymology==
The town's name is attested as Aisincurt in 1175, derived from a Germanic masculine name Aizo, Aizino and the early Northern French word curt 'farm with a courtyard' (Late Latin cortem). It has no etymological connection in French with Agincourt, Meurthe-et-Moselle (attested as Egincourt 875), which is derived from another Germanic male name *Ingin-. Albert Dauzat and Charles Rostaing, Dictionnaire tymologique des noms de lieux en France, ditions Larousse 1968. p. 4. 

==History==
Azincourt is famous as being near the site of the battle fought on 25 October 1415 in which the army led by King Henry V of England defeated the forces led by Charles d'Albret on behalf of Charles VI of France, which has gone down in English history as the Battle of Agincourt. According to M. Forrest, the French knights were so encumbered by their armour that they were exhausted even before the start of the battle. The House of Commons: 1509 - 1558, Volume 4; Stanley T. Bindoff, John S. Roskell, Lewis Namier, Romney Sedgwick, David Hayton, Eveline Cruickshanks, R. G. Thorne, P. W. Hasler (Boydell & Brewer, 1982) 

Later on, when he became king in 1509, Henry VIII is supposed to have commissioned an English translation of a Life of Henry V Henry VIII;
 J. J. Scarisbrick, p. 23 so that he could emulate him, on the grounds that he thought that launching a campaign against France would help him to impose himself on the European stage. In 1513, Henry VIII conclusively crossed the English Channel and stopped at Azincourt. He was notably accompanied by John Nevill.

The battle, as was the tradition, was named after a nearby castle called Azincourt. The castle has since disappeared and the settlement now known as Azincourt adopted the name in the 17th Century.

==Population==

==Sights==
The original battlefield museum in the village featured model knights made out of Action Man figures. However, this has now been replaced by a more professional exhibition space incorporating laser, video, slide shows, audio commentaries, and some interactive elements. Azincourt Centre Historique The museum building is shaped like a longbow similar to those used at the battle by archers under King Henry.

, an annual medieval festival commemorating local history has been held in the village since 2004, "Videos from Azincourt" at Azincourt Alliance on a July weekend in the summer. Initially the festival was held in October, but due to the inclement weather and local heavy clay soil (like the battle) making the festival difficult it was moved to July. 
Commemorative monument near to the battlefield

==International relations==

===Twin towns  Sister cities===
Azincourt is twinned with:

* Middleham, United Kingdom 

==See also==
* Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department

==References==
* INSEE commune file

==External links==
* Azincourt on the Quid website 



[[Albert Speer]]

Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer (; March 19, 1905  September 1, 1981) was a German architect who was, for a part of World War II, Minister of Armaments and War Production for the Third Reich. Speer was Adolf Hitler's chief architect before assuming ministerial office. As "the Nazi who said sorry", he accepted moral responsibility at the Nuremberg trials and in his memoirs for complicity in crimes of the Nazi regime. His level of involvement in the persecution of the Jews and his level of knowledge of the Holocaust remain matters of dispute.

Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931, launching him on a political and governmental career which lasted fourteen years. His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle. Hitler instructed him to design and construct a number of structures, including the Reich Chancellery and the Zeppelinfeld stadium in Nuremberg where Party rallies were held. Speer also made plans to reconstruct Berlin on a grand scale, with huge buildings, wide boulevards, and a reorganized transportation system.

In February 1942, Hitler appointed Speer Minister of Armaments and War Production. Under his leadership, Germany's war production continued to increase despite considerable Allied bombing. After the war, he was tried at Nuremberg and sentenced to 20 years in prison for his role in the Nazi regime, principally for the use of forced labor. He served his full sentence, most of it at Spandau Prison in West Berlin.

Following his release from Spandau in 1966, Speer published two bestselling autobiographical works, Inside the Third Reich and , detailing his often close personal relationship with Hitler, and providing readers and historians with a unique perspective on the workings of the Nazi regime. He later wrote a third book, Infiltration, about the SS. Speer died of natural causes in 1981 while on a visit to London.

== Early years ==
Speer was born in Mannheim, into an upper-middle-class family. He was the second of three sons of Albert and Luise Speer. In 1918, the family moved permanently to their summer home Villa Speer on Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg, Heidelberg. According to Henry T. King, deputy prosecutor at Nuremberg who later wrote a book about Speer, "Love and warmth were lacking in the household of Speer's youth." Speer was active in sports, taking up skiing and mountaineering. Speer's Heidelberg school offered rugby football, unusual for Germany, and Speer was a participant. He wanted to become a mathematician, but his father said if Speer chose this occupation he would "lead a life without money, without a position and without a future". Instead, Speer followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture.

Speer began his architectural studies at the University of Karlsruhe instead of a more highly acclaimed institution because the hyperinflation crisis of 1923 limited his parents' income. In 1924 when the crisis had abated, he transferred to the "much more reputable" Technical University of Munich. In 1925 he transferred again, this time to the Technical University of Berlin where he studied under Heinrich Tessenow, whom Speer greatly admired. After passing his exams in 1927, Speer became Tessenow's assistant, a high honor for a man of 22. As such, Speer taught some of Tessenow's classes while continuing his own postgraduate studies. In Munich, and continuing in Berlin, Speer began a close friendship, ultimately spanning over 50 years, with Rudolf Wolters, who also studied under Tessenow.

In mid-1922, Speer began courting Margarete (Margret) Weber (19051987), the daughter of a successful craftsman who employed 50 workers. The relationship was frowned upon by Speer's class-conscious mother, who felt that the Webers were socially inferior. Despite this opposition, the two married in Berlin on 28 August 1928; seven years were to elapse before Margarete Speer was invited to stay at her in-laws' home.

== Nazi architect ==

=== Joining the Nazis (19301934) ===
Speer stated he was apolitical when he was a young man, and that he attended a Berlin Nazi rally in December 1930 at the urging of some of his students. He was surprised to find Hitler dressed in a neat blue suit, rather than the brown uniform seen on Nazi Party posters, and was greatly impressed, not only with Hitler's proposals, but also with the man himself. Several weeks later he attended another rally: this one was presided over by Joseph Goebbels. Speer was disturbed by the way Goebbels whipped the crowd into a frenzy. Despite this unease, Speer could not shake the impression Hitler had made on him. On March 1, 1931, he applied to join the Nazi Party and became member number 474,481.

Speer's first Nazi Party position was as head of the Party's motorist association for the Berlin suburb of Wannsee; he was the only Nazi in the town with a car. Speer reported to the Party's leader for the West End of Berlin, Karl Hanke, who hired Speerwithout feeto redecorate a villa he had just rented. Hanke was enthusiastic about the resulting work.

In 1931, Speer surrendered his position as Tessenow's assistant because of pay cuts and moved to Mannheim, hoping to use his father's connections to get commissions. He had little success, and his father gave him a job as manager of the elder Speer's properties. In July 1932, the Speers visited Berlin to help out the Party prior to the Reichstag elections. While they were there, Hanke recommended the young architect to Goebbels to help renovate the Party's Berlin headquarters. Speer, who had been about to leave with his wife for a vacation in East Prussia, agreed to do the work. When the commission was completed, Speer returned to Mannheim and remained there as Hitler took office in January 1933.

After the Nazis took control, Hanke recalled Speer to Berlin. Goebbels, the new Propaganda Minister, commissioned Speer to renovate his Ministry's building on Wilhelmplatz. Speer also designed the 1933 May Day commemoration in Berlin. In Inside the Third Reich, he wrote that, on seeing the original design for the Berlin rally on Hanke's desk, he remarked that the site would resemble a Schtzenfest  a rifle club meet. Hanke, now Goebbels' State Secretary, challenged him to create a better design. As Speer learned later, Hitler was enthusiastic about Speer's design (which used giant flags), though Goebbels took credit for it. Tessenow was dismissive: "Do you think you have created something? It's showy, that's all."

The organizers of the 1933 Nrnberg Nazi Party rally asked Speer to submit designs for the rally, bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time. Neither the organizers nor Rudolf Hess were willing to decide whether to approve the plans, and Hess sent Speer to Hitler's Munich apartment to seek his approval. When Speer entered, the new Chancellor was busy cleaning a pistol, which he briefly laid aside to cast a short, interested glance at the plans, approving them without even looking at the young architect. This work won Speer his first national post, as Nazi Party "Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations".

Speer's next major assignment was as liaison to the Berlin building trades for Paul Troost's renovation of the Chancellery. As Chancellor, Hitler had a residence in the building and came by every day to be briefed by Speer and the building supervisor on the progress of the renovations. After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, to the architect's great excitement. Hitler evinced considerable interest in Speer during the luncheon, and later told Speer that he had been looking for a young architect capable of carrying out his architectural dreams for the new Germany. Speer quickly became part of Hitler's inner circle; he was expected to call on Hitler in the morning for a walk or chat, to provide consultation on architectural matters, and to discuss Hitler's ideas. Most days he was invited to dinner.

The two men found much in common: Hitler spoke of Speer as a "kindred spirit" for whom he had always maintained "the warmest human feelings". The young, ambitious architect was dazzled by his rapid rise and close proximity to Hitler, which guaranteed him a flood of commissions from the government and from the highest ranks of the Party. Speer testified at Nuremberg, "I belonged to a circle which consisted of other artists and his personal staff. If Hitler had had any friends at all, I certainly would have been one of his close friends."

=== First Architect of the Third Reich (19341939) ===

The Cathedral of light above the Zeppelintribune

When Troost died on January 21, 1934, Speer effectively replaced him as the Party's chief architect. Hitler appointed Speer as head of the Chief Office for Construction, which placed him nominally on Hess's staff.

One of Speer's first commissions after Troost's death was the Zeppelinfeld stadiumthe Nrnberg parade grounds seen in Leni Riefenstahl's propaganda masterpiece Triumph of the Will. This huge work was able to hold 340,000 people. The tribune was influenced by the Pergamon Altar in Anatolia, but was magnified to an enormous scale. Speer insisted that as many events as possible be held at night, both to give greater prominence to his lighting effects and to hide the individual Nazis, many of whom were overweight. Speer surrounded the site with 130 anti-aircraft searchlights. This created the effect of a "cathedral of light" or, as it was called by British Ambassador Sir Neville Henderson, a "cathedral of ice". Speer described this as his most beautiful work, and as the only one that stood the test of time.

Nrnberg was to be the site of many more official Nazi buildings, most of which were never built; for example, the German Stadium would have accommodated 400,000 spectators, while an even larger rally ground would have held half a million people. While planning these structures, Speer conceived the concept of "ruin value": that major buildings should be constructed in such a way they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins for thousands of years into the future. Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of the Third Reich, just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of those civilizations. Hitler enthusiastically embraced this concept, and ordered that all the Reich's important buildings be constructed in accord with it.

Speer's German pavilion (left) facing the Soviet pavilion (right), 1937 World's Fair, Paris

Speer could not avoid seeing the brutal excesses of the Nazi regime. Shortly after Hitler consolidated power in the Night of the Long Knives, Hitler ordered Speer to take workmen and go to the building housing the offices of Vice-Chancellor Franz von Papen to begin its conversion into a security headquarters, even though it was still occupied by von Papen's officials. Speer and his group entered the building, to be confronted with a pool of blood, apparently from the body of Herbert von Bose, von Papen's secretary, who had been killed there. Speer related that the sight had no effect on him, other than to cause him to avoid that room.

When Hitler deprecated Werner March's design for the Stadium (Berlin)#1936: Reichssportfeld|Olympic Stadium] for the 1936 Summer Olympics as too modern, Speer modified the plans by adding a stone exterior. Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris. The German and Soviet pavilion sites were opposite each other. On learning (through a clandestine look at the Soviet plans) that the Soviet design included two colossal figures seemingly about to overrun the German site, Speer modified his design to include a cubic mass which would check their advance, with a huge eagle on top looking down on the Soviet figures. Both pavilions were awarded gold medals for their designs. Speer also received, from Hitler Youth Leader and later fellow Spandau prisoner Baldur von Schirach, the Golden Hitler Youth Honor Badge with oak leaves.

In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for the Reich Capital with the rank of undersecretary of state in the Reich government. The position carried with it extraordinary powers over the Berlin city government and made Speer answerable to Hitler alone. It also made Speer a member of the Reichstag, though the body by then had little effective power. Hitler ordered Speer to develop plans to rebuild Berlin. The plans centered on a three-mile long grand boulevard running from north to south, which Speer called the Prachtstrasse, or Street of Magnificence; he also referred to it as the "North-South Axis". At the northern end of the boulevard, Speer planned to build the Volkshalle, a huge assembly hall with a dome which would have been over 700 ft high, with floor space for 180,000 people. At the southern end of the avenue a great triumphal arch would rise; it would be almost 400 ft high, and able to fit the Arc de Triomphe inside its opening. The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the postponement, and later the abandonment, of these plans. Part of the land for the boulevard was to be obtained by consolidating Berlin's railway system. Speer hired Wolters as part of his design team, with special responsibility for the Prachtstrasse. When Speer's father saw the model for the new Berlin, he said to his son, "You've all gone completely insane."

Marble Gallery of the New Reich Chancellery

In January 1938, Hitler asked Speer to build a new Reich Chancellery on the same site as the existing structure, and said he needed it for urgent foreign policy reasons no later than his next New Year's reception for diplomats on January 10, 1939. This was a huge undertaking, especially as the existing Chancellery was in full operation. After consultation with his assistants, Speer agreed. Although the site could not be cleared until April, Speer was successful in building the large, impressive structure in nine months. The structure included a "Marble Gallery" 146 metres long, almost twice the length of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles. Speer employed thousands of workers in two shifts. Hitler, who had remained away from the project, was overwhelmed when Speer presented it, fully furnished, two days early. In appreciation for the architect's work on the Chancellery, Hitler awarded Speer the Nazi Golden Party Badge. Tessenow was less impressed, suggesting to Speer that he should have taken nine years over the project. The second Chancellery was damaged in the Battle of Berlin in 1945 and was eventually dismantled by the Soviets, its stone used for a war memorial.

During the Chancellery project, the pogrom of Kristallnacht took place. Speer made no mention of it in the first draft of Inside the Third Reich, and it was only on the urgent advice of his publisher that he added a mention of seeing the ruins of the Central Synagogue in Berlin from his car.

Speer was under significant psychological pressure during this period of his life. He would later remember:

=== Wartime architect (19391942) ===
Hitler visits Paris in 1940 with Speer (left) and sculptor Arno Breker

Speer supported the German invasion of Poland and subsequent war, though he recognized that it would lead to the postponement, at the least, of his architectural dreams. In his later years, Speer, talking with his biographer-to-be Gitta Sereny, explained how he felt in 1939: "Of course I was perfectly aware that sought world domination ... [A]t that time I asked for nothing better. That was the whole point of my buildings. They would have looked grotesque if Hitler had sat still in Germany. All I wanted was for this great man to dominate the globe."

Speer placed his department at the disposal of the Wehrmacht. When Hitler remonstrated, and said it was not for Speer to decide how his workers should be used, Speer simply ignored him. Among Speer's innovations were quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris; before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites. As the war progressed, initially to great German success, Speer continued preliminary work on the Berlin and Nrnberg plans, at Hitler's insistence, but failed to convince him of the need to suspend peacetime construction projects. Speer also oversaw the construction of buildings for the Wehrmacht and Luftwaffe, and developed a considerable organization to deal with this work.

In 1940, Joseph Stalin proposed that Speer pay a visit to Moscow. Stalin had been particularly impressed by Speer's work in Paris, and wished to meet the "Architect of the Reich". Hitler, alternating between amusement and anger, did not allow Speer to go, fearing that Stalin would put Speer in a "rat hole" until a new Moscow arose. When Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, Speer came to doubt, despite Hitler's reassurances, that his projects for Berlin would ever be completed.

== Minister of Armaments ==

=== Appointment and increasing power ===
Speer (right) awarded an Org.Todt ring by Hitler  May 1943
On February 8, 1942, Minister of Armaments Fritz Todt died in a plane crash shortly after taking off from Hitler's eastern headquarters at Rastenburg. Speer, who had arrived in Rastenburg the previous evening, had accepted Todt's offer to fly with him to Berlin, but had canceled some hours before takeoff (Speer stated in his memoirs that the cancellation was because of exhaustion from travel and a late-night meeting with Hitler). Later that day, Hitler appointed Speer as Todt's successor to all of his posts. In Inside the Third Reich, Speer recounts his meeting with Hitler and his reluctance to take ministerial office, only doing so because Hitler commanded it. Speer also states that Hermann Gring raced to Hitler's headquarters on hearing of Todt's death, hoping to claim Todt's powers. Hitler instead presented Gring with the fait accompli of Speer's appointment.

At the time of Speer's accession to the office, the German economy, unlike the British one, was not fully geared for war production. Consumer goods were still being produced at nearly as high a level as during peacetime. No fewer than five "Supreme Authorities" had jurisdiction over armament productionone of which, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, had declared in November 1941 that conditions did not permit an increase in armament production. Few women were employed in the factories, which were running only one shift. One evening soon after his appointment, Speer went to visit a Berlin armament factory; he found no one on the premises.

Speer inspects a Panzer V tank, 1942 

Speer overcame these difficulties by centralizing power over the war economy in himself. Factories were given autonomy, or as Speer put it, "self-responsibility", and each factory concentrated on a single product. Backed by Hitler's strong support (the dictator stated, "Speer, I'll sign anything that comes from you"), he divided the armament field according to weapon system, with experts rather than civil servants overseeing each department. No department head could be older than 55anyone older being susceptible to "routine and arrogance"and no deputy older than 40. Over these departments was a central planning committee headed by Speer, which took increasing responsibility for war production, and as time went by, for the German economy itself. According to the minutes of a conference at Wehrmacht High Command in March 1942, "It is only Speer's word that counts nowadays. He can interfere in all departments. Already he overrides all departments ... On the whole, Speer's attitude is to the point." Goebbels would note in his diary in June 1943, "Speer is still tops with the Fhrer. He is truly a genius with organization." Speer was so successful in his position that by late 1943, he was widely regarded among the Nazi elite as a possible successor to Hitler.

While Speer had tremendous power, he was of course subordinate to Hitler. Nazi officials sometimes went around Speer by seeking direct orders from the dictator. When Speer ordered peacetime building work suspended, the Gauleiters (Nazi Party district leaders) obtained an exemption for their pet projects. When Speer sought the appointment of Hanke as a labor czar to optimize the use of German labor, Hitler, under the influence of Martin Bormann, instead appointed Fritz Sauckel. Rather than increasing female labor and taking other steps to better organize German labor, as Speer favored, Sauckel advocated importing labor from the occupied nations  and did so, obtaining workers for (among other things) Speer's armament factories, using the most brutal methods.

On December 10, 1943, Speer visited the underground Mittelwerk V-2 rocket factory that used concentration camp labor. Shocked by the conditions there (5.7 percent of the work force died that month), and to ensure the workers were in good enough shape to perform the labor, Speer ordered improved conditions for the workers and the construction of the above-ground Dora camp. In spite of these changes, half of the workers at Mittelwerk eventually died. Speer later commented, "[t]he conditions for these prisoners were in fact barbarous, and a sense of profound involvement and personal guilt seizes me whenever I think of them."

Speer (right, with arms folded and swastika armband) looks on with Field Marshal Erhard Milch (left) during weapons testing.

By 1943, the Allies had gained air superiority over Germany, and bombings of German cities and industry had become commonplace. However, the Allies in their strategic bombing campaign did not concentrate on industry, and Speer, with his improvisational skill, was able to overcome bombing losses. In spite of these losses, German production of tanks more than doubled in 1943, production of planes increased by 80 percent, and production time for Kriegsmarine submarines was reduced from one year to two months. Production would continue to increase until the second half of 1944, by which time enough equipment to supply 270 army divisions was being producedalthough the Wehrmacht had only 150 divisions in the field.

In January 1944, Speer fell ill with complications from an inflamed knee, and was away from the office for three months. During his absence, his political rivals (mainly Gring, and Martin Bormann), attempted to have some of his powers permanently transferred to them. According to Speer, SS chief Heinrich Himmler tried to have him physically isolated by having Himmler's personal physician Karl Gebhardt treat him, though his "care" did not improve his health. Speer's wife and friends managed to have his case transferred to his friend Dr. Karl Brandt, and he slowly recovered. In April, Speer's rivals for power succeeded in having him deprived of responsibility for construction, and Speer promptly sent Hitler a bitter letter, concluding with an offer of his resignation. Judging Speer indispensable to the war effort, Field Marshal Erhard Milch persuaded Hitler to try to get his minister to reconsider. Hitler sent Milch to Speer with a message not addressing the dispute but instead stating that he still regarded Speer as highly as ever. According to Milch, upon hearing the message, Speer burst out, "The Fhrer can kiss my ass!" After a lengthy argument, Milch persuaded Speer to withdraw his offer of resignation, on the condition his powers were restored. On April 23, 1944, Speer went to see Hitler who agreed that "everything stay as it was, will remain the head of all German construction". According to Speer, while he was successful in this debate, Hitler had also won, "because he wanted and needed me back in his corner, and he got me".

=== Fall of the Reich ===
Reichsminister Speer rests on a doorstep

Speer's name was included on the list of members of a post-Hitler government drawn up by the conspirators behind the July 1944 assassination plot to kill Hitler. The list had a question mark and the annotation "to be won over" by his name, which likely saved him from the extensive purges that followed the scheme's failure.

By February 1945, Speer, who had long concluded that the war was lost, was working to supply areas about to be occupied with food and materials to get them through the hard times ahead. On March 19, 1945, Hitler issued his Nero Decree, ordering a scorched earth policy in both Germany and the occupied territories. Hitler's order, by its terms, deprived Speer of any power to interfere with the decree, and Speer went to confront Hitler, telling him the war was lost. Hitler gave Speer 24 hours to reconsider his position, and when the two met the following day, Speer answered, "I stand unconditionally behind you." However, he demanded the exclusive power to implement the Nero Decree, and Hitler signed an order to that effect. Using this order, Speer worked to persuade generals and Gauleiters to circumvent the Nero Decree and avoid needless sacrifice of personnel and destruction of industry that would be needed after the war.

Speer managed to reach a relatively safe area near Hamburg as the Nazi regime finally collapsed, but decided on a final, risky visit to Berlin to see Hitler one more time. Speer stated at Nuremberg, "I felt that it was my duty not to run away like a coward, but to stand up to him again." Speer visited the Fhrerbunker on April 22. Hitler seemed calm and somewhat distracted, and the two had a long, disjointed conversation in which the dictator defended his actions and informed Speer of his intent to commit suicide and have his body burned. In the published edition of Inside the Third Reich, Speer relates that he confessed to Hitler that he had defied the Nero Decree, but then assured Hitler of his personal loyalty, bringing tears to the dictator's eyes. Speer biographer Gitta Sereny argued, "Psychologically, it is possible that this is the way he remembered the occasion, because it was how he would have liked to behave, and the way he would have liked Hitler to react. But the fact is that none of it happened; our witness to this is Speer himself." Sereny notes that Speer's original draft of his memoirs lacks the confession and Hitler's tearful reaction, and contains an explicit denial that any confession or emotional exchange took place, as had been alleged in a French magazine article.

The following morning, Speer left the Fhrerbunker; Hitler curtly bade him farewell. Speer toured the damaged Chancellery one last time before leaving Berlin to return to Hamburg. On April 29, the day before committing suicide, Hitler dictated a final political testament which dropped Speer from the successor government. Speer was to be replaced by his own subordinate, Karl-Otto Saur.

== Nuremberg Trial ==

Leading members of the Flensburg Government after their arrest. Karl Dnitz (centre, in long, dark coat) is followed by Speer (bareheaded) and Alfred Jodl (to the left of Speer).

After Hitler's death, Speer offered his services to the so-called Flensburg Government, headed by Hitler's successor, Karl Dnitz, and took a significant role in that short-lived regime. On May 15, the Americans arrived and asked Speer if he would be willing to provide information on the effects of the air war. Speer agreed, and over the next several days, provided information on a broad range of subjects. On May 23, two weeks after the surrender of German troops, the British arrested the members of the Flensburg Government and brought Nazi Germany to a formal end.

Speer was taken to several internment centres for Nazi officials and interrogated. In September 1945, he was told that he would be tried for war crimes, and several days later, he was taken to Nuremberg and incarcerated there. Speer was indicted on all four possible counts: first, participating in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of crime against peace, second, planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace, third, war crimes, and lastly, crimes against humanity.

The Nuremberg defendants listen to the proceedings (Speer, top seated row, fifth from right)

U.S. Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson, the chief U.S. prosecutor at Nuremberg, alleged, "Speer joined in planning and executing the program to dragoon prisoners of war and foreign workers into German war industries, which waxed in output while the workers waned in starvation." Speer's attorney, Dr. Hans Flchsner, presented Speer as an artist thrust into political life, who had always remained a non-ideologue and who had been promised by Hitler that he could return to architecture after the war. During his testimony, Speer accepted responsibility for the Nazi regime's actions:

An observer at the trial, journalist and author William L. Shirer, wrote that, compared to his codefendants, Speer "made the most straightforward impression of all and ... during the long trial spoke honestly and with no attempt to shirk his responsibility and his guilt". Speer also testified that he had planned to kill Hitler in early 1945 by introducing tabun poison gas into the Fhrerbunker ventilation shaft. He said his efforts were frustrated by the impracticability of tabun and his lack of ready access to a replacement nerve agent, and also by the unexpected construction of a tall chimney that put the air intake out of reach. Speer stated his motive was despair at realising that Hitler intended to take the German people down with him. Speer's supposed assassination plan subsequently met with some scepticism, with Speer's architectural rival Hermann Giesler sneering, "the second most powerful man in the state did not have a ladder."

17 October 1946 newsreel of Nuremberg Trials sentencing

Speer was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, though he was acquitted on the other two counts. On 1 October 1946, he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. While three of the eight judges (two Soviet and one American) initially advocated the death penalty for Speer, the other judges did not, and a compromise sentence was reached "after two days' discussion and some rather bitter horse-trading".

The court's judgment stated that:

Twelve of the defendants were sentenced to death (including Bormann, in absentia) and three acquitted; only seven of the defendants were sentenced to imprisonment. They remained in the cells at Nuremberg as the Allies debated where, and under what conditions, they should be incarcerated.

== Imprisonment ==

: For additional detail on Speer's time at Spandau Prison, see Rudolf Wolters#Spandau years
Speer spent most of his sentence at Spandau Prison.

On July 18, 1947, Speer and his six fellow prisoners, all former high officials of the Nazi regime, were flown from Nuremberg to Berlin under heavy guard. The prisoners were taken to Spandau Prison in the British Sector of what would become West Berlin, where they would be designated by number, with Speer given Number Five. Initially, the prisoners were kept in solitary confinement for all but half an hour a day, and were not permitted to address each other or their guards. As time passed, the strict regimen was relaxed, especially during the three months in four that the three Western powers were in control; the four occupying powers took overall control on a monthly rotation. Speer considered himself an outcast among his fellow prisoners for his acceptance of responsibility at Nuremberg.

Speer made a deliberate effort to make as productive a use of his time as possible. He wrote, "I am obsessed with the idea of using this time of confinement for writing a book of major importance ... That could mean transforming prison cell into scholar's den." The prisoners were forbidden to write memoirs, and mail was severely limited and censored. However, as a result of an offer from a sympathetic orderly, Speer was able to have his writings, which eventually amounted to 20,000 sheets, sent to Wolters. By 1954, Speer had completed his memoirs, which became the basis of Inside the Third Reich, and which Wolters arranged to have transcribed onto 1,100 typewritten pages. He was also able to send letters and financial instructions, and to obtain writing paper and letters from the outside. His many letters to his children, all secretly transmitted, eventually formed the basis for Spandau: The Secret Diaries.

With the draft memoir complete and clandestinely transmitted, Speer sought a new project. He found one while taking his daily exercise, walking in circles around the prison yard. Measuring the path's distance carefully, Speer set out to walk the distance from Berlin to Heidelberg. He then expanded his idea into a worldwide journey, visualizing the places he was "traveling" through while walking the path around the prison yard. Speer ordered guidebooks and other materials about the nations through which he imagined he was passing, so as to envisage as accurate a picture as possible. Meticulously calculating every meter traveled, and mapping distances to the real-world geography, he began in northern Germany, passed through Asia by a southern route before entering Siberia, then crossed the Bering Strait and continued southwards, finally ending his sentence 35 km south of Guadalajara, Mexico.

Speer devoted much of his time and energy to reading. Though the prisoners brought some books with them in their personal property, Spandau Prison had no library so books were sent from Spandau's municipal library. From 1952 the prisoners were also able to order books from the Berlin central library in Wilmersdorf. Speer was a voracious reader and he completed well over 500 books in the first three years at Spandau alone. He read classic novels, travelogues, books on ancient Egypt, and biographies of such figures as Lucas Cranach, douard Manet, and Genghis Khan. Speer took to the prison garden for enjoyment and work, at first to do something constructive while afflicted with writer's block. He was allowed to build an ambitious garden, transforming what he initially described as a "wilderness" into what the American commander at Spandau described as "Speer's Garden of Eden".

Speer's supporters maintained a continual call for his release. Among those who pledged support for Speer's sentence to be commuted were Charles de Gaulle, U.S. diplomat George Ball, former U.S. High Commissioner John J. McCloy, and former Nuremberg prosecutor Hartley Shawcross. Willy Brandt was a strong advocate of Speer's, supporting his release, sending flowers to his daughter on the day of his release, and putting an end to the de-Nazification proceedings against Speer, which could have caused his property to be confiscated. A reduced sentence required the consent of all four of the occupying powers, and the Soviets adamantly opposed any such proposal. Speer served his full sentence, and was released on the stroke of midnight as October 1, 1966 began.

== Release and later life ==
Entrance Villa Speer, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg, Heidelberg, in December 2011
Speer's grave in Heidelberg

Speer's release from prison was a worldwide media event, as reporters and photographers crowded both the street outside Spandau and the lobby of the Berlin hotel where Speer spent his first hours of freedom in over 20 years. He said little, reserving most comments for a major interview published in Der Spiegel in November 1966, in which he again took personal responsibility for crimes of the Nazi regime. Abandoning plans to return to architecture (two proposed partners died shortly before his release), he revised his Spandau writings into two autobiographical books, and later researched and published a third work, about Himmler and the SS. His books, most notably Inside the Third Reich (in German, Erinnerungen, or Reminiscences) and Spandau: The Secret Diaries, provide a unique and personal look into the personalities of the Nazi era, and have become much valued by historians. Speer was aided in shaping the works by Joachim Fest and Wolf Jobst Siedler from the publishing house Ullstein. Speer found himself unable to re-establish his relationship with his children, even with his son Albert, who had also become an architect. According to Speer's daughter Hilde, "One by one my sister and brothers gave up. There was no communication."

Following the publication of his bestselling books, Speer donated a considerable amount of money to Jewish charities. According to Siedler, these donations were as high as 80% of his royalties. Speer kept the donations anonymous, both for fear of rejection, and for fear of being called a hypocrite.

As early as 1953, when Wolters strongly objected to Speer referring to Hitler in the memoirs draft as a criminal, Speer had predicted that were the writings to be published, he would lose a "good many friends". This came to pass, as following the publication of Inside the Third Reich, close friends, such as Wolters and sculptor Arno Breker, distanced themselves from him. Hans Baur, Hitler's personal pilot, suggested, "Speer must have taken leave of his senses." Wolters wondered that Speer did not now "walk through life in a hair shirt, distributing his fortune among the victims of National Socialism, forswear all the vanities and pleasures of life and live on locusts and wild honey".

Speer made himself widely available to historians and other enquirers. He did an extensive, in-depth interview for the June 1971 issue of Playboy magazine, in which he stated, "If I didn't see it, then it was because I didn't want to see it." In October 1973, Speer made his first trip to Britain, flying to London under an assumed name to be interviewed on the BBC Midweek programme by Ludovic Kennedy. Upon arrival, he was detained for almost eight hours at Heathrow Airport when British immigration authorities discovered his true identity. The Home Secretary, Robert Carr, allowed Speer into the country for 48 hours. In the same year he appeared in the The World at War television program. While in London eight years later to participate in the BBC Newsnight programme, Speer suffered a stroke and died on September 1, 1981. Speer had formed a relationship with a German-born Englishwoman, and was with her at the time of his death.

Even to the end of his life, Speer continued to question his actions under Hitler. In his final book, Infiltration, he asks, "What would have happened if Hitler had asked me to make decisions that required the utmost hardness? ... How far would I have gone? ... If I had occupied a different position, to what extent would I have ordered atrocities if Hitler had told me to do so?" Speer leaves the questions unanswered.

== Legacy and controversy ==
The view of Speer as an unpolitical "miracle man" is challenged by Yale historian Adam Tooze. In his 2006 book, The Wages of Destruction, Tooze, following Gitta Sereny, argues that Speer's ideological commitment to the Nazi cause was greater than he claimed. . Cf. . Tooze further contends that an insufficiently challenged Speer "mythology" (partly fostered by Speer himself through politically motivated, tendentious use of statistics and other propaganda) had led many historians to assign Speer far more credit for the increases in armaments production than was warranted and give insufficient consideration to the "highly political" function of the so-called armaments miracle.

=== Architectural legacy ===
The Soviet War Memorial, constructed using marble from Speer's Chancellery
Little remains of Speer's personal architectural works, other than the plans and photographs. No buildings designed by Speer in the Nazi era remain in Berlin; a double row of lampposts along the Strasse des 17. Juni designed by Speer still stands. The tribune of the Zeppelinfeld stadium in Nuremberg, though partly demolished, may also be seen. Speer's work may also be seen in London, where he redesigned the interior of the German Embassy to the United Kingdom, then located at 79 Carlton House Terrace. Since 1967, it has served as the offices of the Royal Society. His work there, stripped of its Nazi fixtures and partially covered by carpets, survives in part.

Another legacy was the Arbeitsstab Wiederaufbau zerstrter Stdte (Working group on Reconstruction of destroyed cities), authorized by Speer in 1943 to rebuild bombed German cities to make them more livable in the age of the automobile. Headed by Wolters, the working group took a possible military defeat into their calculations. The Arbeitsstabs recommendations served as the basis of the postwar redevelopment plans in many cities, and Arbeitsstab members became prominent in the rebuilding.

=== Actions regarding the Jews ===
As General Building Inspector, Speer was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement. From 1939 onward, the Department used the Nuremberg Laws to evict Jewish tenants of non-Jewish landlords in Berlin, to make way for non-Jewish tenants displaced by redevelopment or bombing. Eventually, 75,000 Jews were displaced by these measures. Speer was aware of these activities, and inquired as to their progress. At least one original memo from Speer so inquiring still exists, as does the Chronicle of the Department's activities, kept by Wolters.

Following his release from Spandau, Speer presented to the German Federal Archives an edited version of the Chronicle, stripped by Wolters of any mention of the Jews. When David Irving discovered discrepancies between the edited Chronicle and other documents, Wolters explained the situation to Speer, who responded by suggesting to Wolters that the relevant pages of the original Chronicle should "cease to exist". Wolters did not destroy the Chronicle, and, as his friendship with Speer deteriorated, allowed access to the original Chronicle to doctoral student Matthias Schmidt (who, after obtaining his doctorate, developed his thesis into a book, Albert Speer: The End of a Myth). Speer considered Wolters' actions to be a "betrayal" and a "stab in the back". The original Chronicle reached the Archives in 1983, after both Speer and Wolters had died.

=== Knowledge of the Holocaust ===
Speer maintained at Nuremberg and in his memoirs that he had no knowledge of the Holocaust. In Inside the Third Reich, he wrote that in mid-1944, he was told by Hanke (by then Gauleiter of Lower Silesia) that the minister should never accept an invitation to inspect a concentration camp in neighbouring Upper Silesia, as "he had seen something there which he was not permitted to describe and moreover could not describe". Speer later concluded that Hanke must have been speaking of Auschwitz, and blamed himself for not inquiring further of Hanke or seeking information from Himmler or Hitler:

Much of the controversy over Speer's knowledge of the Holocaust has centered on his presence at the Posen Conference on 6 October 1943, at which Himmler gave a speech detailing the ongoing Holocaust to Nazi leaders. Himmler said, "The grave decision had to be taken to cause this people to vanish from the earth ... In the lands we occupy, the Jewish question will be dealt with by the end of the year." Speer is mentioned several times in the speech, and Himmler seems to address him directly. In Inside the Third Reich, Speer mentions his own address to the officials (which took place earlier in the day) but does not mention Himmler's speech.

Bronze eagle from Speer's Chancellery, now in the Imperial War Museum

In 1971, American historian Erich Goldhagen published an article arguing that Speer was present for Himmler's speech. According to Fest in his biography of Speer, "Goldhagen's accusation certainly would have been more convincing" had he not placed supposed incriminating statements linking Speer with the Holocaust in quotation marks, attributed to Himmler, which were in fact invented by Goldhagen. In response, after considerable research in the German Federal Archives in Koblenz, Speer said he had left Posen around noon (long before Himmler's speech) to journey to Hitler's headquarters at Rastenburg. In Inside the Third Reich, published before the Goldhagen article, Speer recalled that on the evening after the conference, many Nazi officials were so drunk that they needed help boarding the special train which was to take them to a meeting with Hitler. One of his biographers, Dan van der Vat, suggests this necessarily implies he must have still been present at Posen then, and must have heard Himmler's speech. In response to Goldhagen's article, Speer had alleged that in writing Inside the Third Reich, he erred in reporting an incident that happened at another conference at Posen a year later, as happening in 1943. In 2007, the Guardian reported that a letter from Speer dated December 23, 1971, had been found in Britain in a collection of his correspondence to Hlne Jeanty, widow of a Belgian resistance fighter. In the letter, Speer states that he had been present for Himmler's presentation in Posen. Speer wrote: "There is no doubt  I was present as Himmler announced on October 6, 1943 that all Jews would be killed."

In 2005, the Daily Telegraph reported that documents had surfaced indicating that Speer had approved the allocation of materials for the expansion of Auschwitz after two of his assistants toured the facility on a day when almost a thousand Jews were murdered. The documents supposedly bore annotations in Speer's own handwriting. Speer biographer Gitta Sereny stated that, due to his workload, Speer would not have been personally aware of such activities.

The debate over Speer's knowledge of, or complicity in, the Holocaust made him a symbol for people who were involved with the Nazi regime yet did not have (or claimed not to have had) an active part in the regime's atrocities. As film director Heinrich Breloer remarked, "created a market for people who said, 'Believe me, I didn't know anything about Holocaust. Just look at the Fhrer's friend, he didn't know about it either.

== Career summary ==

Joined NSDAP: March 1, 1931
Party Number: 474,481

=== Nazi Party positions ===

* Member, National Socialist Motor Corps: 1931
* Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations: 1933
* Department Chief, German Labor Front: 1934
* Chief, NSDAP Directorate for Technical Matters: 1942

From 1934 to 1939, Speer was often referred to as "First Architect of the Reich", however this was mainly a title given to him by Hitler and not an actual political position within the Nazi Party or German government.

=== Government positions ===

* General Building Inspector for the Reich Capitol: 1937
* Reich Minister for Weapons, Munitions, and Armaments: 1942

In 1943, under his authority as Reich Minister of Armaments, Speer also became the Director of Organisation Todt. The standard uniform Speer wore during the later half of World War II was an insignia-less Nazi Party brown jacket, with an "Org Todt" armband.

=== Political ranks ===

* Mitglieder: 1931
* Amtsleiter des Reichsleitung (later replaced by Einsatzleiter; equivalent to Leutnant or Second Lieutenant): 1934
* Hauptamtsleiter des Reichsleitung (later replaced by Haupteinsatzleiter; equivalent to Captain): 1935
* Dienstleiter (no equivalent, but senior to Colonel) : 1939
* Hauptdienstleiter (no equivalent, but senior to Colonel): 1941
* Befehlsleiter (equivalent to Generalmajor or Brigadier-General): 1942
* Oberbefehlsleiter (equivalent to Generalleutnant or Major-General): 1944

=== Awards and decorations ===

* Golden Party Badge
* Golden Hitler Youth Badge (with Oak Leaves)
* Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross
* NSDAP Long Service Award (Silver  15 Years)
* Honour Chevron for the Old Guard

== See also ==
* Glossary of Nazi Germany
* List of Nazi Party leaders and officials

== Notes ==
Explanatory notes

Citations

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
: (Original German edition: )
* 
: (Original German edition: )
* 
* 

Online sources

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* . Republished in paperback in 1997 by Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-0-684-82949-4
: (Original German edition: )
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Audio interviews with Andrew Birkin, 1971
* : Interactive maps and 3D reconstructions of Speer's buildings in Berlin
* Review of Albert Speer: His Battle with Truth in Foreign Affairs
* 
* Affidavit of Albert Speer: affidavit, sworn and signed at Munich on June 15, 1977, translated from the German original.

 



[[Allioideae]]

Allioideae is a subfamily of monocot flowering plants in the family Amaryllidaceae, order Asparagales. It was formerly treated as a separate family, Alliaceae. The subfamily name is derived from the generic name of the type genus, Allium.

Successive revisions of the influential Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification have changed the circumscription of the family. In the 1998 version, Alliaceae were a distinct family; in the 2003 version, combining the Alliaceae with the Agapanthaceae and the Amaryllidaceae sensu stricto was recommended but optional; in the 2009 version, only the broad circumscription of the Amaryllidaceae is allowed, with the Alliaceae reduced to a subfamily, Allioideae. 

Note that quite a few of the plants that were once included in family Alliaceae have been assigned to the subfamily Brodiaeoideae (rather than the subfamily Allioideae). 

Some of the species of Allium are important food plants for example onions (Allium cepa), chives (A. schoenoprasum), garlic (A. sativum and A. scordoprasum), and leeks (A. porrum). Species of Allium, Gilliesia, Ipheion, Leucocoryne, Nothoscordum, and Tulbaghia are cultivated as ornamentals. Anthony Huxley, Mark Griffiths, and Margot Levy (1992). The New Royal Horticultural Society Dictionary of Gardening. The Macmillan Press,Limited: London. The Stockton Press: New York. ISBN 978-0-333-47494-5 (set). 

Thirteen of the total of about 20 genera are endemic to temperate South America. Knud Rahn. 1998. "Alliaceae" pages 70-78. In: Klaus Kubitzki (general editor) with Klaus Kubitzki, Herbert F.J. Huber, Paula J. Rudall, Peter F. Stevens, and Thomas Sttzel (volume editors). The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants volume III. Springer-Verlag: Berlin;Heidelberg, Germany. ISBN 978-3-540-64060-8 Nothoscordum ranges from Argentina to Canada. Allium is indigenous to most of North America, Eurasia, and North Africa. 

The largest genera are Allium (260-690 species), Nothoscordum (25), and Tulbaghia (22). Some of the generic limits are not clear. Ipheion, Nothoscordum, and possibly others are not monophyletic. Michael F. Fay, Paula J. Rudall, and Mark W. Chase. 2006. "Molecular studies of subfamily Gilliesioideae (Alliaceae)". Aliso 22(Monocots: Comparative Biology and Evolution):367-371. ISSN 0065-6275. 

Allioideae is divided into three tribes: Allieae, Tulbaghieae, and Gilliesieae. Allieae contains only one genus Allium (Milula is merged with Allium in the latest systems). Tulbaghieae contains only Tulbaghia. Gilliesieae contains the remaining genera. Allieae is sister to a clade composed of Tulbaghia and Gilliesieae. J. Chris Pires, Ivan J. Maureira, Thomas J. Givnish, Kenneth J. Sytsma, Ole Seberg, Gitte Petersen, Jerrold I. Davis, Dennis W. Stevenson, Paula J. Rudall, Michael F. Fay, and Mark W. Chase. 2006. "Phylogeny, genome size, and chromosome evolution of Asparagales". Aliso 22(Monocots: Comparative Biology and Evolution):287-304. ISSN 0065-6275. 

==Genera==
, the following genera are included in the Allioideae:

 *Allium L. *Ancrumia Harv. ex Baker * Caloscordum Herb. *Erinna Phil. * Garaventia Looser *Gethyum Phil. *Gilliesia Lindl. *Ipheion Rafinesque *Latace Phil. *Leucocoryne Lindl. *Miersia Lindl. *Milula Prain *Muilla S.Watson ex Bentham *Nothoscordum Kunth. *Prototulbaghia Vosa *Schickendantziella Looser *Solaria Phil. *Speea Loes. *Trichlora Baker *Tristagma Poepp. *Tulbaghia L. 

The genera Androstephium, Bessera, Bloomeria, Brodiaea, Dandya, Dichelostemma, Jaimehintonia, Milla, Muilla, Petronymphe, Triteleia, and Triteleiopsis are now treated in the family Themidaceae. Petronymphe is back in Themidaceae after spending a few years in Anthericaceae (now a segregate of Agavaceae). 

==History==
In 1985, Dahlgren, Clifford, and Yeo defined their Alliaceae to include all of the genera that are now there, plus Agapanthus and a group of genera that are now placed in Themidaceae, or its equivalent, the subfamily Brodiaeoideae of Asparagaceae. Rolf M.T. Dahlgren, H. Trevor Clifford, and Peter F. Yeo. 1985. The Families of the Monocotyledons. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo. ISBN 978-3-540-13655-2. ISBN 978-0-387-13655-4. They divided Alliaceae into three subfamilies: Agapanthoideae, Allioideae, and Gilliesioideae. Agapanthoideae consisted of Agapanthus and Tulbaghia. Allioideae contained two tribes: Brodiaeeae and a broadly defined Allieae. Gilliesioideae was composed of about half of the genera now placed in Gilliesieae, the rest being assigned to Allieae.

In 1996, a molecular phylogenetic study of the rbcL gene showed that Agapanthus was misplaced in Alliaceae, and the authors excluded it from the family. Michael F. Fay and Mark W. Chase. 1996. "Resurrection of Themidaceae for the Brodiaea alliance, and recircumscription of Alliaceae, Amaryllidaceae, and Agapanthoideae". Taxon 45(3):441-451. (see External links below). They also raised Brodiaeeae to family rank as Themidaceae. They reduced the tribe Allieae to two genera, Allium and Milula, and transferred the rest of Allieae to Gilliesieae. This is the circumscription which the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group accepted in the APG classification of 1998 and which later became known as Alliaceae sensu stricto.

In the APG II system of 2003, Alliaceae could be recognized sensu stricto or sensu lato, as mentioned above. Soon after the publication of APG II, the ICBN conserved the name Amaryllidaceae for the family that had been called Alliaceae sensu lato in APG II.

When the APG III system was published in 2009, the alternative circumscriptions were discontinued and Alliaceae was no longer recognized. Alliaceae sensu stricto became the subfamily Allioideae of Amaryllidaceae sensu lato. Some botanists have not strictly followed the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and have recognized the smaller version of Alliaceae at family rank. Armen L. Takhtajan (Takhtadzhian). Flowering Plants second edition (2009). Springer Science+Business Media. ISBN 978-1-4020-9608-2. 

==See also==
*Ramsons

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

*Alliaceae in Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 7, May 2006.
* Resurrection of Themidaceae
* Alliaceae lato in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants
* Liliaceae in Flora of North America
* NCBI Taxonomy Browser sensu stricto
* links at CSDL, Texas
* Alliaceae of Mongolia in FloraGREIF

 



[[Asteraceae]]

Asteraceae or Compositae (commonly referred to as the aster, daisy, or sunflower family) is the name of an exceedingly large and widespread family of flowering plants (Angiospermae). Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards) Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 13, updated: 04/19/2014 19:57:49 Jeffrey, C. 2007. Compositae: Introduction with key to tribes. Pages 61-87 in Families and Genera of Vascular Plants, vol. VIII, Flowering Plants, Eudicots, Asterales (J. W. Kadereit and C. Jeffrey, eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin The group has more than 23,000 currently accepted species, spread across 1,620 genera (list) and 12 subfamilies. In terms of numbers of species, Asteraceae is rivaled only by Orchidaceae. Panero, J.L., Crozier, B.S. Tree of Life - Asteraceae (Which of the two families is actually larger is unclear, owing to uncertainty about exactly how many species exist in each family). The main feature of the family is the composite flower type in the form of capitula surrounded by involucral bracts. The name "Asteraceae" comes from Aster, the most prominent genus in the family, that derives from the Greek  meaning star, and is connected with its inflorescence star form. As for the term "Compositae", more ancient but still valid, it obviously makes reference to the fact that the family is one of the few angiosperm ones to have composite flowers. International Code of Botanical Nomenclature. In point 18/5 states: "The following names, used traditionally, are considered valid: Compositae (Asteraceae...). This family has a remarkable ecological and economical importance, and is present from the polar regions to the tropics, colonizing all available habitats. The Asteraceae may represent as much as 10% of autochthonous flora in many regions of the world.

Most members of Asteraceae are herbaceous, but a significant number are also shrubs, vines, or trees. The family has a worldwide distribution, and is most common in the arid and semiarid regions of subtropical and lower temperate latitudes. Barkely, T.M., Brouillet, L., Strother, J.L. (2006) Flora of North America - Asteraceae" http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id=10074 

The Asteraceae are an economically important family. Some members provide products including cooking oils, lettuce, sunflower seeds, artichokes, sweetening agents, coffee substitutes, and herbal teas. Several genera are popular with the horticultural community, including marigold, pot marigold (also known as calendula), cone flowers, various daisies, fleabane, chrysanthemums, dahlias, zinnias, and heleniums. Asteraceae are important in herbal medicine, including Grindelia, Echinacea, yarrow, and many others. Dr. Duke's Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases A number of species have come to be considered invasive, including, most notably in North America, dandelion, which was originally introduced by European settlers who used the young leaves as a salad green. 

==Etymology==
The Latin name "Asteraceae" is derived from the type genus Aster, which is a Greek term that means "star". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Aster. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/aster "Compositae", an older but still valid name, International Code of Botanical Nomenclature - Article 18.5 http://ibot.sav.sk/icbn/main.htm means "composite" and refers to the characteristic inflorescence, a special type of pseudanthium found in only a few other angiosperm families. The study of this family is known as synantherology.

The vernacular name "daisy", widely applied to members of this family, is derived from its Old English name: dgesege, from dges eage, meaning "day's eye". This is because the petals (of Bellis perennis) open at dawn and close at dusk.

==Distribution==
Asteraceae have a cosmopolitan distribution, and are found everywhere except Antarctica and the extreme Arctic. They are especially numerous in tropical and subtropical regions (notably Central America, eastern Brazil, the Andes, the Mediterranean, the Levant part of the Middle East, southern Africa, central Asia, and southwestern China). 

==Taxonomy==
Compositae were first described in 1792 by the German botanist Paul Dietrich Giseke. Solbrig, O.T. (1963) Subfamilial Nomenclature of Compositae. Taxon 12: 229-235 Traditionally, two subfamilies were recognised: Asteroideae (or Tubuliflorae) and Cichorioideae (or Liguliflorae). The latter has been shown to be extensively paraphyletic, and has now been divided into 11 subfamilies, but the former still stands. The phylogenetic tree presented below is based on Panero & Funk (2002). Panero, J.L., Funk, V.A. (2002) Toward a phylogenetic subfamilial classification for the Compositae (Asteraceae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 115: 909-922. The diamond denotes a very poorly supported node (<50% bootstrap support), the dot a poorly supported node (<80%). 

It is noteworthy that the four subfamilies Asteroideae, Cichorioideae, Carduoideae and Mutisioideae contain 99% of the species diversity of the whole family (approximately 70%, 14%, 11% and 3% respectively).

Because of the morphological complexity exhibited by this family, agreeing on generic circumscriptions has often been difficult for taxonomists. As a result, several of these genera have required multiple revisions. Judd, W.S., Campbell, C.S., Kellogg, E.A., Stevens, P.F. (2007) Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland. 

==Characteristics==
Asteraceae are mostly herbaceous plants, but some shrubs, trees and climbers do exist. Asteraceae are generally easy to distinguish from other plants, mainly because of their characteristic inflorescence and other shared characteristics. However, determining genera and species is notoriously difficult (see "damned yellow composite" for example).

===Roots and stems===
Asteraceae generally produce taproots, but sometimes they possess fibrous root systems. Stems are generally erect, but can be prostrate to ascending. Some species have underground stems in the form of caudices or rhizomes. These can be fleshy or woody depending on the species. 

===Leaves===
The leaves and the stems very often contain secretory canals with resin or latex (particularly common among the Cichorioideae). The leaves can be alternate, opposite, or whorled. They may be simple, but are often deeply lobed or otherwise incised, often conduplicate or revolute. The margins can be entire or lobed or toothed.

===Flowers===
====Floral heads====
In many plants of the Asteraceae family, what appears to be a single flower is actually a cluster of much smaller flowers. Sia Morhardt, Emil Morhardt, California Desert Flowers, University of California Press, pp. 29-32 The overall appearance of the cluster, as a single flower, functions in attracting pollinators in the same way as the structure of an individual flower in some other plant families. The older family name, Compositae, comes from the fact that what appears to be a single flower, is actually a composite of smaller flowers. The "petals" or "sunrays" in a sunflower head are actually individual strap-shaped Pam MacKay, Mojave Desert Wildflowers, illustration p. 35 flowers called "ray flowers", and the "sun disk" is made of smaller circular shaped individual flowers called "disc flowers". The word aster means "star" in Greek, referring to the appearance of some family members, as a "star" surrounded by "rays". The cluster of flowers that may appear to be a single flower, is called a head. The entire head may move tracking the sun, like a "smart" solar panel, which maximizes reflectivity of the whole unit and can thereby attract more pollinators. 
 
A ray flower is a 3-tipped (3-lobed), strap-shaped, individual flower in the head of some members of the Asteraceae family. Sometimes a ray flower has 2 tips (or 2-lobes). The corolla of the ray flower may have 2 tiny teeth opposite the 3 lobed strap, or tongue, indicating evolution by fusion from an originally 5 part corolla. Sometimes, the 3:2 arrangement is reversed, with 2 tips on the tongue, and 0 or 3 tiny teeth opposite the tongue. A ligulate flower is a 5 tipped, strap-shaped, individual flower in the heads of other members. A ligule is the strap-shaped tongue tongue of the corolla of a ray flower or ligulate flower. A disk flower is a radially symmetric (i.e., with identical shaped petals arranged in circle around the center) individual flower in the head, which is ringed by ray flowers when both are present. Sometimes ray flowers may be slightly off from radial symmetry, or weakly bilaterally symmetric, as in the case of desert pincushions Chaenactis fremontii. 

At the base of the head, and surrounding the flowers before opening, is a bundle of sepal-like bracts or scales called phyllaries, which together form the involucre that protects the individual flowers in the head before opening. The individual heads have the smaller individual flowers arranged on a round or dome-like structure called the receptacle. The flowers mature first at the outside, moving toward the center, with the youngest in the middle. 

The individual flowers in a head have 5 fused petals (rarely 4), but instead of sepals, have threadlike, hairy, or bristly structures called pappus, which surround the fruit and can stick to animal fur or be lifted by wind, aiding in seed dispersal. The whitish fluffy head of a dandelion commonly blown on by children, is made of the pappus, with tiny seeds attached at the ends, whereby the pappus provides a parachute like structure to help the seed be carried away in the wind. 

A radiate head has disc flowers surrounded by ray flowers. A ligulate head has all ligulate flowers. When a sunflower family flower head has only disk flowers that are sterile, male, or have both male and female parts, it is a discoid head. Disciform heads have only disc flowers, but may have two kinds (male flowers and female flowers) in one head, or may have different heads of two kinds (all male, or all female). Pistillate heads have all female flowers. Staminate heads have all male flowers. 

Sometimes, but rarely, the head contains only a single flower, or has a single flowered pistillate (female) head, and a multi-flowered male staminate (male) head. 

====Floral structures====
Flower diagram of Carduus (Carduoideae) shows (outermost to innermost): subtending bract and stem axis; fused calyx; fused corolla; stamens fused to corolla; gynoecium with two carpels and one locule
A typical Asteraceae flower head (here Bidens torta) showing the individual flowers
Ray floret (as in Cichorioideae, and the outer florets in Asteroideae)
Disc floret (as in Asteroideae)
The most evident characteristic of Asteraceae is perhaps their inflorescence: a specialised capitulum, technically called a calathid or calathidium, but generally referred to as flower head or, alternatively, simply capitulum. Usher, G. (1966) A dictionary of botany, including terms used in bio-chemistry, soil science, and statistics. LCCN 66 0 25447 The capitulum is a contracted raceme composed of numerous individual sessile flowers, called the florets, all sharing the same receptacle.

The capitulum of Asteraceae has evolved many characteristics that make it look superficially like a single flower. This type of flower-like inflorescence is fairly widespread amongst angiosperms, and has been given the name of pseudanthia.

A set of bracts forms an involucre surrounding the base of the capitulum. These are called "phyllaries", or "involucral bracts". They may simulate the sepals of the pseudanthium. These are mostly herbaceous but can also be brightly coloured (e.g. Helichrysum) or have a scarious (dry and membranous) texture. The phyllaries can be free or fused, and arranged in one to many rows, overlapping like the tiles of a roof (imbricate) or not (this variation is important in identification of tribes and genera).

Each floret may itself be subtended by a bract, called a "palea" or "receptacular bract". These bracts as a group are often called "chaff". The presence or absence of these bracts, their distribution on the receptacle, and their size and shape are all important diagnostic characteristics for genera and tribes.

The florets have five petals fused at the base to form a corolla tube and they may be either actinomorphic or zygomorphic. Disc florets are usually actinomorphic, with five petal lips on the rim of the corolla tube. The petal lips may be either very short, or long, in which case they form deeply lobed petals. The latter is the only kind of floret in the Carduoideae, while the first kind is more widespread. Ray florets are always highly zygomorphic and are characterised by the presence of a ligule, a strap-shaped structure on the edge of the corolla tube consisting of fused petals. In the Asteroideae and other minor subfamilies these are usually borne only on florets at the circumference of the capitulum and have a 3+2 scheme  above the fused corolla tube, three very long fused petals form the ligule, with the other two petals being inconspicuously small. The Cichorioidea has only ray florets, with a 5+0 scheme  all five petals form the ligule. A 4+1 scheme is found in the Barnadesioideae. The tip of the ligule is often divided into teeth, each one representing a petal. Some marginal florets may have no petals at all (filiform floret).

The calyx of the florets may be absent, but when present is always modified into a pappus of two or more teeth, scales or bristles and this is often involved in the dispersion of the seeds. As with the bracts, the nature of the pappus is an important diagnostic feature.

There are usually five stamens. The filaments are fused to the corolla, while the anthers are generally connate (syngenesious anthers), thus forming a sort of tube around the style (theca). They commonly have basal and/or apical appendages. Pollen is released inside the tube and is collected around the growing style, and then, as the style elongates, is pushed out of the tube (ndelspritze).

The pistil consists of two connate carpels. The style has two lobes. Stigmatic tissue may be located in the interior surface or form two lateral lines. The ovary is inferior and has only one ovule, with basal placentation.

===Fruits and seeds===
The fruit of the Asteraceae is achene-like, and is called a cypsela (plural cypselae). Although there are two fused carpels, there is only one locule, and only one seed per fruit is formed. It may sometimes be winged or spiny because the pappus, which is derived from calyx tissue often remains on the fruit (for example in dandelion). In some species, however, the pappus falls off (for example in Helianthus). Cypsela morphology is often used to help determine plant relationships at the genus and species level. The mature seeds usually have little endosperm or none. 

===Metabolites===
Asteraceae generally store energy in the form of inulin. They produce iso/chlorogenic acid, sesquiterpene lactones, pentacyclic triterpene alcohols, various alkaloids, acetylenes (cyclic, aromatic, with vinyl end groups), tannins. They have terpenoid essential oils which never contain iridoids. 

==Evolution==
Diversification of Asteraceae appears to have taken place roughly 42-36 million years ago, the stem group perhaps being up to 49 million years old. 

It is still unknown whether the precise cause of their great success was the development of the highly specialised capitulum, their ability to store energy as fructans (mainly inulin), which is an advantage in relatively dry zones, or some combination of these and possibly other factors. 

==Ecology==
Seeds are dispersed by the wind in Carlina
Epizoochory in Bidens tripartita
Asteraceae are especially common in open and dry environments. 

Many members of the Asteraceae are pollinated by insects, which explains their value in attracting beneficial insects, but anemophyly is also present (e.g. Ambrosia, Artemisia). There are many apomictic species in the family.

Seeds are ordinarily dispersed intact with the fruiting body, the cypsela. Wind dispersal is common (anemochory) assisted by a hairy pappus. Another common variation is epizoochory, in which the dispersal unit, a single cypsela (e.g. Bidens) or entire capitulum (e.g. Arctium) provided with hooks, spines or some equivalent structure, sticks to the fur or plumage of an animal (or even to clothes, like in the photo) just to fall off later far from its mother plant.

==Uses==
Commercially important plants in the Asteraceae include the food crops Lactuca sativa (lettuce), Cichorium (chicory), Cynara scolymus (globe artichoke), Helianthus annuus (sunflower), Smallanthus sonchifolius (yacn), Carthamus tinctorius (safflower) and Helianthus tuberosus (Jerusalem artichoke).

Many members of the family are grown as ornamental plants for their flowers and some are important ornamental crops for the cut flower industry. Some examples are Chrysanthemum, Gerbera, Calendula, Dendranthema, Argyranthemum, Dahlia, Tagetes, Zinnia and many others.

Other commercially important species include Compositae used as herbs and in herbal teas and other beverages. Chamomile, which comes from two different species, the annual Matricaria recutita or German chamomile, and the perennial Chamaemelum nobile, also called Roman chamomile. Calendula, also called the pot marigold is grown commercially for herbal teas and the potpourri industry. Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea), is used as a medicinal tea. Winter tarragon, also called Mexican mint marigold, Tagetes lucida is commonly grown and used as a tarragon substitute in climates where tarragon will not survive. Finally, the wormwood genus Artemisia includes absinthe (A. absinthium) and tarragon (A. dracunculus).

Compositae have also been used for industrial purposes. Common in all commercial poultry feed, marigold (Tagetes patula) is grown primarily in Mexico and Central American nations. Marigold oil, extracted from Tagetes minuta, is used in the cola and cigarette industries.

Plants in Asteraceae are medically important in areas that don't have access to Western medicine. They are also commonly featured in medical and phytochemical journals because the sesquiterpene lactone compounds contained within them are an important cause of allergic contact dermatitis. Allergy to these compounds is the leading cause of allergic contact dermatitis in florists in the US. Pollen from ragweed Ambrosia is among the main causes of so-called hay fever in the United States. Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America. Ragweed Allergy. http://www.aafa.org/display.cfm?id=9&sub=19&cont=267 

Many members of Asteraceae are copious nectar producers and are useful for evaluating pollinator populations during their bloom. Centaurea (knapweed), Helianthus annuus (domestic sunflower), and some species of Solidago (goldenrod) are major "honey plants" for beekeepers. Solidago produces relatively high protein pollen, which helps honey bees over winter.

Some members of the Asteraceae are economically important as weeds. Notable in the United States are the ragwort, Senecio jacobaea, groundsel Senecio vulgaris and Taraxacum (dandelion).

The genera Chrysanthemum, Pulicaria, Tagetes, and Tanacetum contain species with useful insecticidal properties.

Parthenium argentatum (guayule) is a source of hypoallergenic latex.

The essential oil is an ingredient in a "natural" haemorrhoid treatment. http://www.amoils.com/h-hemorrhoids-ingredients.html, http://www.amoils.com/hemorrhoids.html 

==Genera==

==See also==
* Terminology for Asteraceae
* Damned yellow composite

==References==

==External links==

* Compositae at The Plant List
* Compositae at The Families of Flowering Plants (DELTA)
* Asteraceae at the Encyclopedia of Life
* Asteraceae at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website
* Asteraceae at the Tree of Life Web Project
* Asteraceae at the online Flora of North America
* Asteraceae at the online Flora of Pakistan
* Asteraceae at the online Flora of Zimbabwe
* Compositae at the online Flora of Taiwan
* Asteraceae at the online FloraBasethe Western Australian Flora
* Compositae at the online Flora of New Zealand
* The International Composite Alliance (TICA) A worldwide group of composite systematists

 01



[[Apiaceae]]

The Apiaceae (or Umbelliferae), commonly known as the celery, carrot or parsley family, are a family of mostly aromatic plants with hollow stems. The family, which is named after the type genus Apium, is large, with more than 3,700 species spread across 434 genera; it is the 16th-largest family of flowering plants. Stevens, P.F. (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 9, June 2008. Included in this family are the well-known plants: Angelica, anise, arracacha, asafoetida, caraway, carrot, celery, Centella asiatica, chervil, cicely, coriander (including cilantro and culantro), cumin, dill, fennel, hemlock, lovage, Queen Anne's lace, parsley, parsnip, sea holly, and the now extinct silphium.

== Description ==

Most Apiaceae are annual, biennial or perennial herbs (frequently with the leaves aggregated toward the base), though a minority are shrubs or trees.They are multicellular plants. Their leaves are of variable size and alternately arranged, or alternate with the upper leaves becoming nearly opposite. In some taxa, the texture is leathery, fleshy, or even rigid, but always with stomata. They are petiolate or perfoliate and more or less sheathing, the blade usually dissected and pinnatifid, but entire in some genera. Most commonly, crushing their leaves emits a marked smell, aromatic to foetid, but absent in some members. The flowers are nearly always aggregated in terminal umbels, simple or compound, often umbelliform cymes, rarely in heads.

The defining characteristic of this family is the inflorescence: a simple or compound umbel. Flowers across the Apiaceae are fairly uniform and are usually perfect (hermaphroditic) and actinomorphic, but some are andromonoecious, polygamomonoecious, or even dioecious (as in Acronema), with a distinct calyx and corolla, but the calyx if often highly reduced, to the point of being undetectable in many species, while the corolla can be white, yellow, pink or purple. The flowers are nearly perfectly pentamerous, with 5 petals, sepals, and stamens.
The androecium contains of 5 stamens, but there is often variation in the functionality of the stamens even within a single inflorescence. Some flowers are functionally staminate (where a pistil may be present but has no ovules capable of being fertilized) while others are functionally pistillate (where stamens are present but their anthers do not produce viable pollen). Pollination of one flower by the pollen of a different flower of the same plant (geitonogamy) is common. The gynoecium consists of two carpels fused into a single, bicarpellate pistil with an inferior ovary. When mature, the fused carpels separate into two mericarps. 
Stylopodiums secrete nectar, attracting pollinators like flies, mosquitoes, gnats, beetles, moths, and bees.

The fruits are nonfleshy schizocarp of two mericarps, each with a single seed; they separate at maturity and are dispersed by wind. Some fruit segments (like those in Daucus spp. are covered in bristles and spread via external transport. The seeds have an oily endosperm Watson, L., Dallwitz, M.J. (1992 onwards) The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, and information retrieval. Version: 4 March 2011. and generally contain large quantities of fatty oils, with the fatty acid petroselinic acid occurring universally throughout the family while rarely being found outside of the Apiaceae.

== Systematics ==

The family is solidly placed within the Apiales order in the APG III classification system. It is closely related to Araliaceae and the boundaries between these families remain unclear. Traditionally groups within the family have been delimited largely based on fruit morphology, and the results from this have not been congruent with the more recent molecular phylogenetic analyses. The subfamilial and tribal classification for the family is currently in a state of flux, with many of the groups being found to be grossly paraphyletic or polyphyletic. 

== Etymology ==

Apiaceae was first described by John Lindley in 1836. Lindley, J. (1836) An Introduction to the Natural System of Botany, 2nd Edition. Longman, London. The name is derived from the type genus Apium, which was originally used by Pliny the Elder circa 50 AD for a celery-like plant. The alternative name for the family, Umbelliferae, derives from the inflorescence being generally in the form of a compound umbel. 
The family was one of the first to be recognized as a distinct group in Jacques Daleschamps' 1586 Historia generalis plantarum. With Robert Morisons 1672 Plantarum umbelilliferarum distribution nova it became the first group of plants for which a systematic study was published.

== Ecology ==
The black swallowtail butterfly, Papilio polyxenes, utilizes the Apiaceae family for food and host plants during oviposition. Hall, Donald W. 2011 "Featured Creatures - Eastern Black Swallowtail." Entomology and Nematology Department, University of Florida. http://entnemdept.ufl.edu/creatures/bfly/bfly2/eastern_black_swallowtail.htm#life 

== Uses ==

=== Cultivation ===

Many members of this family are cultivated for various purposes. The plant structure includes a tap root, which can be large enough to be useful in food, as with parsnips (Pastinaca sativa), carrots (Daucus carota), and Hamburg parsley (Petroselinum crispum). Many plants of this group are also adapted to conditions that encourage heavy concentrations of essential oils, and as a result some are flavourful aromatic herbs. Examples are parsley (Petroselinum crispum), coriander (Coriandrum sativum), and dill (Anethum graveolens). The plentiful seeds of the umbels, likewise, are sometimes used in cuisine, as with, coriander (Coriandrum sativum), fennel (Foeniculum vulgare), cumin (Cuminum cyminum), and caraway (Carum carvi).

Other notable cultivated Apiaceae include chervil (Anthriscus cerefolium), angelica (Angelica spp.), celery (Apium graveolens), arracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza), poison hemlock (Conium maculatum), sea holly (Eryngium spp.), asafoetida (Ferula asafoetida), galbanum (Ferula gummosa), cicely (Myrrhis odorata), anise (Pimpinella anisum), lovage (Levisticum officinale), and hacquetia (Hacquetia epipactis). 

=== Companion plants ===

Almost every widely cultivated plant of this group is a companion plant. In large part, this is because the tiny flowers forming the umbels, are perfectly suited for ladybugs, parasitic wasps, and predatory flies, which actually drink nectar when not reproducing. They then will prey upon insect pests on nearby plants.

Some of the plants are herbs that produce enough scent to possibly dilute the odours of nearby plants, or the pheromones emitted by insects that find those plants, which would otherwise attract more pests.

=== Folk medicine ===

Many plants in this family, such as wild carrot, have estrogenic properties and have been used as a folk medicine for birth control. Most notable for this use is the extinct giant fennel, silphium.
Conium maculatum has been used as a sedative and in treatments for arthritis and asthma in addition to its most famous use: as a humane method of killing criminals and philosophers. 
Daucus carota has been used as a diuretic, as a stimulant, to aid in uterine ailments, and one time as a treatment for jaundice.
According to the Greek physician and botanist Dioscorides,  especially Bastard or Wild Parsleyprovokes venery and bodily lust and erection of the parts. Fennel has been used to treat nausea; species of Ferula have been used to ease constipation and coughs; cumin has been used as a treatment for diarrhea; coriander for halitosis; Eryngium spp. to treat genitourinary problems; Centella asiatica to treat syphilis; and Ferula assa-foetida has been used as a carminative, antispasmodic, and stimulant.

=== Other uses ===

The poisonous members of the Apiaceae have been used for a variety of purposes globally. The poisonous Oenanthe crocata has been used to stupefy fish, Cicuta douglasii has been used as an aid in suicides, and arrow poisons have been made from various other family species.

Daucus carota has been used as coloring for butter and its roots used as a coffee substitute.

Dorema ammoniacum, Ferula galbaniflua, and Ferula sumbul are sources of incense. 

The woody Azorella compacta Phil. has been used in South America for fuel.

== Chemistry ==
Polyacetylenes can be found in Apiaceae vegetables like carrot, celery, fennel, parsley and parsnip where they show cytotoxic activities. Polyacetylenes from the Apiaceae Vegetables Carrot, Celery, Fennel, Parsley, and Parsnip and Their Cytotoxic Activities. Christian Zidorn, Karin Jhrer, Markus Ganzera, Birthe Schubert, Elisabeth Maria Sigmund, Judith Mader, Richard Greil, Ernst P. Ellmerer and Hermann Stuppner, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53 (7), pages 25182523, Many species contain coumarins or coumarin derivatives, such as furanocoumarins.

== Genera ==

File:Chaerophyllum_bulbosum_-_Khlers_Medizinal-Pflanzen-177.jpg|Chaerophyllum bulbosum
File:Apiaceae Pimpinella anisum.jpg|Anise (Pimpinella anisum) from Woodville (1793) Woodville, W. (1793) Medical Botany. James Phillips, London. 
File:Angelica archangelica (1118596627).jpg|Angelica archangelica
File:Coriandrum sativum 003.JPG|Flowers of Coriandrum sativum

==See also==
* Autumnalia

== References ==

== Further reading ==
*Apiaceae. 2011. Utah State University Intermountain Herbarium. 20 October 2011. http://herbarium.usu.edu/taxa/apiaceae.htm
*Constance, L. (1971). History of the classification of Umbelliferae (Apiaceae). in Heywood, V. H. , The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 111. Academic Press, London.
*Cronquist, A. (1968). The Evolution and Classification of Flowering Plants. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
*French, D. H. (1971). Ethnobotany of the Umbelliferae. in Heywood, V. H. , The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 385412. Academic Press, London.
*Hegnauer, R. (1971) Chemical Patterns and Relationships of Umbelliferae. in Heywood, V. H. , The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 267277. Academic Press, London.
*Heywood, V. H. (1971). Systematic survey of Old World Umbelliferae. in Heywood, V. H. , The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 3141. Academic Press, London.
*Judd, W. S. et al. (1999). Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
*Plunkett, G. M. and S. R. Downie (1999). Major lineages within Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae: a comparison of chloroplast restriction site and DNA sequence data. American Journal of Botany, 86, 10141026.
*Plunkett, G. M., D. E. Soltis, and P. S. Soltis (1996). Higher Level Relationships of Apiales (Apiaceae and Araliaceae) Based on Phylogenetic Analysis of rbcL Sequences. Botanical Society of America, 83 (4), 499515.
*Plunkett, G. M., D. E. Soltis, and P. S. Soltis (1996). Evolutionary Patters in Apiaceae: Inferences Based on matK Sequence Data. American Society of Plant Taxonomists, 21 (4), 477495.
*Nieto Feliner, Gonzalo; Jury, Stephen Leonard & Herrero Nieto, Alberto (eds.) Flora iberica. Plantas vasculares de la Pennsula Ibrica e Islas Baleares. Vol. X. "Araliaceae-Umbelliferae" (2003) Madrid: Real Jardn Botnico, CSIC (in Spanish).

== External links ==

 * Apiaceae at The Plant List * Umbelliferae at The Families of Flowering Plants (DELTA) * Apiaceae at the Encyclopedia of Life * Apiaceae at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website * Apiaceae at the online Flora of Northern Ireland * Apiaceae at the online Michigan Flora * Apiaceae at the online Flora of China * Apiaceae at the online Flora of Zimbabwe * Apiaceae at the online Flora of Western Australia * Umbelliferae at the online Flora of New Zealand * Umbelliferae at the online Flora of Pakistan * Apiaceae at Chileflora * Apiaceae at Flowers in Israel * Apiaceae at Discover Life * Apiaceae at the Utah Valley University Herbarium * Apiaceae at the Plantarium Photo Database (Russia) * Umbellifer Resource Centre at the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh * Umbellifer Information Server at Moscow State University 

 

[[Axon]]

An axon (from Greek, axis) also known as a nerve fibre; is a long, slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, that typically conducts electrical impulses away from the neuron's cell body. The function of the axon is to transmit information to different neurons, muscles and glands. In certain sensory neurons (pseudounipolar neurons), such as those for touch and warmth, the electrical impulse travels along an axon from the periphery to the cell body, and from the cell body to the spinal cord along another branch of the same axon. Axon dysfunction causes many inherited and acquired neurological disorders which can affect both the peripheral and central neurons.

An axon is one of two types of protoplasmic protrusions that extrude from the cell body of a neuron, the other type being dendrites. Axons are distinguished from dendrites by several features, including shape (dendrites often taper while axons usually maintain a constant radius), length (dendrites are restricted to a small region around the cell body while axons can be much longer), and function (dendrites usually receive signals while axons usually transmit them). All of these rules have exceptions, however.

Some types of neurons have no axon and transmit signals from their dendrites. No neuron ever has more than one axon; however in invertebrates such as insects or leeches the axon sometimes consists of several regions that function more or less independently of each other. Most axons branch, in some cases very profusely.

Axons make contact with other cellsusually other neurons but sometimes muscle or gland cellsat junctions called synapses. At a synapse, the membrane of the axon closely adjoins the membrane of the target cell, and special molecular structures serve to transmit electrical or electrochemical signals across the gap. Some synaptic junctions appear partway along an axon as it extendsthese are called en passant ("in passing") synapses. Other synapses appear as terminals at the ends of axonal branches. A single axon, with all its branches taken together, can innervate multiple parts of the brain and generate thousands of synaptic terminals.

==Anatomy==
Cross section of an axon.
1. Axon
2. Nucleus of Schwann Cell
3. Schwann Cell
4. Myelin Sheath
5. Neurilemma
Axons are the primary transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they form nerves. Some axons can extend up to one meter or more while others extend as little as one millimeter. The longest axons in the human body are those of the sciatic nerve, which run from the base of the spinal cord to the big toe of each foot. The diameter of axons is also variable. Most individual axons are microscopic in diameter (typically about one micrometer (m) across). The largest mammalian axons can reach a diameter of up to 20 m. The squid giant axon, which is specialized to conduct signals very rapidly, is close to 1 millimetre in diameter, the size of a small pencil lead. Axonal arborization (the branching structure at the end of a nerve fiber) also differs from one nerve fiber to the next. Axons in the central nervous system typically show complex trees with many branch points. In comparison, the cerebellar granule cell axon is characterized by a single T-shaped branch node from which two parallel fibers extend. Elaborate arborization allows for the simultaneous transmission of messages to a large number of target neurons within a single region of the brain.

There are two types of axons occurring in the peripheral system and the central nervous system: unmyelinated and myelinated axons. Myelin is a layer of a fatty insulating substance, which is formed by two types of glial cells: Schwann cells ensheathing peripheral neurons and oligodendrocytes insulating those of the central nervous system. Along myelinated nerve fibers, gaps in the myelin sheath known as nodes of Ranvier occur at evenly spaced intervals. The myelination enables an especially rapid mode of electrical impulse propagation called saltatory conduction. Demyelination of axons causes the multitude of neurological symptoms found in the disease multiple sclerosis.
A dissected human brain, showing grey matter and white matter
If the brain of a vertebrate is extracted and sliced into thin sections, some parts of each section appear dark and other parts lighter in color. The dark parts are known as grey matter and the lighter parts as white matter. White matter gets its light color from the myelin sheaths of axons: the white matter parts of the brain are characterized by a high density of myelinated axons passing through them, and a low density of cell bodies of neurons. The cerebral cortex has a thick layer of grey matter on the surface and a large volume of white matter underneath: what this means is that most of the surface is filled with neuron cell bodies, whereas much of the area underneath is filled with myelinated axons that connect these neurons to each other.

===Initial segment===
The axon initial segment  the thick, unmyelinated part of an axon that connects directly to the cell body  consists of a specialized complex of proteins. It is approximately 25m in length and functions as the site of action potential initiation. The density of voltage-gated sodium channels is much higher in the initial segment than in the remainder of the axon or in the adjacent cell body, excepting the axon hillock. The voltage-gated ion channels are known to be found within certain areas of the axonal membrane and initiate action potential, conduction, and synaptic transmission. 

===Nodes of Ranvier===

Nodes of Ranvier (also known as myelin sheath gaps) are short unmyelinated segments of a myelinated axon, which are found periodically interspersed between segments of the myelin sheath. Therefore, at the point of the node of Ranvier, the axon is reduced in diameter. These nodes are areas where action potentials can be generated. In saltatory conduction, electrical currents produced at each node of Ranvier are conducted with little attenuation to the next node in line, where they remain strong enough to generate another action potential. Thus in a myelinated axon, action potentials effectively "jump" from node to node, bypassing the myelinated stretches in between, resulting in a propagation speed much faster than even the fastest unmyelinated axon can sustain.

==Action potentials==

Most axons carry signals in the form of action potentials, which are discrete electrochemical impulses that travel rapidly along an axon, starting at the cell body and terminating at points where the axon makes synaptic contact with target cells. The defining characteristic of an action potentials is that it is "all-or-nothing"  every action potential that an axon generates has essentially the same size and shape. This all-or-nothing characteristic allows action potentials to be transmitted from one end of a long axon to the other without any reduction in size. There are, however, some types of neurons with short axons that carry graded electrochemical signals, of variable amplitude.

When an action potential reaches a presynaptic terminal, it activates the synaptic transmission process. The first step is rapid opening of calcium ion channels in the membrane of the axon, allowing calcium ions to flow inward across the membrane. The resulting increase in intracellular calcium concentration causes vesicles (tiny containers enclosed by a lipid membrane) filled with a neurotransmitter chemical to fuse with the axon's membrane and empty their contents into the extracellular space. The neurotransmitter is released from the presynaptic nerve through exocytosis. The neurotransmitter chemical then diffuses across to receptors located on the membrane of the target cell. The neurotransmitter binds to these receptors and activates them. Depending on the type of receptors that are activated, the effect on the target cell can be to excite the target cell, inhibit it, or alter its metabolism in some way. This entire sequence of events often takes place in less than a thousandth of a second. Afterward, inside the presynaptic terminal, a new set of vesicles are moved into position next to the membrane, ready to be released when the next action potential arrives. The action potential is the final electrical step in the integration of synaptic messages at the scale of the neuron. 

A)pyramidal cell,interneuron,and short durationwaveform (Axon). (B) overlay of the three average waveforms; (C) average and standard error of peak-trough time for pyramidal cells interneurons, and putative axons.(D)Scatter plot of signal to noise ratios for individual units againstpeak-trough time for axons, pyramidal cells (PYR) and interneurons (INT).
Extracellular recordings of action potential propagation in axons has been demonstrated in freely moving animals. While extracellular somatic action potentials have been used to study cellular activity in freely moving animals such as place cells, axonal activity in both white and gray matter can also be recorded. Extracellular recordings of axon action potential propagation is distinct from somatic action potentials in three ways: 1. The signal has a shorter peak-trough duration (~150s) than of pyramidal cells (~500s) or interneurons (~250s). 2. The voltage change is triphasic. 3. Activity recorded on a tetrode is seen on only one of the four recording wires. In recordings from freely moving rats, axonal signals have been isolated in white matter tracts including the alveus and the corpus callosum as well hippocampal gray matter. 

In fact, the generation of action potentials in vivo is sequential in nature, and these sequential spikes constitute the digital codes in the neurons. Although previous studies indicate an axonal origin of a single spike evoked by short-term pulses, physiological signals in vivo trigger the initiation of sequential spikes at the cell bodies of the neurons, Rongjing Ge, Hao Qian and Jin-Hui Wang* (2011) Molecular Brain 4(19), 1~11 Rongjing Ge, Hao Qian, Na Chen and Jin-Hui Wang* (2014) Molecular Brain 7(26):1-16 

In addition to propagating action potentials to axonal terminals, the axon is able to amplify the action potentials, which makes sure a secure propagation of sequential action potentials toward the axonal terminal. In terms of molecular mechanisms, voltage-gated sodium channels in the axons possess lower threshold and shorter refractory period in response to short-term pulses. Na Chen, Jiandong Yu, Hao Qian and Jin-Hui Wang* (2010). "http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0011868" PLoS One 5(7):e11868. 

==Development and growth==

===Development===
Studies done on cultured hippocampal neurons suggest that neurons initially produce multiple neurites that are equivalent, yet only one of these neurites is destined to become the axon. It is unclear whether axon specification precedes axon elongation or vice versa, although recent evidence points to the latter. If an axon that is not fully developed is cut, the polarity can change and other neurites can potentially become the axon. This alteration of polarity only occurs when the axon is cut at least 10 m shorter than the other neurites. After the incision is made, the longest neurite will become the future axon and all the other neurites, including the original axon, will turn into dendrites. Imposing an external force on a neurite, causing it to elongate, will make it become an axon. Nonetheless, axonal development is achieved through a complex interplay between extracellular signaling, intracellular signaling and cytoskeletal dynamics.

====Extracellular signaling====

The extracellular signals that propagate through the extracellular matrix surrounding neurons play a prominent role in axonal development. These signaling molecules include proteins, neurotrophic factors, and extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules. 
UNC-6 or netrin, a secreted protein, functions in axon formation. When the UNC-6 receptor is mutated, several neurites are irregularly projected out of neurons and finally a single axon is extended anteriorly. Neuroglia and pioneer neurons express UNC-6 to provide global and local netrin cues for guiding migrations in C. elegans The neurotrophic factors nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin 3 (NT3) are also involved in axon development and bind to Trk receptors. 

The ganglioside-converting enzyme plasma membrane ganglioside sialidase (PMGS), which is involved in the activation of TrkA at the tip of neutrites, is required for the elongation of axons. PMGS asymmetrically distributes to the tip of the neurite that is destined to become the future axon. 

====Intracellular signaling====
During axonal development, the activity of PI3K is increased at the tip of destined axon. Disrupting the activity of PI3K inhibits axonal development. Activation of PI3K results in the production of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns) which can cause significant elongation of a neurite, converting it into an axon. As such, the overexpression of phosphatases that dephosphorylate PtdIns leads into the failure of polarization. 

====Cytoskeletal dynamics====
The neurite with the lowest actin filament content will become the axon. PGMS concentration and f-actin content are inversely correlated; when PGMS becomes enriched at the tip of a neurite, its f-actin content is substantially decreased. In addition, exposure to actin-depolimerizing drugs and toxin B (which inactivates Rho-signaling) causes the formation of multiple axons. Consequently, the interruption of the actin network in a growth cone will promote its neurite to become the axon. 

===Growth===
Axon of 9 day old mouse with growth cone visible
Growing axons move through their environment via the growth cone, which is at the tip of the axon. The growth cone has a broad sheet like extension called lamellipodia which contain protrusions called filopodia. The filopodia are the mechanism by which the entire process adheres to surfaces and explores the surrounding environment. Actin plays a major role in the mobility of this system.
Environments with high levels of cell adhesion molecules or CAM's create an ideal environment for axonal growth. This seems to provide a "sticky" surface for axons to grow along. Examples of CAM's specific to neural systems include N-CAM, neuroglial CAM or NgCAM, TAG-1, and MAG all of which are part of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Another set of molecules called extracellular matrix adhesion molecules also provide a sticky substrate for axons to grow along. Examples of these molecules include laminin, fibronectin, tenascin, and perlecan. Some of these are surface bound to cells and thus act as short range attractants or repellents. Others are difusible ligands and thus can have long range effects.

Cells called guidepost cells assist in the guidance of neuronal axon growth. These cells are typically other, sometimes immature, neurons.

It has also been discovered through research that if the axons of a neuron were damaged, as long as the soma (the cell body of a neuron) is not damaged, the axons would regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells. This is also referred to as neuroregeneration. 

Nogo-A is a type of neurite growth inhibitory component that is present in the central nervous system myelin membranes (found in an axon). It has a crucial role in restricting axonal regeneration in adult mammalian central nervous system. In recent studies, if Nogo- A is blocked and neutralized, it is possible to induce long-distance axonal regeneration which leads to enhancement of functional recovery in rats and mouse spinal cord. This has yet to be done on humans. A recent study has also found that macrophages activated through a specific inflammatory pathway activated by the Dectin-1 receptor are capable of promoting axon recovery, also however causing neurotoxicity in the neuron. 

==History==
Some of the first intracellular recordings in a nervous system were made in the late 1930s by Kenneth S. Cole and Howard J. Curtis. German anatomist Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters is generally credited with the discovery of the axon by distinguishing it from the dendrites. Swiss Rdolf Albert von Klliker and German Robert Remak were the first to identify and characterize the axon initial segment. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential, leading the formulation of the HodgkinHuxley model. Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963. The formulas detailing axonal conductance were extended to vertebrates in the FrankenhaeuserHuxley equations. Louis-Antoine Ranvier was the first to describe the gaps or nodes found on axons and for this contribution these axonal features are now commonly referred to as the Nodes of Ranvier. Santiago Ramn y Cajal, a Spanish anatomist, proposed that axons were the output components of neurons, describing their functionality. Erlanger and Gasser earlier developed the classification system for peripheral nerve fibers, Sansom B, "Reflex Isolation" http://www.sansomnia.com based on axonal conduction velocity, myelination, fiber size etc.
Even recently our understanding of the biochemical basis for action potential propagation has advanced, and now includes many details about individual ion channels.

==Injury==

In order of degree of severity, injury to a nerve can be described as neuropraxia, axonotmesis, or neurotmesis.
Concussion is considered a mild form of diffuse axonal injury. eMedicine - Traumatic Brain Injury: Definition, Epidemiology, Pathophysiology : Article by Segun T Dawodu, MD, FAAPMR, FAANEM, CIME, DipMI(RCSed) The dysfunction of axons in the nervous system is one of the major causes of many inherited neurological disorders that affect both peripheral and central neurons. 

==Classification==

The axons that make up nerves in the human peripheral nervous system can be classified based on their physical features and signal conduction properties.

===Motor=== 
Lower motor neurons have two kind of fibers:

+Motor fiber types 
 Type Erlanger-Gasser Classification Diameter (m) Myelin Conduction velocity Associated muscle fibers 
  A 13-20 Yes 80120 m/s Extrafusal muscle fibers 
  A 5-8 Yes 424 m/s Intrafusal muscle fibers 

===Sensory=== 
Different sensory receptors are innervated by different types of nerve fibers. Proprioceptors are innervated by type Ia, Ib and II sensory fibers, mechanoreceptors by type II and III sensory fibers and nociceptors and thermoreceptors by type III and IV sensory fibers.

+Sensory fiber types 
 Type Erlanger-Gasser Classification Diameter (m) Myelin Conduction velocity Associated sensory receptors 
 Ia A 13-20 Yes 80120 m/s Primary receptors of muscle spindle 
 Ib A 13-20 Yes 80120 m/s Golgi tendon organ 
 II A 6-12 Yes 3375 m/s Secondary receptors of muscle spindle All cutaneous mechanoreceptors 
 III A 1-5 Thin 330 m/s Free nerve endings of touch and pressure Nociceptors of neospinothalamic tract Cold thermoreceptors 
 IV C 0.2-1.5 No 0.5-2.0 m/s Nociceptors of paleospinothalamic tract Warmth receptors 

===Autonomic===
The autonomic nervous system has two kinds of peripheral fibers:

+Fiber types 
 Type Erlanger-Gasser Classification Diameter (m) Myelin Conduction velocity 
 preganglionic fibers B 15 Yes 315 m/s 
 postganglionic fibers C 0.21.5 No 0.52.0 m/s 

==See also==
*Axon guidance
*Electrophysiology
*Nerve fiber
*Pioneer axon
*Telodendron

==References==

==External links==
* - "Slide 3 Spinal cord"
* - Bialowas, Andrzej, Carlier, Edmond, Campanac, Emilie, Debanne, Dominique, Alcaraz. Axon Physiology, GislePHYSIOLOGICAL REVIEWS, V. 91 (2), 04/2011, p. 555-602.



[[Aramaic alphabet]]

The Aramaic alphabet is adapted from the Phoenician alphabet and became distinctive from it by the 8th century BCE. It was used to write the Aramaic language. The letters all represent consonants, some of which are matres lectionis, which also indicate long vowels.

The Aramaic alphabet is historically significant, since virtually all modern Middle Eastern writing systems can be traced back to it, as well as numerous non-Chinese writing systems of Central and East Asia. This is primarily due to the widespread usage of the Aramaic language as both a lingua franca and the official language of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, and its successor, the Achaemenid Empire. Among the scripts in modern use, the Hebrew alphabet bears the closest relation to the Imperial Aramaic script of the 5th century BC, with an identical letter inventory and, for the most part, nearly identical letter shapes.

Writing systems that indicate consonants but do not indicate most vowels (like the Aramaic one) or indicate them with added diacritical signs, have been called abjads by Peter T. Daniels to distinguish them from later alphabets, such as Greek, that represent vowels more systematically. This is to avoid the notion that a writing system that represents sounds must be either a syllabary or an alphabet, which implies that a system like Aramaic must be either a syllabary (as argued by Gelb) or an incomplete or deficient alphabet (as most other writers have said); rather, it is a different type.

==History==
===Origins===
Bilingual Greek and Aramaic inscription by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka the Great at Kandahar, Afghanistan, 3rd century BC
The earliest inscriptions in the Aramaic language use the Phoenician alphabet. Over time, the alphabet developed into the form shown below. Aramaic gradually became the lingua franca throughout the Middle East, with the script at first complementing and then displacing Assyrian cuneiform as the predominant writing system.

===Achaemenid period===
Around 500 BC, following the Achaemenid conquest of Mesopotamia under Darius I, Old Aramaic was adopted by the conquerors as the "vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed Official Aramaic or Imperial Aramaic, can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the Achaemenids in holding their far-flung empire together for as long as they did." p. 251 

Imperial Aramaic was highly standardised; its orthography was based more on historical roots than any spoken dialect and was inevitably influenced by Old Persian.

For centuries after the fall of the Achaemenid Empire in 331 BC, Imperial Aramaicor near enough for it to be recognisablewould remain an influence on the various native Iranian languages. The Aramaic script would survive as the essential characteristics of the Pahlavi writing system. 

A group of thirty Aramaic documents from Bactria have been recently discovered. An analysis was published in November 2006. The texts, which were rendered on leather, reflect the use of Aramaic in the 4th century BC Achaemenid administration of Bactria and Sogdiana. 

Its widespread usage led to the gradual adoption of the Aramaic alphabet for writing the Hebrew language. Formerly, Hebrew had been written using an alphabet closer in form to that of Phoenician (the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet).

===Aramaic-derived scripts===
Since the evolution of the Aramaic alphabet out of the Phoenician one was a gradual process, the division of the world's alphabets into those derived from the Phoenician one directly and those derived from Phoenician via Aramaic is somewhat artificial. In general, the alphabets of the Mediterranean region (Anatolia, Greece, Italy) are classified as Phoenician-derived, adapted from around the 8th century BCE, while those of the East (the Levant, Persia, Central Asia and India) are considered Aramaic-derived, adapted from around the 6th century BCE from the Imperial Aramaic script of the Achaemenid Empire.

After the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, the unity of the Imperial Aramaic script was lost, diversifying into a number of descendant cursives.

The Hebrew and Nabataean alphabets, as they stood by the Roman era, were little changed in style from the Imperial Aramaic alphabet.

A Cursive Hebrew variant developed from the early centuries AD, but it remained restricted to the status of a variant used alongside the non-cursive. By contrast, the cursive developed out of the Nabataean alphabet in the same period soon became the standard for writing Arabic, evolving into the Arabic alphabet as it stood by the time of the early spread of Islam.

The development of cursive versions of Aramaic also led to the creation of the Syriac, Palmyrenean and Mandaic alphabets. These scripts formed the basis of the historical scripts of Central Asia, such as the Sogdian and Mongolian alphabets.

It has been suggested that the Old Turkic script in 8th century epigraphy originated in the Aramaic script.

===Aramaic alphabet===
Today, Biblical Aramaic, Jewish Neo-Aramaic dialects and the Aramaic language of the Talmud are written in the Hebrew alphabet. Syriac and Christian Neo-Aramaic dialects are written in the Syriac alphabet. Mandaic is written in the Mandaic alphabet. Due to the near-identity of the Aramaic and the classical Hebrew alphabets, Aramaic text is mostly typeset in standard Hebrew script in scholarly literature.

 Letter name Hebrew script Syriac script Letter Equivalent Letter in Sound value 
 Hebrew Arabic Brahmi Nabataean Kharosthi 
 lap    25px 60px 25px ; , 
 Bth    25px 53px 25px , 
 Gmal   //= 25px 27px 25px , 
 Dlath   //,/d/ 25px 27px 25px , 
 H    ? 53px ? 
 Waw    25px 27px 25px ; , 
 Zain    ? 27px ? 
 th   /X/, // ? 53px ? 
 th    //, // 25px 27px 25px emphatic 
 Yodh    25px 53px 25px ; , 
 Kp     25px 53px 25px , 
 Lmadh    25px 53px 25px 
 Mim     25px 53px 25px 
 Nun     25px 53px 25px 
 Semkath    25px 27px 25px 
    /,/// ? 27px ? 
 P    /f/ 25px 53px 25px , 
 dh ,    /s/ ,// 25px 53px 25px emphatic 
 Qop    25px 27px 25px 
 Rsh    25px 27px 25px 
 Shin    25px 27px 25px 
 Taw   /t/,// 25px 53px 25px , 

===Matres lectionis===

The letters Waw and Yudh, put following the consonants that were followed by the vowels u and i (and often also o and e), are used to indicate the long vowels  and  respectively (often also  and  respectively). These letters, which stand for both consonant and vowel sounds, are known as matres lectionis. The letter Alaph, likewise, had some of the characteristics of a mater lectionis: in initial positions, it indicated a specific consonant called glottal stop (followed by a vowel), and, in the middle of the word and word finally, it often also stood for the long vowels  or . Among Jews, influence of Hebrew spelling often led to the use of He instead of Alaph in word final positions. The practice of using certain letters to hold vowel values spread to child writing systems of Aramaic, such as Hebrew and Arabic, where they are still used today.

==Unicode==

The Aramaic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009 with the release of version 5.2.

The Unicode block for Imperial Aramaic is U+10840&ndash;U+1085F:

==References==

* Byrne, Ryan. Middle Aramaic Scripts. Encyclopaedia of Language and Linguistics. Elsevier. (2006)
* Daniels, Peter T., et al. eds. The World's Writing Systems. Oxford. (1996)
* Coulmas, Florian. The Writing Systems of the World. Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford. (1989)
* Rudder, Joshua. Learn to Write Aramaic: A Step-by-Step Approach to the Historical & Modern Scripts. n.p.: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2011. 220 pp. ISBN 978-1461021421 Includes a wide variety of Aramaic scripts.
* Ancient Hebrew and Aramaic on Coins, reading and transliterating Proto-Hebrew, online edition. (Judaea Coin Archive)

==External links==

* Comparison of Aramaic to related alphabets
* Omniglot entry

 

[[American shot]]

"American shot" is a translation of a phrase from French film criticism, "plan amricain" and refers to a medium-long ("knee") film shot of a group of characters, who are arranged so that all are visible to the camera. The usual arrangement is for the actors to stand in an irregular line from one side of the screen to the other, with the actors at the end coming forward a little and standing more in profile than the others. The purpose of the composition is to allow complex dialogue scenes to be played out without changes in camera position. In some literature, this is simply referred to as a 3/4 shot.

One of the other main reasons why French critics called it 'American Shot' was its frequent use in westerns. This was because a shot that started at knee level would reveal the weapon of a cowboy, usually holstered at his waist. It's actually the closest you can get to an actor while keeping both his face and his holstered gun in frame.

The French critics thought it was characteristic of American films of the 1930s or 1940s; however, it was mostly characteristic of cheaper American movies, such as Charlie Chan mysteries where people collected in front of a fireplace or at the foot of the stairs in order to explain what happened a few minutes ago.

Howard Hawks legitimized this style in his films, allowing characters to act, even when not talking, when most of the audience would not be paying attention. It became his trademark style.



[[Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis]]

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is an immune mediated disease of the brain. It usually occurs following a viral infection but may appear following vaccination, bacterial or parasitic infection, or even appear spontaneously. As it involves autoimmune demyelination, it is similar to multiple sclerosis, and is considered part of the Multiple sclerosis borderline diseases. The incidence rate is about 8 per 1,000,000 people per year. Although it occurs in all ages, most reported cases are in children and adolescents, with the average age around 5 to 8 years old. The mortality rate may be as high as 5%, however full recovery is seen in 50 to 75% of cases with increase in survival rates up to 70 to 90% with figures including minor residual disability as well. The average time to recover is one to six months.

ADEM produces multiple inflammatory lesions in the brain and spinal cord, particularly in the white matter. Usually these are found in the subcortical and central white matter and cortical gray-white junction of both cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord, but periventricular white matter and gray matter of the cortex, thalami and basal ganglia may also be involved.

When the patient suffers more than one demyelinating episode, it is called recurrent disseminated encephalomyelitis or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM).

==Causes and antecedent history==
Viral infections thought to induce ADEM include influenza virus, enterovirus, measles, mumps, rubella, varicella zoster, Epstein Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, hepatitis A, and coxsackievirus; while the bacterial infections include Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Borrelia burgdorferi, Leptospira, and beta-hemolytic Streptococci. The only vaccine proven to induce ADEM is the Semple form of the rabies vaccine, but hepatitis B, pertussis, diphtheria, measles, mumps, rubella, pneumococcus, varicella, influenza, Japanese encephalitis, and polio vaccines have all been implicated. The majority of the studies that correlate vaccination with ADEM onset use small samples or case studies. Large scale epidemiological studies (e.g., of MMR vaccine or smallpox vaccine) do not show increased risk of ADEM following vaccination. In rare cases, ADEM seems to follow from organ transplantation. The risk of ADEM from measles vaccination is about 1 to 2 per million, which is far lower than the risk of developing ADEM from an actual measles infection, which is about 1 per 1000 for measles (and 1 per 5000 for rubella). Measles infection also appears to lead to worse ADEM outcomes than cases associated with measles immunization. Some vaccines, later shown to have been contaminated with host animal CNS tissue, have ADEM incident rates as high as 1 in 600. 

==Presentation==
ADEM has an abrupt onset and a monophasic course. Symptoms usually begin 13 weeks after infection. Major symptoms include fever, headache, drowsiness, seizures and coma. Although initially the symptoms are usually mild, they worsen rapidly over the course of hours to days, with the average time to maximum severity being about four and a half days. Additional symptoms include hemiparesis, paraparesis, and cranial nerve palsies. Allmendinger A, Krauthamer A, Spektor V. Case of the month. Diagnostic Imaging. 2009;31(12):10. 

==Treatment==
No controlled clinical trials have been conducted on ADEM treatment, but aggressive treatment aimed at rapidly reducing inflammation of the CNS is standard. The widely accepted first-line treatment is high doses of intravenous corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone or dexamethasone, followed by 36 weeks of gradually lower oral doses of prednisolone. Patients treated with methylprednisolone have shown better outcomes than those treated with dexamethasone. Oral tapers of less than three weeks duration show a higher chance of relapsing, and tend to show poorer outcomes. Other antiinflamatory and immunosuppressive therapies have been reported to show beneficial effect, such as plasmapheresis, high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), mitoxantrone and cyclophosphamide. These are considered alternative therapies, used when corticosteroids cannot be used, or fail to show an effect.

There is some evidence to suggest that patients may respond to a combination of methylprednisolone and immunoglobulins if they fail to respond to either separately 
In a study of 16 children with ADEM, 10 recovered completely after high-dose methylprednisolone, one severe case that failed to respond to steroids recovered completely after IV Ig; the five most severe cases -with ADAM and severe peripheral neuropathy- were treated with combined high-dose methylprednisolone and immunoglobulin, two remained paraplegic, one had motor and cognitive handicaps, and two recovered. A recent review of IVIg treatment of ADEM (of which the previous study formed the bulk of the cases) found that 70% of children showed complete recovery after treatment with IVIg, or IVIg plus corticosteroids. A study of IVIg treatment in adults with ADEM showed that IVIg seems more effective in treating sensory and motor disturbances, while steroids seem more effective in treating impairments of cognition, consciousness and rigor. This same study found one subject, a 71-year-old man who had not responded to steroids, that responded to an IVIg treatment 58 days after disease onset.

==Prognosis==
Full recovery is seen in 50 to 70% of cases, ranging to 70 to 90% recovery with some minor residual disability (typically assessed using measures such as mRS or EDSS), average time to recover is one to six months. The mortality rate may be as high as 5%. Poorer outcomes are associated with unresponsiveness to steroid therapy, unusually severe neurological symptoms, or sudden onset. Children tend to have more favorable outcomes than adults, and cases presenting without fevers tend to have poorer outcomes. The latter effect may be due to either protective effects of fever, or that diagnosis and treatment is sought more rapidly when fever is present.

===Motor deficits===
Residual motor deficits are estimated to remain in about 8 to 30% of cases, the range in severity from mild clumsiness to ataxia and hemiparesis. 

===Neurocognitive===
Patients with demyelinating illnesses, such as MS, have shown cognitive deficits even when there is minimal physical disability. Research suggests that similar effects are seen after ADEM, but that the deficits are less severe than those seen in MS. A study of six children with ADEM (mean age at presentation 7.7 years) were tested for a range of neurocognitive tests after an average of 3.5 years of recovery. All six children performed in the normal range on most tests, including verbal IQ and performance IQ, but performed at least one standard deviation below age norms in at least one cognitive domain, such as complex attention (one child), short-term memory (one child) and internalizing behaviour/affect (two children). Group means for each cognitive domain were all within one standard deviation of age norms, demonstrating that, as a group, they were normal. These deficits were less severe than those seen in similar aged children with a diagnosis of MS. 

Another study compared nineteen children with a history of ADEM, of which 10 were five years of age or younger at the time (average age 3.8 years old, tested an average of 3.9 years later) and nine were older (mean age 7.7y at time of ADEM, tested an average of 2.2 years later) to nineteen matched controls. Scores on IQ tests and educational achievement were lower for the young onset ADEM group (average IQ 90) compared to the late onset (average IQ 100) and control groups (average IQ 106), while the late onset ADEM children scored lower on verbal processing speed. Again, all groups means were within one standard deviation of the controls, meaning that while effects were statistically reliable, the children were as a whole, still within the normal range. There were also more behavioural problems in the early onset group, although there is some suggestion that this may be due, at least in part, to the stress of hospitalization at a young age. 

==ADEM and multiple sclerosis==
While ADEM and MS both involve autoimmune demyelination, they differ in many clinical, genetic, imaging, and histopathological aspects. Some authors consider MS and its borderline forms to constitute a spectrum, differing only in chronicity, severity, and clinical course, Weinshenker B, Miller D. (1999). Multiple sclerosis: one disease or many? In: Siva A, Kesselring J, Thompson A, eds. Frontiers in multiple sclerosis. London: Dunitz, p37-46. while others consider them discretely different diseases. 

Problems for differential diagnosis increase due to the lack of agreement for a definition of Multiple Sclerosis. H. Lassmann, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis, , For some people MS should be considered a clinical entity based in inflammatory lesions separated in time and space. As some cases of ADEM satisfy these conditions, they should be considered inside the MS spectrum. Using a pathological definition instead, they would be apart (plaques in the white matter in MS are sharply delineated, while the inflammation in ADEM is widely disseminated and ill-defined).

==Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis==
Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHL, or AHLE), also known as acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE), acute hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis (AHEM), acute necrotizing hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (ANHLE), Weston-Hurst syndrome, or Hurst's disease, is a hyperacute and frequently fatal form of ADEM. AHL is relatively rare (less than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature as of 2006), it is seen in about 2% of ADEM cases, and is characterized by necrotizing vasculitis of venules and hemorrhage, and edema. Death is common in the first week and overall mortality is about 70%, but increasing evidence points to favorable outcomes after aggressive treatment with corticosteroids, immunoglobulins, cyclophosphamide, and plasma exchange. About 70% of survivors show residual neurological deficits, but some survivors have shown surprisingly little deficit considering the magnitude of the white matter affected. 
This disease has been occasionally associated with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, malaria, Venugopal V, Haider M (2013) First case report of acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis following Plasmodium vivax infection. Indian J Med Microbiol 31(1):79-81. doi: 10.4103/0255-0857.108736. septicemia associated with immune complex deposition, methanol poisoning, and other underlying conditions.

==Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis==

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an animal model of CNS inflammation and demyelination frequently used to investigate potential MS treatments. An acute monophasic illness, EAE is far more similar to ADEM than MS. 

==See also==
* Optic neuritis
* Transverse myelitis

==References==

==External links==
* Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) at myelitis.org
*
*
* Information for parents about Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis



[[Ataxia]]

Ataxia (from Greek - negative prefix + - = "lack of order") is a neurological sign consisting of lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movements. Ataxia is a non-specific clinical manifestation implying dysfunction of the parts of the nervous system that coordinate movement, such as the cerebellum. Several possible causes exist for these patterns of neurological dysfunction. Dystaxia is a mild degree of ataxia. dystaxia. (n.d.). The American Heritage Stedman's Medical Dictionary. Retrieved 09 March 2014, from Dictionary.com website: http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/dystaxia 

==Types==

===Cerebellar===
The term cerebellar ataxia is used to indicate ataxia that is due to dysfunction of the cerebellum. The cerebellum is responsible for integrating a significant amount of neural information that is used to coordinate smoothly ongoing movements and to participate in motor planning. Although ataxia is not present with all cerebellar lesions, many conditions affecting the cerebellum do produce ataxia. People with cerebellar ataxia may have trouble regulating the force, range, direction, velocity and rhythm of muscle contractions. This results in a characteristic type of irregular, uncoordinated movement that can manifest itself in many possible ways, such as asthenia, asynergy, delayed reaction time, and dyschronometria. Individuals with cerebellar ataxia could also display instability of gait, difficulty with eye movements, dysarthria, dysphagia, hypotonia, dysmetria and dysdiadochokinesia. These deficits can vary depending on which cerebellar structures have been damaged, and whether the lesion is bilateral or unilateral.

People with cerebellar ataxia may initially present with poor balance, which could be demonstrated as an inability to stand on one leg or perform tandem gait. As the condition progresses, walking is characterized by a widened base and high stepping, as well as staggering and lurching from side to side. Turning is also problematic and could result in falls. As cerebellar ataxia becomes severe, great assistance and effort are needed in order to stand and walk. Dysarthria, an impairment with articulation, may also be present and is characterized by "scanning" speech that consists of slower rate, irregular rhythm and variable volume. There may also be slurring of speech, tremor of the voice and ataxic respiration. Cerebellar ataxia could result with incoordination of movement, particularly in the extremities. There is overshooting with finger to nose testing, and heel to shin testing; thus, dysmetria is evident. Impairments with alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), as well as dysrhythmia, may also be displayed. There may also be tremor of the head and trunk (titubation) in individuals with cerebellar ataxia. 

It is thought that dysmetria is caused by a deficit in the control of interaction torques in multijoint motion. Interaction torques are created at an associated joint when the primary joint is moved. For example, if a movement required reaching to touch a target in front of the body, flexion at the shoulder would create a torque at the elbow, while extension of the elbow would create a torque at the wrist. These torques increase as the speed of movement increases and must be compensated and adjusted for to create coordinated movement. This may, therefore, explain decreased coordination at higher movement velocities and accelerations.

* Dysfunction of the vestibulocerebellum (flocculonodular lobe) impairs the balance and the control of eye movements. This presents itself with postural instability, in which the person tends to separate his/her feet upon standing, in order to gain a wider base and to avoid titubation (bodily oscillations tending to be forward-backward ones). The instability is therefore worsened when standing with the feet together, regardless of whether the eyes are open or closed. This is a negative Romberg's test, or more accurately, it denotes the individual's inability to carry out the test, because the individual feels unstable even with open eyes. 
* Dysfunction of the spinocerebellum (vermis and associated areas near the midline) presents itself with a wide-based "drunken sailor" gait (called truncal ataxia), characterised by uncertain starts and stops, lateral deviations, and unequal steps. As a result of this gait impairment, falling is a concern in patients with ataxia. Studies examining falls in this population show that 74-93% of patients have fallen at least once in the past year and up to 60% admit to fear of falling. 
* Dysfunction of the cerebrocerebellum (lateral hemispheres) presents as disturbances in carrying out voluntary, planned movements by the extremities (called appendicular ataxia). These include:
**intention tremor (coarse trembling, accentuated over the execution of voluntary movements, possibly involving the head and eyes as well as the limbs and torso);
**peculiar writing abnormalities (large, unequal letters, irregular underlining);
**a peculiar pattern of dysarthria (slurred speech, sometimes characterised by explosive variations in voice intensity despite a regular rhythm).
**inability to perform rapidly alternating movements, known as dysdiadochokinesia. This could involve rapidly switching from pronation to supination of the forearm. Movements become more irregular with increases of speed. 
**inability to judge distances or ranges of movement. This is known as dysmetria and is often seen as undershooting, hypometria, or overshooting, hypermetria, the required distance or range to reach a target. This is sometimes seen when a patient is asked to reach out and touch someone's finger or touch his or her own nose. 
**the rebound phenomenon, also known as the loss of the check reflex is also sometimes seen in patients with cerebellar ataxia. For example, when a patient is flexing his or her elbow isometrically against a resistance. When the resistance is suddenly removed without warning, the patient's arm may swing up and even strike themselves. With an intact check reflex, the patient will check and activate the opposing triceps to slow and stop the movement. 

===Sensory===
The term sensory ataxia is employed to indicate ataxia due to loss of proprioception, the loss of sensitivity to the positions of joint and body parts. This is generally caused by dysfunction of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, because they carry proprioceptive information up to the brain. In some cases, the cause of sensory ataxia may instead be dysfunction of the various parts of the brain which receive positional information, including the cerebellum, thalamus, and parietal lobes.

Sensory ataxia presents itself with an unsteady "stomping" gait with heavy heel strikes, as well as a postural instability that is usually worsened when the lack of proprioceptive input cannot be compensated for by visual input, such as in poorly lit environments.

Physicians can find evidence of sensory ataxia during physical examination by having the patient stand with his/her feet together and eyes shut. In affected patients, this will cause the instability to worsen markedly, producing wide oscillations and possibly a fall. This is called a positive Romberg's test. Worsening of the finger-pointing test with the eyes closed is another feature of sensory ataxia. Also, when the patient is standing with arms and hands extended toward the physician, if the eyes are closed, the patient's finger will tend to "fall down" and then be restored to the horizontal extended position by sudden muscular contractions (the "ataxic hand").

===Vestibular===
The term vestibular ataxia is employed to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the vestibular system, which in acute and unilateral cases is associated with prominent vertigo, nausea and vomiting. In slow-onset, chronic bilateral cases of vestibular dysfunction, these characteristic manifestations may be absent, and dysequilibrium may be the sole presentation.

==Causes==
The three types of ataxia have overlapping causes, and therefore can either coexist or occur in isolation.

===Focal lesions===
Any type of focal lesion of the central nervous system (such as stroke, brain tumour, multiple sclerosis) will cause the type of ataxia corresponding to the site of the lesion: cerebellar if in the cerebellum, sensory if in the dorsal spinal cord (and rarely in the thalamus or parietal lobe), vestibular if in the vestibular system (including the vestibular areas of the cerebral cortex).

===Exogenous substances===
Exogenous substances that cause ataxia mainly do so because they have a depressant effect on central nervous system function. The most common example is ethanol, which is capable of causing reversible cerebellar and vestibular ataxia. Other examples include various prescription drugs (e.g. most antiepileptic drugs have cerebellar ataxia as a possible adverse effect), Lithium level over 1.5mEq/L, cannabis ingestion and various other recreational drugs (e.g. ketamine, PCP or dextromethorphan, all of which are NMDA receptor antagonists that produce a dissociative state at high doses). A further class of pharmaceuticals which can cause short term ataxia, especially in high doses are the benzodiazepines. Exposure to high levels of methylmercury, through consumption of fish with high mercury concentrations, is also a known cause of ataxia and other neurological disorders. 

===Radiation poisoning===
Ataxia can be induced as a result of severe acute radiation poisoning with an absorbed dose of more than 30 Grays.

===Vitamin B12 deficiency===
Vitamin B12 deficiency may cause, among several neurological abnormalities, overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia.

===Hypothyroidism===
Symptoms of neurological dysfunction may be the presenting feature in some patients with hypothyroidism. These include reversible cerebellar ataxia, dementia, peripheral neuropathy, psychosis and coma. Most of the neurological complications improve completely after thyroid hormone replacement therapy. 

===Causes of isolated sensory ataxia===
Peripheral neuropathies may cause generalised or localised sensory ataxia (e.g. a limb only) depending on the extent of the neuropathic involvement. Spinal disorders of various types may cause sensory ataxia from the lesioned level below, when they involve the dorsal columns 

===Non-hereditary cerebellar degeneration===
Non-hereditary causes of cerebellar degeneration include chronic ethanol abuse, head injury, paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, high altitude cerebral oedema, coeliac disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus and cerebellitis.

===Hereditary ataxias===
Ataxia may depend on hereditary disorders consisting of degeneration of the cerebellum and/or of the spine; most cases feature both to some extent, and therefore present with overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia, even though one is often more evident than the other. Hereditary disorders causing ataxia include autosomal dominant ones such as spinocerebellar ataxia, episodic ataxia, and dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, as well as autosomal recessive disorders such as Friedreich's ataxia (sensory and cerebellar, with the former predominating) and Niemann Pick disease, ataxia-telangiectasia (sensory and cerebellar, with the latter predominating), and abetalipoproteinaemia. An example of X-linked ataxic condition is the rare fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome.

===Arnold-Chiari malformation===
Arnold-Chiari malformation is a malformation of the brain. It consists of a downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils and the medulla through the foramen magnum, sometimes causing hydrocephalus as a result of obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid outflow.

===Wilson's disease===
Wilson's disease is an autosomal-recessive gene disorder whereby an alteration of the ATP7B gene results in an inability to properly excrete copper from the body. Copper accumulates in the nervous system and liver and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological and organ impairments. 

=== Gluten ataxia ===

Gluten ataxia may be a form of gluten sensitivity, a wide spectrum of disorders marked by an abnormal immunological response to gluten. With gluten ataxia, damage takes place in the cerebellum, the balance center of the brain that controls coordination and complex movements like walking, speaking and swallowing. Gluten ataxia is the single most common cause of sporadic idiopathic ataxia. 

Gluten ataxia is an immune-mediated disease triggered by the ingestion of gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. It should be considered in the differential diagnosis of all patients with idiopathic sporadic ataxia. Early diagnosis and treatment with a gluten free diet can improve ataxia and prevent its progression. Readily available and sensitive markers of gluten ataxia include anti-gliadin antibodies. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) deposits against transglutaminase 2 (TG2) in the small bowel and at extraintestinal sites are proving to be additionally reliable and perhaps more specific markers of the whole spectrum of gluten sensitivity. They may also hold the key to its pathogenesis. 

Gluten ataxia is defined as sporadic cerebellar ataxia associated with the presence circulating antigliadin antibodies and in the absence of an alternative etiology for ataxia. 

===Sodium-potassium pump===

Misfunction of the sodium-potassium pump may be a factor in some ataxias. The - pump has been shown to control and set the intrinsic activity mode of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. This suggests that the pump might not simply be a homeostatic, "housekeeping" molecule for ionic gradients; but could be a computational element in the cerebellum and the brain. Indeed, an ouabain block of - pumps in the cerebellum of a live mouse results in it displaying ataxia and dystonia. Ataxia is observed for lower ouabain concentrations, dystonia is observed at higher ouabain concentrations.

==Treatment==
The treatment of ataxia and its effectiveness depend on the underlying cause. Treatment may limit or reduce the effects of ataxia, but it is unlikely to eliminate them entirely. Recovery tends to be better in individuals with a single focal injury (such as stroke or a benign tumour), compared to those who have a neurological degenerative condition. A review of the management of degenerative ataxia was published in 2009. 

The movement disorders associated with ataxia can be managed by pharmacological treatments and through physical therapy and occupational therapy to reduce disability. Some drug treatments that have been used to control ataxia include: 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), idebenone, amantadine, physostigmine, L-carnitine or derivatives, trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole, vigabatrin, phosphatidylcholine, acetazolamide, 4-aminopyridine, buspirone, and a combination of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E. 

Physical therapy requires a focus on adapting activity and facilitating motor learning for retraining specific functional motor patterns. A recent systematic review suggested that physical therapy is effective, but there is only moderate evidence to support this conclusion. The most commonly used physical therapy interventions for cerebellar ataxia are vestibular habituation, Frenkel Exercises, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF), and balance training; however, therapy is often highly individualized and gait and coordination training are large components of therapy.

Current research suggests that, if a person is able to walk with or without a mobility aid, physical therapy should include an exercise program addressing five components: static balance, dynamic balance, trunk-limb coordination, stairs, and contracture prevention. Once the physical therapist determines that the individual is able to safely perform parts of the program independently, it is important that the individual be prescribed and regularly engage in a supplementary home exercise program that incorporates these components to further improve long term outcomes. These outcomes include balance tasks, gait, and individual activities of daily living. While the improvements are attributed primarily to changes in the brain and not just the hip and/or ankle joints, it is still unknown whether the improvements are due to adaptations in the cerebellum or compensation by other areas of the brain. 

Decomposition, simplification, or slowing of multijoint movement may also be an effective strategy that therapists may use to improve function in patients with ataxia. Training likely needs to be intense and focusedas indicated by one study performed with stroke patients experiencing limb ataxia who underwent intensive upper limb retraining. Their therapy consisted of constraint-induced movement therapy which resulted in improvements of their arm function. Treatment should likely include strategies to manage difficulties with everyday activities such as walking. Gait aids (such as a cane or walker) can be provided to decrease the risk of falls associated with impairment of balance or poor coordination. Severe ataxia may eventually lead to the need for a wheelchair. In order to obtain better results, possible coexisting motor deficits need to be addressed in addition to those induced by ataxia. For example, muscle weakness and decreased endurance could lead to increasing fatigue and poorer movement patterns.

There are several assessment tools available to therapists and health care professionals working with patients with ataxia. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) is one of the most widely used and has been proven to have very high reliability and validity. Other tools that assess motor function, balance and coordination are also highly valuable to help the therapist track the progress of their patient, as well as to quantify the patient's functionality. These tests include, but are not limited to:
* The Berg Balance Scale
* Tandem Walking (to test for Tandem gaitability)
* Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia 
* tapping tests  The person must quickly and repeatedly tap their arm or leg while the therapist monitors the amount of dysdiadochokinesia. 
* finger-nose testing  This test has several variations including finger-to-therapist's finger, finger-to-finger, and alternate nose-to-finger. 

==Other uses==
The term "ataxia" is sometimes used in a broader sense to indicate lack of coordination in some physiological process. Examples include optic ataxia (lack of coordination between visual inputs and hand movements, resulting in inability to reach and grab objects) and ataxic respiration (lack of coordination in respiratory movements, usually due to dysfunction of the respiratory centres in the medulla oblongata). Optic ataxia may be caused by lesions to the posterior parietal cortex, which is responsible for combining and expressing positional information and relating it to movement. Outputs of the posterior parietal cortex include the spinal cord, brain stem motor pathways, pre-motor and pre-frontal cortex, basal ganglia and the cerebellum. Some neurons in the posterior parietal cortex are modulated by intention. Optic ataxia is usually part of Balint's syndrome, but can be seen in isolation with injuries to the superior parietal lobule, as it represents a disconnection between visual-association cortex and the frontal premotor and motor cortex. 

==See also==
*Ataxic cerebral palsy

==References==

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Friedreich's Ataxia Research Alliance (FARA)
* Ataxia Connect Social Network
* Ataxia UK, including guidelines
* Brasil, Rio Grande do Sul - Associao dos Amigos, Parentes e Portadores de Ataxias Dominantes
* Canadian Association for Familial Ataxias - Claude St-Jean Foundation
* International Ataxia Awareness Day
* LivingWithAtaxia Forums & Community
* Overview at National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)
* Rochester Ataxia Foundation, Rochester, NY
* The latest news and research on Ataxia
* US National Ataxia Foundation
* University of Minnesota Ataxia Center
* Video demonstration of ataxic gait
* Gluten Ataxia
* Range of Neurologic Disorders in Patients With Celiac Disease
* The Cerebellum
* Cerebellum and Ataxias

and signs: Nervous system]



[[Abdul Alhazred]]

Abdul Alhazred is a fictional character created by American horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. He is the so-called "Mad Arab" credited with authoring the fictional book Kitab al-Azif (the Necronomicon), and as such is an integral part of Cthulhu Mythos lore.

==Name==

The name Abdul Alhazred is a pseudonym that Lovecraft created in his youth, which he took on after reading 1001 Arabian Nights at the age of about five. The name was invented either by Lovecraft, or by Albert Baker, the Phillips' family lawyer. Harms, p. 7, The Encyclopedia Cthulhiana. Abdul is a common Arabic name component (but never a name by itself), but Alhazred may allude to Hazard, a reference to the book's destructive and dangerous nature, or to Lovecraft's ancestors by that name. L. Sprague de Camp, Lovecraft, a Biography. Ballantine, 1976. Rootsweb page on Lovecraft's family tree, showing his Hazard ancestry. It might also have been a play on "all-has-read", since Lovecraft was an avid reader in youth. Pearsall, "Alhazred, Abdul", The Lovecraft Lexicon, p. 55. 

Another possibility, raised in an essay by the Swedish fantasy writer and editor Rickard Berghorn, is that the name Alhazred was influenced by references to two historical authors whose names were Latinized as Alhazen: Alhazen ben Josef, who translated Ptolemy into Arabic; and Abu 'Ali al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham, who wrote about optics, mathematics and physics. Ibn al-Haytham is said to have pretended to be mad to escape the wrath of a ruler. Rickard Berghorn "Alhazen och Alhazred" 

Abdul Alhazred is not a real Arabic name, and seems to contain the Arabic definite article morpheme al- twice in a row (anomalous in terms of Arabic grammar). The more proper Arabic form might be Abd-al-Hazred or Abdul Hazred. In Arabic translations, his name has appeared as Abdullah ( ): Arabic  = "he fenced in", "he prohibited". Hazred could come from the Arabic word "Hazrat" meaning Great Lord with a twist that makes it sound like "red" and "hazard" both indicative of danger. It is also thought by some to be a corruption of sorts on the phrase "All has read," to imply he has read lots, and has immense amounts of knowledge. However Abdul is a common Arabic prefix meaning "Servant" and "Al" is Arabic for "the", and if "hazra" means "he prohibited", "he fenced in" or "Great Lord", then the name would mean "Servant of the Prohibited", "Servant of the Fenced in", or "Servant of the Great Lord" which would make sense considering his role, even if it is not a proper Arabic name.

Similarly, an article (written from an in-universe perspective) in the Call of Cthulhu tabletop role-playing game speculates that it may be a corruption of Abd Al-Azrad, which it claims translates to The Worshipper of the Great Devourer.

The phrase "mad Arab", sometimes with both words capitalized in Lovecraft's stories, is used so commonly before Alhazred's name that it almost constitutes a title. A reference to the "Mad Arab" in Cthulhu Mythos fiction is invariably a synonym for Abdul Alhazred. Later writers sometimes preface Alhazred with words such as "monk" (such as in the Chick parody tract "Who will be Eaten First?" by Howard Hallis) or "scholar" replacing Arab to avoid any racist overtones.

==Biography==

===H. P. Lovecraft===

According to Lovecraft's "History of the Necronomicon" (written 1927, first published 1938), Alhazred was:

:a mad poet of Sana, in Yemen, who is said to have flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D. He visited the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secret of Memphis and spent ten years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia&mdash;the Roba El Khaliyeh or "Empty Space" of the ancients&mdash;and "Dahna" or "Crimson" desert of the modern Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by protective evil spirits and monsters of death. Of this desert many strange and unbelievable marvels are told by those who pretend to have penetrated it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in Damascus.

In 730, while still living in Damascus, Alhazred supposedly wrote a book of ultimate evil in Arabic, al-Azif, which would later become known as the Necronomicon. Those who have dealings with this book usually come to an unpleasant end, and Alhazred was no exception. Again according to Lovecraft's "History":

:Of his final death or disappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told. He is said by Ebn Khallikan (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large number of fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He claimed to have seen the fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found beneath the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and secrets of a race older than mankind. He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping unknown entities whom he called Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu.

===August Derleth===

August Derleth later made alterations to the biography of Alhazred, such as redating his death to 731. Derleth also changed Alhazred's final fate, as described in his short story "The Keeper of the Key", first published in May 1951. In the story, Professor Laban Shrewsbury (a recurring Derleth character) and his assistant at the time, Nayland Colum, discover Alhazred's burial site.

While the two are heading a caravan from Salalah, Oman, they cross the border into Yemen and find the unexplored desert area that the Necronomicon calls "Roba el Ehaliyeh" or "Roba el Khaliyeh"  presumably a reference to the Empty Quarter or "Rub al Khali".

At the center of the area they discover the Nameless City (the setting of the Lovecraft story of the same name) and in Derleth's text the domain of the Great Old One Hastur. Shrewsbury, an old agent of Hastur and the devoted enemy of Hastur's half-brother, Cthulhu, crosses its gates in search of Alhazred's burial site.

He indeed finds Alhazred's burial chamber and learns of his fate. Alhazred had been kidnapped in Damascus and brought to the Nameless City, where he had earlier studied and learned some of the Necronomicons lore. As punishment for betraying their secrets, Alhazred was tortured. Then they blinded him, severed his tongue and executed him.

Although the entrance to the chamber warns against disturbing him, Shrewsbury opens Alhazred's sarcophagus anyway, finding that only rags, bones, and dust remain of Alhazred. However, the sarcophagus also contains Alhazred's personal, incomplete copy of the Necronomicon, written in the Arabic alphabet. Shrewsbury then uses necromancy to recall Alhazred's spirit and orders it to draw a map of the world as he knew it. After obtaining the map, which reveals the location of R'lyeh and other secret places, Shrewsbury finally lets Alhazred return to his eternal rest.

==In non-Mythos fiction==

Like his creation the Necronomicon, Alhazred is often referenced in works that are not generally considered part of the Cthulhu Mythos, either as a subtle nod to Lovecraft or to create a connection to his world.

In The Eyes of the Dragon, by Stephen King, the Mad Arab appears in a reference by the evil wizard Flagg to the Necronomicon, "written on the high, distant Plains of Leng by a madman named Alharzed." 

In Fallout 3, an irradiated and mentally insane character named Jaime Palabras can be heard rambling on an audio tape, saying "Abdul comes again, on the feast of the weaker. Feast for the Deep Temple. Born again, here. Alhazred, Gyeth. Gyeth."

In Diablo III, a travelling scholar named "Abd al-Hazir" is the narrator for many of the game's features. Given the similarities in the two characters' names, professions, written works and generally dark subject matter, it is likely that Lovecraft's Alhazred provided the main inspiration for al-Hazir.

The Mercyful Fate albums Time and Into the Unknown reference Alhazred.

The MMORPG Wizard101 features a Krok called Alhazred who teaches Balance magic.

A statue of Alhazred makes a cameo appearance as the "Mad Scholar" in Graham McNeill's book A Thousand Sons. This novel features sorcerers who become destroyed by forbidden knowledge and takes place in the Warhammer 40,000 setting, itself utilizing Lovecraftian themes.

Abdul Alhazred acts as vizier to King Calaphim and Queen Allaria in the Land of the Green Isles in .

In the game , the library contains a book called Kitab as-Azif. The character Snake says it was written by Abdul Alhazred and was said to be one of the books used in the creation of the Necronomicon.

A book by Al-Hazred is mentioned in The Atrocity Archives by Charles Stross.

In the Novel Metrom by Andrew Knaut, Abdul Alhazred was in an elite Esis protection team known as Vel Team L-Viathan. He was banished after contacting Esis on Gabrielle DuMont's whereabouts and lived in the Waste alone. When meeting his old team he caused his best friend and partner Zan Farkafk to go insane.

In the novel, A Night in the Lonesome October by Roger Zelazny, a character carries an icon painted by Alhazred known as the Alhazred Icon.

In the video game Wild Arms, the similarly named Alhazad (Japanese: , Aruhazdo) is an evil Metal Demon with a great enjoyment for killing and destruction. He also practices human experimentation, transforming humans into monsters and other creatures.

==See also==
*Alchemy and chemistry in Islam
*Islamic astrology
*Abdul Alhazred (comics)
*Alhazred (novel)
*Sana'a manuscripts

==References==

*

*

*

*

*

===Notes===



[[Ada Lovelace]]

Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace (10 December 1815  27 November 1852), born Augusta Ada Byron and now commonly known as Ada Lovelace, was an English mathematician and writer chiefly known for her work on Charles Babbage's early mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. Her notes on the engine include what is recognised as the first algorithm intended to be carried out by a machine. Because of this, she is often described as the world's first computer programmer. . 

Lovelace was born 10 December 1815 as the only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron and his wife Anne Isabella Byron. Ada Lovelace Biography, biography.com All Byron's other children were born out of wedlock. Byron separated from his wife a month after Ada was born and left England forever four months later, eventually dying of disease in the Greek War of Independence when Ada was eight years old. Ada's mother remained bitter at Lord Byron and promoted Ada's interest in mathematics and logic in an effort to prevent her from developing what she saw as the insanity seen in her father, but Ada remained interested in him despite this (and was, upon her eventual death, buried next to him at her request).

Ada described her approach as "poetical science" and herself as an "Analyst (& Metaphysician)". As a young adult, her mathematical talents led her to an ongoing working relationship and friendship with fellow British mathematician Charles Babbage, and in particular Babbage's work on the Analytical Engine. Between 1842 and 1843, she translated an article by Italian military engineer Luigi Menabrea on the engine, which she supplemented with an elaborate set of notes of her own, simply called Notes. These notes contain what many consider to be the first computer programthat is, an algorithm designed to be carried out by a machine. Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of computers. She also developed a vision on the capability of computers to go beyond mere calculating or number-crunching while others, including Babbage himself, focused only on those capabilities. Her mind-set of "poetical science" led her to ask basic questions about the Analytical Engine (as shown in her notes) examining how individuals and society relate to technology as a collaborative tool. . 

==Biography==

===Childhood===
Ada Lovelace was born Augusta Ada Byron on 10 December 1815, the child of the poet George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron, and Anne Isabella "Annabella" Milbanke, Baroness Byron. George Byron expected his baby to be a "glorious boy" and was disappointed when his wife gave birth to a girl. Augusta was named after Byron's half-sister, Augusta Leigh, and was called "Ada" by Byron himself.

Ada, aged four
On 16 January 1816, Annabella, at George's behest, left for her parents' home at Kirkby Mallory taking one-month-old Ada with her. Although English law at the time gave fathers full custody of their children in cases of separation, Byron made no attempt to claim his parental rights but did request that his sister keep him informed of Ada's welfare. On 21 April, Byron signed the Deed of Separation, although very reluctantly, and left England for good a few days later. Aside from an acrimonious separation, Annabella continually throughout her life made allegations about Byron's immoral behavior. This set of events made Ada famous in Victorian society. Byron did not have a relationship with his daughter, and never saw her again. He died in 1824 when she was eight years old. Her mother was the only significant parental figure in her life. . Ada was not allowed to view any portrait of her father until her twentieth birthday. Her mother became Baroness Wentworth in her own right in 1856.

Annabella did not have a close relationship with the young Ada, and often left her in the care of her own mother Judith, Hon. Lady Milbanke, who doted on her grandchild. However, due to societal attitudes of the timewhich favored the husband in any separation, with the welfare of any child acting as mitigationAnnabella had to present herself as a loving mother to the rest of society. This included writing anxious letters to Lady Milbanke about Ada's welfare, with a cover note saying to retain the letters in case she had to use them to show maternal concern. In one letter to Lady Milbanke, she referred to Ada as "it": "I talk to it for your satisfaction, not my own, and shall be very glad when you have it under your own." In her teenage years, several of her mother's close friends watched Ada for any sign of moral deviation. Ada dubbed these observers the "Furies", and later complained they exaggerated and invented stories about her.

Ada, aged seventeen, 1832
Ada was often ill, beginning in early childhood. At the age of eight, she experienced headaches that obscured her vision. In June 1829, she was paralyzed after a bout of measles. She was subjected to continuous bed rest for nearly a year, which may have extended her period of disability. By 1831, she was able to walk with crutches. Despite being ill Ada developed her mathematical and technological skills. At age 12, this future "Lady Fairy", as Charles Babbage affectionately called her, decided she wanted to fly. Ada went about the project methodically, thoughtfully, with imagination and passion. Her first step in February 1828, was to construct wings. She investigated different material and sizes. She considered various materials for the wings; paper, oilsilk, wires and feathers. She examined the anatomy of birds to determine the right proportion between the wings and the body. She decided to write a book Flyology illustrating, with plates, some of her findings. She decided what equipment she would need, for example, a compass, to "cut across the country by the most direct road", so that she could surmount mountains, rivers and valleys. Her final step was to integrate steam with the "art of flying". 

In early 1833, Ada had an affair with a tutor and, after being caught, tried to elope with him. The tutor's relatives recognized her and contacted her mother. Annabella and her friends covered the incident up to prevent a public scandal. Ada never met her younger half-sister, Allegra, daughter of Lord Byron and Claire Clairmont. Allegra died in 1822 at the age of five. Ada did have some contact with Elizabeth Medora Leigh, the daughter of Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh, who purposely avoided Ada as much as possible when introduced at Court.

===Adult years===
Lovelace developed a strong relationship with her tutor Mary Somerville. She had a strong respect and affection for Somerville. and the two of them corresponded for many years. Other acquaintances included Andrew Crosse, Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Charles Dickens and Michael Faraday. By 1834, Ada was a regular at Court and started attending various events. She danced often and was able to charm many people, and was described by most people as being dainty. However, John Hobhouse, Lord Byron's friend, was the exception and he described her as ".a large, coarse-skinned young woman but with something of my friend's features, particularly the mouth." This description followed their meeting on 24 February 1834 in which Ada made it clear to Hobhouse that she did not like him, probably due to the influence of her mother, which led her to dislike all of her father's friends. This first impression was not to last, and they later became friends.

On 8 July 1835 she married William King, 8th Baron King, becoming Baroness King. . Their residence was a large estate at Ockham Park, in Ockham, Surrey, along with another estate on Loch Torridon, and a home in London. They spent their honeymoon at Worthy Manor in Ashley Combe near Porlock Weir, Somerset. The Manor had been built as a hunting lodge in 1799 and was improved by King in preparation for their honeymoon. It later became their summer retreat and was further improved during this time.

They had three children: Byron (born 12 May 1836); Anne Isabella (called Annabella, later Lady Anne Blunt; born 22 September 1837), and Ralph Gordon (born 2 July 1839). Immediately after the birth of Annabella, Lady King experienced "a tedious and suffering illness, which took months to cure." In 1838, her husband became Earl of Lovelace. Thus, she was styled "The Right Honourable the Countess of Lovelace" for most of her married life. In 1843-44, Ada's mother assigned William Benjamin Carpenter to teach Ada's children, and to act as a 'moral' instructor for Ada. He quickly fell for her, and encouraged her to express any frustrated affections, claiming that his marriage meant he'd never act in an "unbecoming" manner. When it became clear that Carpenter was trying to start an affair, Ada cut it off.

In 1841, Lovelace and Medora Leigh (daughter of Lord Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh) were told by Ada's mother that her father was also Medora's father. On 27 February 1841, Ada wrote to her mother: "I am not in the least 'astonished'. In fact you merely 'confirm' what I have for 'years and years' felt scarcely a doubt about, but should have considered it most improper in me to hint to you that I in any way suspected." She did not blame the incestuous relationship on Byron, but instead blamed Augusta Leigh: "I fear 'she' is 'more inherently' wicked than 'he' ever was." In the 1840s, Ada flirted with scandals: firstly from a relaxed relationship with men who were not her husband, which led to rumours of affairsand secondly, her love of gambling. The gambling led to her forming a syndicate with male friends, and an ambitious attempt in 1851 to create a mathematical model for successful large bets. This went disastrously wrong, leaving her thousands of pounds in debt to the syndicate, forcing her to admit it all to her husband. She had a shadowy relationship with Andrew Crosse's son John from 1844 onwards. John Crosse destroyed most of their correspondence after her death as part of a legal agreement. She bequeathed him the only heirlooms her father had personally left to her. During her final illness, she would panic at the idea of the younger Crosse being kept from visiting her.

===Death===
Painting of Ada Lovelace at a piano in 1852 by Henry Phillips. While she was in great pain at the time, she sat for the painting as Phillips' father, Thomas Phillips, had painted Ada's father, Lord Byron.
Ada Lovelace died at the age of 36 on 27 November 1852, . from uterine cancer probably exacerbated by bloodletting by her physicians. The illness lasted several months, in which time Annabella took command over whom Ada saw, and excluded all of her friends and confidants. Under her mother's influence, she had a religious transformation (after previously being a materialist) and was coaxed into repenting of her previous conduct and making Annabella her executor. She lost contact with her husband after she confessed something to him on 30 August which caused him to abandon her bedside. What she told him is unknown. She was buried, at her request, next to her father at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene, Hucknall, Nottingham.

===Education===
Throughout her illnesses, she continued her education. Her mother's obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Lord Byron was one of the reasons that Ada was taught mathematics from an early age. She was privately schooled in mathematics and science by William Frend, William King, Sources disagree on whether William King, her math tutor, and William King, her later husband, were the same person. and Mary Somerville, noted researcher and scientific author of the 19th century. One of her later tutors was mathematician and logician Augustus De Morgan. From 1832, when she was seventeen, her remarkable mathematical abilities began to emerge, and her interest in mathematics dominated the majority of her adult life. In a letter to Lady Byron, De Morgan suggested that her daughter's skill in mathematics could lead her to become "an original mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence."

Lovelace often questioned basic assumptions by integrating poetry and science. While studying differential calculus, she wrote to De Morgan: I may remark that the curious transformations many formulae can undergo, the unsuspected and to a beginner apparently impossible identity of forms exceedingly dissimilar at first sight, is I think one of the chief difficulties in the early part of mathematical studies. I am often reminded of certain sprites and fairies one reads of, who are at one's elbows in one shape now, and the next minute in a form most dissimilar... Lovelace believed that intuition and imagination were critical to effectively applying mathematical and scientific concepts. She valued metaphysics as much as mathematics, viewing both as tools for exploring "the unseen worlds around us".

==Work==
Throughout her life, Ada was strongly interested in scientific developments and fads of the day, including phrenology and mesmerism. Even after her famous work with Babbage, Ada continued to work on other projects. In 1844, she commented to a friend Woronzow Greig about her desire to create a mathematical model for how the brain gives rise to thoughts and nerves to feelings ("a calculus of the nervous system"). She never achieved this, however. In part, her interest in the brain came from a long-running preoccupation, inherited from her mother, about her 'potential' madness. As part of her research into this project, she visited electrical engineer Andrew Crosse in 1844 to learn how to carry out electrical experiments. In the same year, she wrote a review of a paper by Baron Karl von Reichenbach, Researches on Magnetism, but this was not published and does not appear to have progressed past the first draft. In 1851, the year before her cancer struck, she wrote to her mother mentioning "certain productions" she was working on regarding the relation of maths and music.

Portrait of Ada by British painter Margaret Sarah Carpenter (1836)
Lovelace first met Charles Babbage in June 1833, through their mutual friend Mary Somerville. Later that month, Babbage invited Lovelace to see the prototype for his Difference Engine. She became fascinated with the machine and used her relationship with Somerville to visit Babbage as often as she could. Babbage was impressed by Lovelace's intellect and analytic skills. He called her The Enchantress of Numbers. In 1843 he wrote of her:

During a nine-month period in 184243, Ada translated Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's memoir on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended a set of notes. Explaining the Analytical Engine's function was a difficult task, as even other scientists did not really grasp the concept and the British establishment was uninterested in it. Ada's notes even had to explain how the Engine differed from the original Difference Engine.

The notes are longer than the memoir itself and include (in Section G), in complete detail, a method for calculating a sequence of Bernoulli numbers with the Engine, which would have run correctly had the Analytical Engine been built (only his Difference Engine has been built, completed in London in 2002). 

Based on this work, Lovelace is now widely credited with being the first computer programmer and her method is recognised as the world's first computer program. Gleick, J. (2011) , London, Fourth Estate, pp. 116118. Her work was well received at the time; Michael Faraday described himself as a fan of her writing.

Lovelace and Babbage had a minor falling out when the papers were published, when he tried to leave his own statement (a criticism of the government's treatment of his Engine) as an unsigned prefacewhich would imply that she had written that also. When Taylor's Scientific Memoirs ruled that the statement should be signed, Babbage wrote to Ada asking her to withdraw the paper. This was the first that she knew he was leaving it unsigned, and she wrote back refusing to withdraw the paper. Historian Benjamin Woolley theorised that, "His actions suggested he had so enthusiastically sought Ada's involvement, and so happily indulged her ... because of her 'celebrated name'." Their friendship recovered, and they continued to correspond. On 12 August 1851, when she was dying of cancer, Ada wrote to him asking him to be her executor, though this letter did not give him the necessary legal authority. Part of the terrace at Worthy Manor was known as Philosopher's Walk, as it was there that Ada and Babbage were reputed to have walked while discussing mathematical principles. 

==First computer program==
In 1842, Babbage was invited to give a seminar at the University of Turin about his Analytical Engine. Luigi Menabrea, a young Italian engineer, and future Prime Minister of Italy, wrote up Babbage's lecture in French, and this transcript was subsequently published in the Bibliothque universelle de Genve in October 1842.
Babbage's friend Charles Wheatstone commissioned Ada to translate Menabrea's paper into English. She then augmented the paper with notes, which were added to the translation. Ada spent the better part of a year doing this, assisted with input from Babbage. These notes, which are more extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then published in Taylor's Scientific Memoirs under the initialism AAL. In 1953, more than a century after her death, Ada's notes on Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished. The engine has now been recognized as an early model for a computer and Ada's notes as a description of a computer and software. 

An illustration inspired by the A. E. Chalon portrait created for the Ada Initiative, which supports open technology and women
Her notes were labeled alphabetically from A to G. In note G, she describes an algorithm for the Analytical Engine to compute Bernoulli numbers. It is considered the first algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer, and Ada has often been cited as the first computer programmer for this reason. http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2013/08/tom-stoppards-arcadia-at-twenty.html The engine was never completed, however, so her code was never tested. 

==Conceptual leap==
In her notes, Lovelace emphasized the difference between the Analytical Engine and previous calculating machines, particularly its ability to be programmed to solve problems of any complexity. She realised the potential of the device extended far beyond mere number crunching. She wrote:

This analysis was a conceptual leap from previous ideas about the capabilities of computing devices, and foreshadowed the capabilities and implications of the modern computer. This insight is seen as significant by writers such as Betty Toole and Benjamin Woolley, as well as programmer John Graham-Cumming, whose project Plan 28 has the aim of constructing the first complete Analytical Engine. 

==Controversy over extent of contributions==
Though Ada Lovelace is often referred to as the first computer programmer, there is disagreement over the extent of her contributions, and whether she can accurately be called a programmer. Allan G. Bromley, in the 1990 essay Difference and Analytical Engines, wrote, "All but one of the programs cited in her notes had been prepared by Babbage from three to seven years earlier. The exception was prepared by Babbage for her, although she did detect a 'bug' in it. Not only is there no evidence that Ada ever prepared a program for the Analytical Engine, but her correspondence with Babbage shows that she did not have the knowledge to do so." . On the other hand, Eugene Eric Kim and Betty Alexandra Toole wrote, " was certainly capable of writing the program herself given the proper formula; this is clear from her depth of understanding regarding the process of programming and from her improvements on Babbage's programming notation." 

Curator and author Doron Swade, in his 2001 book The Difference Engine, wrote, "The first algorithms or stepwise operations leading to a solutionwhat we now recognize as a 'program', although the word was used neither by her nor by Babbagewere certainly published under her name. But the work had been completed by Babbage much earlier." . Kim and Toole dispute this claim: "Babbage had written several small programs for the Analytical Engine in his notebook in 1836 and 1837, but none of them approached the complexity of the Bernoulli numbers program." 

Blue plaque to Lovelace in St. James's Square, London
Historian Bruce Collier went further in his 1990 book The Little Engine That Could've, calling Ada not only irrelevant, but delusional:

Writer Benjamin Woolley said that while Ada's mathematical abilities have been contested, she can claim "some contribution": "Note A, the first she wrote, and the one over which Babbage had the least influence, contains a sophisticated analysis of the idea and implications of mechanical computation" and that this discussion of the implications of Babbage's invention was the most important aspect of her work. According to Woolley, her notes were "detailed and thorough nd still... metaphysical, meaningfully so." They explained how the machine worked and " above the technical minutiae of Babbage's extraordinary invention to reveal its true grandeur."
Babbage published the following on Ada's contribution, in his Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (1864): 

Eugene Eric Kim and Betty Alexandar Toole elucidate Babbage's role in writing the first computer program: 

==In popular culture==
Lovelace has been portrayed in Romulus Linney's 1977 play Childe Byron, the 1990 steampunk novel The Difference Engine by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, the 1997 film Conceiving Ada, and in John Crowley's 2005 novel Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land, where she is featured as an unseen character whose personality is forcefully depicted in her annotations and anti-heroic efforts to archive her father's lost novel. 

In Tom Stoppard's 1993 play Arcadia, the precocious teenage genius Thomasina Coverly (a character "apparently based" Profile, Gale Edwards, 1994, Director of "Arcadia" for the Sydney Theatre Company on Ada Lovelacethe play also involves Lord Byron) comes to understand chaos theory, and theorises the second law of thermodynamics, before either is officially recognised.

==Commemoration==
The computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States Department of Defense, was named after Ada Lovelace. The reference manual for the language was approved on 10 December 1980, and the Department of Defense Military Standard for the language, MIL-STD-1815, was given the number of the year of her birth. Since 1998, the British Computer Society has awarded a medal in her name and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women students of computer science. 
In the UK, the BCSWomen Lovelace Colloquium, the annual conference for women undergraduates is named after Ada Lovelace. 

"Ada Lovelace Day" is an annual event celebrated in mid-October whose goal is to "...raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering and maths."

The Ada Initiative is a non-profit organization dedicated to increasing the involvement of women in the free culture and open source movements. 

On the 197th anniversary of her birth, Google dedicated its Google Doodle to her. The doodle shows Lovelace working on a formula along with images that show the evolution of the computer. 

The Engineering in Computer Science and Telecommunications College building in Zaragoza University is called the Ada Byron Building. The village computer centre in the village of Porlock, near where Ada Lovelace lived, is named after her. There is a building in the small town of Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire named Ada Lovelace House. 
One of the tunnel boring machines excavating the tunnels for London's Crossrail project is named Ada in commemoration of Ada Lovelace. 

==Titles and styles by which she was known==
* 10 December 1815  8 July 1835: The Honorable Ada Augusta Byron
* 8 July 1835  1838: The Right Honorable The Lady King
* 1838  27 November 1852: The Right Honorable The Countess of Lovelace

==Ancestry==

==Publications==
* Sketch of the Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage, Esq. with notes by trans. Ada Lovelace, in Scientific Memoirs, Vol 3 (1842).

==See also==

* Great Lives (BBC Radio 4) aired on 17 September 2013 was dedicated to the story of Ada Lovelace. Series 31 episode 7 
* Women in computing
* Ada Initiative

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* .
* .
* .
* 
* .
* .
* With notes upon the memoir by the translator.
* .
* 
* 
* .
* .
* .
* .

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[August Derleth]]

August William Derleth (February 24, 1909  July 4, 1971) was an American writer and anthologist. Though best remembered as the first publisher of the writings of H. P. Lovecraft, and for his own contributions to the Cthulhu Mythos genre of horror, as well as his founding of the publisher Arkham House (which did much to bring supernatural fiction into print in hardcover in the US that had only been readily available in the UK), Derleth was a leading American regional writer of his day, as well as prolific in several other genres, including historical fiction, poetry, detective fiction, science fiction, and biography.

A 1938 Guggenheim Fellow, Derleth considered his most serious work to be the ambitious Sac Prairie Saga, a series of fiction, historical fiction, poetry, and non-fiction naturalist works designed to memorialize life in the Wisconsin he knew. Derleth can also be considered a pioneering naturalist and conservationist in his writing.

==Life==
The son of William Julius Derleth and Rose Louise Volk, Derleth grew up in Sauk City, Wisconsin. "August Derleth Services Wednesday in Sauk City," Capital Times, July 6, 1971, p. 24, col. 2. He was educated in local parochial and public high school. Derleth wrote his first fiction at age 13. He was interested most in reading, and he made three trips to the library a week. He would save his money to buy books (his personal library exceeded 12,000 later on in life). Some of his biggest influences were Ralph Waldo Emerson's essays, Walt Whitman, H. L. Mencken's The American Mercury, Samuel Johnson's The History of Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia, Alexandre Dumas, Edgar Allan Poe, Walter Scott, and Henry David Thoreau's Walden.

Forty rejected stories and three years later, according to anthologist Jim Stephens, he sold his first story, "Bat's Belfry", to Weird Tales magazine. Derleth wrote throughout his four years at the University of Wisconsin, where he received a B.A. in 1930. During this time he also served briefly as associate editor of Minneapolis-based Fawcett Publications Mystic Magazine.

Returning to Sauk City in the summer of 1931, Derleth worked in a local canning factory and collaborated with childhood friend Mark Schorer (later Chairman of the University of California, Berkeley English Department). They rented a cabin, writing Gothic and other horror stories and selling them
to Weird Tales magazine. Derleth won a place on the O'Brien Roll of Honor for Five Alone, published in Place of Hawks, but was first found in Pagany magazine.

As a result of his early work on the Sac Prairie Saga, Derleth was awarded the prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship; his sponsors were Helen C. White, Nobel Prize-winning novelist Sinclair Lewis and poet Edgar Lee Masters of Spoon River Anthology fame.

In the mid-1930s, Derleth organized a Ranger's Club for young people, served as clerk and president of the local school board, served as a parole officer, organized a local men's club and a parent-teacher association. 
Derleth, August. "An Autobiography." He also lectured in American regional literature at the University of Wisconsin and was a contributing editor of Outdoors Magazine.

With longtime friend Donald Wandrei, Derleth in 1939 founded Arkham House. Its initial objective was to publish the works of H.P Lovecraft, with whom Derleth had corresponded since his teenage years. At the same time, he began teaching a course in American Regional Literature at the University of Wisconsin.

In 1941, he became literary editor of The Capital Times newspaper in Madison, a post he held until his resignation in 1960. His hobbies included fencing, swimming, chess, philately and comic-strips (Derleth reportedly deployed the funding from his Guggenheim Fellowship to bind his comic book collection, most recently valued in the millions of dollars, rather than to travel abroad as the award intended.). Derleth's true avocation, however, was hiking the terrain of his native Wisconsin lands, and observing and recording nature with an expert eye.

Derleth once wrote of his writing methods, "I write very swiftly, from 750,000 to a million words yearly, very little of it pulp material."

He was married April 6, 1953, to Sandra Evelyn Winters. They divorced six years later. Derleth retained custody of the couple's two children, April Rose and Walden William. April earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1977. She became majority stockholder, President, and CEO of Arkham House in 1994. She remained in that capacity until her death. She was known in the community as a naturalist and humanitarian. April died on March 21, 2011. 

In 1960, Derleth began editing and publishing a magazine called Hawk and Whippoorwill, dedicated to poems of man and nature.

Derleth died of a heart attack on July 4, 1971, and is buried in St. Aloysius Cemetery in Sauk City. 

==Career==
Derleth at his typewriter.
Derleth wrote more than 150 short stories and more than 100 books during his lifetime.

===The Sac Prairie Saga===
Derleth wrote an expansive series of novels, short stories, journals, poems, and other works about Sac Prairie (whose prototype is Sauk City). Derleth intended this series to comprise up to 50 novels telling the projected life-story of the region from the 19th century onwards, with analogies to Balzac's Human Comedy and Proust's Remembrance of Things Past.

This, and other early work by Derleth, made him a well-known figure among the regional literary figures of his time: early Pulitzer Prize winners Hamlin Garland and Zona Gale, as well as Sinclair Lewis, the last both an admirer and critic of Derleth.

As Edward Wagenknecht writes in Cavalcade of the American Novel: "What Mr. Derleth has that is lacking...in modern novelists generally, is a country. He belongs. He writes of a land and a people that are bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. In his fictional world, there is a unity much deeper and more fundamental than anything that can be conferred by an ideology. It is clear, too, that he did not get the best, and most fictionally useful, part of his background material from research in the library; like Scott, in his Border novels, he gives, rather, the impression of having drunk it in with his mother's milk."

Jim Stephens, editor of An August Derleth Reader, (1992), argues: "what Derleth accomplished....was to gather a Wisconsin mythos which gave respect to the ancient fundament of our contemporary life."

The author inaugurated the Sac Prairie Saga with four novellas comprising Place of Hawks, published by Loring & Mussey in 1935. At publication, The Detroit News wrote: "Certainly with this book Mr. Derleth may be added to the American writers of distinction." 

Derleth's first novel, Still is the Summer Night, was published two years later by the famous Charles Scribners' editor Maxwell Perkins, and was the second in his Sac Prairie Saga.

Village Year, the first in a series of journalsmeditations on nature, Midwestern village American life, and morewas published in 1941 to praise from The New York Times Book Review: "A book of instant sensitive responsiveness...recreates its scene with acuteness and beauty, and makes an unusual contribution to the Americana of the present day." The New York Herald Tribune observed that "Derleth...deepens the value of his village setting by presenting in full the enduring natural background; with the people projected against this, the writing comes to have the quality of an old Flemish picture, humanity lively and amusing and loveable in the foreground and nature magnificent beyond." James Grey, writing in the St. Louis Dispatch concluded, "Derleth has achieved a kind of prose equivalent of the Spoon River Anthology."

In the same year, Evening in Spring was published by Charles Scribners & Sons. This work Derleth considered among his finest. What The Milwaukee Journal called "this beautiful little love story," is an autobiographical novel of first love beset by small town religious bigotry. The work received critical praise: The New Yorker considered it a story told "with tenderness and charm," while the Chicago Tribune concluded: "It's as though he turned back the pages of an old diary and told, with rekindled emotion, of the pangs of pain and the sharp, clear sweetness of a boy's first love." Helen Constance White, wrote in The Capital Times that it was "...the best articulated, the most fully disciplined of his stories."

These were followed in 1943 with Shadow of Night, a Scribners' novel of which The Chicago Sun wrote: "Structurally it has the perfection of a carved jewel...A psychological novel of the first order, and an adventure tale that is unique and inspiriting."

In November 1945, however, Derleth's work was attacked by his one-time admirer and mentor, Sinclair Lewis. Writing in Esquire, Lewis said, "It is a proof of Mr. Derleth's merit that he makes one want to make the journey and see his particular Avalon: The Wisconsin River shining among its islands, and the castles of Baron Pierneau and Hercules Dousman. He is a champion and a justification of regionalism. Yet he is also a burly, bounding, bustling, self-confident, opinionated, and highly sweatered young man with faults so grievous that a melancholoy perusal of them may be of more value to apprentices than a study of his serious virtues. If he could ever be persuaded that he isn't half as good as he thinks he is, if he would learn the art of sitting still and using a blue pencil, he might become twice as good as he thinks he iswhich would about rank him with Homer." Derleth good humoredly reprinted the criticism along with a photograph of himself sans sweater, on the back cover of his 1948 country journal: Village Daybook.

A lighter side to the Sac Prairie Saga is a series of quasi-autobiographical short stories known as the "Gus Elker Stories," amusing tales of country life that Peter Ruber, Derleth's last editor, said were "...models of construction and...fused with some of the most memorable characters in American literature." Most were written between 1934 and the late 1940s, though the last, "Tail of the Dog", was published in 1959 and won the Scholastic Magazine short story award for the year. The series was collected and republished in Country Matters in 1996.

"Walden West," published in 1961, is considered by many Derleth's finest work. This prose meditation is built out of the same fundamental material as the series of Sac Prairie journals, but is organized around three themes: "the persistence of memory...the sounds and odors of the country...and Thoreau's observation that the 'mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.'" A blend of nature writing, philosophic musings, and careful observation of the people and place of "Sac Prairie." Of this work, George Vukelich, author of "North Country Notebook," writes: "Derleth's Walden West is...the equal of Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg,Ohio, Thornton Wilder's Our Town, and Edgar Lee Masters' Spoon River Anthology." This was followed eight years later by "Return to Walden West," a work of similar quality, but with a more noticeable environmentalist edge to the writing, notes critic Norbert Blei.

A close literary relative of the Sac Prairie Saga was Derleth's Wisconsin Saga, which comprises several historical novels.

===Detective and mystery fiction===
Detective fiction represented another substantial body of Derleth's work. Most notable among this work was a series of 70 stories in affectionate pastiche of Sherlock Holmes, whose creator, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, he admired greatly. These included one published novel as well (Mr. Fairlie's Final Journey). The series features a (Sherlock Holmes-styled) British detective named Solar Pons, of Praed Street in London. The series was greatly admired by such notable writers and critics of mystery and detective fiction as Ellery Queen (Frederic Dannay), Anthony Boucher, Vincent Starrett and Howard Haycraft.

In his 1944 volume The Misadventures of Sherlock Holmes, Ellery Queen wrote of Derleth's The Norcross Riddle, an early Pons story: "How many budding authors, not even old enough to vote, could have captured the spirit and atmosphere with as much fidelity?" Queen adds, "...and his choice of the euphonic Solar Pons is an appealing addition to the fascinating lore of Sherlockian nomenclature." Vincent Starrett, in his foreword to the 1964 edition of The Casebook of Solar Pons, wrote that the series is "...as sparkling a galaxy of Sherlockian pastiches as we have had since the canonical entertainments came to an end."

Despite close similarities to Doyle's creation, Pons lived in the post-World War I era, in the decade of the 1920s. Though Derleth never wrote a Pons novel to equal The Hound of the Baskervilles, editor Peter Ruber wrote: "...Derleth produced more than a few Solar Pons stories almost as good as Sir Arthur's, and many that had better plot construction."

Although these stories were a form of diversion for Derleth, Ruber, who edited The Original Text Solar Pons Omnibus Edition (2000), argued: "Because the stories were generally of such high quality, they ought to be assessed on their own merits as a unique contribution in the annals of mystery ficton, rather than suffering comparison as one of the endless imitators of Sherlock Holmes."

Some of the stories were self-published, through a new imprint called "Mycroft & Moran", an appellation of humorous significance to Holmesian scholars. For approximately a decade, an active supporting group was the Praed Street Irregulars, patterned after the Baker Street Irregulars.

In 1946, Conan Doyle's two sons made some attempts to force Derleth to cease publishing the Solar Pons series, but the efforts were unsuccessful and eventually withdrawn. Peter Ruber. "Introduction" in August Derleth, The Final Adventures of Solar Pons, Shelburne, Ont.: M&M, 1998. 

Derleth's mystery and detective fiction also included a series of works set in Sac Prairie and featuring Judge Peck as the central character.

===Youth and children's fiction===
Derleth wrote many and varied children's works, including biographies meant to introduce younger readers to explorer Fr. Marquette, as well as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Arguably most important among his works for younger readers, however, is the Steve and Sim Mystery Series. The ten-volume series is set in Sac Prairie of the 1920s and can thus be considered in its own right a part of the Sac Prairie Saga, as well as an extension of Derleth's body of mystery fiction. Robert Hood, writing in the New York Times said: "Steve and Sim, the major characters, are twentieth-century cousins of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer; Derleth's minor characters, little gems of comic drawing." The first novel in the series, The Moon Tenders, does, in fact, involve a rafting adventure down the Wisconsin River, which led regional writer Jesse Stuart to suggest the novel was one that "older people might read to recapture the spirit and dream of youth." The connection to the Sac Prairie Saga was noted by the Chicago Tribune: "Once again a small midwest community in 1920s is depicted with perception, skill, and dry humor."

===Arkham House and the "Cthulhu Mythos"===
Derleth near the time he began working on the Cthulhu Mythos
Derleth was a correspondent and friend of H. P. Lovecraft  when Lovecraft wrote about "le Comte d'Erlette" in his fiction, it was in homage to Derleth. Derleth invented the term "Cthulhu Mythos" to describe the fictional universe described in the series of stories shared by Lovecraft and other writers in his circle.

When Lovecraft died in 1937, Derleth and Donald Wandrei assembled a collection of Lovecraft's stories and tried to get them published. Existing publishers showed little interest, so Derleth and Wandrei founded Arkham House in 1939 for that purpose. The name of the company derived from Lovecraft's fictional town of Arkham, Massachusetts, which features in many of his stories. In 1939 Arkham House published The Outsider and Others, a huge collection that contained most of Lovecraft's known short stories. Derleth and Wandrei soon expanded Arkham House and began a regular publishing schedule after its second book, Someone in the Dark, a collection of some of Derleth's own horror stories, was published in 1941.

Following Lovecraft's death, Derleth wrote a number of stories based on fragments and notes left by Lovecraft. These were published in Weird Tales and later in book form, under the byline "H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth", with Derleth calling himself a "posthumous collaborator." This practice has raised objections in some quarters that Derleth simply used Lovecraft's name to market what was essentially his own fiction; S. T. Joshi refers to the "posthumous collaborations" as marking the beginning of "perhaps the most disreputable phase of Derleth's activities". Joshi, H. P. Lovecraft: A Life, Necronomicon Press 1996, p.638. 

A significant number of H. P. Lovecraft fans and critics, such as Dirk W. Mosig, Mosig, "H. P. Lovecraft: Myth Maker" (1976), collected in Mosig at Last, Necronomicon Press 1997. S. T. Joshi, Joshi, H. P. Lovecraft: A Life, Necronomicon Press 1996, pp. 4034. and Richard L. Tierney "The Derleth Mythos" in Meade & Penny Frierson (eds), HPL (1972) were dissatisfied with Derleth's invention of the term Cthulhu Mythos (Lovecraft himself used Yog-Sothothery) and his presentation of Lovecraft's fiction as having an overall pattern reflecting Derleth's own Christian world view, which they contrast with Lovecraft's depiction of an amoral universe. However Robert M. Price points out that while Derleth's tales are distinct from Lovecraft's in their use of hope and his depiction of a struggle between good and evil, nevertheless the basis of Derlerth's systemization are found in Lovecraft. He also suggests that the differences can be over stated:

Derleth was more optimistic than Lovecraft in his conception of the Mythos, but we are dealing with a difference more of degree than kind. There are indeed tales wherein Derleth's protagonists get off scot-free (like "The Shadow in the Attic", "Witches' Hollow", or "The Shuttered Room"), but often the hero is doomed (e.g., "The House in the Valley", "The Peabody Heritage", "Something in Wood"), as in Lovecraft. And it must be remembered that an occasional Lovecraftian hero does manage to overcome the odds, e.g., in "The Horror in the Museum", "The Shunned House", and 'The Case of Charles Dexter Ward'. 
 http://crypt-of-cthulhu.com/lovecraftderleth.htm 

Derleth also treated Lovecraft's Old Ones as representatives of elemental forces, creating new fictional entities to flesh out this framework.

Such debates aside, Derleth's founding of Arkham House and his successful effort to rescue Lovecraft from literary obscurity are widely acknowledged by practitioners in the horror field as seminal events in the field. For instance, Ramsey Campbell has acknowledged Derleth's encouragement and guidance during the early part of his own writing career, For example, in The Count of Thirty (Necronomicon Press 1993), p.11. and Kirby McCauley has cited Derleth and Arkham House as an inspiration for his own anthology, Dark Forces. Kirby McCauley, Introduction, Dark Forces (1980). Arkham House and Derleth published Dark Carnival, the first book by Ray Bradbury, as well. Brian Lumley cites the importance of Derleth to his own Lovecraftian work, and contends in a 2009 introduction to Derleth's work that he was "...one of the first, finest, and most discerning editors and publishers of macabre fiction."

Important as was Derleth's work to rescue H.P. Lovecraft from literary obscurity at the time of Lovecraft's death, Derleth also built a body of horror and spectral fiction of his own; still frequently anthologized. The best of this work, recently reprinted in four volumes of short storiesmost of which were originally published in Weird Tales, illustrates Derleth's original abilities in the genre. While Derleth considered his work in this genre less important than his most serious literary efforts, the compilers of these four anthologies, including Ramsey Campbell, note that the stories still resonate after more than fifty years.

In 2009, The Library of America selected Derleths story The Panelled Room for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American Fantastic Tales.

===Other works===
Derleth also wrote many historical novels, as part of both the Sac Prairie Saga and the Wisconsin Saga. He also wrote history; arguably most notable among these was The Wisconsin: River of a Thousand Isles, published in 1942. The work was one in a series entitled "The Rivers of America", conceived by writer Constance Lindsay Skinner in the Great Depression as a series that would connect Americans to their heritage through the history of the great rivers of the nation. Skinner wanted the series to be written by artists, not academicians. Derleth, while not a trained historian, was, according to former Wisconsin state historian William F. Thompson, "...a very competent regional historian who based his historical writing upon research in the primary documents and who regularly sought the help of professionals... ." In the foreword to the 1985 reissue of the work by The University of Wisconsin Press, Thompson concluded: "No other writer, of whatever background or training, knew and understood his particular 'corner of the earth' better than August Derleth."

Derleth wrote several volumes of poems, as well as biographies of Zona Gale, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.

He also wrote introductions to several collections of classic early 20th century comics, such as Buster Brown, Little Nemo in Slumberland, and Katzenjammer Kids, as well as a book of children's poetry entitled A Boy's Way, and the foreword to Tales from an Indian Lodge by Phebe Jewell Nichols. Derleth also wrote under the noms de plume Stephen Grendon, Kenyon Holmes and Tally Mason.

Derleth's papers and comic book collection (valued at a considerable sum upon his death) were donated to the Wisconsin Historical Society in Madison. Derleth, August, 19091971 

==Bibliography==

===Novels===

===Short story collections===
Sac Prairie Saga
* Place of Hawks (1935)
* Country Growth (1940)
* Wisconsin Earth: A Sac Prairie Sampler (1948)
* Sac Prairie People (1948)
* Wisconsin in Their Bones (1961)
* Country Matters (1996)
* Return to Sac Prairie (1996)
* The Lost Sac Prairie Novels (2000), including The Odyssey of Janna Meade (first published in the Star Weekly magazine December 3, 1949); The Wind in the Cedars (also as Happiness Shall Not Escape) (first published in Redbook Magazine, January 1946), Lamplight for the Dark (first published in Redbook Magazine January 1941); Shane's Girls (also as Happiness is a Gift) (first published in Redbook Magazine 1948)

Solar Pons
* Re: Sherlock Holmes|"In Re: Sherlock Holmes"  The Adventures of Solar Pons] (UK: The Adventures of Solar Pons) (1945)
* The Memoirs of Solar Pons (1951)
* Three Problems for Solar Pons (1952)
* The Return of Solar Pons (1958)
* The Reminiscences of Solar Pons (1961)
* Mr. Fairlie's Final Journey (1968)
* The Casebook of Solar Pons (1965)
* A Praed Street Dossier (1968)
* The Chronicles of Solar Pons (1973)
* The Solar Pons Omnibus (1982)
* The Final Adventures of Solar Pons (1998)

 Horror & Lovecraft-Mythos
* Someone in the Dark (1941)
* Something Near (1945)
* Not Long for this World (1948)
* The Survivor and Others (1957) with H. P. Lovecraft
* The Mask of Cthulhu (1958)
* Lonesome Places (1962)
* The Trail of Cthulhu (1962)
* Mr. George and Other Odd Persons (1963) as Stephen Grendon
* Colonel Markesan and Less Pleasant People (1966) with Mark Schorer
* The Watchers Out of Time and Others (1974) with H. P. Lovecraft
* Dwellers in Darkness (1976)
* In Lovecraft's Shadow (1998)
* Who Shall I Say is Calling & Other Stories S. Deziemianowicz, ed. (2009)
* The Sleepers and Other Wakeful Things(2009)
* August Derleth's Eerie Creatures (2009)
* (2009)

Science fiction
* Harrigan's File (1975)

Other
* Consider Your Verdict (1937) as Tally Mason

===Short fiction===

===Journals (Sac Prairie Saga)===
* Atmosphere of Houses (1939)
* Village Year: A Sac Prairie Journal (1941)
* Village Daybook (1947)
* Countryman's Journal (1963)
* Walden West (1961)
* Wisconsin Country: A Sac Prairie Journal (1965)
* Return to Walden West (1970)

===Poems===
* Incubus (1934)
* Omega (1934)
* To a Spaceship (1934)
* Man and the Cosmos (1935)
* "Only Deserted" (1937)
* The Shores of Night (1947)
* Providence: Two Gentlemen Meet at Midnight (1948)
* Jacksnipe Over (1971)
* Something Left Behind (1971)

===Poetry collections===

===Essays/articles===

===Biography===
* Still Small Voice (1940)  biography of newpaperwoman and writer Zona Gale
* H.P.L.: A Memoir (1945)
* Some Notes on H. P. Lovecraft (1959)
* Concord Rebel: A Life of Henry D. Thoreau (1962)
* Emerson, Our Contemporary (1970)

===History===
* The Wisconsin: River of a Thousand Isles (1942)
* The Milwaukee Road: Its First Hundred Years (1948)
* Saint Ignatius and the Company of Jesus (1956)
* Columbus and the New World (1957)
* Father Marquette and the Great Rivers (1959)
* Wisconsin Murders (1968)

===Anthologies===

====As Stephen Grendon====

====With H. P. Lovecraft====

====With Marc R. Schorer====

====Other collaborations====
* The Churchyard Yew (1947) as Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu
* The Adventure of the Snitch in Time (1953) with Mack Reynolds
* The Adventure of the Ball of Nostradamus (1955) with Mack Reynolds
* The House in the Oaks (1971) with Robert E. Howard

====Media adaptations====
* "The Metronome" - The Unforeseen (TV,1960)
* "The Incredible Doctor Markesan" - Thriller (TV, 1962)
* "House - with Ghost" - Night Gallery (TV, 1971)
* "The Dark Boy" - Night Gallery (TV, 1971)
* "Logoda's Head" - Night Gallery (TV, 1971)
 Kim Newman (ed) The BFI Companion to Horror. London: Cassell, 1996, p. 92 

====Awards====
* O'Brien Roll of Honour for short story, 1933
* Guggenheim fellow, 1938

==See also==

* August Derleth Award
* List of authors of new Sherlock Holmes stories
* List of horror fiction authors
* List of people from Wisconsin
* Mark Schorer
* Non-canonical Sherlock Holmes works
* Sauk City, Wisconsin

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Meudt, Edna. 'August Derleth: "A simple, honorable man",' Wisconsin Academy Review, 19:2 (Summer, 1972) 811.
* 
* 
* Schorer, Mark. "An Appraisal of the Work of August Derleth," The Capital Times, July 9, 1971.
* 

==Further reading==
* Robert Bloch. "Two Great Editors". Is No 4 (Oct 1971). Reprint in Bloch's Out of My Head. Cambridge MA: NESFA Press, 1986, 71-79.
* Lin Carter. "A Day in Derleth Country". Is No 4 (Oct 1971). Reprint in Crypt of Cthulhu 1, No 6.

==External links==
* The August Derleth Society
* 
* A short autobiography
* A more detailed biography
* Online catalog of Derleth's collection at the Wisconsin Historical Society
* Arkham House Publishers founded by Derleth
* Stanton & Lee Publishers founded by Derleth
* August Derleth Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Alps]]

The Alps are one of the great mountain range systems of Europe stretching approximately 1,200 km across eight Alpine countries from Austria and Slovenia in the east, France, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and south east Germany, to the west. Monaco and Italy to the south. "Alpine Convention". Alpine Conferences. Retrieved August 3, 2012 The mountains were formed over tens of millions of years as the African and Eurasian tectonic plates collided. Extreme shortening caused by the event resulted in marine sedimentary rocks rising by thrusting and folding into high mountain peaks such as Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn. Mont Blanc spans the FrenchItalian border, and at 4810 m is the highest mountain in the Alps. The Alpine region area contains about a hundred peaks higher than 4000 m, known as the "four-thousanders".

The altitude and size of the range affects the climate in Europe; in the mountains precipitation levels vary greatly and climatic conditions consist of distinct zones. Wildlife such as ibex live in the higher peaks to elevations of 3400 m, and plants such as Edelweiss grow in rocky areas in lower elevations as well as in higher elevations. Evidence of human habitation in the Alps goes back to the Paleolithic era. A mummified man, determined to be 5,000 years old, was discovered on a glacier at the AustrianItalian border in 1991. By the 6th century BC, the Celtic La Tne culture was well established. Hannibal famously crossed the Alps with a herd of elephants, and the Romans had settlements in the region. In 1800 Napoleon crossed one of the mountain passes with an army of 40,000. The 18th and 19th centuries saw an influx of naturalists, writers, and artists, in particular the Romantics, followed by the golden age of alpinism as mountaineers began to ascend the peaks. In World War II, Adolf Hitler kept a base of operation in the Bavarian Alps throughout the war.

The Alpine region has a strong cultural identity. The traditional culture of farming, cheesemaking, and woodworking still exists in Alpine villages, although the tourist industry began to grow early in the 20th century and expanded greatly after World War II to become the dominant industry by the end of the century. The Winter Olympic Games have been hosted in the Swiss, French, Italian, Austrian and German Alps. At present the region is home to 14 million people and has 120 million annual visitors. Chatr, Baptiste, et al. (2010), 8 

== Etymology ==
An "alp" refers to a high mountain pasture where cows are brought to for grazing, often with a structure, such as this one on the south side of the Alps.
The English word Alps derives from the Latin Alpes (through French). Maurus Servius Honoratus, an ancient commentator of Virgil, says in his commentary (A. X 13) that all high mountains are called Alpes by Celts. The term may be common to Italo-Celtic, because the Celtic languages have terms for high mountains derived from alp.

This may be consistent with the theory that in Latin Alpes is a name of non-Indo-European origin (which is common for prominent mountains and mountain ranges in the Mediterranean region). According to the Old English Dictionary, the Latin Alpes might possibly derive from a pre-Indo-European word *alb "hill", with Albania being a related derivation. Interestingly, Albania (which is a foreign name for modern Albanians) has been used as a name for a number of mountainous areas across Europe. In Roman times, Albania was a name for the eastern Caucasus, while in the English language Albania (or Albany) was occasionally used as a name for Scotland. 

It's likely that alb ("white") and albus have common origins deriving from the association of the tops of tall mountains or steep hills with snow.

In modern languages the term alp, alm, albe or alpe refers to a grazing pastures in the alpine regions below the glaciers, not the peaks. Schmid et al. (2004), 93 An alp refers to a high mountain pasture where cows are taken to be grazed during the summer months and where hay barns can be found, and the term "the Alps", referring to the mountains, is a misnomer. Fleming (2000), 4 The term for the mountain peaks varies by nation and language: words such as horn, kogel, gipfel, and berg are used in German speaking regions: mont, pic, dent and aiguille in French speaking regions; and monte or cima in Italian speaking regions. Shoumatoff (2001), 117119 

German Alpen is the accusative in origin, but was made the nominative in Modern German, whence also Alm. "Names". Federal Department of Foreign Affairs. Swissworld.org. Retrieved August 3, 2012 

== Geography ==

The Alps extend from France in the west to Slovenia in the east, and from Italy in the south to Germany in the north.

The Alps are a crescent shaped geographic feature of central Europe that ranges in a 800 km arc from east to west and is 200 km in width. The mean height of the mountain peaks is 2.5 km. The range stretches from the Mediterranean Sea north above the Po river basin, extending through France from Grenoble, eastward through mid and southern Switzerland. The range continues toward Vienna in Austria, and east to the Adriatic Sea and into Slovenia. Chatr, Baptiste, et al. (2010), 9 Fleming (2000), 1 To the south it dips into northern Italy and to the north extends to the south border of Bavaria in Germany. Beattie (2006), xiixiii In areas like Chiasso, Switzerland, and Neuschwanstein, Bavaria, the demarkation between the mountain range and the flatlands are clear; in other places such as Geneva, the demarkation is less clear. The countries with the greatest alpine territory are Switzerland, France, Austria and Italy.

The highest portion of the range is divided by the glacial trough of the Rhone valley, with the Pennine Alps from Mont Blanc to the Matterhorn and Monte Rosa on the Southern side, and the Bernese Alps on the Northern. The peaks in the easterly portion of the range, in Austria and Slovenia, are smaller than those in the central and western portions. 

The variances in nomenclature in the region spanned by the Alps makes classification of the mountains and subregions difficult, but a general classification is that of the Eastern Alps and Western Alps with the divide between the two occurring in eastern Switzerland according to geologist Stefan Schmid, near the Splgen Pass.

The highest peaks of the Western Alps and Eastern Alps, respectively, are Mont Blanc, at 4810 m Shoumtoff (2001), 23 and Piz Bernina at 4049 m. The second-highest peaks are Monte Rosa at 4634 m and Ortler Excluding the Piz Zup and Piz Roseg located in the Bernina range, close to Piz Bernina. at 3905 m, respectively

Series of lower mountain ranges run parallel to the main chain of the Alps, including the French Prealps in France and the Jura Mountains in Switzerland and France. The secondary chain of the Alps follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, passing over many of the highest and most well-known peaks in the Alps. From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards, before turning to the northwest and then, near the Colle della Maddalena, to the north. Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain heads approximately east-northeast, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.

== Passes ==
Teufelsbrcke (Devil's Bridge) at the Gotthard Pass; the medieval bridge is below the newer bridge.

The Alps have been crossed for war and commerce, and by pilgrims, students and tourists. Crossing routes by road, train or foot are known as passes, and usually consist of depressions in the mountains in which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre-mountainous zones. In the medieval period hospices were established by religious orders at the summits of many of the main passes. The most important passes are the Col de l'Iseran (the highest), the Brenner Pass, the Mont-Cenis, the Great St. Bernard Pass, the Col de Tende, the Gotthard Pass, the Semmering Pass, and the Stelvio Pass. Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopedia Online Academic Edition. Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 6 August 2012 

Crossing the Italian-Austrian border, the Brenner Pass separates the tztal Alps and Zillertal Alps and has been in use as a trading route since the 14th century. The lowest of the Alpine passes at 985 m, the Semmering crosses from Lower Austria to Styria; since the 12th century when a hospice was built there it has seen continuous use. A railroad with a tunnel 1 mi long was built along the route of the pass in the mid-19th century. With a summit of 2,469 m, the Great St. Bernard Pass is one of the highest in the Alps, crossing the Italian-Swiss border east of the Pennine Alps along the flanks of Mont Blanc. The pass was used by Napoleon Bonaparte to cross 40,000 troops in 1800. The Saint Gotthard Pass crosses from Central Switzerland to Ticino; in the late 19th century the 9 mi long Saint Gotthard Tunnel was built connecting Lucerne in Switzerland, with Milan in Italy. The Mont Cenis pass has been a major commercial road between Western Europe and Italy. Now the pass has been supplanted by the Frjus Road and Rail tunnel. At 2,756 m, the Stelvio Pass in northern Italy is one of the highest of the Alpine passes; the road was built in the 1820s. The highest pass in the alps is the col de l'Iseran in Savoy (France) at 2,770 m.

== Orogeny and geology ==

Important geological concepts were established as naturalists began studying the rock formations of the Alps in the 18th century. In the mid-19th century the now defunct theory of geosynclines was used to explain the presence of "folded" mountain chains but by the mid-20th century the theory of plate tectonics became widely accepted. 

The geologic folding seen at the Arpanaz waterfall, shown here in a mid-18th century drawing, was noted by 18th-century geologists. Graciansky (2011), 5 

The formation of the Alps (the Alpine orogeny) was an episodic process that began about 300 million years ago. Shoumatoff (2001), 35 In the Paleozoic Era the Pangaean supercontinent consisted of a single tectonic plate; it broke into separate plates during the Mesozoic Era and the Tethys sea developed between Laurasia and Gondwana during the Jurassic Period. Graciansky (2011), 12 The Tethys was later squeezed between colliding plates causing the formation of mountain ranges called the Alpide belt, from Gibraltar through the Himalayas to Indonesiaa process that began at the end of the Mesozoic and continues into the present. The formation of the Alps was a segment of this orogenic process, caused by the collision between the African and the Eurasian plates that began in the late Cretaceous Period. Gerrard, (1990), 16 

Under extreme compressive stresses and pressure, marine sedimentary rocks were uplifted, creating characteristic recumbent folds, or nappes, and thrust faults. Earth (2008), 142 As the rising peaks underwent erosion, a layer of marine flysch sediments was deposited in the foreland basin, and the sediments became involved in younger nappes (folds) as the orogeny progressed. Coarse sediments from the continual uplift and erosion were later deposited in foreland areas as molasse. Gerrard, (1990), 9 The molasse regions in Switzerland and Bavaria were well-developed and saw further upthrusting of flysch. Schmid (2004), 102 
The crystalline basement of the Mont Blanc Massif.

The Alpine orogeny occurred in ongoing cycles through to the Paleogene causing differences in nappe structures, with a late-stage orogeny causing the development of the Jura Mountains. Schmid (2004), 97 A series of tectonic events in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods caused different paleogeographic regions. The Alps are subdivided by different lithology (rock composition) and nappe structure according to the orogenic events that affected them. Schmid (2004), 93 The geological subdivision differentiates the Western, Eastern Alps and Southern Alps: the Helveticum in the north, the Penninicum and Austroalpine system in the center and, south of the Periadriatic Seam, the Southern Alpine system. 

Compressed metamorphosed Tethyan sediments and their oceanic basement are sandwiched between the tip of the Matterhorn, which consists of gneisses originally part of the African plate, and the base of the peak, which is part of the Eurasian plate. 

According to geologist Stefan Schmid, because the Western Alps underwent a metamorphic event in the Cenozoic Era while the Austroalpine peaks underwent an event in the Cretaceous Period, the two areas show distinct differences in nappe formations. Flysch deposits in the Southern Alps of Lombardy probably occurred in the Cretaceous or later. 

Peaks in France, Italy and Switzerland lie in the "Houlliere zone", which consists of basement with sediments from the Mesozoic Era. Schmid, 99 High "massifs" with external sedimentary cover are more common in the Western Alps and were affected by Neogene Period thin-skinned thrusting whereas the Eastern Alps have comparatively few high peaked massifs. Similarly the peaks in Switzerland extending to western Austria (Helvetic nappes) consist of thin-skinned sedimentary folding that detached from former basement rock. Schmid (2004), 103 

In simple terms the structure of the Alps consists of layers of rock of European, African and oceanic (Tethyan) origin. Graciansky (2011), 29 The bottom nappe structure is of continental European origin, above which are stacked marine sediment nappes, topped off by nappes derived from the African plate. Graciansky (2011), 31 The Matterhorn is an example of the ongoing orogeny and shows evidence of great folding. The tip of the mountain consists of gneisses from the African plate; the base of the peak, below the glaciated area, consists of European basement rock. The sequence of Tethyan marine sediments and their oceanic basement is sandwiched between rock derived from the African and European plates. 

The core regions of the Alpine orogenic belt have been folded and fractured in such a manner that erosion created the characteristic steep vertical peaks of the Swiss Alps that rise seemingly straight out of the foreland areas. Peaks such as Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and high peaks in the Pennine Alps, the Brianonnais, and Hohe Tauern consist of layers of rock from the various orogenies including exposures of basement rock. Beattie (2006), 68 

== "Four-thousanders" and ascents ==

The Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme (UIAA) has defined a list of 82 "official" Alpine summits that reach at least 4,000 m. The list includes not only mountains, but also subpeaks with little prominence that are considered important mountaineering objectives. Below are listed the 22 "four-thousanders" with at least 500 m of prominence.

While Mont Blanc was first climbed in 1786, most of the Alpine four-thousanders were climbed during the first half of the 19th century; the ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865 marked the end of the golden age of alpinism. Karl Blodig (18591956) was among the first to successfully climb all the major 4,000 m peaks. He completed his series of ascents in 1911. Michael Huxley, The Geographical magazine: Volume 59, Geographical Press, 1987 

The first British Mont Blanc ascent was in 1788; the first female ascent in 1819. By the mid-1850s Swiss mountaineers had ascended most of the peaks and were eagerly sought as mountain guides. Edward Whymper reached the top of the Matterhorn in 1865 (after seven attempts), and in 1938 the last of the six great north faces of the Alps was climbed with the first ascent of the Eiger Nordwand (north face of the Eiger). Shoumatoff (2001), 197200 

 The 22 Alpine four-thousanders with at least 500 metres of topographic prominence Name Height Range Name Height Range 
 Mont Blanc 4810 m Graian Alps Dent d'Hrens 4171 m Pennine Alps 
 Monte Rosa 4634 m Pennine Alps Jungfrau 4158 m Bernese Alps 
 Dom 4545 m Pennine Alps Aiguille Verte 4122 m Graian Alps 
 Weisshorn 4506 m Pennine Alps Mnch 4107 m Bernese Alps 
 Matterhorn 4478 m Pennine Alps Barre des crins 4102 m Dauphin Alps 
 Dent Blanche 4357 m Pennine Alps Schreckhorn 4078 m Bernese Alps 
 Grand Combin 4314 m Pennine Alps Ober Gabelhorn 4063 m Pennine Alps 
 Finsteraarhorn 4273 m Bernese Alps Gran Paradiso 4061 m Graian Alps 
 Grandes Jorasses 4208 m Graian Alps Piz Bernina 4049 m Bernina Range 
 Rimpfischhorn 4199 m Pennine Alps Weissmies 4017 m Pennine Alps 
 Aletschhorn 4193 m Bernese Alps Lagginhorn 4010 m Pennine Alps 

== Minerals ==
The Alps are a source of a minerals that have been mined for thousands of years. In the 8th to 6th centuries BC during the Hallstatt culture, Celtic tribes mined copper; later the Romans mined gold for coins in the Bad Gastein area. Erzberg in Styria furnishes high-quality iron ore for the steel industry. Crystals are found throughout much of the Alpine region such as cinnabar, amethyst, and quartz. The cinnabar deposits in Slovenia are a notable source of cinnabar pigments. Shoumatoff (2001), 4953 

Alpine crystals have been studied and collected for hundreds of years, and began to be classified in the 18th century. Leonhard Euler studied the shapes of crystals, and by the 19th century crystal hunting was common in Alpine regions. David Friedrich Wiser amassed a collection of 8000 crystals that he studied and documented. In the 20th century Robert Parker wrote a well-known work about the rock crystals of the Swiss Alps; at the same period a commission was established to control and standardize the naming of Alpine minerals. Roth, 1017 

== Glaciers ==

In the Miocene Epoch the mountains underwent severe erosion because of glaciation, which was noted in the mid-19th century by naturalist Louis Agassiz who presented a paper proclaiming the Alps were covered in ice at various intervalsa theory he formed when studying rocks near his Neuchtel home which he believed originated to the west in the Bernese Oberland. Because of his work he came to be known as the "father of the ice-age concept" although other naturalists before him put forth similar ideas. Shoumatoff (2001), 6368 

Louis Agassiz's studies of the Unteraar Glacier in the 1840s showed that it moved at 100 m per year. 

Agassiz studied glacier movement in the 1840s at the Unteraar Glacier where he found the glacier moved 100 m per year, more rapidly in the middle than at the edges. His work was continued by other scientists and now a permanent laboratory exists inside a glacier under the Jungfraujoch, devoted exclusively to the study of Alpine glaciers. 

Glaciers pick up rocks and sediment with them as they flow. This causes erosion and the formation of valleys over time. The Inn valley is an example of a valley carved by glaciers during the ice ages with a typical terraced structure caused by erosion. Eroded rocks from the most recent ice age lie at the bottom of the valley while the top of the valley consists of erosion from earlier ice ages. Glacial valleys have characteristically steep walls (reliefs); valleys with lower reliefs and talus slopes are remnants of glacial troughs or previously infilled valleys. Gerrard, (1990), 132 Moraines, piles of rock picked up during the movement of the glacier, accumulate at edges, center and the terminus of glaciers. 

Inside a glacier at the top of the train station at the Jungfraujoch

Alpine glaciers can be straight rivers of ice, long sweeping rivers, spread in a fan-like shape (Piedmont glaciers), and curtains of ice that hang from vertical slopes of the mountain peaks. Some glaciers flow in two directions such as the glacier between the Jungfrau and the Mnch in Switzerland and the Similaun glacier on the border of Italy and Austria. The stress of the movement causes the ice to break and crack loudly, perhaps explaining why the mountains were believed to be home to dragons in the medieval period. The cracking creates unpredictable and dangerous crevasses, often invisible under new snowfall, which cause the greatest danger to mountaineers. 

Glaciers end in ice caves (the Rhone Glacier), by trailing into a lake or river, or by shedding snowmelt on a meadow. Sometimes a piece of glacier will detach or break resulting in flooding, property damage and loss of life. Shoumatoff (2001), 7172 In the 17th century about 2500 people were killed by an avalanche in a village on the French-Italian border; in the 19th century 120 homes in a village near Zermatt were destroyed by an avalanche. Fleming (2000), 8990 

High levels of precipitation cause the glaciers to descend to permafrost levels in some areas whereas in other, more arid regions, glaciers remain above about the 3,500 m level. Gerrard, (1990), 78 The 1817 km2 of the Alps covered by glaciers in 1876 had shrunk to 1342 km2 by 1973, resulting in decreased river run-off levels. Gerrard, (1990), 108 Forty percent of the glaciation in Austria has disappeared since 1850, and 30% of that in Switzerland. Ceben (1998), 38 

== Rivers and lakes ==
The St. Bartholomew's chapel on the Knigssee in Bavaria is a popular tourist destination. Shoumatoff (2001), 31 

The Alps provide lowland Europe with drinking water, irrigation, and hydroelectric power. Chatr, Baptiste, et al. (2010), 5 Although the area is only about 11 percent of the surface area of Europe, the Alps provide up to 90 percent of water to lowland Europe, particularly to arid areas and during the summer months. Cities such as Milan depend on 80 percent of water from Alpine runoff. Benniston et al. (2011), 1 Price, Martin. Mountains: Globally Important Eco-systems". University of Oxford Water from the rivers is used in over 500 hydroelectricity power plants, generating as much as 2900 kilowatts per hour of electricity. 

Major European rivers flow from Switzerland, such as the Rhine, the Rhone, the Inn, the Ticino and the Po rivers, all of which have headwaters in the Alps and flow into neighbouring countries, finally emptying into the North Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Adriatic Sea and the Black Sea. Other rivers such as the Danube have major tributaries flowing into them that originate in the Alps. The Rhone river is second to the Nile as a freshwater source to the Mediterranean Sea; the river begins as glacial meltwater, flows into Lake Geneva, and from there to France where one of its uses is to cool nuclear power plants. Benniston et al. (2011), 3 The Rhine originates in a 30 square kilometre area in Switzerland and represents almost 60 percent of water exported from the country. Tributary valleys, some of which are complicated, channel water to the main valleys which can experience flooding during the snow melt season when rapid runoff causes debris torrents and swollen rivers. Ceben (1998), 31 

The rivers form lakes, such as Lake Geneva, a crescent shaped lake crossing the Swiss border with Geneva on the Swiss side and the town of Evian-les-Bains on the French side. In Germany, the medieval St. Bartholomew's chapel was built on the south side of the Knigssee, accessible only by boat or by climbing over the abutting peaks. Shoumatoff (2001), 24, 31 

Scientists have been studying the impact of climate change and water use. For example, each year more water is diverted from rivers for snowmaking in the ski resorts, the effect of which is yet unknown. Furthermore, the decrease of glaciated areas combined with a succession of winters with lower-than-expected precipitation may have a future impact on the rivers in the Alps as well as an effect on the water availability to the lowlands. Chatr, Baptiste, et al. (2010), 13 

== Climate ==

The Alps are a classic example of what happens when a temperate area at lower altitude gives way to higher-elevation terrain. Elevations around the world that have cold climates similar to those of the polar regions have been called Alpine. A rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere causes the temperature to decrease (see adiabatic lapse rate). The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of heat, often accompanied by precipitation in the form of snow or rain. The height of the Alps is sufficient to divide the weather patterns in Europe into a wet north and a dry south because moisture is sucked from the air as it flows over the high peaks. Fleming (2000), 3 

The Aletsch Glacier with pine trees growing on the hillside

The severe weather in the Alps has been studied since the 18th century; particularly the weather patterns such as the seasonal foehn wind. Numerous weather stations were placed in the mountains early in the early 20th century, providing continuous data for climatologists. Ceben (1998), 2224 Some of the valleys are quite arid such as the Aosta valley in Italy, the Maurienne in France, the Valais in Switzerland, and northern Tyrol. 

The areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff. The mean precipitation in the Alps ranges from a low of 2600 mm per year to 3600 mm per year, with the higher levels occurring at high altitudes. At altitudes between 1,000 and, snowfall begins in November and accumulates through to April or May when the melt begins. Snow lines vary from 2,400 to, above which the snow is permanent and the temperatures hover around the freezing point even July and August. High-water levels in streams and rivers peak in June and July when the snow is still melting at the higher altitudes. Ceben (1998), 3436 

The Alps are split into five climatic zones, each with different vegetation. The climate, plant life and animal life vary among the different sections or zones of the mountains. The lowest zone is the colline zone, which exists between 500 and, depending on the location. The montane zone extends from 800 to, followed by the sub-Alpine zone from 1,600 to. The Alpine zone, extending from tree line to snow line, is followed by the glacial zone, which covers the glaciated areas of the mountain. Climatic conditions show variances within the same zones; for example, weather conditions at the head of a mountain valley, extending directly from the peaks, are colder and more severe than those at the mouth of a valley which tend to be less severe and receive less snowfall. Viazzo (1980), 17 

Various models of climate change have been projected into the 22nd century for the Alps, with an expectation that a trend toward increased temperatures will have an effect on snowfall, snowpack, glaciation, and river runoff. Benniston (2011), 34 

== Ecology ==

=== Flora ===

Stemless gentian (Gentiana acaulis)

13,000 species of plants have been identified in the Alpine regions. Alpine plants are grouped by habitat and soil type which can be limestone or non-calcerous. The habitats range from meadows, bogs, woodland (deciduous and coniferous) areas to soilless scree and moraines, and rock faces and ridges. Reynolds, (2012), 4345 A natural vegetation limit with altitude is given by the presence of the chief deciduous treesoak, beech, ash and sycamore maple. These do not reach exactly to the same elevation, nor are they often found growing together; but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the presence of wild herbaceous vegetation. This limit usually lies about 1200 m above the sea on the north side of the Alps, but on the southern slopes it often rises to 1500 m, sometimes even to 1700 m. Shoumatoff (2001), 75 

Above the forestry, there is often a band of short pine trees (Pinus mugo), which is in turn superseded by Alpenrosen, dwarf shrubs, typically Rhododendron ferrugineum (on acid soils) or Rhododendron hirsutum (on alkaline soils). Beattie (2006), 17 Although the Alpenrose prefers acidic soil, the plants are found throughout the region. Above the tree line is the area defined as "alpine" where in the alpine meadow plants are found that have adapted well to harsh conditions of cold temperatures, aridity, and high altitudes. The alpine area fluctuates greatly because of regional fluctuations in tree lines. Krner (2003), 9 

Edelweiss (Leontopodium alpinum)

Alpine plants such the Alpine gentian grow in abundance in areas such as the meadows above the Lauterbrunnental. Gentians are named after the Illyrian king Gentius, and 40 species of the early-spring blooming flower grow in the Alps, in a range of 1,500 to. Shoumatoff (2001), 85 Writing about the gentians in Switzerland D. H. Lawrence described them as "darkening the day-time, torch-like with the smoking blueness of Pluto's gloom." qtd in Beattie (2006), 17 Gentians tend to "appear" repeatedly as the spring blooming takes place at progressively later dates, moving from the lower altitude to the higher altitude meadows where the snow melts much later than in the valleys. On the highest rocky ledges the spring flowers bloom in the summer. 

At these higher altitudes, the plants tend to form isolated cushions. In the Alps, several species of flowering plants have been recorded above 4000 m, including Ranunculus glacialis, Androsace alpina and Saxifraga biflora. The Eritrichium nanum, commonly known as the King of the Alps, is the most elusive of the alpine flowers, growing on rocky ridges at 2,600 to. Shoumatoff (2001), 87 Perhaps the best known of the alpine plants is the Edelweiss which grows in rocky areas and can be found at altitudes as low as 1,400 m and as high as 3,400 m. The plants that grow at the highest altitudes have adapted to conditions by specialization such as growing in rock screes that give protection from winds. Sharp (2002), 14 

The extreme and stressful climatic conditions give way to the growth of plant species with secondary metabolites important for medicinal purposes. Origanum vulgare, Prunella vulgaris, Solanum nigrum and Urtica dioica are some of the more useful medicinal species found in the Alps. Kala, C.P. and Ratajc, P. 2012."High altitude biodiversity of the Alps and the Himalayas: ethnobotany, plant distribution and conservation perspective". Biodiversity and Conservation, 21 (4): 11151126. 

Human interference has nearly exterminated the trees in many areas, and, except for the beech forests of the Austrian Alps, forests of deciduous trees are rarely found after the extreme deforestation between the 17th and 19th centuries. Gerrard (1990), 225 The vegetation has changed since the second half of the 20th century, as the high alpine meadows cease to be harvested for hay or used for grazing which eventually might result in a regrowth of forest. In some areas the modern practice of building ski runs by mechanical means has destroyed the underlying tundra from which the plant life cannot recover during the non-skiing months, whereas areas that still practice a natural piste type of ski slope building preserve the fragile underlayers. 

=== Fauna ===
The Alps are a habitat for 30,000 species of wildlife, ranging from the tiniest snow fleas to brown bears, many of which have made adaptations to the harsh cold conditions and high altitudes to the point that some only survive in specific micro-climates either directly above or below the snow line. Shoumatoff (2001), 90, 96, 101 

Young Alpine ibex. When fully grown its horns will be about one metre wide.

The largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes are the Ibex, which have been sighted as high as 3,000 m. The ibex live in caves and descend to eat the succulent alpine grasses. Shoumatoff (2001), 104 Classified as antelopes, Chamois are smaller than ibex and found throughout the Alps, living above the tree line and are common in the entire alpine range. Rupicapra rupicapra 1758 Areas of the eastern Alps are still home to brown bears. In Switzerland the canton of Bern was named for the bears but the last bear is recorded as having been killed in 1792 above Kleine Scheidegg by three hunters from Grindelwald. Shoumatoff (2001), 101 

Many rodents such as voles live underground. Marmots live almost exclusively above the tree line as high as 2,700 m. They hibernate in large groups to provide warmth, Shoumatoff (2001), 102103 and can be found in all areas of the Alps, in large colonies they build beneath the alpine pastures. Golden eagles and Bearded Vultures are the largest birds to be found in the Alps; they nest high on rocky ledges and can be found at altitudes of 2,400 m. The most common bird isa the alpine chough which can be found scavenging at climber's huts or at the Jungfraujoch, a high altitude tourist destination. Shoumatoff (2001), 9798 

The Alpine Apollo Butterfly has adapted to Alpine conditions.

Reptiles such as adders and vipers live up to the snow line; because they cannot bear the cold temperatures they hibernate underground and soak up the warmth on rocky ledges. Shoumatoff (2001), 96 The high-altitude Alpine salamanders have adapted to living above the snow line by giving birth to fully developed young rather than laying eggs. Brown trout can be found in the streams up to the snow line. Molluscs such as the wood snail live up the snow line. Popularly gathered as food, the snails are now protected. Shoumatoff (2001), 8889 

A number of species of moths live in the Alps, some of which are believed to have evolved in the same habitat up to 120 million years ago, long before the Alps were created. Blue moths can commonly be seen drinking from the snow melt; some species of blue moths fly as high as 1,800 m. Shoumatoff (2001), 93 The butterflies tend to be large, such as those from the swallowtail Parnassus family, with a habitat that ranges to 1,800 m. Twelve species of beetles have habitats up to the snow line; the most beautiful and formerly collected for its colours but now protected is the Rosalia alpina. Shoumatoff (2001), 91 Spiders, such as the large wolf spider, live above the snow line and can be seen as high as 4,00 m. Scorpions can be found in the Italian Alps. 

Some of the species of moths and insects show evidence of having been indigenous to the area from as long ago as the Alpine orogeny. In Emosson
in Valais, Switzerland, dinosaur tracks were found in 1970s, dating probably from the Triassic era. Reynolds (2012), 75 

== History ==

=== Prehistory to Christianity ===
tzi, the 5,300-year-old mummy, found in the tztal Alps shown here in a museum reproduction of what he may have looked like.

About 10,000 years ago, when the ice melted after the last glacial period, late Paleolithic communities were established along the lake shores and in cave systems. Evidence of human habitation has been found in caves near Vercors, close to Grenoble; in Austria the Mondsee culture shows evidence of houses built on piles to keep them dry. Standing stones have been found in Alpine areas of France and Italy. The Rock Drawings in Valcamonica are more than 5000 years old; more than 200,000 drawings and etchings have been identified at the site. Beatttie, (2006), 25 

In 1991 a mummy of a neolithic body, known as tzi the Iceman, was discovered by hikers on the Similaun glacier. His clothing and gear indicate that he lived in an alpine farming community, while the location and manner of his deathan arrowhead was discovered in his shouldersuggests he was traveling from one place to another. Beatttie, (2006), 21 Analysis of the Mitochondrial DNA of tzi, has shown that he belongs to the K1 subclade which cannot be categorized into any of the three modern branches of that subclade. The new subclade has provisionally been named K1 for tzi. Luca Ermini et al., "Complete Mitochondrial Genome Sequence of the Tyrolean Iceman," Current Biology, vol. 18, no. 21 (30 October 2008), pp. 16871693. 

Celtic tribes settled in Switzerland between 1000 to 1500 BC. The Raetians lived in the eastern regions, while the west was occupied by the Helvetii and the Allobrogi settled in the Rhone valley and in Savoy. Among the many substances Celtic tribes mined was salt in areas such as Salzburg in Austria where evidence of the Hallstatt culture was found by a mine manager in the 19th century. By the 6th century BC the La Tne culture was well established in the region, Fleming (2000), 2 and became known for high quality decorated weapons and jewelry. Shoumatoff (2001), 131 The Celts were the most widespread of the mountain tribesthey had warriors that were strong, tall and fair skinned skilled with iron weapons, which gave them an advantage in warfare. Shoumatoff (2001), 110 

During the Second Punic War in 218 BC, the Carthaginian general Hannibal probably crossed the Alps with an army numbering 38,000 infantry, 8,000 cavalry, and 37 war elephants. This was one of the most celebrated achievements of any military force in ancient warfare, Lancel, Serge, (1999), 71 although no evidence exists of the actual crossing or the place of crossing. The Romans, however, had built roads along the mountain passes, which continued to be used through the medieval period to cross the mountains and Roman road markers can still be found on the mountain passes. Prevas (2001), 6869 

Chteau de Chillon, an early medieval castle on the north shore of Lake Geneva, is shown here against the backdrop of the Dents du Midi

The Roman expansion brought the defeat of the Allobrogi in 121 BC and during the Gallic Wars in 58 BC Julius Caesar overcame the Helvetii. The Rhaetians continued to resist but were eventually conquered when the Romans turned northward to the Danube valley in Austria and defeated the Brigantes. Beatttie, (2006), 27 The Romans built settlements in the Alps; towns such as Aosta (named for Augustus) in Italy, Martigny and Lausanne in Switzerland, and Partenkirchen in Bavaria show remains of Roman baths, villas, arenas and temples. Beattie, (2006), 2831 Much of the Alpine region was gradually settled by Germanic tribes, (Lombards, Alemanni, Bavarii, and Franks) from the 6th to the 13th centuries, Beattie, (2006), 31, 34 with the latest expansion corresponding to the Walser migrations.

=== Christianity, feudalism, and Napoleonic wars ===
Christianity was established in the region by the Romans, and saw the establishment of monasteries and churches in the high regions. The Frankish expansion of the Carolingian Empire and the Bavarian expansion in the eastern Alps introduced feudalism and the building of castles to support the growing number of dukedoms and kingdoms. Castello del Buonconsiglio in Trento, Italy, still has intricate frescoes, excellent examples of Gothic art, in a tower room. In Switzerland, Chteau de Chillon is preserved as an example of medieval architecture. Beattie, (2006), 32, 34, 37, 43 

Much of the medieval period was a time of power struggles between competing dynasties such as the House of Savoy, the Visconti in northern Italy and the House of Habsburg in Austria. Beattie, (2006), 41, 46, 48 In 1291 to protect themselves from incursions by the Habsburgs, four cantons in the middle of Switzerland drew up a charter that is considered to be a declaration of independence from neighboring kingdoms. After a series of battles fought in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, more cantons joined the confederacy and by the 16th century Switzerland was well-established as a separate state. Beattie, (2006), 56, 66 

Russian troops under Suvorov crossing the Alps in 1799
During the Napoleonic Wars in the late 18th century and early 19th century, Napoleon annexed territory formerly controlled by the Habsburgs and Savoys. In 1798 he established the Helvetic Republic in Switzerland; two years later he led an army across the St. Bernhard pass and conquered almost all of the Alpine regions. Shoumatoff (2001), 182183 

In the 19th century, the monasteries built in the high Alps during the medieval period to shelter travelers and as places of pilgrimage, became tourist destinations. The Benedictines had built monasteries in Lucerne, Switzerland, and Oberammergau; the Cistercians in the Tyrol and at Lake Constance; and the Augustinians had abbeys in the Savoy and one in the center of Interlaken, Switzerland. Beattie, (2006), 6970 The Great St Bernard Hospice, built in the 9th or 10th centuries, at the summit of the Great Saint Bernard Pass was shelter for travelers and place for pilgrims since its inception; by the 19th century it became a tourist attraction with notable visitors such as author Charles Dickens and mountaineer Edward Whymper. Beattie, (2006), 73, 7576 

=== Exploration ===

The first ascent of the Matterhorn (1865), lithograph by Gustave Dor

Radiocarbon dated charcoal placed around 50,000 years ago was found in the Drachloch (Dragon's Hole) cave above the village of Vattis in the canton of St. Gallen, proving that the high peaks were visited by prehistoric people. Seven bear skulls from the cave may have been buried by the same prehistoric people. Shoumatoff (2001), 108 The peaks, however, were mostly ignored except for a few notable examples, and long left to the exclusive attention of the people of the adjoining valleys. Shoumatoff (2001), 188191 The mountain peaks were seen as terrifying, the abode of dragons and demons, to the point that people blindfolded themselves to cross the Alpine passes. Fleming (2000), 6 The glaciers remained a mystery and many still believed the highest areas to be inhabited by dragons. Fleming (2000), 12 

Charles VII of France ordered his chamberlain to climb Mont Aiguille in 1356. The knight reached the summit of Rocciamelone where he left a bronze triptych of three crosses, a feat which he conducted with the use of ladders to traverse the ice. Fleming (2000), 5 In 1492 Antoine de Ville climbed Mont Aiguille, without reaching the summit, an experience he described as "horrifying and terrifying." Leonardo da Vinci was fascinated by variations of light in the higher altitudes, and climbed a mountainscholars are uncertain which one; some believe it may have been Monte Rosa. From his description of a "blue like that of a gentian" sky it is thought that he reached a significantly high altitude. qtd in Shoumatoff (2001), 193 In the 18th century four Chamonix man almost made the summit of Mont Blanc but were overcome by altitude sickness and snowblindness. Shoumatoff (2001), 192194 

Conrad Gessner was the first naturalist to ascend the mountains in the 16th century, to study them, writing that in the mountains he found the "theatre of the Lord". Fleming (2000), 8 By the 19th century more naturalists began to arrive to explore, study and conquer the high peaks; they were followed by artists, writers and painters. Fleming (2000), vii Two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were Horace-Bndict de Saussure (17401799) in the Pennine Alps, Fleming (2000), 27 and the Benedictine monk of Disentis Placidus a Spescha (17521833). Born in Geneva, Saussure was enamored with the mountains from an early age; he left a law career to become a naturalist and spent many years trekking through the Bernese Oberland, the Savoy, the Piedmont and Valais, studying the glaciers and the geology, as he became an early proponent of the theory of rock upheaval. Fleming (2000), 1213, 30, 27 Saussure, in 1787, was a member of the third ascent of Mont Blanctoday the summits of all the peaks have been climbed. 

=== The Romantics ===

Jean-Jacques Rousseau was the first of many to present the Alps as a place of allure and beauty, banishing the prevalent conception of the mountains as a hellish wasteland inhabited by demons. Rousseau's conception of alpine purity was later emphasized with the publication of Albrecht von Haller's poem Die Alpen that described the mountains as an area of mythical purity. Beattie, (2006), 121123 Late in the 18th century the first wave of Romantics such as Goethe and Turner came to admire the scenery; Wordsworth visited the area in 1790, writing of his experiences in The Prelude. Schiller later wrote the play William Tell romanticising Swiss independence. After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Alpine countries began to see an influx of poets, artists, and musicians, Fleming (2000), 83 as visitors came to experience the sublime effects of monumental nature. Beattie, (2006), 125126 

Panoramic view from Nivolet peak. The Bourget lake inspired many romantic poets and especially Lamartine
The scenery of the lac du Bourget in Savoy inspired the romantic poet Lamartine who wrote Le Lac (the lake)

In 1816 Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley and his wife Mary Shelley visited Geneva and all three were inspired by the scenery in their writings. During these visits Shelley wrote the poem "Mont Blanc", Byron wrote "The Prisoner of Chillon" and the dramatic poem Manfred, and Mary Shelley, who found the scenery overwhelming, conceived the idea for the novel Frankenstein in her villa on the shores of Lake Geneva in the midst of a thunderstorm. When Coleridge travelled to Chamonix, he declaimed, in defiance of Shelley, who had signed himself "Atheos" in the guestbook of the Hotel de Londres near Montenvers, Geoffrey Hartman, "Gods, Ghosts, and Shelley's 'Atheos'", Literature and Theology, Volume 24, Issue 1, pp. 418 "Who would be, who could be an atheist in this valley of wonders". Beattie, (2006), 127133 By the mid-19th century scientists began to arrive en masse to study the geology and ecology of the region. Beattie, (2006), 139 

=== The World Wars ===
During World War I, an estimated 40,000 to 80,000 soldiers died as a result of avalanches during the mountain campaign in the Alps at the Austrian-Italian front, many of which were caused by artillery fire. Eduard Rabofsky et al., Lawininenhandbuch, Innsbruck, Verlaganstalt Tyrolia, 1986, p. 11 Some 10,000 men, from both sides, lost their lives in avalanches in December 1916. History Channel - December 13, 1916: Soldiers perish in avalanche as World War I rages 

Austrian-born Adolf Hitler had a lifelong romantic fascination with the Alps and by the 1930s established a home in the Obersalzberg region outside of Berchtesgaden. His first visit to the area was in 1923 and he maintained a strong tie there until the end of his life. At the end of World War II the US Army occupied Obersalzberg, to prevent Hitler from retreating with the Wehrmacht into the mountains. Mitchell (2007), 710 

The Nazis hid looted art in salt mines at Altaussee, such as the Early Netherlandish Ghent Altarpiece which sustained significant damage.

By 1940 the Third Reich had occupied many of the Alpine countries. Austria underwent a political coup that made it part of the Third Reich; France had been invaded and Italy was a fascist regime. Switzerland was the only country to luckily avoid invasion. Halbrook (1998), 1 The Swiss Confederate mobilized its troopsthe country follows the doctrine of "armed neutrality" with all males required to have military traininga number that General Eisenhower estimated to be about 850,000. The Swiss commanders wired the infrastructure leading into the country, and threatening to destroy bridges, railway tunnels and passes in the event of a Nazi invasion, and then they retreated to the heart of the mountain peaks where conditions were harsher and a military invasion would involve difficult and protracted battles. Halbrook (2006), 13 

Ski troops were trained for the war, and battles were waged in mountainous areas such as the battle at Riva Ridge in Italy, where the American 10th Mountain Division encountered heavy resistance in February 1945. Feuer (2006), viii At the end of the war, a substantial amount of Nazi plunder was found stored in Austria, where Hitler had hoped to retreat as the war drew to a close. The salt mines surrounding the Altaussee area, where American troops found 75 kilos of gold coins stored in a single mine, were used to store looted art, jewels, and currency; vast quantities of looted art were found and returned to the owners. Mitchell (2007), 10, 151 

== Alpine people and culture ==

The population of the region is 14 million spread across eight countries. On the rim of the mountains, on the plateaus and the plains the economy consists of manufacturing and service jobs whereas in the higher altitudes and in the mountains farming is still essential to the economy. Chartes et. el. (2010), 14 
The city of Trento is known for its quality of life.
Hallstatt is known for its production of salt, dating back to prehistoric times. Today, the majority lives in Alpine towns or agglomerations, especially around Grenoble, Innsbruck, Trento and Bozen/Bolzano. Alpine urban regions, which often extend over entire valley sections, Krakover & Borsdorf (2000): Spatial dynamics of urban expansion: The case of Innsbruck, Austria. DIE ERDE 131 (2), 125141 are perceived to offer a relatively high quality of live to due their proximity to natural environments. Borsdorf (1999): Quality of life in alpine towns- with examples from Innsbruck and Bregenz. Revue de geographie alpine 87 (1), 163169 Farming and forestry continue to be mainstays of Alpine culture, industries that provide for export to the cities and maintain the mountain ecology. Chartes et. el. (2010), 5 

Much of the Alpine culture is unchanged since the medieval period when skills that guaranteed survival in the mountain valleys and in the highest villages became mainstays, leading to strong traditions of carpentry, woodcarving, baking and pastry-making, and cheesemaking. Shoumataff (2001), 123126 Farming and forestry continue to be mainstays of Alpine culture, industries that provide for export to the cities and maintain the mountain ecology. 

Farming had been a traditional occupation for centuries, although is becoming less dominant in the 20th century with the advent of tourism. Grazing and pasture land is limited because of the steep and rocky topography of the Alps. In mid-June cows are moved to the highest pastures close to the snowline, where they are watched by herdsmen who stay in the high altitudes often living in stone huts or wooden barns during the summers. Villagers celebrate the day the cows are herded up to the pastures and again when they return in mid-September. The Alpanschluss or Dsalpes ("coming down from the alps") is celebrated by decorating the cows with garlands and enormous cowbells while the farmers dress in traditional costumes. 

Herding sheep

Cheesemaking is an ancient tradition in most Alpine countries. A wheel of cheese from the Emmental in Switzerland can weigh up to 100 pounds, and the Beaufort in Savoy can weight up to 70 kg. Owners of the cows traditionally receive from the cheesemakers a portion in relation to the proportion of the cow's milk from the summer months in the high alps. Haymaking is an important farming activity in mountain villages which has become somewhat mechanized recent years, although the slopes are so steep that usually scythes are necessary to cut the grass. Hay is normally brought in twice a year, often also on festival days. Alpine festivals vary from country to country and often include the display of local costumes such as dirndl and trachten, the playing of Alpenhorns, wrestling matches, some pagan traditions such as Walpurgis Night, and in many areas Carnival is celebrated before Lent. Shoumataff (2001), 129, 135 

In the high villages people live in homes built according to medieval designs that withstand cold winters. The kitchen is separated from the living area (called the stube, the area of the home heated by a stove), and second-floor bedrooms benefit from rising heat. The typical Swiss chalet originated in the Bernese Oberland. Chalets often face south or downhill, are built of solid wood, with a steeply gabled roof to allow accumulated snow to slide off easily. Stairs leading to upper levels are sometimes built on the outside, and balconies are sometimes enclosed. Shoumataff (2001), 134 
In some French chalets called "Tournavel" the cows are staying downstairs, people using the warmth from the cattle to heat up the living areas designed for humans upstairs.
Typical village of Savoy (France) with roofs made up with pieces of rocks.
Food is passed from the kitchen to the stube, where the dining room table is placed. Some meals are communal, such as fondue, where a pot is set in the middle of the table for each person to dip into. Other meals are still served in a traditional manner on carved wooden plates. Furniture has been traditionally elaborately carved and in many Alpine countries carpentry skills are passed from generation to generation. Roofs are constructed from Alpine rocks such as pieces of schist, gneiss or slate. Shoumataff (2001), 131, 134 Theses chalets are usually found in the higher parts of the valleys were the wood is rare and the amount of snow very important during the cold months like the Maurienne valley in Savoy. The inclination of the roof cannot exceed 40%, allowing the snow to stay on top. Thus this thick layer is used as an effective insulation from the cold. Cahier d'architecture Haute Maurienne/Vanoise 

The Alpine regions are multicultural and linguistically diverse. Dialects are common, and vary from valley to valley, region to region. In the Slavic Alps alone 19 dialects have been identified. Some of the French dialects spoken in the French, Swiss and the Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Old Provenal and is called mostly Arpitan; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages. Shoumataff (2001), 114166 Romansh, spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland, is an ancient Rheato-Romanic language derived from Latin, remnants of ancient Celtic languages and perhaps Etruscan. 
In others parts of the alps, Celtic languages were used. Like the name of Tarentaise in Savoy (France) deriving from "Darantasia" a Celtic word, meaning "The wild waters" (see Ceutrones).

== Tourism ==

The ski resort in Speikboden, Italy

At present the Alps are one of the more popular tourist destinations in the world with many resorts such Oberstdorf, in Bavaria, Saalbach in Austria, Davos in Switzerland, Chamonix in France, and Cortina d'Ampezzo in Italy recording more than a million annual visitors. With over 120 million visitors a year tourism is integral to the Alpine economy with much it coming from winter sports although summer visitors are an important component of the tourism industry. Bartaletti, Fabrizio."What Role Do the Alps Play within World Tourism?". Commission Internationale pour la Protection des Alpes. CIRPA.org. Retrieved 9 August 2012 

The tourism industry began in the early 19th century when foreigners visited the Alps, traveled to the bases of the mountains to enjoy the scenery, and stayed at the spa-resorts. Large hotels were built during the Belle poque; cog-railways, built early in the 20th century, brought tourists to ever higher elevations, with the Jungfraubahn terminating at the Jungfraujoch after going through a tunnel in Eiger. During this period winter sports were slowly introduced: in 1882 the first figure skating championship was held in St. Moritz, and downhill skiing became a popular sport with English visitors early in the 20th century, as the first ski-lift was installed in 1908 above Grindelwald. Beattie (2006), 198 

Karl Schranz running the Lauberhorn in 1966
In the first half of the 20th century the Olympic Winter Games were held three times in Alpine venues: the 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix, France; the 1928 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland; and the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. During World War II the winter games were canceled but after that time the Winter Games have been held in St. Moritz (1948), Cortina d'Ampezzo (1956), Innsbruck, Austria (1964 and 1976), Grenoble, France, (1968), Albertville, France, (1992), and Torino (2006). "21 Past Olympic Games". Olympic.org. Retrieved August 13, 2012 In 1930 the Lauberhorn Rennen (Lauberhorn Race), was run for the first time on the Lauberhorn above Wengen; Lauberhorn History. Retrieved August 14, 2012. the equally demanding Hahnenkamm was first run in the same year in Kitzbhl, Austria. "Hahenkamm Races Kitzbuhel". HKR.com. Retrieved August 13, 2012 Both races continue to be held each January on successive weekends. The Lauberhorn is the more strenuous downhill race at 4.5 km and poses danger to racers who reach 130 km/h within seconds of leaving the start gate. Lauberhorn Downhill. Retrieved August 14, 2012. 

During the post-World War I period ski-lifts were built in Swiss and Austrian towns to accommodate winter visitors, but summer tourism continued to be important; by the mid-20th century the popularity of downhill skiing increased greatly as it became more accessible and in the 1970s several new villages were built in France devoted almost exclusively to skiing, such as Les Menuires. Until this point Austria and Switzerland had been the traditional and more popular destinations for winter sports, but by the end of the 20th century and into the early 21st century, France, Italy and the Tyrol began to see increases in winter visitors. From 1980 to the present, ski-lifts have been modernized and snow-making machines installed at many resorts, leading to concerns regarding the loss of traditional Alpine culture and questions regarding sustainable development as the winter ski industry continues to develop quickly and the number of summer tourists decline. 

== Transportation ==
Zentralbahn Interregio train following the Lake Brienz shoreline, near Niederried in Switzerland.
The region is serviced by 4,200 km of roads used by 6 million vehicles. Train travel is well established in the Alps, with, for instance 120 km of track for every 1000 km2 in a country such as Switzerland. "Rail". Swissworld.org. Retrieved August 20, 2012 Most of Europe's highest railways are located there. Moreover, plans are underway to build a 57 km-long sub-alpine tunnel connecting the older Ltschberg and Gotthard tunnels built in the 19th century. "The Longest Hole". Swissworld.org. Retrieved August 20, 2012 

Some high mountain villages, such as Avoriaz (in France), Wengen, and Zermatt (in Switzerland) are accessible only by cable car or cog-rail trains, and are car free. Other villages in the Alps are considering becoming car free zones or limiting the number of cars for reasons of sustainability of the fragile Alpine terrain. Hudson (2000), 107 

The lower regions and larger towns of the Alps are well-served by motorways and main roads, but higher mountain passes and byroads can be treacherous even in summer due to steep slopes. Many passes are closed in winter. A multitude of airports around the Alps (and some within), as well as long-distance rail links from all neighbouring countries, afford large numbers of travellers easy access from abroad. 

== Notes ==

===References===

=== Sources ===
* Allaby, Michael et al. The Encyclopedia of Earth. (2008). Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25471-8
* Beattie, Andrew. (2006). The Alps: A Cultural History. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530955-3
* Benniston, Martin, et al. (2011). "Impact of Climatic Change on Water and Natural Hazards in the Alps". Environmental Science and Policy. Volume 30. 19
* Cebon, Peter, et al. (1998). Views from the Alps: Regional Perspectives on Climate Change. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-03252-0
* Chatr, Baptiste, et al. (2010). The Alps: People and Pressures in the Mountains, the Facts at a Glance. Permanent Secretariat of the Alpine Convention (alpconv.org). Retrieved August 4, 2012. ISBN 978-88-905158-2-8
* De Graciansky, Pierre-Charles et al. (2011). The Western Alps, From Rift to Passive Margin to Orogenic Belt. Amsterdam: Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-53724-9
* Feuer, A.B. (2006). Packs On!: Memoirs of the 10th Mountain Division in World War II. Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3289-5
* Fleming, Fergus. (2000). Killing Dragons: The Conquest of the Alps. New York: Grove. ISBN 978-0-8021-3867-5
* Halbrook, Stephen P. (1998). Target Switzerland: Swiss Armed Neutrality in World War II. Rockville Center, NY: Sarpedon. ISBN 978-1-885119-53-7
* Halbrook, Stephen P. (2006). The Swiss and the Nazis: How the Alpine Republic Survived in the Shadow of the Third Reich. Havertown, PA: Casemate. ISBN 978-1-932033-42-7
* Hudson, Simon. (2000). Snow Business: A Study of the International Ski Industry. New York: Cengage ISBN 978-0-304-70471-2
* Gerrard, AJ. (1990) Mountain Environments: An Examination of the Physical Geography of Mountains. Boston: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-07128-4
* Krner, Christian. (2003). Alpine Plant Life. New York: Springer Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-00347-2
* Lancel, Serge. (1999). Hannibal. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21848-7
* Mitchell, Arthur H. (2007). Hitler's Mountain. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-2458-0
* Prevas, John. (2001). Hannibal Crosses The Alps: The Invasion Of Italy And The Punic Wars. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81070-1
* Reynolds, Kev. (2012) The Swiss Alps. Cicerone Press. ISBN 978-1-85284-465-3
* Roth, Philipe. (2007). Minerals first Discovered in Switzerland. Lausanne, CH: Museum of Geology. ISBN 978-3-9807561-8-1
* Schmid, Stefan M. (2004). "Regional tectonics: from the Rhine graben to the Po plain, a summary of the tectonic evolution of the Alps and their forelands". Basel: Geologisch-Palontologisches Institut
* Sharp, Hilary. (2002). Trekking and Climbing in the Western Alps. London: New Holland. ISBN 978-0-8117-2954-3
* Schmid, Stefan M.et al. (2004). "Tectonic map and overall architecture of the Alpine orogen". Eclogae Geologicae Helvetiae. Volume 97. 93117
* Shoumatoff, Nicholas and Nina. (2001). The Alps: Europe's Mountain Heart. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-11111-4
* Viazzo, Pier Paolo. (1980). Upland Communities: Environment, Population and Social Structure in the Alps since the Sixteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521306638

== External links ==

* 17, 2005 Satellite photo of the Alps, taken on 31 August 2005 by MODIS aboard Terra
* Official website of the Alpine Space Programme This EU co-funded programme co-finances transnational projects in the Alpine region

 



[[Albert Camus]]

Albert Camus (; 7 November 1913  4 January 1960) was a French Nobel Prize winning author, journalist, and philosopher. His views contributed to the rise of the philosophy known as absurdism. He wrote in his essay "The Rebel" that his whole life was devoted to opposing the philosophy of nihilism while still delving deeply into individual and sexual freedom.

Camus did not consider himself to be an existentialist despite usually being classified as one (even during his own lifetime). In an interview in 1945, Camus rejected any ideological associations: "No, I am not an existentialist. Sartre and I are always surprised to see our names linked...". "Les Nouvelles littraires", 15 November 1945 

Camus was born in French Algeria to a Pied-Noir family. He studied at the University of Algiers, where he was goalkeeper for the university association football team, until he contracted tuberculosis in 1930. In 1949, Camus founded the Group for International Liaisons within the Revolutionary Union Movement after his split with Garry Davis's Citizens of the World movement. The formation of this group, according to Camus, was intended to "denounce two ideologies found in both the USSR and the USA" regarding their idolatry of technology. 

Camus was awarded the 1957 Nobel Prize for Literature "for his important literary production, which with clear-sighted earnestness illuminates the problems of the human conscience in our times". 

==Early years==
Albert Camus was born on 7 November 1913 in Dran (then known as Mondovi) in French Algeria to a Pied-Noir family. His mother was of Spanish descent and was half-deaf. Lottman 1979, p.11 His father Lucien, a poor agricultural worker, died in the Battle of the Marne in 1914 during World War I, while serving as a member of the Zouave infantry regiment. This fact is confirmed in the article 'The Master of the Absurd Turns 100', in the September/October 2013 issue of Philosophy Now magazine. The article can be accessed here Camus and his mother lived in poor conditions during his childhood in the Belcourt section of Algiers.

In 1923, Camus was accepted into the lyce and eventually he was admitted to the University of Algiers. After he contracted tuberculosis in 1930, he had to end his football activities (he had been a goalkeeper for the university team) and reduce his studies to part-time. To earn money, he also took odd jobs: as private tutor, car parts clerk and assistant at the Meteorological Institute. He completed his licence de philosophie (BA) in 1935; in May 1936, he successfully presented his thesis on Plotinus, No-Platonisme et Pense Chrtienne (Neo-Platonism and Christian Thought), for his diplme d'tudes suprieures (roughly equivalent to an MA thesis). 

Camus joined the French Communist Party in the spring of 1935, seeing it as a way to "fight inequalities between Europeans and 'natives' in Algeria". He did not suggest he was a Marxist or that he had read Das Kapital, but did write, "We might see communism as a springboard and asceticism that prepares the ground for more spiritual activities." Todd, O Albert Camus: A Life, pp. 37, 250, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998; Carroll & Graf, 2000 In 1936, the independence-minded Algerian Communist Party (PCA) was founded. Camus joined the activities of the Algerian People's Party (Le Parti du Peuple Algrien), which got him into trouble with his Communist party comrades. As a result, in 1937 he was denounced as a Trotskyite and expelled from the party. Camus went on to be associated with the French anarchist movement.

The anarchist Andr Prudhommeaux first introduced him at a meeting in 1948 of the Cercle des tudiants Anarchistes (Anarchist Student Circle) as a sympathiser familiar with anarchist thought. Camus wrote for anarchist publications such as Le Libertaire, La rvolution Proletarienne and Solidaridad Obrera (Workers' Solidarity, the organ of the anarcho-syndicalist CNT (National Confederation of Labor)). Camus stood with the anarchists when they expressed support for the uprising of 1953 in East Germany. He again allied with the anarchists in 1956, first in support of the workers' uprising in Pozna, Poland, and then later in the year with the Hungarian Revolution.

===Marriages===
In 1934, Camus married Simone Hi, but the marriage ended as a consequence of infidelities on both sides. In 1935, he founded Thtre du Travail (Worker's Theatre), renamed Thtre de l'Equipe (Team's Theatre) in 1937. It lasted until 1939. From 1937 to 1939 he wrote for a socialist paper, Alger-Rpublicain. His work included an account of the peasants who lived in Kabylie in poor conditions, which apparently cost him his job. From 1939 to 1940, he briefly wrote for a similar paper, Soir-Republicain. He was rejected by the French army because of his TB.

In 1940, Camus married Francine Faure, a pianist and mathematician. Although he loved her, he had argued passionately against the institution of marriage, dismissing it as unnatural. Even after Francine gave birth to twins, Catherine and Jean, on 5 September 1945, he continued to joke to friends that he was not cut out for marriage. Camus conducted numerous affairs, particularly an irregular and eventually public affair with the Spanish-born actress Mara Casares. In the same year, Camus began to work for Paris-Soir magazine. In the first stage of World War II, the so-called Phoney War, Camus was a pacifist. In Paris during the Wehrmacht occupation, on 15 December 1941, Camus witnessed the execution of Gabriel Pri; it crystallized his revolt against the Germans. He moved to Bordeaux with the rest of the staff of Paris-Soir. In the same year he finished his first books, The Stranger and The Myth of Sisyphus. He returned briefly to Oran, Algeria in 1942.

==Literary career==
During the war Camus joined the French Resistance cell Combat, which published an underground newspaper of the same name. This group worked against the Nazis, and in it Camus assumed the nom de guerre Beauchard. Camus became the paper's editor in 1943. He first met Sartre at the dress rehearsal of Sartre's play, The Flies, in June 1943. , by Simone de Beauvoir 
When the Allies liberated Paris in August 1944, Camus witnessed and reported the last of the fighting. Soon after the event on 6 August 1945, he was one of the few French editors to publicly express opposition and disgust to the United States' dropping the atomic bomb in Hiroshima. He resigned from Combat in 1947 when it became a commercial paper. After the war, Camus began frequenting the Caf de Flore on the Boulevard Saint-Germain in Paris with Sartre and others. He also toured the United States to lecture about French thought. Although he leaned left, politically, his strong criticisms of Communist doctrine did not win him any friends in the Communist parties and eventually alienated Sartre.

In 1949, his TB returned and Camus lived in seclusion for two years. In 1951, he published The Rebel, a philosophical analysis of rebellion and revolution which expressed his rejection of communism. Upsetting many of his colleagues and contemporaries in France, the book brought about the final split with Sartre. The dour reception depressed Camus; he began to translate plays.

Camus's first significant contribution to philosophy was his idea of the absurd. He saw it as the result of our desire for clarity and meaning within a world and condition that offers neither, which he expressed in The Myth of Sisyphus and incorporated into many of his other works, such as The Stranger and The Plague. Despite his split from his "study partner", Sartre, some still argue that Camus falls into the existentialist camp. He specifically rejected that label in his essay "Enigma" and elsewhere (see: The Lyrical and Critical Essays of Albert Camus). The current confusion arises, in part, because many recent applications of existentialism have much in common with many of Camus's practical ideas (see: Resistance, Rebellion, and Death). But, his personal understanding of the world (e.g., "a benign indifference", in The Stranger), and every vision he had for its progress (e.g., vanquishing the "adolescent furies" of history and society, in The Rebel) undoubtedly set him apart.

In the 1950s, Camus devoted his efforts to human rights. In 1952, he resigned from his work for UNESCO when the UN accepted Spain as a member under the leadership of General Franco. In 1953, he criticized Soviet methods to crush a workers' strike in East Berlin. In 1956, he protested against similar methods in Poland (protests in Pozna) and the Soviet repression of the Hungarian revolution in October.

The monument to Camus built in the small town of Villeblevin, France where he died in an automobile accident on 4 January 1960

Camus maintained his pacifism and resisted capital punishment anywhere in the world. He wrote an essay against capital punishment in collaboration with Arthur Koestler, the writer, intellectual and founder of the League Against Capital Punishment. He was consistent in his call for non-aggression in Algeria. 

The bronze plaque on the monument to Camus in the town of Villeblevin, France. The plaque reads: "From the General Council of the Yonne Department, in homage to the writer Albert Camus whose remains lay in vigil at the Villeblevin town hall on the night of 4 to 5 January 1960."

When the Algerian War began in 1954, Camus was confronted with a moral dilemma. He identified with the pied-noirs such as his own parents and defended the French government's actions against the revolt. He argued that the Algerian uprising was an integral part of the 'new Arab imperialism' led by Egypt and an 'anti-Western' offensive orchestrated by Russia to 'encircle Europe' and 'isolate the United States'. Actuelles III: Chroniques Algeriennes, 193958 Although favouring greater Algerian autonomy or even federation, though not full-scale independence, he believed that the pied-noirs and Arabs could co-exist. During the war he advocated a civil truce that would spare the civilians, which was rejected by both sides, who regarded it as foolish. Behind the scenes, he began to work for imprisoned Algerians who faced the death penalty.

From 1955 to 1956, Camus wrote for L'Express. In 1957 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature "for his important literary production, which with clear-sighted earnestness illuminates the problems of the human conscience in our times", not for his novel The Fall, published the previous year, but for his writings against capital punishment in the essay "Rflexions sur la Guillotine" (Reflections on the Guillotine). When he spoke to students at the University of Stockholm, he defended his apparent inactivity in the Algerian question; he stated that he was worried about what might happen to his mother, who still lived in Algeria. This led to further ostracism by French left-wing intellectuals.

==Revolutionary Union Movement and Europe==
As he wrote in The Rebel rvolt (in the chapter about "The Thought on Midday"), Camus was a follower of the ancient Greek 'Solar Tradition' (la pense solaire). In 194748, he founded the Revolutionary Union Movement (Groupes de liaison internationale  GLI) a trade union movement in the context of revolutionary syndicalism (Syndicalisme rvolutionnaire). According to Olivier Todd, in his biography, 'Albert Camus, une vie', it was a group opposed to some tendencies of the Surrealist movement of Andr Breton. For more, see the book Alfred Rosmer et le mouvement rvolutionnaire internationale by Christian Gras.

His colleagues were Nicolas Lazarvitch, Louis Mercier, Roger Lapeyre, Paul Chauvet, Auguste Largentier, Jean de Bo (see the article: "Nicolas Lazarvitch, Itinraire d'un syndicaliste rvolutionnaire" by Sylvain Boulouque in the review Communisme, n 61, 2000). His main aim was to express the positive side of surrealism and existentialism, rejecting the negativity and the nihilism of Andr Breton.

From 1943, Albert Camus had correspondence with Altiero Spinelli who founded the European Federalist Movement in Milansee Ventotene Manifesto and the book "Unire l'Europa, superare gli stati", Altiero Spinelli nel Partito d'Azione del Nord Italia e in Francia dal 1944 al 1945-annexed a letter by Altiero Spinelli to Albert Camus.

In 1944 Camus founded the "French Committee for the European Federation" (Comit Franais pour la Fderation Europene  CFFE) declaring that Europe "can only evolve along the path of economic progress, democracy and peace if the nation states become a federation."

From 2225 March 1945, the first conference of the European Federalist Movement was organised in Paris with the participation of Albert Camus, George Orwell, Emmanuel Mounier, Lewis Mumford, Andr Philip, Daniel Mayer, Franois Bondy and Altiero Spinelli. (see the book The Biography of Europe by Pan Drakopoulos) This specific branch of the European Federalist Movement disintegrated in 1957 after Winston Churchill's ideas about the European integration rose to dominance.

==Death==
Camus died on 4 January 1960 at the age of 46, in a car accident near Sens, in Le Grand Fossard in the small town of Villeblevin. In his coat pocket was an unused train ticket. He had planned to travel by train with his wife and children, but at the last minute he accepted his publisher's proposal to travel with him. 
Albert Camus's gravestone
The driver of the Facel Vega car, Michel Gallimard, who was Camus's publisher and close friend, also died in the accident. In August 2011, the Milan newspaper Corriere della Sera reported a theory that the writer had been the victim of a Soviet plot, but Camus's biographer Olivier Todd did not consider it credible. Kim Willsher Albert Camus might have been killed by the KGB for criticising the Soviet Union, claims newspaper The Observer, 7 August 2011 Camus was buried in the Lourmarin Cemetery, Lourmarin, Vaucluse, France.

He was the second-youngest recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature, after Rudyard Kipling. 

He was survived by his wife and twin son and daughter, Jean and Catherine, who hold the copyrights to his work.

Two of Camus's works were published posthumously. The first, entitled A Happy Death (1970), featured a character named Patrice Mersault, comparable to The Stranger's Meursault. There is scholarly debate as to the relationship between the two books. The second was an unfinished novel, The First Man (1995), which Camus was writing before he died. The novel was an autobiographical work about his childhood in Algeria.

==Summary of absurdism==
Many writers have addressed the Absurd, each with his or her own interpretation of what the Absurd is and what comprises its importance. For example, Sartre recognizes the absurdity of individual experience, while Kierkegaard explains that the absurdity of certain religious truths prevent us from reaching God rationally. Camus regretted the continued reference to himself as a "philosopher of the absurd". He showed less interest in the Absurd shortly after publishing Le Mythe de Sisyphe (The Myth of Sisyphus). To distinguish his ideas, scholars sometimes refer to the Paradox of the Absurd, when referring to "Camus's Absurd". 

His early thoughts appeared in his first collection of essays, L'Envers et l'endroit (Betwixt and Between) in 1937. Absurd themes were expressed with more sophistication in his second collection of essays, Noces (Nuptials), in 1938. In these essays Camus reflects on the experience of the Absurd. In 1942 he published the story of a man living an absurd life as L'tranger (The Stranger). In the same year he released Le Mythe de Sisyphe (The Myth of Sisyphus), a literary essay on the Absurd. He also wrote a play about Caligula, a Roman Emperor, pursuing an absurd logic. The play was not performed until 1945.

The turning point in Camus's attitude to the Absurd occurs in a collection of four letters to an anonymous German friend, written between July 1943 and July 1944. The first was published in the Revue Libre in 1943, the second in the Cahiers de Libration in 1944, and the third in the newspaper Liberts, in 1945. The four letters were published as Lettres  un ami allemand (Letters to a German Friend) in 1945, and were included in the collection Resistance, Rebellion, and Death.

==Ideas on the absurd==

Camus presents the reader with dualisms such as happiness and sadness, dark and light, life and death, etc. He emphasizes the fact that happiness is fleeting and that the human condition is one of mortality; for Camus, this is cause for a greater appreciation for life and happiness. In Le Mythe, dualism becomes a paradox: we value our own lives in spite of our mortality and in spite of the universe's silence. While we can live with a dualism (I can accept periods of unhappiness, because I know I will also experience happiness to come), we cannot live with the paradox (I think my life is of great importance, but I also think it is meaningless). In Le Mythe, Camus investigates our experience of the Absurd and asks how we live with it. Our life must have meaning for us to value it. If we accept that life has no meaning and therefore no value, should we kill ourselves? 

In Le Mythe, Camus suggests that 'creation of meaning', would entail a logical leap or a kind of philosophical suicide in order to find psychological comfort. But Camus wants to know if he can live with what logic and lucidity has uncovered  if one can build a foundation on what one knows and nothing more. Creation of meaning is not a viable alternative but a logical leap and an evasion of the problem. He gives examples of how others would seem to make this kind of leap. The alternative option, namely suicide, would entail another kind of leap, where one attempts to kill absurdity by destroying one of its terms (the human being). Camus points out, however, that there is no more meaning in death than there is in life, and that it simply evades the problem yet again. Camus concludes, that we must instead 'entertain' both death and the absurd, while never agreeing to their terms.

Meursault, the absurdist hero of L'tranger, has killed a man and is scheduled to be executed. Caligula ends up admitting his absurd logic was wrong and is killed by an assassination he has deliberately brought about. However, while Camus possibly suggests that Caligula's absurd reasoning is wrong, the play's anti-hero does get the last word, as the author similarly exalts Meursault's final moments. 

Camus made a significant contribution to a viewpoint of the Absurd, and always rejected nihilism as a valid response. "If nothing had any meaning, you would be right. But there is something that still has a meaning." Second Letter to a German Friend, December 1943.

Camus's understanding of the Absurd promotes public debate; his various offerings entice us to think about the Absurd and offer our own contribution. Concepts such as cooperation, joint effort and solidarity are of key importance to Camus, though they are most likely sources of 'relative' versus 'absolute' meaning. In The Rebel, Camus identifies rebellion (or rather, the values indicated by rebellion) as a basis for human solidarity. "When he rebels, a man identifies himself with other men and so surpasses himself, and from this point of view human solidarity is metaphysical. But for the moment we are only talking of the kind of solidarity that is born in chains." 

==Opposition to totalitarianism==
Throughout his life, Camus spoke out against and actively opposed totalitarianism in its many forms. Early on, Camus was active within the French Resistance to the German occupation of France during World War II, even directing the famous Resistance journal, Combat. On the French collaboration with Nazi occupiers he wrote: "Now the only moral value is courage, which is useful here for judging the puppets and chatterboxes who pretend to speak in the name of the people." After liberation, Camus remarked, "This country does not need a Talleyrand, but a Saint-Just." The reality of the bloody postwar tribunals soon changed his mind: Camus publicly reversed himself and became a lifelong opponent of capital punishment. 

Camus's well-known falling out with Sartre is linked to this opposition to totalitarianism. Camus detected a reflexive totalitarianism in the mass politics espoused by Sartre in the name of radical Marxism. This was apparent in his work L'Homme Rvolt (The Rebel) which not only was an assault on the Soviet police state, but also questioned the very nature of mass revolutionary politics. Camus continued to speak out against the atrocities of the Soviet Union, a sentiment captured in his 1957 speech, The Blood of the Hungarians, commemorating the anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, an uprising crushed in a bloody assault by the Red Army.

==Football==
Camus was once asked by his friend Charles Poncet which he preferred, football or the theatre. Camus is said to have replied, "Football, without hesitation." 

Camus played as goalkeeper for Racing Universitaire d'Alger (RUA won both the North African Champions Cup and the North African Cup twice each in the 1930s) junior team from 192830. The sense of team spirit, fraternity, and common purpose appealed to Camus enormously. In match reports Camus would often attract positive comment for playing with passion and courage. Any aspirations in football disappeared at age 17, upon contracting tuberculosisthen incurable, Camus was bedridden for long and painful periods.

When Camus was asked in the 1950s by an alumni sports magazine for a few words regarding his time with the RUA, his response included the following:

After many years during which I saw many things, what I know most surely about morality and the duty of man I owe to sport and learned it in the RUA. 

Camus was referring to a sort of simplistic morality he wrote about in his early essays, the principle of sticking up for your friends, of valuing bravery and fair-play. Camus's belief was that political and religious authorities try to confuse us with over-complicated moral systems to make things appear more complex than they really are, potentially to serve their own needs. 

==Works==

===Novels===
* The Stranger (L'tranger, often translated as The Outsider) (1942)
* The Plague (La Peste) (1947)
* The Fall (La Chute) (1956)
* A Happy Death (La Mort heureuse) (written 19361938, published posthumously 1971)
* The First Man (Le premier homme) (incomplete, published posthumously 1995)

===Short stories===
* Exile and the Kingdom (L'exil et le royaume) (collection) (1957)
** "The Adulterous Woman" ("La Femme adultre")
** "The Renegade or a Confused Spirit" ("Le Rengat ou un esprit confus")
** "The Silent Men" ("Les Muets")
** "The Guest" ("L'Hte")
** "Jonas or the Artist at Work" ("Jonas ou lartiste au travail")
** "The Growing Stone" ("La Pierre qui pousse")

===Non-fiction books===
* Christian Metaphysics and Neoplatonism (1935)
* Betwixt and Between (L'envers et l'endroit, also translated as The Wrong Side and the Right Side) (Collection, 1937)
* Nuptials (Noces) (1938)
* The Myth of Sisyphus (Le Mythe de Sisyphe) (1942)
* The Rebel (L'Homme rvolt) (1951)
* Notebooks 19351942 (Carnets, mai 1935  fevrier 1942) (1962)
* Notebooks 19431951 (1965)
* Notebooks 19511959 (2008) Published as "Carnets Tome III : Mars 1951  December 1959" (1989)

===Plays===
* Caligula (performed 1945, written 1938)
* Requiem for a Nun (Requiem pour une nonne, adapted from William Faulkner's novel by the same name) (1956)
* The Misunderstanding (Le Malentendu) (1944)
* The State of Siege (L' Etat de Sige) (1948)
* The Just Assassins (Les Justes) (1949)
* The Possessed (Les Possds, adapted from Fyodor Dostoyevsky's novel Demons) (1959)

===Essays===
* Create Dangerously (Essay on Realism and Artistic Creation) (1957)
* The Ancient Greek Tragedy (Parnassos lecture in Greece) (1956)
* The Crisis of Man (Lecture at Columbia University) (1946)
* Why Spain? (Essay for the theatrical play L' Etat de Sige) (1948)
* Reflections on the Guillotine (Rflexions sur la guillotine) (Extended essay, 1957)
* Neither Victims Nor Executioners (Combat) (1946)

===Collected essays===
* Resistance, Rebellion, and Death (1961)  a collection of essays selected by the author, including the 1945 Lettres  un ami allemand (Letters to a German Friend) and A Defense of Intelligence, a 1945 speech given at a meeting organized by Amiti Franaise Orme, Mark (2007). The Development of Albert Camus's Concern for Social and Political Justice, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0838641105 
* Lyrical and Critical Essays (1970)
* Youthful Writings (1976)
* Between Hell and Reason: Essays from the Resistance Newspaper "Combat", 19441947 (1991)
* Camus at "Combat": Writing 19441947 (2005)
* Albert Camus Contre la Peine de Mort (2011)

==References==

==Further reading==
* Camus (1959), by Germaine Bre ISBN 1-122-01570-4
* Camus (1966), by Adele King ISBN 0-05-001423-4
* Camus: vida e obra (1970), by Vicente de Paulo Barretto.
* Albert Camus: A Biography (1979), by Herbert R. Lottman (ISBN 3-927258-06-7)
* "Camus: a critical examination" (1988), by David Sprintzen (ISBN 0-87722-544-3)
* Albert Camus and the Minister (2000), by Howard E. Mumma (ISBN 1-55725-246-7)
* Albert Camus, The Artist in the Arena (1965), by Emmett Parker ()
* Albert Camus, A Study of His Work (1957), by Philip Malcolm Waller Thody ()
* Albert Camus: A Life (2000), by Olivier Todd (ISBN 0-7867-0739-9)
* Albert Camus: Kunst und Moral, by Heiner Wittmann (ISBN 3-631-39525-6)
* Ethics and Creativity in the Political thought of Simone Weil and Albert Camus 2004, by Dr. John Randolph LeBlanc (ISBN 978-0-7734-6567-1)
* The Mandarins by Simone de Beauvoir (1954) Winner of the 1954 Goncourt Prize; Camus himself states that he is "the hero" of the book in his Notebooks 1951-1959.
* Camus, A Romance (2009), by Elizabeth Hawes (ISBN 978-0802118899)
* Socrates, Lucretius, CamusTwo Philosophical Traditions on Death 2001, by Fred Wilson (ISBN 0-7734-7369-6)
* "Sartre and Camus: A Historic Confrontation" (2004), by David Sprintzen and Adrian van den Hoven (ISBN 1-59102-157-x)
* a play about the Camus - Jean-Paul Sartre feud over Algeria The Weight Of Days was written by English playwright Roy Smiles in 2011.

===Since 2009===

* Heiner Wittmann : Sartre and Camus in Aesthetics. The Challenge of Freedom. Hrsg. v. Dirk Hoeges. Dialoghi/Dialogues. Literatur und Kultur Italiens und Frankreichs, Band 13, Frankfurt/M 2009 (ISBN 978-3-631-58693-8)
* Jacques Ferrandez, L'Hte : D'aprs l'uvre d'Albert Camus, ditions Gallimard-Jeunesse, Collection Ftiche, 13 novembre 2009, 62 pages, (ISBN 2-07-062870-1)
* Jos Lenzini, Les derniers jours de la vie d'Albert Camus, ditions Actes Sud, Collection Romans et nouvelles, octobre 2009, (ISBN 2742786295)
* Dolors Lyotard, Albert Camus contemporain, ditions Presses Universitaires du Septentrion, Collection Objet, 218 pages, 5 novembre 2009, (ISBN 2757401114)
* Albert Camus et Ren Char, La Postrit du soleil, ditions Gallimard, Collection Blanche, 20 novembre 2009, avec des photographies de Henriette Grindat, 79 pages, (ISBN 2070127788)
* Jeanyves Gurin, Dictionnaire Albert Camus, ditions Robert Laffont, Collection Bouquins, 19 novembre 2009, 992 pages, (ISBN 2221-10734-8)
* Catherine Camus, Albert Camus, Solitaire et Solidaire, ditions Michel-Lafon, 2009
* Jos Lenzini, Camus et l'Algrie, ditions disud, Collection Les critures, 11 janvier 2010, 159 pages, (ISBN 2744908517)
* Virgil Tanase, Camus, ditions Gallimard, Collection Folio Biographies, 21 janvier 2010, 410 pages, (ISBN 2070344320)
* Alain Vircondelet, Albert Camus, fils dAlger, ditions Fayard, 2010
* Jean-Luc Moreau, Camus l'intouchable, Polmiques et complicits, ditions criture-d. Neige, 2010 (ISBN 978-2909240961)
* ve Morisi, Albert Camus contre la peine de mort, prface de Robert Badinter, ditions Gallimard, 6 octobre 2011, 351 pages, (ISBN 2070135543)
* Brent C. Sleasman, Albert Camus's Philosophy of Communication: Making Sense in an Age of Absurdity, 2011 (ISBN 978-1604977912)
* Michel Onfray. L'ordre Libertaire: La vie philosophique de Albert Camus. Flammarion. 2012
* Albert Camus, Algerian Chronicles, Harvard University Press. 2013. ISBN 9780674072589 (3 May 2013 review)

===Articles and conferences===
* Heiner Wittmann, Camus et Sartre : deux littraires-philosophes, confrence prsente lors dune Journe dtudes  la Maison Henri Heine sur la littrature et la morale, 15 dcembre 2005
* Guy Dumur, Les silences d'Albert Camus, Mdecine franaise, 1948
* Francis Jeanson, Albert Camus ou l'me rvolte, Les Temps modernes, 1952
* Jean Ngroni, Albert Camus et le thtre de l'quipe, Revue d'histoire du thtre, 1960
* Pierre Nguyen-Van-Huy, La mtaphysique du bonheur chez Albert Camus, Neuchtel, La Baconnire, 1962
* Bernard Pingaud, La voix de Camus, La Quinzaine littraire, 1971

===Documents and testimonies===
* Lordre libertaire, la vie philosophique dAlbert Camus , de Michel Onfray, Flammarion, 596 pages, 2012
* Camus et Sartre, Amiti et combat, Aronson Ronald, ditions Alvik, 2005
* Albert Camus et l'Espagne, disud, septembre 2005
* Pierre Zima, L'indiffrence romanesque : Sartre, Moravia, Camus, ditions L'Harmattan, mars 2005
* Albert Camus et les critures algriennes. Quelles traces ?,disud, 2004
* Arnaud Corbic, Camus - L'absurde, la rvolte, l'amour, Les ditions de l'Atelier, 2003
* Albert Camus et les critures du XXe sicle, Collectif, Artois Presse Universit, 2003 (Colloque de Cergy 2002)
* Audisio, Camus, Robls, frres de Soleil, Collectif, disud, 2003
* En commune prsence : Albert Camus et Ren Char, Collectif, dition Folle Avoine, 2003
* criture autobiographique et Carnets : Albert Camus, Jean Grenier, Louis Guilloux, Collectif, dition Folle Avoine, 2003
* Denis Salas, Albert Camus, la juste rvolte, ditions Michalon, 2002
* Jacqueline Lvi-Valensi, Camus  Combat, Cahiers Albert Camus n8, Gallimard, 2002
* Emmanuel Robls, Camus, frre de soleil, ditions Le Seuil, 1995
* Histoire d'un livre : l'Etranger d'Albert Camus, Collectif, ditions Imec, 1991

==External links==
* Albert Camus Society UK
* 

 



[[Agatha Christie]]

Dame Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie, DBE (born Miller; 15 September 1890  12 January 1976) was an English crime novelist, short story writer, and playwright. She also wrote six romances under the name Mary Westmacott, but she is best known for the 66 detective novels and 14 short story collections she wrote under her own name, most of which revolve around the investigations of such characters as Hercule Poirot, Miss Jane Marple and Tommy and Tuppence. She also wrote the world's longest-running play, The Mousetrap. 

Born into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in Torquay, Devon, Christie served in a hospital during the First World War, before marrying and starting a family in London. She was initially unsuccessful at getting her work published; but in 1920 The Bodley Head press published her novel The Mysterious Affair at Styles, featuring the character of Poirot. This launched her literary career.

The Guinness Book of World Records lists Christie as the best-selling novelist of all time. Her novels have sold roughly 4 billion copies, and her estate claims that her works come third in the rankings of the world's most-widely published books, behind Shakespeare's works and the Bible. According to Index Translationum, Christie is the most-translated individual author  having been translated into at least 103 languages. . And Then There Were None is Christie's best-selling novel with 100 million sales to date, making it the world's best-selling mystery ever, and one of the best-selling books of all time. In 1971, she was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace. . In 2013, The Murder of Roger Ackroyd was voted the best crime novel ever by 600 fellow writers of the Crime Writers' Association. 

Christie's stage play The Mousetrap holds the record for the longest initial run: it opened at the Ambassadors Theatre in London on 25 November 1952 and as of 2012 is still running after more than 25,000 performances. In 1955, Christie was the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's highest honour, the Grand Master Award, and in the same year Witness for the Prosecution was given an Edgar Award by the MWA for Best Play.
Most of her books and short stories have been adapted for television, radio, video games and comics, and more than thirty feature films have been based on her work.

==Life and career==

===Childhood: 18901910===
Agatha-Mary Clarissa Christie was born on 15 September 1890 into a wealthy upper middle-class family in Ashfield, Torquay, Devon in South West England. Christie's mother, Clara Boehmer, was an Englishwoman who had been born in Belfast, modern-day Northern Ireland, in 1854 to Captain Frederick Boehmer and Mary Ann West; the couple's only daughter, she had four brothers, one of whom died young. Captain Boehmer was killed in a riding accident while stationed on Jersey in April 1863, leaving Mary Ann to raise her children alone on a meagre income. Under financial strain, she sent Clara to live with her aunt Margaret Miller ne West, who had married wealthy American Nathaniel Frary Miller in 1863 and lived in Prinsted, West Sussex. Clara stayed with Margaret, and there she would meet her future husband, an American stockbroker named Frederick Alvah Miller, who was the son of Nathaniel. Frederick was a member of the small and wealthy American upper class, and had been sent to Europe to gain an education in Switzerland. Considered personable and friendly by those who knew him, he soon developed a romantic relationship with Clara, and they were married in April 1878. Their first child, Margaret "Madge" Frary Miller (18791950) was born in Torquay, where the couple were renting lodgings, while their second, Louis "Monty" Montant (18801929) was born in the U.S. state of New York, where Frederick was on a business trip. Clara soon purchased a villa in Torquay, named "Ashfield", in which to raise her family, and it was here that her third and final child, Agatha, was born.

Agatha Christie as a girl, date unknown
Christie would describe her childhood as "very happy", and was surrounded by a series of strong and independent women from an early age. Her time was spent alternating between her Devonshire home, her step grandmother/aunt's house in Ealing, West London and parts of Southern Europe, where her family would holiday during the winter. Nominally Christian, she was also raised in a household with various esoteric beliefs, and like her siblings believed that their mother Clara was a psychic with the ability of second sight. Her mother insisted that she receive a home education, and so her parents were responsible for teaching her to read and write, and to be able to perform basic arithmetic, a subject that she particularly enjoyed. They also taught her about music, and she learned to play both the piano and the mandolin. A voracious reader from an early age, among her earliest memories were those of reading the children's books written by Mrs Molesworth, including The Adventures of Herr Baby (1881), Christmas Tree Land (1897) and The Magic Nuts (1898). She also read the work of Edith Nesbit, including The Story of the Treasure Seekers (1899), The Phoenix and the Carpet (1903) and The Railway Children (1906). When a little older she moved on to reading the surreal verse of Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll. Much of her childhood was spent largely alone and separate from other children, although she spent much time with her pets, whom she adored. Eventually making friends with a group of other girls in Torquay, she noted that "one of the highlights of my existence" was her appearance with them in a youth production of Gilbert and Sullivan's The Yeomen of the Guard, in which she played the hero, Colonel Fairfax. This was to be her last operatic role, for as she later wrote, "an experience that you really enjoyed should never be repeated." Christie, Agatha. Agatha Christie: An Autobiography, London: HarperCollins (1993), p. 125 

Her father was often ill, suffering from a series of heart attacks, and in November 1901 he died, aged 55. His death left the family devastated, and in an uncertain economic situation. Clara and Agatha continued to live together in their Torquay home; Madge had moved to the nearby Cheadle Hall with her new husband and Monty had joined the army and been sent to South Africa to fight in the Boer War. Agatha would later claim that her father's death, occurring when she was 11 years old, marked the end of her childhood for her. In 1902, Agatha would be sent to receive a formal education at Miss Guyer's Girls School in Torquay, but found it difficult to adjust to the disciplined atmosphere. In 1905 she was then sent to the city of Paris, France, where she was educated in three pensions  Mademoiselle Cabernet's, Les Marroniers and then Miss Dryden's  the latter of which served primarily as a finishing school.

===Early literary attempts and the First World War: 19101919===
Returning to England in 1910, Agatha found that her mother Clara was ill. They decided to spend time together in the warmer climate of Cairo, then a popular tourist destination for wealthy Britons; staying for three months at the Gezirah Palace Hotel. Agatha  always chaperoned by her mother  attended many social functions in search of a husband. She visited such ancient Egyptian monuments as the Great Pyramid of Giza, but did not exhibit the great interest in archaeology and Egyptology that became prominent in her later years. Morgan 1984. pp. 4041. 

Returning to Britain, she continued her social activities. Writing and performing in amateur theatrics, she also helped put on a play called The Blue Beard of Unhappiness with female friends. Her writing extended to both poetry and music. Some early works saw publication, but she decided against focusing on either of these as future professions. Morgan 1984. pp. 4546. 

While recovering in bed from illness she penned her first short story  "The House of Beauty". This was about 6000 words on the world of "madness and dreams", a subject of fascination for her. Biographer Janet Morgan later commented that despite "infelicities of style", the story was nevertheless "compelling". Morgan 1984. pp. 4849. Other shorts followed, most of them illustrating her interest in spiritualism and the paranormal. These included "The Call of Wings" and "The Little Lonely God". Various magazines rejected all her early submissions, made under pseudonyms, although some were revised and published later, often with new titles. Morgan 1984. pp. 4950. 

Christie then set her first novel, Snow Upon the Desert, in Cairo, and drew from her recent experiences in that city. Under the pseudonym Monosyllaba, she was perturbed when various publishers all declined. Morgan 1984. pp. 5051. Clara suggested that her daughter ask for advice from a family friend and neighbour, the successful writer Eden Philpotts. Philpotts obliged her enquiry, encouraged her writing, and sent her an introduction to his literary agent, Hughes Massie. However, he too rejected Snow Upon the Desert, and suggested a second novel. Morgan 1984. pp. 5152. 

Meanwhile, Christie continued searching for a husband, and entered into short-lived relationships with four separate men and an engagement with another. She then met Archibald "Archie" Christie (18891962) Archie Christie at a dance given by Lord and Lady Clifford of Chudleigh, about 12 mi from Torquay. Archie had been born in India, the son of a judge in the Indian Civil Service. In England he joined the air service, stationed at Devon in 1912. The couple quickly fell in love. Upon learning he would be stationed in Farnborough, Archie proposed marriage, and Agatha accepted. Morgan 1984. pp. 5463. 

1914 saw the outbreak of World War I, and Archie was sent to France to do battle with the German forces. Agatha also involved herself in the war effort, joining the Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD) and attending to wounded soldiers at the hospital in Torquay. In this position she was responsible for aiding the doctors and maintaining morale; performing 3,400 hours of unpaid work between October 1914 and December 1916. As a dispenser, she finally earned 16 yearly until the end of her service in September 1918.

She met her fianc Archie in London during his leave at the end of 1914, and they married on the afternoon of Christmas Eve. They met throughout the war every time he was posted home. Rising through the ranks, he was eventually stationed back to Britain in September 1918 as a colonel in the Air Ministry. They settled into a flat at 5 Northwick Terrace in St. John's Wood, Northwest London. Morgan 1984. pp. 6474. 

===First novels: 19191923===
Christie had long been a fan of detective novels, having enjoyed Wilkie Collins' The Woman in White and The Moonstone as well as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's early Sherlock Holmes stories. She wrote her own detective novel The Mysterious Affair at Styles featuring Hercule Poirot; portrayed as a former Belgian police officer noted for his twirly large "magnificent moustaches" and egg-shaped head, who took refuge in Britain after Germany had invaded Belgium. Christie's inspiration for this stemmed from real Belgian refugees who existed in Torquay. Morgan 1984. pp. 7579. 

The Styles manuscript was not accepted by such publishing companies as Hodder and Stoughton and Methuen. However, John Lane at The Bodley Head kept the submission for several months, then offered to accept it provided Christie change the ending. She duly did so, and then signed a contract that she later felt was exploitative. Morgan 1984. pp. 79, 8182. Christie meanwhile settled into married life, giving birth to daughter Rosalind at Ashfield in August 1919, where the couple  having few friends in London  spent much of their time. Morgan 1984. p. 79. Archie left the Air Force at the end of the war and started working in the City financial sector at a relatively low salary, though they still employed a maid. Morgan 1984. pp. 8081. 

Christie's second novel, The Secret Adversary (1922), featured a new detective couple Tommy and Tuppence. Again published by The Bodley Head, it earned her 50. A third novel again featured Poirot, Murder on the Links (1923), as did short stories commissioned by Bruce Ingram, editor of Sketch magazine. Morgan 1984. p. 83. In order to tour the world promoting the British Empire Exhibition the couple left their daughter Rosalind with Agatha's mother and sister then travelled to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Hawaii. Morgan 1984. pp. 86103. They learned to surf prone in South Africa, then in Waikiki were among the first Britons to surf standing up. 

===Disappearance===
In late 1926, Archie asked Agatha for a divorce. He was in love with Nancy Neele, who had been a friend of Major Belcher, director of the British Empire Mission, on the promotional tour a few years earlier. On 3 December 1926, the Christies quarrelled, and Archie left their house, Styles, in Sunningdale, Berkshire, to spend the weekend with his mistress at Godalming, Surrey. That same evening, around 9.45 pm, Christie disappeared from her home, leaving behind a letter for her secretary saying that she was going to Yorkshire.

Her car, a Morris Cowley, was later found at Newlands Corner, by a lake near Guildford, with an expired driving licence and clothes. Her disappearance caused an outcry from the public. The Home Secretary, William Joynson-Hicks, pressured police, and a newspaper offered 100 reward.

Over a thousand police officers, 15,000 volunteers and several aeroplanes scoured the rural landscape. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle even gave a spirit medium one of Christie's gloves to find the missing woman. Dorothy L Sayers visited the house in Surrey, later using the scenario in her book Unnatural Death. 

Christie's disappearance featured on the front page of The New York Times. Despite the extensive manhunt, she was not found for 10 days. On 14 December 1926, Agatha Christie was found at the Swan Hydropathic Hotel (now the Old Swan Hotel) in Harrogate, Yorkshire, registered as Mrs Teresa Neele from Cape Town.

Christie's autobiography makes no reference to her disappearance. Although two doctors diagnosed her as suffering from amnesia, opinion remains divided as to why she disappeared. She was known to be in a depressed state from literary overwork, her mother's death earlier that year and her husband's infidelity. Public reaction at the time was largely negative, supposing a publicity stunt or attempt to frame her husband for murder. . 

The 1979 Michael Apted film Agatha features a disclaimer in the opening credits stating that what follows is an imaginary solution to an authentic mystery. The film stars Vanessa Redgrave, Dustin Hoffman and Timothy Dalton and depicts Christie planning suicide in such a way as to frame her husband's mistress for her "murder". An American reporter, played by Hoffman, follows her closely and stops the plan. The film outraged Christie's heirs who fought two unsuccessful lawsuits in America in an attempt to prevent the film from being distributed.

Author Jared Cade interviewed numerous witnesses and relatives for his sympathetic biography, Agatha Christie and the Eleven Missing Days, revised 2011. He provided substantial evidence to suggest she planned the event to embarrass her husband, never supposing the resulting escalated melodrama. . 

The Christies divorced in 1928, and Archie married Nancy Neele. Agatha retained custody of daughter Rosalind, and the Christie name for her writing. During their marriage, she published six novels, a collection of short stories, and a number of short stories in magazines.

===Second marriage and later life===
Agatha Christie's room at the Pera Palace Hotel in Istanbul, where she wrote Murder on the Orient Express
Agatha Christie blue plaque. No. 58 Sheffield Terrace, Kensington & Chelsea, London
In 1930 Christie married archaeologist Max Mallowan, having met him in an archaeological dig. Their marriage was always happy, and it continued until Christie's death in 1976. Max introduced her to wine, which she never enjoyed  preferring to drink water in restaurants. She tried unsuccessfully to make herself like cigarettes by smoking one after lunch and one after dinner every day for six months. . 

Christie frequently used settings that were familiar to her for her stories. Her travels with Mallowan contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East. Other novels (such as And Then There Were None) were set in and around Torquay, where she was raised. Christie's 1934 novel Murder on the Orient Express was written in the Pera Palace Hotel in Istanbul, Turkey, the southern terminus of the railway. The hotel maintains Christie's room as a memorial to the author. . The Greenway Estate in Devon, acquired by the couple as a summer residence in 1938, is now in the care of the National Trust.

Christie often stayed at Abney Hall in Cheshire, owned by her brother-in-law, James Watts, basing at least two stories there: a short story "The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding", in the story collection of the same name, and the novel After the Funeral. "Abney became Agatha's greatest inspiration for country-house life, with all its servants and grandeur being woven into her plots. The descriptions of the fictional Chimneys, Stoneygates, and other houses in her stories are mostly Abney in various forms." . 

During the Second World War, Christie worked in the pharmacy at University College Hospital, London, where she acquired a knowledge of poisons that she put to good use in her post-war crime novels. For example, the use of thallium as a poison was suggested to her by UCH Chief Pharmacist Harold Davis (later appointed Chief Pharmacist at the UK Ministry of Health), and in The Pale Horse, published in 1961, she employed it to dispatch a series of victims, the first clue to the murder method coming from the victims' loss of hair. So accurate was her description of thallium poisoning that on at least one occasion it helped solve a case that was baffling doctors. . John Emsley, The poison prescribed by Agatha Christie:, The Independent, 20 July 1992 

Christie lived in Chelsea, first in Cresswell Place and later in Sheffield Terrace. Both properties are now marked by blue plaques.

Around 19411942, the British intelligence agency MI5 investigated Agatha Christie. A character called Major Bletchley appeared in her 1941 thriller N or M?, a story that features a hunt for two of Hitler's top secret spy agents in Britain. MI5 was afraid that Christie had a spy in Britain's top-secret codebreaking centre, Bletchley Park. The agency's fears were allayed when Christie commented to codebreaker Dilly Knox that Bletchley was simply the name of "one of my least lovable characters." 

To honour her many literary works, she was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1956 New Year Honours. The next year, she became the President of the Detection Club. . In the 1971 New Year Honours, she was promoted Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire, three years after her husband had been knighted for his archaeological work in 1968. They were one of the few married couples where both partners were honoured in their own right. From 1968, owing to her husband's knighthood, Christie could also be styled Lady Mallowan.

Agatha Christie's gravestone in Cholsey
From 1971 to 1974, Christie's health began to fail, although she continued to write. In 1975, sensing her increasing weakness, Christie signed over the rights of her most successful play, The Mousetrap, to her grandson. . Recently, using experimental textual tools of analysis, Canadian researchers have suggested that Christie may have begun to suffer from Alzheimer's disease or other dementia. . . 

Agatha Christie died on 12 January 1976 at age 85 from natural causes at her Winterbrook House in the north of Cholsey parish, adjoining Wallingford in Oxfordshire (formerly part of Berkshire). She is buried in the nearby churchyard of St Mary's, Cholsey. She was survived by her only child, Rosalind Margaret Hicks. 

=== Agatha Christie's estate and subsequent ownership of works===
During Agatha Christie's life, she had set up a private company, Agatha Christie Limited to hold the rights to her works, and around 1959 she had also transferred her 278 acre home, Greenway Estate, to her daughter Rosalind. Obituary: Rosalind Hicks, 2004-11-13, The Telegraph In 1968, when she was almost 80 years old, she sold a 51% stake in Agatha Christie Limited (and therefore the works it owned) to Booker Books (better known as Booker Author's Division), a subsidiary of the British food and transport conglomerate Booker-McConnell (now Booker Group), the founder of the Booker Prize for literature, which later increased its stake to 64%. Agatha Christie Limited remains the owner of the worldwide rights for over 80 of Christie's novels and short stories, 19 plays and nearly 40 TV films. 

After her death in 1976, Christie's remaining 36% share of the company was additionally inherited by Rosalind, who passionately preserved her mother's works, image and legacy until her own death 28 years later. The family's share of the company allowed them to appoint 50% of the board and the chairman, and thereby to retain a veto over new treatments, updated versions, and republications, of her works. Agatha Christie begins new chapter after 10m selloff - online version at TheFreeLibrary.com, cited as being from the Birmingham Post & Mail, 1998-06-04. In 1993 Rosalind founded the Agatha Christie Society and became its first president. In 2004 her obituary in The Telegraph commented that Rosalind had been "determined to remain true to her mother's vision and to protect the integrity of her creations" and disapproved of "merchandising" activities. On Rosalind's death  also at age 85 (28 October 2004 in Torbay, Devon, from natural causes )  both this and the Greenway Estate passed to Christie's grandson Matthew Pritchard, who in 2000 gifted Greenway - both house and contents - to the National Trust. The Big Question: How big is the Agatha Christie industry, and what explains her enduring appeal? - The Independent Christie's family and family trusts, including Prichard, continue to own the remaining 36% stake in Agatha Christie Limited, Acorn Media buys stake in Agatha Christie estate - The Guardian, 2012-02-29 and remain associated with the company. In particular Prichard remains as the company's chairman, and also in his own right holds the copyright to some of his grandmother's later literary works (including The Mousetrap). Thompson, Laura. Agatha Christie, An English Mystery. (Page 473). Headline, 2007 ISBN 978-0-7553-1487-4 

In 1998, Booker sold a number of its non-food assets to focus on its core business. As part of that, its shares in Agatha Christie Limited (at the time earning 2.1m annual revenue ) were sold for 10m to Chorion, a major international media company whose portfolio of well known authors' works also included the literary estates of Enid Blyton and Dennis Wheatley. However in February 2012, Chorion found itself in financial difficulties some years after a management buy-out, and began to sell off their literary assets on the market, selling their stake in Christies estate (specifically, their 64% stake in Agatha Christie Limited) to the current owner Acorn Media UK (part of RLJ Entertainment, Inc. and the RLJ Companies, owned by American entrepreneur Robert L. Johnson) during that same month. 

As of 2014, media reports state that the BBC had acquired the exclusive television rights to Christie's works in the UK (previously associated with ITV) and plans with Acorn's co-operation to air new productions for the 125th anniversary of Christie's birth in 2015. David Walliams heralds new era for BBC as the new home of Agatha Christie adaptations 

==Writings==

===Fictional writings ===
====Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple====
Agatha Christie's first book The Mysterious Affair at Styles was published in 1920 and introduced the detective Hercule Poirot, who became a long-running character in many of Christie's works, appearing in 33 novels and 54 short stories.

Miss (Jane) Marple, who also became well known, was introduced in the short stories The Thirteen Problems in 1927 and was based on Christie's grandmother and her "Ealing cronies". Both Jane and Gran "always expected the worst of everyone and everything, and were, with almost frightening accuracy, usually proved right." Miss Marple appeared in 12 of Christie's novels.

During the Second World War, Christie wrote two novels, Curtain, and Sleeping Murder, intended as the last cases of these two great detectives, Hercule Poirot and Jane Marple. Both books were sealed in a bank vault for over thirty years and were released for publication by Christie only at the end of her life, when she realised that she could not write any more novels. These publications came on the heels of the success of the film version of Murder on the Orient Express in 1974.

Like Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Sherlock Holmes, Christie was to become increasingly tired of her detective Poirot. By the end of the 1930s, Christie wrote in her diary that she was finding Poirot "insufferable," and by the 1960s she felt that he was "an egocentric creep." However, unlike Conan Doyle, Christie resisted the temptation to kill her detective off while he was still popular. She saw herself as an entertainer whose job was to produce what the public liked, and the public liked Poirot. . Feeling tied down, stuck with a love interest, she did marry off Hastings in an attempt to trim her cast commitments. In contrast, Christie was fond of Miss Marple. However, the Belgian detective's titles outnumber the Marple titles more than two to one: this is largely because Christie wrote numerous Poirot novels early in her career, while The Murder at the Vicarage remained the sole Marple novel until the 1940s. Christie never wrote a novel or short story featuring both Poirot and Miss Marple. In a recording discovered and released in 2008, Christie revealed the reason for this: "Hercule Poirot, a complete egoist, would not like being taught his business or having suggestions made to him by an elderly spinster lady". 

Poirot is the only fictional character to have been given an obituary in The New York Times, following the publication of Curtain. It appeared on the front page of the paper on 6 August 1975. 

Following the great success of Curtain, Christie gave permission for the release of Sleeping Murder sometime in 1976 but died in January 1976 before the book could be released. This may explain some of the inconsistencies compared to the rest of the Marple series  for example, Colonel Arthur Bantry, husband of Miss Marple's friend Dolly, is still alive and well in Sleeping Murder despite the fact he is noted as having died in books published earlier. It may be that Christie simply did not have time to revise the manuscript before she died. Miss Marple fared better than Poirot, since after solving the mystery in Sleeping Murder she returns home to her regular life in St. Mary Mead.

====Formula and plot devices====
Agatha Christie's reputation as "The Queen of Crime" was built upon the large number of classic motifs that she introduced, or for which she provided the most famous example. Christie built these tropes into what is now considered classic mystery structure: a murder is committed, there are multiple suspects who are all concealing secrets, and the detective gradually uncovers these secrets over the course of the story, discovering the most shocking twists towards the end. At the end, in a Christie hallmark, the detective usually gathers the surviving suspects into one room, explains the course of his or her deductive reasoning, and reveals the guilty party, although there are exceptions in which it is left to the guilty party (or parties) to explain all (such as And Then There Were None and Endless Night, both rather nihilistic in nature). Mezei, Kathy. "Spinsters, Surveillance, and Speech: The Case of Miss Marple, Miss Mole, and Miss Jekyll". Journal of Modern Literature 30.2 (2007): 103120 Beehler, Sharon A. "Close vs. Closed Reading: Interpreting the Clues". The English Journal 77.6 (1998): 3943 

Seven stories are named for, or built around words from, well known children's nursery rhymes: And Then There Were None (by Ten Little Indians), One, Two, Buckle My Shoe (by One, Two, Buckle My Shoe), Five Little Pigs (by This Little Piggy), Crooked House (by There Was a Crooked Man), A Pocket Full of Rye (by Sing a Song of Sixpence), Hickory Dickory Dock (by Hickory Dickory Dock), and Three Blind Mice (by Three Blind Mice).

Twice, the murderer turns out to be the unreliable narrator of the story. In six stories, Christie allows the murderer to escape justice: these are The Witness for the Prosecution, Five Little Pigs, The Man in the Brown Suit, Murder on the Orient Express, Curtain and The Unexpected Guest. (When Christie adapted Witness into a stage play, she lengthened the ending so that the murderer was also killed.) There are also numerous instances where the killer is not brought to justice in the legal sense but instead dies (death usually being presented as a more 'sympathetic' outcome), for example Death Comes as the End, And Then There Were None, Death on the Nile, Dumb Witness, The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, Crooked House, Appointment with Death, The Hollow, Nemesis, Cat Among the Pigeons, and The Secret Adversary. In some cases, this is with the collusion of the detective involved. In some stories, the question of whether formal justice will be done is left unresolved, such as Five Little Pigs and Ordeal by Innocence.

Christie often made the unlikeliest character guilty. This happened so often that it became a clich; savvy readers could identify the murderer by simply identifying the least likely suspect. On an edition of Desert Island Discs in 2007, Brian Aldiss claimed that Agatha Christie told him that she wrote her books up to the last chapter, then decided who the most unlikely suspect was, after which she would then go back and make the necessary changes to "frame" that person. John Curran's Agatha Christie: The Secret Notebooks describes different working methods for every book in her autobiography, thus contradicting this claim.

The first Hercule Poirot began with tram passengers and Belgian refugees. Man in the Brown Suit started with Belcher from the world tour. Murder on the Links began with news from France, a wife debunked, who claimed intruders tied her up and murdered her husband. The Murder of Roger Ackroyd killer was suggested by brother-in-law James Watt. The Big Four, helped by Archie's brother Cambell, was a stop-gap collection of Sketch magazine stories, for money when her husband left.

====Character stereotypes====
Christie occasionally inserted stereotyped descriptions of characters into her work, particularly before the end of the Second World War (when such attitudes were more commonly expressed publicly), and particularly in regard to Italians, Jews, and non-Europeans. For example, in the first editions of the collection The Mysterious Mr Quin (1930), in the short story "The Soul of the Croupier," she described "Hebraic men with hook-noses wearing rather flamboyant jewellery"; in later editions the passage was edited to describe "sallow men" wearing same. In "The Hollow", published as late as 1946, one of the more unsympathetic characters is "a Whitechapel Jewess with dyed hair and a voice like a corncrake ..... a small woman with a thick nose, henna red and a disagreeable voice". To contrast with the more stereotyped descriptions, Christie sometimes characterised the "foreigners" in such a way as to make the reader understand and sympathise with them; this is particularly true of her Jewish characters, who while seen as un-English are seldom actually criminals. (See, for example, the character of Oliver Manders in Three Act Tragedy.) 

Often she is lovingly affectionate or teasing with her prejudices. After four years of war-torn London, Christie hoped to return some day to Syria, which she described as "gentle fertile country and its simple people, who know how to laugh and how to enjoy life; who are idle and gay, and who have dignity, good manners, and a great sense of humour, and to whom death is not terrible."

After trouble with an incompetent Swiss French nursery helper Marcelle for toddler Rosalind, she decides "Scottish preferred ... good with the young. The French were hopeless disciplinarians ... Germans good and methodical, but it was not German that I really wanted Rosalind to learn. The Irish were gay but made trouble in the house; the English were of all kinds" She proposes this, after the fact, knowing the chosen Charlotte lasts decades.

Her book titles, changed by American publishers, for example Ten Little Niggers to Ten Little Indians, were kept the same across the Atlantic, after bushels of fan mail.

===Non-fictional writings===

Among Christie's relatively few nonfiction works is Come, Tell Me How You Live about working on an archaeological dig, drawn from her life with second husband Max Mallowan. 

The Grand Tour: Around the World with the Queen of Mystery is a collection of correspondence from her 1922 Grand Tour of the British empire, including South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. 

 was published posthumously in 1977.

===Critical reception===
The world's best-selling mystery writer, and often referred to as the "Queen of Crime", Agatha Christie is considered a master of suspense, plotting, and characterisation. . . Some critics however regarded Christie's plotting abilities as considerably exceeding her literary ones. The novelist Raymond Chandler criticised her in his essay, "The Simple Art of Murder", and the American literary critic Edmund Wilson was dismissive of Christie and the detective fiction genre generally in his New Yorker essay, "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?". . 

==Interests and influences==

=== Archaeology ===

Christie had a lifelong interest in archaeology. On a trip to the excavation site at Ur in 1930, she met her future husband, Sir Max Mallowan, a distinguished archaeologist, but her fame as an author far surpassed his fame in archaeology. Prior to meeting Mallowan, Christie had not had any extensive brushes with archaeology, but once the two married they made sure to only go to sites where they could work together.

While accompanying Mallowan on countless archaeological trips (spending up to 34 months at a time in Syria and Iraq at excavation sites at Ur, Ninevah, Tell Arpachiyah, Chagar Bazar, Tell Brak, and Nimrud), Christie not only wrote novels and short stories, but also contributed work to the archaeological sites, more specifically to the archaeological restoration and labelling of ancient exhibits which includes tasks such as cleaning and conserving delicate ivory pieces, reconstructing pottery, developing photos from early excavations which later led to taking photographs of the site and its findings, and taking field notes. . 

So as to not influence the funding of the archaeological excavations, Christie would always pay for her own board and lodging and her travel expenses, and supported excavations as an anonymous sponsor. . 

During their time in the Middle East, there was also a large amount of time spent travelling to and from Mallowan's sites. Their extensive travelling had a strong influence on her writing, which is often reflected as some type of transportation playing a part in her murderer's schemes. The large amount of travel was reused in novels such as The Murder on the Orient Express, as well as suggesting the idea of archaeology as an adventure itself. 

After the Second World War, she chronicled her time in Syria with fondness in "Come Tell Me How You Live". Anecdotes, memories, funny episodes, are strung in a rough timeline, with more emphasis on eccentric characters, lovely scenery, than factual accuracy.

From 8 November 2001 to 24 March 2002, The British Museum had an exhibit named Agatha Christie and Archaeology: Mystery in Mesopotamia, which presented the secret life of Agatha Christie and the influences of archaeology in her life and works. . 

===Spirituality===
Christie's life within the archaeological world shaped not only the settings and characters for her books but also the issues she highlights. One of the stronger influences is her love of the mystical and mysterious. Many of Christie's books and short stories set both in the Middle East and back in England have a decidedly otherworldly influence in which religious sects, sacrifices, ceremony, and seances play a part. Such stories include "The Hound of Death" and "the Idol House of Astarte". This theme was greatly strengthened by those times Christie spent in the Middle East where she was consistently surrounded by the religious temples and spiritual history of the towns and cities they were excavating during Mallowan's archaeological work.

===Use of archaeology and spirituality in her writing===
Many of the settings for Agatha Christie's books were directly inspired by the many archaeological field seasons spent in the Middle East on the sites managed by her husband Max. The extent of her time spent at the many locations featured in her books is apparent from the extreme detail in which she describes them. One such site featured in her work is the temple site of Abu Simbel, depicted in Death on the Nile. Also there is the great detail in which she describes life at the dig site in Murder in Mesopotamia.

Among the characters in her books, Christie has often given prominence to the archaeologists and experts in Middle Eastern cultures and artefacts. Most notable are the characters of Dr. Eric Leidner in Murder in Mesopotamia and Signor Richetti in Death on the Nile, while many minor characters in They Came to Baghdad were archaeologists.

Indirectly, Christie's famous character Hercule Poirot may be compared to an archaeologist by the manner of his detailed scrutiny of all facts both large and small. Cornelius Holtorf, an academic archaeologist, cites an archaeologist as a detective as being one of the key themes of archaeology in popular culture. He describes an archaeologist as a professional detective of the past who has the ability to reveal secrets for the greater good of society. Holtorf's description of the archaeologist as a detective is very similar to Christie's depiction of Poirot, who is hugely observant and is very careful to look at small details as they often impart the most information. Many of Christie's detective characters show some archaeological traits through their careful attention to clues and artefacts alike. Miss Marple, another of Christie's famous characters, shares these characteristics of careful deduction though the attention paid to the small clues.

Some of Christie's best known novels with heavy archaeological influences are:
* Murder in Mesopotamia (1936) - the most archaeologically influenced of all her novels, as it is set in the Middle East at an archaeological dig site and associated expedition house. The main characters include an archaeologist, Dr. Eric Leidner, his wife, multiple specialists, assistants, and the men working on the site. The novel is noted most for its careful description of the dig site and house, which showed the author had spent much of her time in very similar situations. The characters in this book in particular are also based on archaeologists Christie knew from her personal experiences on excavation sites.

* Appointment with Death (1938) - set in Jerusalem and its surrounding area. The death itself occurs at an old cave site in Petra and offers some very descriptive details of sites which Christie herself could have visited in order to write the book.

* Death on the Nile (1937) - takes place on a tour boat on the Nile. Many archaeological sites are visited along the way and one of the main characters is an archaeologist, Signor Richetti.

* They Came to Baghdad (1951) - inspired by Christie's own trips to Baghdad with Mallowan, and involves an archaeologist as the heroine's love interest.

==Portrayals of Christie==
Christie has been portrayed on a number of occasions in film and television. Several biographical programmes have been made, such as the 2004 BBC's , in which she is portrayed by Olivia Williams, Anna Massey, and Bonnie Wright.

Christie has also been portrayed fictionally. Some of these portrayals have explored and offered accounts of Christie's disappearance in 1926, including the 1979 film Agatha (with Vanessa Redgrave, in which she sneaks away to plan revenge against her husband), and the Doctor Who episode "The Unicorn and the Wasp" (with Fenella Woolgar, in which her disappearance is the result of her suffering a temporary breakdown owing to a brief psychic link being formed between her and an alien). Others, such as 1980 Hungarian film, Kojak Budapesten (not to be confused with the 1986 comedy by the same name) create their own scenarios involving Christie's criminal skill. . In the 1986 TV play, Murder by the Book, Christie herself (Dame Peggy Ashcroft) murdered one of her fictional-turned-real characters, Poirot. The heroine of Liar-Soft's 2008 visual novel , Mary Clarissa Christie, is based on the real-life Christie. Christie features as a character in Gaylord Larsen's Dorothy and Agatha and The London Blitz Murders by Max Allan Collins. 

==Lists of works and adaptations ==
* Agatha Christie bibliography
* List of short stories by Agatha Christie
* Adaptations of Agatha Christie

==See also==

* (Her life story in a 2004 BBC drama)
* Abney Hall (home to her brother-in-law; several books use Abney as their setting)
* Greenway Estate (Christie's former home in Devon. The house and grounds are now in the possession of the National Trust and open to the public)
* Agatha Christie indult (a non-denominational request to which Christie was signatory seeking permission for the occasional use of the Tridentine (Latin) mass in England and Wales)
* Agatha Award
* Agatha Christie Award (Japan)

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==
*.
*
*.
*.
*
*
*.
*.
*
*.
*.
*.
*.

==Further reading==

===Articles===
*
*
*.
* A reprint of the latter.
*

===Books===
* Reprinted as .
*.
*.
*
*
*
*.
*.
*.

==External links==

* Official Agatha Christie site (also Agatha Christie Limited's website)
*
*
*
*
* Agatha Christie/Sir Max Mallowan's blue plaque at Cholsey
* Agatha Christie profile and articles at "The Guardian"
* Agatha Christie profile on PBS.ORG
* Agatha Christie's style and methods, the plot devices that she uses to trick the reader
* Agatha Christie's Profile on FamousAuthors.org

 



[[The Plague]]

The Plague (French: La Peste) is a novel by Albert Camus, published in 1947, that tells the story of medical workers finding solidarity in their labour as the Algerian city of Oran is swept by a plague. It asks a number of questions relating to the nature of destiny and the human condition. The characters in the book, ranging from doctors to vacationers to fugitives, all help to show the effects the plague has on a populace.

The novel is believed to be based on the cholera epidemic that killed a large percentage of Oran's population in 1849 following French colonization, but the novel is placed in the 1940s. Magill 1989:683 Oran and its environs were struck by disease multiple times before Camus published this novel. According to a research report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Oran was decimated by the plague in 1556 and 1678, but outbreaks after European colonization, in 1921 (185 cases), 1931 (76 cases), and 1944 (95 cases), were very far from the scale of the epidemic described in the novel.

The Plague is considered an existentialist classic despite Camus' objection to the label. Camus (in Thody, 1970):345. In an interview on 15 November 1945, Camus said, "No, I am not an existentialist." Forsdick 2007:119 The narrative tone is similar to Kafka's, especially in The Trial, wherein individual sentences potentially have multiple meanings, the material often pointedly resonating as stark allegory of phenomenal consciousness and the human condition. Camus included a dim-witted character misreading The Trial as a mystery novel as an oblique homage. The novel has been read as a metaphorical treatment of the French resistance to Nazi occupation during World War II.

Although Camus's approach in the book is severe, his narrator emphasizes the ideas that we ultimately have no control, and irrationality of life is inevitable. Additionally, he further illustrates the human reaction towards the "absurd"; The Plague represents how the world deals with the philosophical notion of the Absurd, a theory which Camus himself helped to define.

==Plot summary==
The text of The Plague is divided into five parts.

===Part one===
"... Dr Rieux resoved to compile this chronicle ..."
In the town of Oran, thousands of rats, initially unnoticed by the populace, begin to die in the streets. A hysteria develops soon afterward, causing the local newspapers to report the incident. Authorities responding to public pressure order the collection and cremation of the rats, unaware that the collection itself was the catalyst for the spread of the bubonic plague.

The main character, Dr. Bernard Rieux, lives comfortably in an apartment building when strangely the building's concierge, M. Michel, a confidante, dies from a fever. Dr. Rieux consults his colleague, Castel, about the illness until they come to the conclusion that a plague is sweeping the town. They both approach fellow doctors and town authorities about their theory, but are eventually dismissed on the basis of one death. However, as more and more deaths quickly ensue, it becomes apparent that there is an epidemic.

Authorities, including the Prefect, are slow to accept that the situation is serious and quibble over the appropriate action to take. Official notices enacting control measures are posted, but the language used is optimistic and downplays the seriousness of the situation. A "special ward" is opened at the hospital, but its 80 beds are filled within three days. As the death toll begins to rise, more desperate measures are taken. Homes are quarantined; corpses and burials are strictly supervised. A supply of plague serum finally arrives, but there is only enough to treat existing cases and the country's emergency reserves are depleted. When the daily number of deaths jumps to 30, the town is sealed and an outbreak of plague is officially declared.

===Part two===
The town is sealed off. The town gates are shut, rail travel is prohibited, and all mail service is suspended. The use of telephone lines is restricted only to "urgent" calls, leaving short telegrams as the only means of communicating with friends or family outside the town. The separation affects daily activity and depresses the spirit of the townspeople, who begin to feel isolated and introverted, and the plague begins to affect various characters.

One character, Raymond Rambert, devises a plan to escape the city to join his lover in Paris after city officials refused his request to leave. He befriends some underground criminals so that they may smuggle him out of the city. Another character, Father Paneloux, uses the plague as an opportunity to advance his stature in the town by suggesting that the plague was an act of God punishing the citizens' sinful nature. His diatribe falls on the ears of many citizens of the town, who turned to religion in droves but would not have done so under normal circumstances. Cottard, a criminal remorseful enough to attempt suicide yet fearful of being arrested, becomes wealthy as a major smuggler. Meanwhile, Dr. Rieux, a vacationer Jean Tarrou, and a civil servant Joseph Grand exhaustively treat patients in their homes and in the hospital.

Rambert informs Tarrou of his escape plan, but when Tarrou tells him that others in the city, including Dr. Rieux, also have loved ones outside the city whom they are not allowed to see, Rambert becomes sympathetic and changes his mind. He then decides to join Tarrou and Dr. Rieux to help fight the epidemic.

===Part three===

In mid-August, the situation continues to worsen. People try to escape the town, but some are shot by armed sentries. Violence and looting break out on a small scale, and the authorities respond by declaring martial law and imposing a curfew. Funerals are conducted with more and more speed, no ceremony, and little concern for the feelings of the families of the deceased. The inhabitants passively endure their increasing feelings of exile and separation; despondent, they waste away emotionally as well as physically.

===Part four===

In September and October, the town remains at the mercy of the plague. Rieux hears from the sanatorium that his wife's condition is worsening. He also hardens his heart regarding the plague victims so that he can continue to do his work. Cottard, on the other hand, seems to flourish during the plague, because it gives him a sense of being connected to others, since everybody faces the same danger. Cottard and Tarrou attend a performance of Gluck's opera Orpheus and Eurydice, but the actor portraying Orpheus collapses with plague symptoms during the performance.

Rambert finally has a chance to escape, but he decides to stay, saying that he would feel ashamed of himself if he left.

Towards the end of October, Castel's new anti-plague serum is tried for the first time, but it cannot save the life of Othon's young son, who suffers greatly, as Paneloux, Rieux, and Tarrou look on in horror.

Paneloux, who has joined the group of volunteers fighting the plague, gives a second sermon. He addresses the problem of an innocent child's suffering and says it is a test of a Christian's faith, since it requires him either to deny everything or believe everything. He urges the congregation not to give up the struggle but to do everything possible to fight the plague.

A few days after the sermon, Paneloux is taken ill. His symptoms do not conform to those of the plague, but the disease still proves fatal.

Tarrou and Rambert visit one of the isolation camps, where they meet Othon. When Othon's period of quarantine ends, he elects to stay in the camp as a volunteer because this will make him feel less separated from his dead son. Tarrou tells Rieux the story of his life, and the two men go swimming together in the sea. Grand catches the plague and instructs Rieux to burn all his papers. But Grand makes an unexpected recovery, and deaths from the plague start to decline.

===Part five===

By late January, the plague is in full retreat, and the townspeople begin to celebrate the imminent opening of the town gates. Othon, however, does not escape death from the disease. Cottard is distressed by the ending of the epidemic, from which he has profited by shady dealings. Two government employees approach him, and he flees. Despite the epidemic's ending, Tarrou contracts the plague and dies after a heroic struggle. Rieux's wife also dies.

In February, the town gates open and people are reunited with their loved ones from other cities. Rambert is reunited with his wife. Rieux reveals that he is the narrator of the chronicle and that he tried to present an objective view of the events.

Cottard goes mad and shoots at people from his home. He is arrested. Grand begins working on his sentence again. Rieux reflects on the epidemic and reaches the conclusion that there is more to admire than to despise in humans.

==Characters==

*The Narrator: presents himself at the outset of the book as witness to the events and privy to documents, but does not identify himself with any character until the ending of the novel.

*Asthma Patient: The asthma patient receives regular visits from Dr. Rieux. He is a seventy-five-year-old Spaniard with a rugged face, who comments on events in Oran that he hears about on the radio and in the newspapers.

*Dr. Castel: Dr. Castel is one of Rieux's medical colleagues and is much older than Rieux. He realizes after the first few cases that the disease is bubonic plague and is aware of the seriousness of the situation. He labors hard to make an anti-plague serum, but as the epidemic continues, he shows increasing signs of wear and tear.

*Cottard: Cottard lives in the same building as Grand. He does not appear to have a job, and is described as having private means, although he describes himself as "a traveling salesman in wines and spirits." Cottard is an eccentric figure, silent and secretive, who tries to hang himself in his room. Afterwards, he does not want to be interviewed by the police, since he has committed a crime by attempting suicide, and fears arrest.Cottard's personality changes after the outbreak of plague. Whereas he was aloof and mistrustful before, he now becomes agreeable and tries hard to make friends. He appears to relish the coming of the plague, and Tarrou thinks this is because he finds it easier to live with his own fears now that everyone else is in a state of fear, too. Cottard takes advantage of the crisis to make money by selling contraband cigarettes and inferior liquor.When the epidemic ends, Cottard's moods fluctuate. Sometimes he is sociable, but at other times he shuts himself up in his room. Eventually, he loses his mental balance and shoots at random at people on the street. The police arrest him.

*Garcia: Garcia is a man who knows the group of smugglers in Oran. He introduces Rambert to Raoul.

*Gonzales: Gonzales is the smuggler who makes the arrangements for Rambert's escape.

*Joseph Grand: Joseph Grand is a fifty-year-old clerk for the city government. He is tall and thin and always wears clothes a size too large for him. Poorly paid, he lives an austere life, but he is capable of deep affection. In his spare time, Grand polishes up his Latin, and he is also writing a book, but he is such a perfectionist that he continually rewrites the first sentence and can get no further. One of his problems in life is that he can rarely find the correct words to express what he means. Grand tells Rieux that he married while still in his teens, but overwork and poverty took their toll (Grand did not receive the career advancement that he had been promised), and his wife Jeanne left him. He tried but failed to write a letter to her, and he still grieves for his loss.Grand is a neighbor of Cottard, and it is he who calls Rieux for help, when Cottard tries to commit suicide. When the plague takes a grip on the town, Grand joins the team of volunteers, acting as general secretary, recording all the statistics. Rieux regards him as "the true embodiment of the quiet courage that inspired the sanitary groups." Grand catches the plague himself and asks Rieux to burn his manuscript, but then makes an unexpected recovery. At the end of the novel, Grand says he is much happier; he has written to Jeanne and made a fresh start on his book.

*Louis: Louis is one of the sentries who takes part in the plan for Rambert to escape.

*Marcel: Marcel, Louis's brother, is also a sentry who is part of the escape plan for Rambert.

*M. Michel: M. Michel is the concierge of the building in which Rieux lives. An old man, he is the first victim of the plague.

*Jacques Othon:Jacques Othon is M. Othon's young son. When he contracts the plague, he is the first to receive Dr. Castel's anti-plague serum. But the serum is ineffective, and the boy dies after a long and painful struggle.

*M. Othon: M. Othon is a magistrate in Oran. He is tall and thin and, as Tarrou observes in his journal, "his small, beady eyes, narrow nose, and hard, straight mouth make him look like a well-brought-up owl." Othon treats his wife and children unkindly, but after his son dies of the plague, his character softens. After he finishes his time at the isolation camp, where he is sent because his son is infected, he wants to return there, because this would make him feel closer to his lost son. But before Othon can do this, he contracts the plague and dies.

*Father Paneloux: Father Paneloux is a learned, well-respected Jesuit priest. He is well known for having given a series of lectures in which he championed a pure form of Christian doctrine and chastised his audience about their laxity. During the first stage of the plague outbreak, Paneloux preaches a sermon at the cathedral. He has a powerful way of speaking, and he insists to the congregation that the plague is a scourge sent by God to those who have hardened their hearts against him. But Paneloux also claims that God is present to offer succor and hope. Later, Paneloux attends at the bedside of Othon's stricken son and prays that the boy may be spared. After the boy's death, Paneloux tells Rieux that although the death of an innocent child in a world ruled by a loving God cannot be rationally explained, it should nonetheless be accepted. Paneloux joins the team of volunteer workers and preaches another sermon saying that the death of the innocent child is a test of faith. Since God willed the child's death, so the Christian should will it, too. A few days after preaching this sermon, Paneloux is taken ill. He refuses to call for a doctor, trusting in God alone. He dies. Since his symptoms did not seem to resemble those of the plague, Rieux records his death as a "doubtful case."

*The Prefect: The Prefect believes at first that the talk of plague is a false alarm, but on the advice of his medical association, he authorizes limited measures to combat it. When these do not work, he tries to avoid responsibility, saying he will ask the government for orders. After this, he does take responsibility for tightening up the regulations relating to the plague and issues the order to close the town.

*Raymond Rambert: Raymond Rambert is a journalist who is visiting Oran to research a story on living conditions in the Arab quarter of the town. When the plague strikes, he finds himself trapped in a city with which he feels he has no connection. He misses his wife who is in Paris, and he uses all his ingenuity and resourcefulness to persuade the city bureaucracy to allow him to leave. When this fails, he contacts smugglers, who agree to help him to escape for a fee of ten thousand francs. But there is a hitch in the arrangements, and by the time another escape plan is arranged, Rambert has changed his mind. He decides to stay in the city and continue to help fight the plague, saying that he would feel ashamed of himself if he pursued a merely private happiness. He now feels that he belongs in Oran and that the plague is everyone's business, including his.

*Raoul: Raoul is the man who agrees, for a fee of ten thousand francs, to arrange for Rambert to escape. He introduces Rambert to Gonzales.

*Dr. Richard: Dr. Richard is chairman of the Oran Medical Association. He is slow to recommend any action to combat the plague, not wanting to arouse public alarm. He does not even want to admit that the disease is the plague, referring instead to a "special type of fever."

*Dr. Bernard Rieux: Dr. Bernard Rieux is the narrator of the novel, although this is only revealed at the end. Tarrou describes him as about thirty-five-years-old, of moderate height, dark-skinned, with close-cropped black hair. At the beginning of the novel, Rieux's wife, who has been ill for a year, leaves for a sanatorium. It is Rieux who treats the first victim of plague and who first uses the word plague to describe the disease. He urges the authorities to take action to stop the spread of the epidemic. However, at first, along with everyone else, the danger the town faces seems unreal to him. He feels uneasy but does not realize the gravity of the situation. Within a short while, he grasps what is at stake and warns the authorities that unless steps are taken immediately, the epidemic could kill off half the town's population of two hundred thousand within a couple of months.During the epidemic, Rieux heads an auxiliary hospital and works long hours treating the victims. He injects serum and lances the abscesses, but there is little more that he can do, and his duties weigh heavily upon him. He never gets home until late, and he has to distance himself from the natural pity that he feels for the victims; otherwise, he would not be able to go on. It is especially hard for him when he visits a victim in the person's home, because he knows that he must immediately call for an ambulance and have the person removed from the house. Often the relatives plead with him not to do this, since they know they may never see the person again.Rieux works to combat the plague simply because he is a doctor and his job is to relieve human suffering. He does not do it for any grand, religious purpose, like Paneloux (Rieux does not believe in God), or as part of a high-minded moral code, like Tarrou. He is a practical man, doing what needs to be done without any fuss, even though he knows that the struggle against death is something that he can never win.

*Mme. Rieux: Mme. Rieux is Dr. Rieux's mother, who comes to stay with him when his sick wife goes to the sanatorium. She is a serene woman who, after taking care of the housework, sits quietly in a chair. She says that at her age there is nothing much left to fear.

*Jean Tarrou: Jean Tarrou arrived in Oran some weeks before the plague broke out, for unknown reasons. He is not there on business, since he appears to have private means. Tarrou is a good-natured man who smiles a lot. Before the plague came, he liked to associate with the Spanish dancers and musicians in the city. He also keeps a diary, full of his observations of life in Oran, which Rieux incorporates into the narrative.It is Tarrou who first comes up with the idea of organizing teams of volunteers to fight the plague. He wants to do this before the authorities begin to conscript people, and he does not like the official plan to get prisoners to do the work. He takes action, prompted by his own code of morals; he feels that the plague is everybody's responsibility and that everyone should do his or her duty. What interests him, he tells Rieux, is how to become a saint, even though he does not believe in God.Later in the novel, Tarrou tells Rieux, with whom he has become friends, the story of his life. His father, although a kind man in private, was also an aggressive prosecuting attorney who tried death penalty cases, arguing strongly for the death penalty to be imposed. As a young boy, Tarrou attended one day of a criminal proceeding in which a man was on trial for his life. However, the idea of capital punishment disgusted him. After he left home before the age of eighteen, his main interest in life was his opposition to the death penalty, which he regarded as state-sponsored murder. However, years of activism, and fighting for the Republican side of the Spanish Civil War have left him disillusioned.When the plague epidemic is virtually over, Tarrou becomes one of its last victims, but puts up a heroic struggle before dying.

==Themes==

===Absurdism===

Absurdism is the search for a meaning to life and being unable to find one. This is similar to nihilism, where one assumes there is no meaning to life.

===Exile and separation===

The theme of exile and separation is embodied in two characters, Rieux and Rambert, both of whom are separated from the women they love. The theme is also present in the many other nameless citizens who are separated from loved ones in other towns or from those who happened to be out of town when the gates of Oran were closed. In another sense, the entire town feels in exile, since it is completely cut off from the outside world. Rieux, as the narrator, describes what exile meant to them all:

Some, like Rambert, are exiles in double measure since they are not only cut off from those they want to be with but they do not have the luxury of being in their own homes.

The feeling of exile produces many changes in attitudes and behaviors. At first, people indulge in fantasies, imagining the missing person's return, but then they start to feel like prisoners, drifting through life with nothing left but the past, since they do not know how long into the future their ordeal may last. And the past smacks only of regret, of things left undone. Living with the sense of abandonment, they find that they cannot communicate their private grief to their neighbors, and conversations tend to be superficial.

Rieux returns to the theme at the end of the novel, after the epidemic is over, when the depth of the feelings of exile and deprivation is clear from the overwhelming joy with which long parted lovers and family members greet each other.

For some citizens, exile was a feeling more difficult to pin down. They simply desired a reunion with something that could hardly be named but which seemed to them to be the most desirable thing on Earth. Some called it peace. Rieux numbers Tarrou among such people, although he found it only in death.

This understanding of exile suggests the deeper, metaphysical implications of the term. It relates to the loss of the belief that humans live in a rational universe in which they can fulfill their hopes and desires, find meaning, and be at home. As Camus put it in The Myth of Sisyphus, "In a universe that is suddenly deprived of illusions and of light, man feels a stranger. His is an irremediable exile."

===Solidarity, community, and resistance===

The ravages of the plague in Oran vividly convey the absurdist position that humans live in an indifferent, incomprehensible universe that has no rational meaning or order, and no transcendent God. The plague comes unannounced and may strike down anyone at any time. It is arbitrary and capricious, and it leaves humans in a state of fear and uncertainty, which ends only in death. In the face of this metaphysical reality, what must be the response of individuals? Should they resign themselves to it, accept it as inevitable, and seek what solace they can as individuals, or should they join with others and fight back, even though they must live with the certainty that they cannot win? Camus's answer is clearly the latter, embodied in the characters of Rieux, Rambert, and Tarrou. Rieux's position is made clear in part II in a conversation with Tarrou. Rieux argues that one would have to be a madman to submit willingly to the plague. Rather than accepting the natural order of things  the presence of sickness and death  he believes one must fight against them. He is aware of the needs of the community; he does not live for himself alone. When Tarrou points out that " victories will never be lasting," Rieux admits that he is involved in a "never ending defeat," but this does not stop him from engaging in the struggle.

Rieux is also aware that working for the common good demands sacrifice; he cannot expect personal happiness. This is a lesson that Rambert learns. At first he insists that he does not belong in Oran, and his only thought is returning to the woman he loves in Paris. He thinks only of his own personal happiness and the unfairness of the situation in which he has been placed but gradually comes to recognize his membership in a larger human community, which makes demands on him that he cannot ignore. Ultimately he realizes he cannot face his lover if it is as a coward.

Tarrou lives according to an ethical code that demands that he act in a way that benefits the whole community, even though, in this case, he risks his life by doing so. Later in the novel, when Tarrou tells Rieux the story of his life, he adds a new dimension to the term plague. He views it not just as a specific disease or simply as the presence of an impersonal evil external to humans. For Tarrou, plague is the destructive impulse within every person, the will and the capacity to do harm, and it is everyone's duty to be on guard against this tendency within themselves, lest they infect someone else with it. He describes his views to Rieux:

===Religion===

In times of calamity, people often turn to religion, and Camus examines this response in the novel. In contrast to the humanist beliefs of Rieux, Rambert, and Tarrou, the religious perspective is given in the sermons of the stern Jesuit priest, Father Paneloux. While the other main characters believe there is no rational explanation for the outbreak of plague, Paneloux believes there is. In his first sermon, given during the first month of the plague, Paneloux describes the epidemic as the "flail of God," through which God separates the wheat from the chaff, the good from the evil. Paneloux is at pains to emphasize that God did not will the calamity: "He looked on the evil-doing in the town with compassion; only when there was no other remedy did He turn His face away, in order to force people to face the truth about their life" In Paneloux's view, even the terrible suffering caused by the plague works ultimately for good. The divine light can still be seen even in the most catastrophic events, and a Christian hope is granted to all.

Paneloux's argument is based on the theology of St. Augustine, on which he is an expert, and it is accepted as irrefutable by many of the townspeople, including the magistrate, Othon. But it does not satisfy Rieux. Camus carefully manipulates the plot to bring up the question of innocent suffering. Paneloux may argue that the plague is a punishment for sin, but how does he reconcile that doctrine with the death of a child? The child in question is Jacques Othon, and Paneloux, along with Rieux and Tarrou, witnesses his horrible death. Paneloux is moved with compassion for the child, and he takes up the question of innocent suffering in his second sermon. He argues that because a child's suffering is so horrible and cannot easily be explained, it forces people into a crucial test of faith: either we must believe everything or we must deny everything, and who, Paneloux asks, could bear to do the latter? We must yield to the divine will, he says; we cannot pick and choose and accept only what we can understand. But we must still seek to do what good lies in our power (as Paneloux himself does as one of the volunteers who fights the plague).

The second sermon given by Paneloux, however, suggests that his faith has been shaken. Unable to reconcile his beliefs with the death of the child, Paneloux becomes sick and refuses to be treated. His illness is not consistent with the symptoms of the plague, and the inexplicable nature of the illness leads Rieux to diagnose him as a "doubtful case". He leaves his fate in the hands of God, and he dies clinging to his cross and the remnants of his beliefs. The implication is that Paneloux's loss of faith is what leads to his death. Paneloux's death is in contrast to Tarrou's, who fights valiantly against death when his turn comes. The fight Tarrou puts up against his end is emblematic of the fight against the plague and the absurdity of the universe. The criticism of Paneloux, is that he, unlike Tarrou, has lost his faith in humanity. He chooses, instead, to cling to a hollow ideal he no longer believes, and his death, in contrast to Tarrou's, does not bring him peace.

It is clear that Camus's sympathy in this contrast of ideas lies with Rieux and Tarrou.

==Style==

===Point of view===

This story is told through the character Rieux. However, Rieux does not function as a first-person narrator. Rather he disguises himself, referring to himself in the third person and only at the end of the novel reveals who he is. The novel thus appears to be told by an unnamed narrator who gathers information from what he has personally seen and heard regarding the epidemic, as well as from the diary of another character, Tarrou, who makes observations about the events he witnesses.
The reason Rieux does not declare himself earlier is that he wants to give an objective account of the events in Oran. He deliberately adopts the tone of an impartial observer. Rieux is like a witness who exercises restraint when called to testify about a crime; he describes what the characters said and did, without speculating about their thoughts and feelings, although he does offer generalized assessments of the shifting mood of the town as a whole. Rieux refers to his story as a chronicle, and he sees himself as a historian, which justifies his decision to stick to the facts and avoid subjectivity. This also explains why the style of The Plague often gives the impression of distance and detachment. Only rarely is the reader drawn directly into the emotions of the characters or the drama of the scene.

===Allegory===

An allegory is a narrative with two distinct levels of meaning. The first is the literal level; the second signifies a related set of concepts and events. The Plague is in part a historical allegory, in which the plague signifies the German occupation of France from 1940 to 1944 during World War II. Gray 2007:165 

There are many aspects of the narrative that make the allegory plain. The town Oran, which gets afflicted by pestilence and cut off from the outside world, is the equivalent of France. Camus draws from his own experience of isolation during the war in writing The Plague. Gray 2007:167 The citizens are slow to realize the magnitude of the danger because they do not believe in pestilence or that it could happen to them, just as the French were complacent at the beginning of the war. They could not imagine that the Germans, whom they had defeated only twenty years previously, could defeat them in a mere six weeks, as happened when France fell in June 1940.

The different attitudes of the characters reflect different attitudes in the French population during the occupation. Some were the equivalent of Paneloux and thought that France was to blame for the calamity that had befallen it. They believed that the only solution was to submit gracefully to a historical inevitability  the long-term dominance of Europe by Germany. Many people, however, became members of the French Resistance, and they are the allegorical equivalents of the voluntary sanitary teams in the novel, such as Tarrou, Rambert, and Grand, who fight back against the unspeakable evil (the Nazi occupiers).

Some French collaborated with the Germans. In the novel, they are represented by Cottard, who welcomes the plague and uses the economic deprivation that results from it to make a fortune buying and selling on the black market.

Other details in the novel can be read at the allegorical level. The plague that carries people off unexpectedly echoes the reality of the occupation, in which people could be snatched from their homes by the Gestapo and imprisoned or sent to work as slave labor in German-controlled territories or simply killed. The facts of daily life in the plague-stricken city resemble life in wartime France: the showing of reruns at the cinemas, the stockpiling of scarce goods, nighttime curfews and isolation camps (these paralleling the German internment camps). The scenes at the end of the novel, when Oran's gates are reopened, recall the jubilant scenes in Paris when the city was liberated in 1944.
In some places, Camus makes the allegory explicit, as when he refers to the plague in terms that describe an enemy in war: "the epidemic was in retreat all along the line; victory was won and the enemy was abandoning his positions."

===Symbolism===

Imagery of the sea is often used in Camus's works to suggest life, vigor, and freedom. In The Plague, a key description of Oran occurs early, when it is explained that the town is built in such a way that it "turns its back on the bay, with the result that it's impossible to see the sea, you always have to go to look for it." Symbolically, Oran turns its back on life. When the plague hits, the deprivation of this symbol of freedom becomes more pronounced, as the beaches are closed, as is the port. In summer, the inhabitants lose touch with the sea altogether: "for all its nearness, the sea was out of bounds; young limbs had no longer the run of its delights."
A significant episode occurs near the end of part IV, when Tarrou and Rieux sit on the terrace of a house, from which they can see far into the horizon. As he gazes seaward, Tarrou says with a sense of relief that it is good to be there. To set a seal on the friendship between the two men, they go for a swim together. This contact with the ocean is presented as a moment of renewal, harmony, and peace. It is one of the few lyrical episodes in the novel: "hey saw the sea spread out before them, a gently heaving expanse of deep-piled velvet, supple and sleek as a creature of the wild."
Just before Rieux enters the water, he is possessed by a "strange happiness," a feeling that is shared by Tarrou. There is a peaceful image of Rieux lying motionless on his back gazing up at the stars and moon, and then when Tarrou joins him they swim side by side, "with the same zest, the same rhythm, isolated from the world, at last free of the town and of the plague."

==Film adaptations==
* 1992 La Peste directed by Luis Puenzo

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Applied ethics]]

Applied ethics is the philosophical examination, from a moral standpoint, of particular issues in private and public life that are matters of moral judgment. It is thus the attempts to use philosophical methods to identify the morally correct course of action in various fields of human life. Bioethics, for example, is concerned with identifying the correct approach to matters such as euthanasia, or the allocation of scarce health resources, or the use of human embryos in research. Environmental ethics is concerned with questions such as the duties or duty of 'whistleblowers' to the general public as opposed to their loyalty to their employers. As such, it is an area of professional philosophy that is relatively well paid and highly valued both within and outside of academia. Brenda Almond, 'Applied Ethics', in Mautner, Thomas, Dictionary of Philosophy, Penguin 1996 

Applied ethics is distinguished from normative ethics, which concerns what people should believe to be right and wrong, and from meta-ethics, which concerns the nature of moral statements.

An emerging typology for applied ethics (Porter, 2006) uses seven domains to help improve organizations and social issues at the national and global level:

* Decision ethics, or ethical theories and ethical decision processes
* Professional ethics, or ethics to improve professionalism
* Clinical ethics, or ethics to improve our basic health needs
* Business ethics, or individual based morals to improve ethics in a business environment
* Organizational ethics, or ethics among organizations
* Social ethics, or ethics among nations and as one global unit
* Sexual ethics, or ethics based around sexual acts

==Modern approach==
Much of applied ethics is concerned with just three theories:

# Utilitarianism, where the practical consequences of various policies are evaluated on the assumption that the right policy will be the one which results in the greatest happiness. This theories main developments came from Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill who distinguished between an act and rule utilitarianist morality. Later developments have also adjusted the theory, most notably Henry Sidgwick who introduced the idea of motive or intent in morality, and Peter Singer who introduced the idea of preference in to moral decision making. 
# Deontological ethics, notions based on 'rules' i.e. that there is an obligation to perform the 'right' action, regardless of actual consequences (epitomized by Immanuel Kant's notion of the Categorical Imperative which was the centre to Kant's ethical theory based on duty). Another key deontological theory is Natural Law, which was heavily developed by Thomas Aquinas and is the basis of the Roman Catholic Church. 
# Virtue ethics, derived from Aristotle's and Confucius's notions, which asserts that the right action will be that chosen by a suitably 'virtuous' agent.

One modern approach which attempts to overcome the seemingly impossible divide between deontology and utilitarianism (of which the divide is caused by the opposite takings of an absolute and relativist moral view) is case-based reasoning, also known as casuistry. Casuistry does not begin with theory, rather it starts with the immediate facts of a real and concrete case. While casuistry makes use of ethical theory, it does not view ethical theory as the most important feature of moral reasoning. Casuists, like Albert Jonsen and Stephen Toulmin (The Abuse of Casuistry 1988), challenge the traditional paradigm of applied ethics. Instead of starting from theory and applying theory to a particular case, casuists start with the particular case itself and then ask what morally significant features (including both theory and practical considerations) ought to be considered for that particular case. In their observations of medical ethics committees, Jonsen and Toulmin note that a consensus on particularly problematic moral cases often emerges when participants focus on the facts of the case, rather than on ideology or theory. Thus, a Rabbi, a Catholic priest, and an agnostic might agree that, in this particular case, the best approach is to withhold extraordinary medical care, while disagreeing on the reasons that support their individual positions. By focusing on cases and not on theory, those engaged in moral debate increase the possibility of agreement.

==See also==
*Ethical codes
*Outline of ethics

==Bibliography==
 
* 
* (monograph)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Porter, R. (2006). The Health Ethics Typology: Six Domains to Improve Care. Socratic Publishing. ISBN 0-9786699-0-8
* Business Ethics Quarterly
* Business and Professional Ethics
* Environmental Ethics
* Ethics (since 1890)
* The Journal of Ethics
* Journal of Applied Philosophy
* International Journal of Applied Philosophy
* International Journal of Philosophical Practice
* Journal of Business Ethics
* Journal of Business Ethics Education
* Professional Ethics
* Teaching Ethics

==External links==

* Chris Young, How to teach an introduction to applied ethics
* Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University
* W. Maurice Young Centre for Applied Ethics at the University of British Columbia

*


[[Absolute value]]

The absolute value of a number may be thought of as its distance from zero.
In mathematics, the absolute value (or modulus) x of a real number is the non-negative value of without regard to its sign. Namely, 1=x = x for a positive , 1=x = negative , and 1=0 = 0. For example, the absolute value of 3 is 3, and the absolute value of 3 is also 3. The absolute value of a number may be thought of as its distance from zero.

Generalisations of the absolute value for real numbers occur in a wide variety of mathematical settings. For example an absolute value is also defined for the complex numbers, the quaternions, ordered rings, fields and vector spaces. The absolute value is closely related to the notions of magnitude, distance, and norm in various mathematical and physical contexts.

==Terminology and notation==
Jean-Robert Argand introduced the term "module", meaning 'unit of measure' in French, in 1806 specifically for the complex absolute value Oxford English Dictionary, Draft Revision, June 2008 Nahin, O'Connor and Robertson, and functions.Wolfram.com.; for the French sense, see Littr, 1877 and it was borrowed into English in 1866 as the Latin equivalent "modulus". The term "absolute value" has been used in this sense from at least 1806 in French Lazare Nicolas M. Carnot, Mmoire sur la relation qui existe entre les distances respectives de cinq point quelconques pris dans l'espace, p. 105 at Google Books and 1857 in English. James Mill Peirce, A Text-book of Analytic Geometry at Google Books. The oldest citation in the 2nd edition of the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1907. The term "absolute value" is also used in contrast to "relative value". The notation x was introduced by Karl Weierstrass in 1841. Nicholas J. Higham, Handbook of writing for the mathematical sciences, SIAM. ISBN 0-89871-420-6, p. 25 Other names for absolute value include "the numerical value" and "the magnitude". 

The same notation is used with sets to denote cardinality; the meaning depends on context.

==Definition and properties==

===Real numbers===
For any real number the absolute value or modulus of is denoted by x (a vertical bar on each side of the quantity) and is defined as Mendelson, p. 2. 

:

As can be seen from the above definition, the absolute value of is always either positive or zero, but never negative.

From an analytic geometry point of view, the absolute value of a real number is that number's distance from zero along the real number line, and more generally the absolute value of the difference of two real numbers is the distance between them. Indeed the notion of an abstract distance function in mathematics can be seen to be a generalisation of the absolute value of the difference (see "Distance" below).

Since the square root notation without sign represents the positive square root, it follows that

:

 () 

which is sometimes used as a definition of absolute value. , p. A5 

The absolute value has the following four fundamental properties:

:

 () Non-negativity 
 () Positive-definiteness 
 () Multiplicativeness 
 () Subadditivity 

Other important properties of the absolute value include:

:

 () Idempotence (the absolute value of the absolute value is the absolute value) 
 () Evenness (reflection symmetry of the graph) 
 () Identity of indiscernibles (equivalent to positive-definiteness) 
 () Triangle inequality (equivalent to subadditivity) 
 (if ) () Preservation of division (equivalent to multiplicativeness) 
 () Reverse triangle inequality (equivalent to subadditivity) 

Two other useful properties concerning inequalities are:
:
: or 

These relations may be used to solve inequalities involving absolute values. For example:

:

 
 

Absolute value is used to define the absolute difference, the standard metric on the real numbers.

===Complex numbers===
The absolute value of a complex number is the distance from to the origin. It is also seen in the picture that and its complex conjugate have the same absolute value.

Since the complex numbers are not ordered, the definition given above for the real absolute value cannot be directly generalised for a complex number. However the geometric interpretation of the absolute value of a real number as its distance from 0 can be generalised. The absolute value of a complex number is defined as its distance in the complex plane from the origin using the Pythagorean theorem. More generally the absolute value of the difference of two complex numbers is equal to the distance between those two complex numbers.

For any complex number

:

where and are real numbers, the absolute value or modulus of is denoted z and is given by 

:

When the complex part is zero this is the same as the absolute value of the real number .

When a complex number is expressed in polar form as

:

with r  0 and  real, its absolute value is 

:.

The absolute value of a complex number can be written in the complex analogue of equation (1) above as: 

: 

where is the complex conjugate of .
 
The complex absolute value shares all the properties of the real absolute value given in equations (2)(11) above.

Since the positive reals form a subgroup of the complex numbers under multiplication, we may think of absolute value as an endomorphism of the multiplicative group of the complex numbers. . 

==Absolute value function==
The graph of the absolute value function for real numbers
Composition of absolute value with a cubic function in different orders
The real absolute value function is continuous everywhere. It is differentiable everywhere except for = 0. It is monotonically decreasing on the interval and monotonically increasing on the interval . Since a real number and its opposite have the same absolute value, it is an even function, and is hence not invertible.

Both the real and complex functions are idempotent.

It is a piecewise linear, convex function.

===Relationship to the sign function===
The absolute value function of a real number returns its value irrespective of its sign, whereas the sign (or signum) function returns a number's sign irrespective of its value. The following equations show the relationship between these two functions:
:
or
:
and for x  0,
:

===Derivative===
The real absolute value function has a derivative for every x  0, but is not differentiable at 1=x = 0. Its derivative for x  0 is given by the step function Weisstein, Eric W. Absolute Value. From MathWorld  A Wolfram Web Resource. Bartel and Sherbert, p. 163 
:

The subdifferential of x at 1=x = 0 is the interval . Peter Wriggers, Panagiotis Panatiotopoulos, eds., New Developments in Contact Problems, 1999, ISBN 3-211-83154-1, p. 3132 

The complex absolute value function is continuous everywhere but complex differentiable nowhere because it violates the CauchyRiemann equations. 

The second derivative of x with respect to is zero everywhere except zero, where it does not exist. As a generalised function, the second derivative may be taken as two times the Dirac delta function.

===Antiderivative===
The antiderivative (indefinite integral) of the absolute value function is

:

where is an arbitrary constant of integration.

==Distance==

The absolute value is closely related to the idea of distance. As noted above, the absolute value of a real or complex number is the distance from that number to the origin, along the real number line, for real numbers, or in the complex plane, for complex numbers, and more generally, the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers is the distance between them.

The standard Euclidean distance between two points

:

and

:

in Euclidean -space is defined as:
:

This can be seen to be a generalisation of a  b, since if and are real, then by equation (1),
:

While if

:

and

:

are complex numbers, then

:

 
 
 

The above shows that the "absolute value" distance for the real numbers or the complex numbers, agrees with the standard Euclidean distance they inherit as a result of considering them as the one and two-dimensional Euclidean spaces respectively.

The properties of the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers: non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and the triangle inequality given above, can be seen to motivate the more general notion of a distance function as follows:

A real valued function on a set XX is called a metric (or a distance function) on , if it satisfies the following four axioms: These axioms are not minimal; for instance, non-negativity can be derived from the other three: 1=0 = d(a,a)  d(a,b) + d(b,a) = 2d(a,b). 
:

 Non-negativity 
 Identity of indiscernibles 
 Symmetry 
 Triangle inequality 

==Generalizations==

===Ordered rings===
The definition of absolute value given for real numbers above can be extended to any ordered ring. That is, if is an element of an ordered ring R, then the absolute value of , denoted by a, is defined to be: Mac Lane, p. 264. 

:

where a is the additive inverse of , and 0 is the additive identity element.

===Fields===

The fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers given in (2)(5) above, can be used to generalise the notion of absolute value to an arbitrary field, as follows.

A real-valued function on a field is called an absolute value (also a modulus, magnitude, value, or valuation) Shechter, p. 260. This meaning of valuation is rare. Usually, a valuation is the logarithm of the inverse of an absolute value if it satisfies the following four axioms:

:

 Non-negativity 
 Positive-definiteness 
 Multiplicativeness 
 Subadditivity or the triangle inequality 

Where 0 denotes the additive identity element of . It follows from positive-definiteness and multiplicativeness that 1=v(1) = 1, where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity element of . The real and complex absolute values defined above are examples of absolute values for an arbitrary field.

If is an absolute value on , then the function on FF, defined by 1=d(a,b) = v(a  b), is a metric and the following are equivalent:

* satisfies the ultrametric inequality for all , , in .

* is bounded in R.

* for every 

* for all 

* for all 

An absolute value which satisfies any (hence all) of the above conditions is said to be non-Archimedean, otherwise it is said to be Archimedean. Shechter, pp. 260261. 

===Vector spaces===

Again the fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used, with a slight modification, to generalise the notion to an arbitrary vector space.

A real-valued function on a vector space over a field , represented as , is called an absolute value, but more usually a norm, if it satisfies the following axioms:

For all in , and v, u in ,

:

 Non-negativity 
 Positive-definiteness 
 Positive homogeneity or positive scalability 
 Subadditivity or the triangle inequality 

The norm of a vector is also called its length or magnitude.

In the case of Euclidean space Rn, the function defined by

:

is a norm called the Euclidean norm. When the real numbers R are considered as the one-dimensional vector space R1, the absolute value is a norm, and is the -norm (see Lp space) for any . In fact the absolute value is the "only" norm on R1, in the sense that, for every norm  on R1, 1=x = 1x. The complex absolute value is a special case of the norm in an inner product space. It is identical to the Euclidean norm, if the complex plane is identified with the Euclidean plane R2.

==Notes==

==References==
* Bartle; Sherbert; Introduction to real analysis (4th ed.), John Wiley & Sons, 2011 ISBN 978-0-471-43331-6.
* Nahin, Paul J.; An Imaginary Tale; Princeton University Press; (hardcover, 1998). ISBN 0-691-02795-1.
* Mac Lane, Saunders, Garrett Birkhoff, Algebra, American Mathematical Soc., 1999. ISBN 978-0-8218-1646-2.
* Mendelson, Elliott, Schaum's Outline of Beginning Calculus, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2008. ISBN 978-0-07-148754-2.
* O'Connor, J.J. and Robertson, E.F.; "Jean Robert Argand".
* Schechter, Eric; Handbook of Analysis and Its Foundations, pp. 259263, "Absolute Values", Academic Press (1997) ISBN 0-12-622760-8.

==External links==
* 
* 
* 



[[Analog signal]]

An analog or analogue signal is any continuous signal for which the time varying feature (variable) of the signal is a representation of some other time varying quantity, i.e., analogous to another time varying signal. For example, in an analog audio signal, the instantaneous voltage of the signal varies continuously with the pressure of the sound waves. It differs from a digital signal, in which a continuous quantity is represented by a discrete function which can only take on one of a finite number of values. The term analog signal usually refers to electrical signals; however, mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and other systems may also convey analog signals.

An analog signal uses some property of the medium to convey the signal's information. For example, an aneroid barometer uses rotary position as the signal to convey pressure information. In an electrical signal, the voltage, current, or frequency of the signal may be varied to represent the information.

Any information may be conveyed by an analog signal; often such a signal is a measured response to changes in physical phenomena, such as sound, light, temperature, position, or pressure. The physical variable is converted to an analog signal by a transducer. For example, in sound recording, fluctuations in air pressure (that is to say, sound) strike the diaphragm of a microphone which induces corresponding fluctuations in the current produced by a coil in an electromagnetic microphone, or the voltage produced by a condensor microphone. The voltage or the current is said to be an "analog" of the sound.

An analog signal has a theoretically infinite resolution. In practice an analog signal is subject to electronic noise and distortion introduced by communication channels and signal processing operations, which can progressively degrade the signal-to-noise ratio. In contrast, digital signals have a finite resolution. Converting an analog signal to digital form introduces a constant low-level noise called quantization noise into the signal which determines the noise floor, but once in digital form the signal can in general be processed or transmitted without introducing additional noise or distortion. Therefore as analog signal processing systems become more complex, they may ultimately degrade signal resolution to such an extent that their performance is surpassed by digital systems. This explains the widespread use of digital signals in preference to analog in modern technology. In analog systems, it is difficult to detect when such degradation occurs. However, in digital systems, degradation can not only be detected but corrected as well.

==Disadvantages==
The primary disadvantage of analog signal is that any system has noise  i.e., random unwanted variation. As the signal is copied and re-copied, or transmitted over long distances, or electronically processed, the unavoidable noise introduced by each step in the signal path is additive, progressively degrading the signal-to-noise ratio, until in extreme cases the signal can be overwhelmed. This is called generation loss. Noise can show up as 'hiss' and intermodulation distortion in audio signals, or "snow" in video signals. This degradation is impossible to recover, since there is no sure way to distinguish the noise from the signal; amplifying the signal to recover attenuated parts of the signal amplifies the noise (distortion/interference) as well. Since digital signals can be transmitted, stored and processed without introducing noise, even if the resolution of an analog signal is higher than a comparable digital signal, after enough processing the analog signal to noise ratio will be lower.

Electrically, analog signal noise can be diminished by shielding, good connections, and several cable types such as coaxial or twisted pair.

==Modulation==
Another method of conveying an analog signal is to use modulation. In this, some base signal (e.g., a sinusoidal carrier signal) has one of its properties modulated: amplitude modulation involves altering the amplitude of a sinusoidal voltage waveform by the source information, frequency modulation changes the frequency. Other techniques, such as changing the phase of the base signal also work.

Analog circuits do not involve quantisation of information into digital format. The concept being measured over the circuit, whether sound, light, pressure, temperature, or an exceeded limit, remains from end to end.

Sources: Parts of an earlier version of this article were originally taken from Federal Standard 1037C in support of MIL-STD-188.

==See also==
* Ampex
* Analog audio
* Analog device
* Analog signal processing
* Analog sound vs. digital sound
* Analog video
* Analog-to-digital converter
* Digital audio
* Digital signal
* Digital video
* Magnetic tape
* Magnetic recording
* Video tape

==References==



[[Arecales]]

Arecales is an order of flowering plants. The order has been widely recognised only for the past few decades; until then, the accepted name for the order including these plants was Principes. 

The APG II system of 2003 recognises the order and places it in the clade commelinids in the monocots and uses this circumscription:

* order Arecales
*: family Arecaceae, alternative name Palmae

This is unchanged from the APG system of 1998, although it used the spelling "commelinoids" instead of commelinids.

The Cronquist system of 1981 made the same choices at the rank of family and order, but assigned the order to the subclass Arecidae in the class Liliopsida (= monocotyledons).

The Thorne system (1992) and the Dahlgren system had made the same choices at the rank of family and order, but assigned the order to the superorder Arecanae in the subclass Liliidae (= monocotyledons).

==External links==

* NCBI Taxonomy Browser

 



[[Hercule Poirot]]

Hercule Poirot (; ) is a fictional Belgian detective, created by Agatha Christie. Poirot is one of Christie's most famous and long-lived characters, appearing in 33 novels, one play (Black Coffee), and more than 50 short stories published between 1920 and 1975.

Poirot has been portrayed on radio, on screen, for films and television, by various actors, including John Moffatt, Albert Finney, Sir Peter Ustinov, Sir Ian Holm, Tony Randall, Alfred Molina and David Suchet.

== Overview ==

=== Influences ===

Poirot's name was derived from two other fictional detectives of the time: Marie Belloc Lowndes' Hercule Popeau and Frank Howel Evans' Monsieur Poiret, a retired Belgian police officer living in London. 

A more obvious influence on the early Poirot stories is that of Arthur Conan Doyle. In An Autobiography Christie admits, "I was still writing in the Sherlock Holmes tradition  eccentric detective, stooge assistant, with a Lestrade-type Scotland Yard detective, Inspector Japp". Reproduced as the "Introduction" to For his part, Conan Doyle acknowledged basing his detective stories on the model of Edgar Allan Poe's C. Auguste Dupin and his anonymous narrator, and basing his character Sherlock Holmes on Joseph Bell, who in his use of "ratiocination" prefigured Poirot's reliance on his "little grey cells".

Poirot also bears a striking resemblance to A. E. W. Mason's fictional detective, Inspector Hanaud of the French Sret, who first appeared in the 1910 novel At the Villa Rose and predates the first Poirot novel by ten years.

Poirot was a francophone. Unlike the models mentioned above, Christie's Poirot was clearly the result of her early development of the detective in her first book, written in 1916 and published in 1920. Not only was his Belgian nationality interesting because of Belgium's occupation by Germany (which provided a plausible explanation of why such a skilled detective would be out of work and available to solve mysteries at an English country house). At the time of Christie's writing, it was considered patriotic to express sympathy towards the Belgians, since the invasion of their country had constituted Britain's casus belli for entering World War I, and British wartime propaganda emphasised the "Rape of Belgium".

=== Popularity ===

Poirot first appeared in The Mysterious Affair at Styles (published in 1920) and exited in Curtain (published in 1975). Following the latter, Poirot was the only fictional character to receive an obituary on the front page of The New York Times. 

By 1930, Agatha Christie found Poirot "insufferable", and by 1960 she felt that he was a "detestable, bombastic, tiresome, ego-centric little creep". Yet the public loved him and Christie refused to kill him off, claiming that it was her duty to produce what the public liked. 

=== Appearance and propinquities ===

Captain Arthur Hastings' first description of Poirot:

He was hardly more than five feet four inches but carried himself with great dignity. His head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. Even if everything on his face was covered, the tips of moustache and the pink-tipped nose would be visible.
The neatness of his attire was almost incredible; I believe a speck of dust would have caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police.

Agatha Christie's initial description of Poirot in The Murder on the Orient Express:

By the step leading up into the sleeping-car stood a young Belgian lieutenant, resplendent in uniform, conversing with a small man (Hercule Poirot) muffled up to the ears of whom nothing was visible but a pink-tipped nose and the two points of an upward-curled moustache.

In the later books, his limp is not mentioned, suggesting it may have been a temporary wartime injury. Poirot has green eyes that are repeatedly described as shining "like a cat's" when he is struck by a clever idea, e.g. "For about ten minutes sat in dead silence and all the time his eyes grew steadily greener" and dark hair, which he dyes later in life. as Hastings discovers in However, many of his screen incarnations are portrayed as bald or balding.

Frequent mention is made of his patent-leather shoes, damage to which is frequently a source of misery for him, but comical for the reader. E.g. "Hercule Poirot looked down at the tips of his patent-leather shoes and sighed." Poirot's appearance, regarded as fastidious during his early career, later falls hopelessly out of fashion. E.g. "And now here was the man himself. Really a most impossible person  the wrong clothes  button boots! an incredible moustache! Not his  Meredith Blake's kind of fellow at all." He employs pince-nez reading glasses.

Among Poirot's most significant personal attributes is the sensitivity of his stomach:

The plane dropped slightly. "Mon estomac," thought Hercule Poirot, and closed his eyes determinedly.

He suffers from sea sickness, "My stomach, it is not happy on the sea" and in Death in the Clouds he states that his air sickness prevents him from being more alert at the time of the murder. Later in his life, we are told:

Always a man who had taken his stomach seriously, he was reaping his reward in old age. Eating was not only a physical pleasure, it was also an intellectual research.

Poirot is extremely punctual and carries a turnip pocket watch almost to the end of his career. "he walked up the steps to the front door and pressed the bell, glancing as he did so at the neat wrist-watch which had at last replaced an old favourite  the large turnip-faced watch of early days. Yes, it was exactly nine-thirty. As ever, Hercule Poirot was exact to the minute." He is also pernickety about his personal finances, preferring to keep a bank balance of 444 pounds, 4 shillings, and 4 pence.

As mentioned in Curtain and The Clocks, he is fond of classical music, particularly Mozart and Bach.

=== Methods ===

In The Mysterious Affair at Styles, Poirot operates as a fairly conventional, clue-based and logical detective; reflected in his vocabulary by two common phrases: his use of "the little grey cells" and "order and method". Hastings is irritated by the fact that Poirot sometimes conceals important details of his plans, as in The Big Four. In this novel, Hastings is kept in the dark throughout the climax. This aspect of Poirot is less evident in the later novels, partly because there is rarely a narrator to mislead.

In Murder on the Links, still largely dependent on clues himself, Poirot mocks a rival "bloodhound" detective who focuses on the traditional trail of clues established in detective fiction (e.g., Sherlock Holmes depending on footprints, fingerprints, and cigar ash). From this point on, Poirot establishes his psychological bona fides. Rather than painstakingly examining crime scenes, he inquires into the nature of the victim or the psychology of the murderer. He predicates his actions in the later novels on his underlying assumption that particular crimes are committed by particular types of people.

Poirot focuses on getting people to talk. In the early novels, he casts himself in the role of "Papa Poirot", a benign confessor, especially to young women. In later works, Christie made a point of having Poirot supply false or misleading information about himself or his background to assist him in obtaining information. "It has been said of Hercule Poirot by some of his friends and associates, at moments when he has maddened them most, that he prefers lies to truth and will go out of his way to gain his ends by elaborate false statements, rather than trust to the simple truth." In The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, Poirot speaks of a non-existent mentally disabled nephew E.g. "After a careful study of the goods displayed in the window, Poirot entered and represented himself as desirous of purchasing a rucksack for a hypothetical nephew." Hickory Dickory Dock, Chapter 13 to uncover information about homes for the mentally unfit. In Dumb Witness, Poirot invents an elderly invalid mother as a pretense to investigate local nurses. In The Big Four, Poirot pretends to have a younger brother named Achille.

To this day Harold is not quite sure what made him suddenly pour out the whole story to a little man to whom he had only spoken a few minutes before.

Poirot is also willing to appear more foreign or vain in an effort to make people underestimate him. He admits as much:

It is true that I can speak the exact, the idiomatic English. But, my friend, to speak the broken English is an enormous asset. It leads people to despise you. They say  a foreigner  he can't even speak English properly. Also I boast! An Englishman he says often, "A fellow who thinks as much of himself as that cannot be worth much. And so, you see, I put people off their guard.

In later novels, Christie often uses the word mountebank when characters describe Poirot, showing that he has successfully passed himself off as a charlatan or fraud.

Poirot's investigating techniques assist him solving cases; "For in the long run, either through a lie, or through truth, people were bound to give themselves away..." At the end, Poirot usually reveals his description of the sequence of events and his deductions to a room of suspects, often leading to the culprit's apprehension.

== Life ==

"I suppose you know pretty well everything there is to know about Poirot's family by this time". Dr. Sheppard 

A brief passage in The Big Four provides information about Poirot's birth or at least childhood in or near the town of Spa, Belgium or in the village of Ellezelles (province of Hainaut, Belgium  a few memorials dedicated to Hercule Poirot can be seen in the center of this village): "But we did not go into Spa itself. We left the main road and wound into the leafy fastnesses of the hills, till we reached a little hamlet and an isolated white villa high on the hillside." Christie strongly implies that this "quiet retreat in the Ardennes" near Spa is the location of the Poirot family home. Christie is purposefully vague, as Poirot is thought to be an elderly man even in the early novels. And in An Autobiography, she admitted that she already imagined him to be an old man in 1920. At the time, however, she had no idea she would write works featuring him for decades to come.

Christie wrote that Poirot is a Roman Catholic, "Hercule Poirot was a Catholic by birth." and gave her character a strong sense of Catholic morality in later works. In Taken at the Flood, Book II, Chapter 6 Poirot goes into church to pray and happens across a suspect with whom he briefly discusses ideas of sin and confession. Christie provides little information regarding Poirots childhood, only mentioning in Three Act Tragedy that he comes from a large family with little wealth.

=== Policeman ===

"Gustave was not a policeman. I have dealt with policemen all my life and I know. He could pass as a detective to an outsider but not to a man who was a policeman himself."

:  Hercule Poirot 

Hercule Poirot had joined the Brussels police force by 1893. Very little mention is made about this part of his life, but in "The Nemean Lion" (1939) Poirot refers to a Belgian case of his in which "a wealthy soap manufacturer poisoned his wife in order to be free to marry his secretary". As Poirot was often misleading about his past to gain information, the truthfulness of that statement is unknown.

Inspector Japp offers some insight into Poirot's career with the Belgian police when introducing him to a colleague:

You've heard me speak of Mr Poirot? It was in 1904 he and I worked together  the Abercrombie forgery case  you remember he was run down in Brussels. Ah, those were the days Moosier. Then, do you remember "Baron" Altara? There was a pretty rogue for you! He eluded the clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him in Antwerp  thanks to Mr. Poirot here.

In the short story The Chocolate Box (1923) Poirot reveals to Captain Arthur Hastings an account of what he considers to be his only failure. Poirot admits that he has failed to solve a crime "innumerable" times:

I have been called in too late. Very often another, working towards the same goal, has arrived there first. Twice I have been struck down with illness just as I was on the point of success.

Nevertheless, he regards the 1893 case in "The Chocolate Box", The date is given in as his only actual failure of detection. Again, Poirot is not reliable as a narrator of his personal history and there is no evidence that Christie sketched it out in any depth. During his police career Poirot shot a man who was firing from a roof into the public below. In Lord Edgeware Dies, Poirot reveals that he learned to read writing upside down during his police career. Around that time he met Xavier Bouc, director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits. Poirot also became a uniformed director, working on trains.

In The Double Clue, Poirot mentions that he was Chief of Police of Brussels, until "the Great War" (WWI) forced him to leave for England.

=== Private detective ===

I had called in at my friend Poirot's rooms to find him sadly overworked. So much had he become the rage that every rich woman who had mislaid a bracelet or lost a pet kitten rushed to secure the services of the great Hercule Poirot.

During World War I, Poirot left Belgium for England as a refugee (although he returned a few times). On 16 July 1916 he again met his lifelong friend, Captain Arthur Hastings and solved the first of his cases to be published: The Mysterious Affair at Styles. It is clear that Hastings and Poirot are already friends when they meet in Chapter 2 of the novel, as Hastings tells Cynthia that he has not seen him for "some years". Particulars such as the date of 1916 for the case and that Hastings had met Poirot in Belgium, are given in Curtain: Poirot's Last Case, Chapter 1 (someone had been shot in a village where Hastings was duck-shooting and Poirot had been called in from the Brussels police to investigate). After that case, Poirot apparently came to the attention of the British secret service and undertook cases for the British government, including foiling the attempted abduction of the Prime Minister. Recounted in . The events in the story are immediately connected with the First World War, and feature an "Allied Conference" at Versailles that is probably meant to be understood as the Versailles Peace Conference of 1919. Readers were told that the British authorities had learned of Poirot's keen investigative ability from certain Belgian royals.

After the war Poirot became a private detective and began undertaking civilian cases. He moved into what became both his home and work address, 56B Whitehaven Mansions. Hastings first visits the house when he returns to England in June 1935 from Argentina in The A.B.C. Murders, Chapter 1 (it is a plot point in the novel that the flat is at Whitehaven Mansions because a letter to Poirot is misaddressed). It was chosen by Poirot for its symmetry. (This building was in fact built in 1936, decades after Poirot fictionally moved in.) His first case was "The Affair at the Victory Ball", which allowed Poirot to enter high society and begin his career as a private detective.

Between the world wars, Poirot travelled all over Europe, Africa, Asia, and half of South America investigating crimes and solving murders. Most of his cases occurred during this time and he was at the height of his powers at this point in his life. In The Murder on the Links, the Belgian pits his grey cells against a French murderer. In the Middle East, he solved the cases Death on the Nile and Murder in Mesopotamia with ease and even survived An Appointment with Death. As he passed through Eastern Europe on his return trip, he solved The Murder on the Orient Express. However he did not travel to North America, the West Indies, the Caribbean or Oceania, probably due to sea sickness.

It is this villainous sea that troubles me! The mal de mer  it is horrible suffering! Poirot, in 

It was during this time he met the Countess Vera Rossakoff, a glamorous jewel thief. The history of the Countess is, like Poirot's, steeped in mystery. She claims to have been a member of the Russian aristocracy before the Russian Rebellion and suffered greatly as a result, but how much of that story is true is an open question. Even Poirot acknowledges that Rossakoff offered wildly varying accounts of her early life. Poirot later became smitten with the woman and allowed her to escape justice. Cassatis, John (1979). The Diaries of A. Christie. London. 

It is the misfortune of small, precise men always to hanker after large and flamboyant women. Poirot had never been able to rid himself of the fatal fascination that the Countess held for him. "The Capture of Cerebus" (1947). The first sentence quoted is also a close paraphrase of something said to Poirot by Hastings in Chapter 18 of The Big Four 

Although letting the Countess escape was morally questionable, it was not uncommon. In The Nemean Lion, Poirot sided with the criminal, Miss Amy Carnaby, allowing her to evade prosecution by blackmailing his client Sir Joseph Hoggins, who, Poirot discovered, had plans to commit murder. Poirot even sent Miss Carnaby two hundred pounds as a final payoff prior to the conclusion of her dog kidnapping campaign. In The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, Poirot allowed the murderer to escape justice through suicide and then withheld the truth to spare the feelings of the murderer's relatives. In The Augean Stables, he helped the government to cover up vast corruption. In Murder on the Orient Express, Poirot allowed the murderers to go free after discovering that twelve different people participated in Ratchett's murder. There was no question of his guilt, but he had been acquitted in America over a technicality. Considering it poetic justice that twelve jurors had acquitted Ratchett and twelve people had stabbed him, Poirot produced an alternate sequence of events to explain the death.

After his cases in the Middle East, Poirot returned to Britain. Apart from some of the so-called "Labours of Hercules" (see next section) he very rarely went abroad during his later career.

While Poirot was usually paid handsomely by clients, he was also known to take on cases that piqued his curiosity, although they did not pay well.

Poirot shows a love of steam trains, which Christie contrasts with Hasting's love of autos: this is shown in The Plymouth Express, The Mystery of the Blue Train, Murder on the Orient Express, and The ABC Murders (in the TV series, steam trains are seen in nearly all of the episodes).

=== Retirement ===

Thats the way of it. Just a case or two, just one case more  the Prima Donnas farewell performance wont be in it with yours, Poirot. Dr. Burton in the Preface 

Confusion surrounds Poirot's retirement. Most of the cases covered by Poirot's private detective agency take place before his retirement to grow marrows, at which time he solves The Murder of Roger Ackroyd. It has been said that the twelve cases related in The Labours of Hercules (1947) must refer to a different retirement, but the fact that Poirot specifically says that he intends to grow marrows indicates that these stories also take place before Roger Ackroyd, and presumably Poirot closed his agency once he had completed them. There is specific mention in "The Capture of Cerberus" of the twenty year gap between Poirot's previous meeting with Countess Rossakoff and this one. If the Labours precede the events in Roger Ackroyd, then the Ackroyd case must have taken place around twenty years later than it was published, and so must any of the cases that refer to it. One alternative would be that having failed to grow marrows once, Poirot is determined to have another go, but this is specifically denied by Poirot himself. in response to the suggestion that he might take up gardening in his retirement, Poirot answers "Once the vegetable marrows, yes  but never again". Also, in "The Erymanthian Boar", a character is said to have been turned out of Austria by the Nazis, implying that the events of The Labours of Hercules took place after 1937. Another alternative would be to suggest that the Preface to the Labours takes place at one date but that the labours are completed over a matter of twenty years. None of the explanations is especially attractive.

In terms of a rudimentary chronology, Poirot speaks of retiring to grow marrows in Chapter 18 of The Big Four (1927) which places that novel out of published order before Roger Ackroyd. He declines to solve a case for the Home Secretary because he is retired in Chapter One of Peril at End House (1932). He is certainly retired at the time of Three Act Tragedy (1935) but he does not enjoy his retirement and repeatedly takes cases thereafter when his curiosity is engaged. He continues to employ his secretary, Miss Lemon, at the time of the cases retold in Hickory Dickory Dock and Dead Man's Folly, which take place in the mid-1950s. It is therefore better to assume that Christie provided no authoritative chronology for Poirot's retirement, but assumed that he could either be an active detective, a consulting detective, or a retired detective as the needs of the immediate case required.

One consistent element about Poirot's retirement is that his fame declines during it, so that in the later novels he is often disappointed when characters (especially younger characters) recognise neither him nor his name:

"I should, perhaps, Madame, tell you a little more about myself. I am Hercule Poirot."
The revelation left Mrs Summerhayes unmoved.
"What a lovely name," she said kindly. "Greek, isn't it?"

=== Post World War II ===

He, I knew, was not likely to be far from his headquarters. The time when cases had drawn him from one end of England to the other was past. Hastings 

Poirot is less active during the cases that take place at the end of his career. Beginning with Three Act Tragedy (1934), Christie had perfected during the inter-war years a sub-genre of Poirot novel in which the detective himself spent much of the first third of the novel on the periphery of events. In novels such as Taken at the Flood, After the Funeral, and Hickory Dickory Dock, he is even less in evidence, frequently passing the duties of main interviewing detective to a subsidiary character. In Cat Among the Pigeons, Poirot's entrance is so late as to be almost an afterthought. Whether this was a reflection of his age or of Christie's distaste for him, is impossible to assess. Crooked House (1949) and Ordeal by Innocence (1957), which could easily have been Poirot novels, represent a logical endpoint of the general diminution of his presence in such works.

Towards the end of his career, it becomes clear that Poirot's retirement is no longer a convenient fiction. He assumes a genuinely inactive lifestyle during which he concerns himself with studying famous unsolved cases of the past and reading detective novels. He even writes a book about mystery fiction in which he deals sternly with Edgar Allan Poe and Wilkie Collins. In the absence of a more appropriate puzzle, he solves such inconsequential domestic riddles as the presence of three pieces of orange peel in his umbrella stand.

Poirot (and, it is reasonable to suppose, his creator) In The Pale Horse, Chapter 1, the novel's narrator, Mark Easterbrook, disapprovingly describes a typical "Chelsea girl" in much the same terms that Poirot uses in Chapter 1 of Third Girl, suggesting that the condemnation of fashion is authorial. becomes increasingly bemused by the vulgarism of the up-and-coming generation's young people. In Hickory Dickory Dock, he investigates the strange goings on in a student hostel, while in Third Girl (1966) he is forced into contact with the smart set of Chelsea youths. In the growing drug and pop culture of the sixties, he proves himself once again, but has become heavily reliant on other investigators (especially the private investigator, Mr. Goby) who provide him with the clues that he can no longer gather for himself.

You're too old. Nobody told me you were so old. I really don't want to be rude but  there it is. You're too old. I'm really very sorry. Norma Restarick to Poirot in Third Girl, Chapter 1 

Notably, during this time his physical characteristics also change dramatically, and by the time Arthur Hastings meets Poirot again in Curtain, he looks very different from his previous appearances, having become thin with age and with obviously dyed hair.

=== Death ===

Poirot passes away from complications of a heart condition at the end of (novel)|Curtain: Poirot's Last Case]. He had moved his amyl nitrite pills out of his reach, possibly because of guilt. He thereby became the murderer in Curtain, although it was for the benefit of others. Poirot himself noted that he wanted to kill his victim shortly before his own death so that he could avoid succumbing to the arrogance of the murderer, concerned that he may come to view himself as entitled to kill those he deemed necessary to eliminate.

The "murderer" he was hunting had never expressly killed anyone, but subtly and psychologically, he had manipulated others to kill for him, manipulating the moments where others desire to commit murder so that they carry out the crime when they might otherwise dismiss their thoughts as nothing more a momentary passion. Poirot thus was forced to kill the man himself, as otherwise he would have continued his actions and never been officially convicted as he did not legally do anything wrong. It is revealed at the end of Curtain that he fakes his need for a wheelchair to fool people into believing that he is suffering from arthritis, to give the impression that he is more infirm than he is. His last recorded words are "Cher ami!", spoken to Hastings as the Captain left his room. Poirot was buried at Styles, and his funeral was arranged by his best friend Hastings and Hastings' daughter Judith. Hastings reasoned, "Here was the spot where he had lived when he first came to this country. He was to lie here at the last."

While Poirot's actual death and funeral occurred in Curtain, years after his retirement from active investigation, it was not the first time Hastings attended the funeral of his best friend. In The Big Four (1927) Poirot feigned his death and subsequent funeral to launch a surprise attack on the Big Four.

== Recurring characters ==

=== Arthur Hastings ===

Hastings, a former British Army officer, first meets Poirot during Poirot's years as a police officer in Belgium and almost immediately after they both arrive in England. He becomes Poirot's lifelong friend and appears in many cases. Poirot regards Hastings as a poor private detective, not particularly intelligent, yet helpful in his way of being fooled by the criminal or seeing things the way the average man would see them and for his tendency to unknowingly "stumble" onto the truth. Hastings marries and has four children  two sons and two daughters.

Hastings is capable of great bravery and courage, facing death unflinchingly when confronted by The Big Four and displaying unwavering loyalty towards Poirot. However, when forced to choose between Poirot and his wife in that novel, he initially chooses to betray Poirot to protect his wife. Later, though, he tells Poirot to draw back and escape the trap.

The two are an airtight team until Hastings meets and marries Dulcie Duveen, a beautiful music hall performer half his age, after investigating the Murder on the Links. They later emigrate to Argentina, leaving Poirot behind as a "very unhappy old man". Poirot and Hastings reunite for the final time in Curtain: Poirot's Last Case, having been earlier reunited in The Big Four, Peril at End House, The ABC Murders, Lord Edgware Dies and Dumb Witness when Hastings arrives in England for business.

=== Ariadne Oliver ===

The detective novelist Ariadne Oliver is Agatha Christie's humorous self-caricature. Like Christie, she is not overly fond of the detective she is most famous for creatingin Ariadne's case the Finnish sleuth Sven Hjerson. We never learn anything about her husband, but we do know that she hates alcohol and public appearances and has a great fondness for apples until she is put off them by the events of Hallowe'en Party. She also has a habit of constantly changing her hairstyle, and in every appearance by her much is made of her clothes and hats. Her maid Maria prevents the public adoration from becoming too much of a burden on her employer, but does nothing to prevent her from becoming too much of a burden on others.

She has authored over 56 novels and greatly dislikes people modifying her characters. She is the only one in Poirot's universe to have noted that "Its not natural for five or six people to be on the spot when B is murdered and all have a motive for killing B." She first met Poirot in the story Cards on the Table and has been bothering him ever since.

=== Miss Felicity Lemon ===

Poirot's secretary, Miss Felicity Lemon, has few human weaknesses. The only mistakes she makes within the series are a typing error during the events of Hickory Dickory Dock and the mis-mailing of an electricity bill, although she was worried about strange events surrounding her sister at the time. Poirot described her as being "Unbelievably ugly and incredibly efficient. Anything that she mentioned as worth consideration usually was worth consideration." She is an expert on nearly everything and plans to create the perfect filing system. She also worked for the government statistician-turned-philanthropist Parker Pyne. Whether this was during one of Poirots numerous retirements or before she entered his employ is unknown. In The Agatha Christie Hour, she was portrayed by British actress Angela Easterling, while in Agatha Christie's Poirot, she was portrayed by Pauline Moran. A marked difference from the text exists in Moran's portrayal, where she is shown to be an attractive, fashionable and emotional woman showing an occasional soft corner for Poirot.

=== Chief Inspector James Harold Japp ===

Japp is a Scotland Yard Inspector and appears in many of the stories trying to solve cases that Poirot is working on. Japp is outgoing, loud and sometimes inconsiderate by nature and his relationship with the refined Belgian is one of the stranger aspects of Poirots world. He first met Poirot in Belgium in 1904, during the Abercrombie Forgery. Later that year they joined forces again to hunt down a criminal known as Baron Altara. They also meet in England where Poirot often helps Japp and lets him take credit in return for special favours. These favours usually entail Poirot being supplied with other interesting cases. Captain Arthur Hastings In Agatha Christie's Poirot, Japp was portrayed by Philip Jackson. In the film, Thirteen at Dinner (1985), adapted from Lord Edgware Dies, the role of Japp was taken by the actor David Suchet, who would later star as Poirot in the ITV adaptations.

== Major novels ==

The Poirot books take readers through the whole of his life in England, from the first book (The Mysterious Affair at Styles), where he is a refugee staying at Styles, to the last Poirot book (Curtain), where he visits Styles before his death. In between, Poirot solves cases outside England as well, including his most famous case, Murder on the Orient Express (1934).

Hercule Poirot became famous with the publication, in 1926, of The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, whose surprising solution proved controversial. The novel is still among the most famous of all detective novels: Edmund Wilson alludes to it in the title of his well-known attack on detective fiction, "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?" Aside from Roger Ackroyd, the most critically acclaimed Poirot novels appeared from 1932 to 1942, including Murder on the Orient Express, The ABC Murders (1935), Cards on the Table (1936), and Death on the Nile (1937). The last of these, a tale of multiple homicide upon a Nile steamer, was judged by the celebrated detective novelist John Dickson Carr to be among the ten greatest mystery novels of all time.

The 1942 novel Five Little Pigs (aka Murder in Retrospect), in which Poirot investigates a murder committed sixteen years before by analysing various accounts of the tragedy, is a Rashomon-like performance that critic and mystery novelist Robert Barnard called the best of the Christie novels.

== Portrayals ==

=== Stage ===

The first actor to portray Hercule Poirot was Charles Laughton. He appeared on the West End in 1928 in the play Alibi which had been adapted by Michael Morton from the novel The Murder of Roger Ackroyd.

=== Film ===

==== Austin Trevor ====

Austin Trevor debuted the role of Poirot on screen in the 1931 British film Alibi. The film was based on the stage play. Trevor reprised the role of Poirot twice, in Black Coffee and Lord Edgware Dies. Trevor said once that he was probably cast as Poirot simply because he could do a French accent. TV & Film page at the Hercule Poirot Central website. Leslie S. Hiscott directed the first two films, with Henry Edwards taking over for the third.

Albert Finney playing Poirot in the 1974 film, Murder on the Orient Express

==== Tony Randall ====

Tony Randall portrayed Poirot in The Alphabet Murders, a 1965 film also known as The ABC Murders. This was more a satire of Poirot than a straightforward adaptation, and was greatly changed from the original. Much of the story, set in contemporary times, was played for comedy, with Poirot investigating the murders while evading the attempts by Hastings (Robert Morley) and the police to get him out of England and back to Belgium.

==== Albert Finney ====

Albert Finney played Poirot in 1974 in the cinematic version of Murder on the Orient Express. Finney is the only actor to receive an Academy Award nomination for playing Poirot, though he did not win.

==== Peter Ustinov ====

Peter Ustinov as Poirot in a 1982 adaptation of the novel Evil Under the Sun
Peter Ustinov played Poirot six times, starting with Death on the Nile (1978). He reprised the role in Evil Under the Sun (1982) and Appointment with Death (1988).

When Christie's daughter, Rosalind Hicks, observed Ustinov during a rehearsal, she said, "That's not Poirot! He isn't at all like that!" Ustinov, overhearing, remarked "He is now!" Web page at mapdig.com 

He appeared again as Poirot in three made-for-television movies: Thirteen at Dinner (1985), Dead Man's Folly (1986), and Murder in Three Acts (1986). Unlike earlier adaptations that were set during the time in which the novels were written, however, these TV movies were set in the contemporary era. The first of these was based on Lord Edgware Dies and was made by Warner Bros.. It also starred Faye Dunaway and David Suchet as Inspector Japp, just before Suchet began to play the famous detective. David Suchet considers his performance as Japp to be "possibly the worst performance of career". Interview with David Suchet at strandmag.com 

==== Other ====

* Anatoly Ravikovich, Zagadka Endkhauza (End House Mystery) (1989; based on "Peril at End House")

=== Television ===

==== David Suchet ====

David Suchet starred as the eponymous detective in Agatha Christie's Poirot in the ITV series 1989 until in June 2013, he announced he was bidding farewell to the role. "No one could've guessed then that the series would span a quarter-century or that the classically trained Suchet would complete the entire catalog of whodunits featuring the eccentric Belgian investigator, including 33 novels and dozens of short stories." His final appearance, in an adaptation of Curtain: Poirot's Last Case, aired on 13 November 2013.

==== Other ====

* Heini Gbel, (1955; an adaptation of Murder on the Orient Express for the West German television series Die Galerie der groen Detektive)
* Jos Ferrer, Hercule Poirot (1961; Unaired TV Pilot, MGM; adaptation of "The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim")
* Martin Gabel, General Electric Theater (4/1/1962; adaptation of "The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim")
* Horst Bollmann Black Coffee 1973
* Ian Holm, Murder by the Book, 1986
* Alfred Molina, Murder on the Orient Express, 2001
* Konstantin Raikin, Neudacha Puaro (Poirot's Failure) (2002; based on "The Murder of Roger Ackroyd")

=== Animated ===

In 2004, NHK (Japanese public TV network) produced a 39 episode anime series titled Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple, as well as a manga series under the same title released in 2005. The series, adapting several of the best-known Poirot and Marple stories, ran from 4 July 2004 through 15 May 2005, and in repeated reruns on NHK and other networks in Japan. Poirot was voiced by Ktar Satomi and Miss Marple was voiced by Kaoru Yachigusa.

=== Radio ===

Radio adaptations of the Poirot stories also appeared, most recently twenty seven of them on BBC Radio 4 (and regularly repeated on BBC 7, later BBC Radio 4 Extra), starring John Moffatt; Maurice Denham and Peter Sallis have also played Poirot on BBC Radio 4, Mr. Denham in The Mystery of the Blue Train and Mr. Sallis in Hercule Poirot's Christmas. In 1939, Orson Welles and the Mercury Players dramatised Roger Ackroyd on CBS's Campbell Playhouse. Cox, Jim, Radio Crime Fighters, 2002, p. 18, McFarland, Jefferson, NC, ISBN 978-0-7864-1390-4 A 1945 radio series of at least 13 original half-hour episodes (none of which apparently adapt any Christie stories) transferred Poirot from London to New York and starred character actor Harold Huber, perhaps better known for his appearances as a police officer in various Charlie Chan films. On 22 February 1945, "speaking from London, Agatha Christie introduced the initial broadcast of the Poirot series via shortwave". 

=== BBC Radio 4 Poirot radio dramas ===

Recorded and released (John Moffatt stars as Poirot unless otherwise indicated):

=== Parodies and references ===

In Revenge of the Pink Panther, Poirot makes a cameo appearance in a mental asylum, portrayed by Andrew Sachs and claiming to be "the greatest detective in all of France, the greatest in all the world".

In Neil Simon's Murder By Death, American actor James Coco plays "Milo Perrier", a parody of Poirot. The film also features parodies of Charlie Chan, Sam Spade, Nick and Nora Charles, and Miss Marple.

Dudley Jones played Poirot in the film The Strange Case of the End of Civilization as We Know It (1977).

In the movie Spice World, Poirot (Hugh Laurie) accuses a weapons-packing Emma Bunton of the crime.

In , Poirot appears as a young boy on the train transporting Holmes and Watson. Holmes helps the boy in opening a puzzle-box, with Watson giving the boy advice about using his "little grey cells", giving the impression that Poirot first heard about grey cells and their uses from Dr. Watson. Poirot would go on to use the "little grey cells" line countless times throughout Agatha Christie's fiction.

The Belgian brewery Brasserie Ellezelloise makes a highly rated stout called Hercule with a moustachioed caricature of Hercule Poirot on the label.

In the final host segment of Mystery Science Theater 3000s episode "The Rebel Set", Tom Servo dresses up as Poirot and impersonates him in an attempt to discover the identity of B-movie actor Merritt Stone.

Jason Alexander played Poirot in episode 8 of Muppets Tonight in a spoof called "Murder on the Disoriented Express".

Poirot is parodied twice in sketch show That Mitchell and Webb Look, where he is played by David Mitchell; one sketch sees him identifying a killer due to her use of "the evil voice"a voice that only murderers useadmitting that he otherwise had no evidence, and a later sketch sees him meeting a ship captain who is also played by Mitchell.

Leo Bruce parodied Hercule Poirot with the character Amer Picon in his book Case for Three Detectives (1936); the other two characters were parodies of Lord Peter Wimsey and Father Brown.

== See also ==

* Tropes in Agatha Christie's novels

== References ==

==Works==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*

== External links ==
* Agatha Christie|'s Hercule Poirot
* 
* 
* Listen to the 1945 Hercule Poirot radio program
* Article on Hercule Poirot
* Wikitionary definition of Edgar Allan Poe's "ratiocination"

 



[[Miss Marple]]

Jane Marple, usually referred to as Miss Marple, is a fictional character appearing in 12 of Agatha Christie's crime novels and in 20 short stories. Miss Marple is an elderly spinster who lives in the village of St. Mary Mead and acts as an consulting detective. Alongside Hercule Poirot, she is one of the most loved and famous of Christie's characters and has been portrayed numerous times on screen. Her first appearance was in a short story published in The Sketch magazine in 1926, "The Tuesday Night Club", which later became the first chapter of The Thirteen Problems (1932). Her first appearance in a full-length novel was in The Murder at the Vicarage in 1930.

==Origins==
The character of Miss Marple is based on Christie's step grandmother, or her Aunt (Margaret West), and her cronies. Margaret West married Agatha Christie's great grandfather Nathaniel Frary Miller in 1863 in Westbourne, West Sussex. He died in 1869 and she dedicated a stained glass window to his memory in St.John's Church, Main Road, Southbourne, West Sussex. "Agatha Christie used her step grandmother as a model for Miss Marple, new tapes reveal", Stephen Adams, The Daily Telegraph, 16 September 2008. Agatha Christie attributed the inspiration for the character of Miss Marple to a number of sources, stating that Miss Marple was "the sort of old lady who would have been rather like some of my step grandmother's Ealing cronies  old ladies whom I have met in so many villages where I have gone to stay as a girl". Christie also used material from her fictional creation, spinster Caroline Sheppard, who appeared in The Murder of Roger Ackroyd. When Michael Morton adapted the novel for the stage, he removed the character of Caroline replacing her with a young girl. This change saddened Christie and she determined to give old maids a voice: Miss Marple was born. 

There is no definitive source for the derivation of the name 'Marple'. "Was Miss Marple Born in Cheshire?", Cheshire Life, accessed 30 March 2009. The most common explanation is that the name was taken from Marple railway station in Stockport, through which Christie passed. Alternatively, Christie may have taken the name from a family named Marple, who lived at Marple Hall near her sister Madge's home at Abney Hall. "Marple's Profile", Hercule Poirot Central, accessed 30 March 2009. 

==Character==
The character of Jane Marple in the first Miss Marple book, The Murder at the Vicarage, is markedly different from how she appears in later books. This early version of Miss Marple is a gleeful gossip and not an especially nice woman. The citizens of St. Mary Mead like her but are often tired by her nosy nature and how she seems to expect the worst of everyone. In later books she becomes more modern and a kinder person.

Miss Marple solves difficult crimes because of her shrewd intelligence, and St. Mary Mead, over her lifetime, has given her seemingly infinite examples of the negative side of human nature. Crimes always remind her of a parallel incident, although acquaintances may be bored by analogies that often lead her to a deeper realization about the true nature of a crime. She also has a remarkable ability to latch onto a casual comment and connect it to the case at hand. In several stories, she is able to rely on her acquaintance with Sir Henry Clithering, a retired commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, for official information when required.

Miss Marple never married and has no close living relatives. Her nephew, the "well-known author" Raymond West appears in Vicarage, and his wife Joan (initially Joyce), a modern artist, appears in The Thirteen Problems. Raymond overestimates himself and underestimates his aunt's mental acuity. Miss Marple has many other nieces and nephews: Lionel Peel, Diana "Bunch" Harmon. She employs young women (Clara, Emily, Alice, Esther, Gwenda and Amy) from a nearby orphanage, whom she trains for service as general housemaids after the retirement of her long-time maid-housekeeper faithful Florence. She was briefly looked after by her irritating maid, Miss Knight. In her later years, companion Cherry Baker, first introduced in The Mirror Crack'd From Side to Side, lives in.

Miss Marple has never worked for her living and is of independent means, although she benefits in her old age from the financial support of Raymond West, her nephew (A Caribbean Mystery, 1964). She is not herself from the aristocracy or landed gentry, but is quite at home among them and would probably have been happy to describe herself as "genteel"; indeed, a gentlewoman. Miss Marple may thus be considered a female version of that staple of British detective fiction, the gentleman detective. She demonstrates a remarkably thorough education, including some art courses that involved study of human anatomy through the study of human cadavers. In They Do It with Mirrors (1952), it is revealed that Miss Marple grew up in a cathedral close, and that she studied at an Italian finishing school with Americans Ruth Van Rydock and Caroline "Carrie" Louise Serrocold.

While Miss Marple is described as 'an old lady' in many of the stories, her age is mentioned in "At Bertram's Hotel", where it is said she visited the hotel when she was fourteen and almost sixty years have passed since then. Excluding "Sleeping Murder", 41 years passed between the first and last-written novels, and many characters grow and age. An example would be the Vicar's nephew. In The Murder at the Vicarage, the Reverend Clement's nephew Dennis is a teenager. In The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side, it is mentioned that the nephew is now grown and successful and has a career. The effects of aging are seen on Miss Marple, such as needing a vacation after illness in A Caribbean Mystery.

==Novels featuring Miss Marple==
# The Murder at the Vicarage (1930)
# The Body in the Library (1942)
# The Moving Finger (1943)
# A Murder is Announced (1950)
# They Do It with Mirrors, or Murder with Mirrors (1952)
# A Pocket Full of Rye (1953)
# 4.50 from Paddington, or What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw! (1957)
# The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side, or The Mirror Crack'd (1962)
# A Caribbean Mystery (1964)
# At Bertram's Hotel (1965)
# Nemesis (1971)
# Sleeping Murder (written around 1940, published 1976)

==Miss Marple short story collections==
* "The Tuesday Night Club" (short story) featured Miss Marple for the first time ever. Written in 1926.
* The Thirteen Problems (short story collection featuring Miss Marple, also published as The Tuesday Club Murders) (1932)
* Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories (short stories collected posthumously, also published as Miss Marple's Final Cases, but only six of the eight stories actually feature Miss Marple) (written between 1939 and 1954, published 1979)
* Miss Marple: The Complete Short Stories, Hardcover, 243 pages, Published 1985 by Dodd, Mead NY, ISBN 978-0-396-08747-2 includes 20 from 4 sets: The Tuesday Club Murders, The Regatta Mystery, Three Blind Mice and Other Stories, and Double Sin and Other Stories.

Miss Marple also appears in Greenshaw's Folly, a short story traditionally included as part of the Poirot collection The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding (1960). Four stories in the Three Blind Mice collection (1950) feature Miss Marple: Strange Jest, Tape-Measure Murder, The Case of the Caretaker, and The Case of the Perfect Maid.

The Autograph edition of Miss Marple's Final Cases includes the 8 in the original plus Greenshaw's Folly.

==Books about Miss Marple==
* The Life and Times of Miss Jane Marple  a biography by Anne Hart

==Films==

===Margaret Rutherford===
Although popular from her first appearance in 1930, Jane Marple had to wait thirty-two years for her first big-screen appearance, starring Margaret Rutherford. These were popular and successful light comedies, but were disappointing to Christie herself. Nevertheless, Agatha Christie dedicated the novel The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side to Rutherford.

Rutherford presented the character as a bold and eccentric old lady, different from the prim and birdlike character Christie created in her novels. As penned by Christie, Miss Marple has never worked for a living, but the character as portrayed by Margaret Rutherford briefly works as a cook, a hotelier, a painter, a stage actress, a banker, and possibly as a pub landlady, a brewer and an architect. Her education and genteel background are hinted at when she mentions her awards at marksmanship, fencing and equestrianism (although these hints are played for comedic value).

Murder, She Said (1961, directed by George Pollock) was the first of four British MGM productions starring Rutherford. This first film was based on the 1957 novel 4:50 from Paddington (U.S. title, What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!), and the changes made in the plot were typical of the series. In the film, Mrs. McGillicuddy is cut from the plot. Miss Marple herself sees an apparent murder committed on a train running alongside hers. Likewise, it is Miss Marple herself who poses as a maid to find out the facts of the case, not a young friend of hers who has made a business of it.

The other Rutherford films, all directed by Pollock, were Murder at the Gallop (1963), based on the 1953 Hercule Poirot novel After the Funeral (in this film, she is identified as Miss JTV Marple, though there was no indication as to what the extra initials might stand for); Murder Most Foul (1964), based on the 1952 Poirot novel Mrs McGinty's Dead; and Murder Ahoy! (1964). The last film is not based on any Christie work but displays a few plot elements from They Do It With Mirrors (viz., the ship is used as a reform school for wayward boys and one of the teachers uses them as a crime force), and there is a kind of salute to The Mousetrap. Rutherford also appeared briefly as Miss Marple in the spoof Hercule Poirot adventure The Alphabet Murders (1965).

The music to all four films was composed and conducted by Ron Goodwin and is still played on radio today. The same theme is used on all four films with slight variations on each. The main theme has a distinct 1960s feel to it and is known to be a highly complex piece of music due to the quick playing of the Violin. The score was written within a couple of weeks by Goodwin who was approached by George Pollock after Pollock had heard about him from Stanley Black. Black had worked with Pollock on "Stranger in Town" in 1957 and years previously Stanley Black had used Ron Goodwin as his orchestrator. Ron Goodwin  Biography 

Rutherford, who was 70 years old when the first film was made, insisted that she wear her own clothes during the filming of the movie, as well as having her real-life husband, Stringer Davis, appear alongside her as the character 'Mr Stringer'. The Rutherford films are frequently repeated on television in Germany, and in that country Miss Marple is generally identified with Rutherford's quirky portrayal. 

===Angela Lansbury===
In 1980, Angela Lansbury played Miss Marple in The Mirror Crack'd (EMI, directed by Guy Hamilton), based on Christie's 1962 novel. The film featured an all-star cast that included Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson, Geraldine Chaplin, Tony Curtis, and Kim Novak. Edward Fox appeared as Inspector Craddock, who did Miss Marple's legwork. Lansbury's Marple was a crisp, intelligent woman who moved stiffly and spoke in clipped tones. Unlike most incarnations of Miss Marple, this one smoked cigarettes.

Lansbury went on to star in the TV series Murder, She Wrote as Jessica Fletcher, a mystery novelist who also solves crimes. The character of Jessica Fletcher is thought to be based on a combination of Miss Marple, Agatha Christie herself, and another Christie character, Ariadne Oliver, who often appears in the Hercule Poirot mysteries.

===Ita Ever===
In 1983, Estonian stage and film actress Ita Ever starred in the Russian language film adaptation of Agatha Christie's novel A Pocket Full of Rye (using the Russian edition's translated title, The Secret of the Blackbirds) as the character of Miss Marple. 

==Television==
American TV was the setting for the first dramatic portrayal of Miss Marple with Gracie Fields, the legendary British actress, playing her in a 1956 episode of Goodyear TV Playhouse based on A Murder Is Announced, the 1950 Christie novel.

In 1970, the character of Miss Marple was portrayed by Inge Langen in a West German television adaptation of The Murder at the Vicarage (Mord im Pfarrhaus). 

American stage and screen actress Helen Hayes portrayed Miss Marple in two American made-for-TV movies, both for CBS: A Caribbean Mystery (1983) and Murder with Mirrors (1985). Sue Grafton contributed to the screenplay of the former. Hayes's Marple was benign and chirpy.

===Joan Hickson===
Joan Hickson as Miss Marple
From 1984 to 1992, the BBC adapted all of the original Miss Marple novels as a series titled Miss Marple. Joan Hickson played the lead role. In the 1940s, Joan appeared on-stage in an Agatha Christie play, Appointment with Death, which was seen by Christie who wrote in a note to her, "I hope one day you will play my dear Miss Marple". (Coincidentally, Hickson had played a housekeeper in the first film in which Margaret Rutherford played Miss Marple.) As well as portraying Miss Marple on television, Hickson also narrated a number of Miss Marple stories on audio books.

Listing of the TV series featuring Joan Hickson:
* The Body in the Library (1984)
* A Murder is Announced (1985)
* A Pocket Full of Rye (1985)
* The Moving Finger (1985)
* The Murder at the Vicarage (1986)  BAFTA nomination
* Sleeping Murder (1987)
* At Bertram's Hotel (1987)
* Nemesis (1987)  BAFTA nomination
* 4.50 from Paddington (1987)
* A Caribbean Mystery (1989)
* They Do It With Mirrors (1991)
* The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side (1992)

===Geraldine McEwan / Julia McKenzie===
Beginning in 2004, ITV broadcast a series of adaptations of Agatha Christie's books under the title Agatha Christie's Marple, usually referred to as Marple. Geraldine McEwan starred in the first three series. Julia McKenzie took over the role in the fourth season.

The adaptions are notable for changing the plots and characters of the original books (e.g. incorporating lesbian affairs, changing the identities of some killers, renaming or removing significant characters, and even using stories from other books in which Miss Marple did not originally feature). In the Geraldine McEwan series it is revealed that when she was young, Miss Marple had an affair with a married soldier, Captain Ainsworth, who was killed in action in World War I, in December 1915. It is also said (in A Murder Is Announced) that she served as a nurse during World War II.

Listing of the TV series featuring Geraldine McEwan and Julia McKenzie:
* The Body in the Library (2004)
* The Murder at the Vicarage (2004)
* 4.50 from Paddington (2004)
* A Murder is Announced (2005)
* Sleeping Murder (2005)
* The Moving Finger (2006)
* By the Pricking of My Thumbs (2006)
* The Sittaford Mystery (2006)
* At Bertram's Hotel (2007)
* Ordeal by Innocence (2007)
* Towards Zero (2008)
* Nemesis (2008)
* A Pocket Full of Rye (2009)
* Murder is Easy (2009)
* They Do It with Mirrors (2009)
* Why Didn't They Ask Evans? (2009)
* The Pale Horse (2010)
* The Secret of Chimneys (2010)
* The Blue Geranium (2010)
* The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side (2010)
* A Caribbean Mystery (2013)
* Greenshaw's Folly (2013)
* Endless Night (2013)

===Others===
From 2004 to 2005, Japanese TV network NHK produced a 39 episode anime series titled Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple, which features both Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot. Miss Marple's voice is provided by Kaoru Yachigusa. Episodes adapted both short stories and novels.

Listing of the TV series episodes featuring Kaoru Yachigusa:
* Strange Jest (EP 3)
* The Case of the Perfect Maid (EP 4)
* The Tape-Measure Murder (EP 13)
* Ingots of Gold (EP 14)
* The Blue Geranium (EP 15)
* 4.50 from Paddington (EP 2124)
* Motive versus Opportunity (EP 27)
* Sleeping Murder (EP 3033)

==Stage==
In 1974, Barbara Mullen played Miss Marple in Murder at the Vicarage at the Savoy Theatre, London.

In September 1977, veteran actress and author Dulcie Gray played the Miss Marple character in a stage adaptation of A Murder Is Announced at the Vaudeville Theatre in London, England that featured also Dinah Sheridan, Eleanor Summerfield, Patricia Brake and Barbara Flynn. Vaudeville Theatre programme, No.29 February 1978 

==Radio==
BBC Radio 4 dramatised all of the novels from 1993 to 2001 with June Whitfield as Miss Marple. 

 Title Show Episodes Episode Frequency Original airdate 
 Murder At the Vicarage 5 Daily 2630 December 1993 
 A Pocket Full of Rye The Saturday Playhouse 1 11 February 1995 
 At Bertram's Hotel 5 Daily 2529 December 1995 
 The 4:50 From Paddington The Saturday Playhouse 1 29 March 1997 
 A Caribbean Mystery 5 Weekly 30 October  27 November 1997 
 The Mirror Crack'd From Side to Side Agatha Christie Special 1 29 August 1998 
 Nemesis 5 Weekly 9 November  7 December 1998 
 The Body In the Library The Saturday Play 1 22 May 1999 
 A Murder Is Announced 5 Weekly 9 August  6 September 1999 
 The Moving Finger The Saturday Play 1 5 May 2001 
 They Do It With Mirrors 5 Weekly 23 July 2001  20 August 2001 
 Sleeping Murder The Saturday Play 1 8 December 2001 

Miss Marple was also referenced multiple times in the episode "Paris" of the BBC Radio 4 program Cabin Pressure.

==Other appearances==
Marple, as she appeared in volume 20 of Case Closed
Marple was highlighted in volume 20 of the Case Closed manga's edition of "Gosho Aoyama's Mystery Library", a section of the graphic novels (usually the last page) where the author introduces a different detective (or occasionally, a villain) from mystery literature, television, or other media.

==See also==

* List of female detective characters
* Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories

==References==

==External links==
* Miss Marple at the official Agatha Christie website
* Biography of Miss Marple
* 
* Yahoo Grouplist for Geraldine McEwan
* 
* 

 

Marple, Miss



[[April]]

April is the fourth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, the fifth in the early Julian and one of four months with a length of 30 days.

April ( ) is commonly associated with the season of spring in parts of the Northern hemisphere and autumn in parts of the Southern hemisphere, where it is the seasonal equivalent to October in the Northern hemisphere and vice versa.

April starts on the same day of the week as July in all years, and January in leap years. April ends on the same day of the week as December every year. October of the previous year starts on the same day of the week as April of the current year as a common year and May of the previous year starts on the same day of the week as April of the current year as a leap year. July of the previous year ends on the same day of the week as April of the current year as a common year and February and October of the previous year ends on the same day of the week as April of the current year as a leap year. In years immediately before common years, April starts on the same day of the week as September and December of the following year and in years immediately before leap years, June of the following year. In years immediately before common years, April ends on the same day of the week as September of the following year and in years immediately before leap years, March and June of the following year.

==Name and origin==
April from the Trs Riches Heures du duc de Berry

The Romans gave this month the Latin name Aprilis "April" in Chambers's Encyclopdia. London: George Newnes, 1961, Vol. 1, p. 497. but the derivation of this name is uncertain. The traditional etymology is from the verb aperire, "to open", in allusion to its being the season when trees and flowers begin to "open", which is supported by comparison with the modern Greek use of  (anoixis) (opening) for spring. Since some of the Roman months were named in honor of divinities, and as April was sacred to the goddess Venus, her Veneralia being held on the first day, it has been suggested that Aprilis was originally her month Aphrilis, from her equivalent Greek goddess name Aphrodite (Aphros), or from the Etruscan name Apru. Jacob Grimm suggests the name of a hypothetical god or hero, Aper or Aprus. Jacob Grim Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. Cap. "Monate" 

April was the second month of the earliest Roman calendar, before Ianuarius and Februarius were added by King Numa Pompilius about 700 BC. It became the fourth month of the calendar year (the year when twelve months are displayed in order) during the time of the decemvirs about 450 BC, when it also was given 29 days. The 30th day was added during the reform of the calendar undertaken by Julius Caesar in the mid-40s BC, which produced the Julian calendar.

The Anglo-Saxons called April Oster-monath or Eostur-monath. The Venerable Bede says in The Reckoning of Time that this month Eostur is the root of the word Easter. He further states that the month was named after a goddess Eostre whose feast was in that month. It is also attested by Einhard in his work, Vita Karoli Magni.

St George's day is the twenty-third of the month; and St Mark's Eve, with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church, falls on the twenty-fourth.

In China the symbolic ploughing of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood took place in their third month, which frequently corresponds to April. In Finnish April is huhtikuu, meaning slash-and-burn moon, when gymnosperms for beat and burn clearing of farmland were felled.

In Slovene, the most established traditional name is mali traven, meaning the month when plants start growing. It was first written in 1466 in the kofja Loka manuscript. 

==Holidays and events==
Buddha's Birthday is celebrated in April (here is pictured the Tian Tan Buddha in Hong Kong)
*Autism Awareness Month (United States)
*Jazz Appreciation Month (United States)
*National Poetry Month (United States)
*National Poetry Writing Month
*Parkinson's Disease Awareness Month (International)
* Confederate History Month (southern United States)-April 26
*National Arab American Heritage Month (United States)
*National Child Abuse Prevention Month (United States)
*Sexual Assault Awareness Month
*April Fools' Day  April 1
*Belarusian Day  April 3
*Japanese school calendar also starts from April 1, although Nyugakushiki (entry ceremony for schools) are usually held later, around second week of April.
*World Autism Awareness Day - April 2
*Arbor Day (Korea)  April 5
* End of Tax Year (UK)  April 5
*April 1 is the first day of Japanese fiscal year. Major Japanese companies usually have Nyushashiki (entry ceremony for companies) for new employees those who newly hired after their graduation from schools, on this day.
*Passover (Hebrew:) a Jewish holiday
*World Health Day  April 7
*Buddha's Birthday  Traditional Date  April 8
*Araw ng Kagitingan, also known as "Bataan Day" (Philippines)  April 9
*Bengali New Year (Bangladesh) - April 14
*Vaisakh (Nepal) - April 14
*Vaisakhi (India) - April 14
*Good Friday (Christians)  a Friday between March 20 and April 23, being the last Friday before Easter
*Easter, or Resurrection Day (Christians) - celebrated the First Sunday after the first full moon on or after the Spring Equinox, near March 21st (between March 22 and April 25)
*International Trombone Week - varies. In 2012, it is April 115 
* Beginning of Tax Year (India)  April 1
*Thai New Year in Thailand  April 13
*Lao New Year in Laos  April 13
*Burmese New Year in Burma - April 13
*Khmer New Year in Cambodia  April 13
*Tax Day (US)  April 15
*National Healthcare Decisions Day (US) - April 16 
*Boston Marathon  Third Monday
*Zimbabwean Independence Day  April 18 
*  April 20
*Patriots' Day  April 21
*Earth Day  April 22
*Conch Republic Independence Celebration (Key West, Florida)  April 23
*St George's Day Patron Saint Celebration (England, Europe)  April 23
* Armenian Genocide Remembrance Day  April 24
*Liberation Day in Italy - April 25 is a National Holiday that celebrates the end of the Nazi Germany occupation in the Northern Italy.
*ANZAC Day (Australia and New Zealand)  April 25
*Carnation Revolution (Portugal)  April 25
*Confederate Memorial Day (US: Georgia, Tennessee,Florida, Texas)- April 26 
*Resistance day in Slovenia - formerly Liberation Front of the Slovene People day April 27
*Freedom Day (South Africa)  April 27
*April 29 is a Japanese national holiday, as Shwa Day since 2007. It has been celebrated as The Emperor's Birthday from 1927 to 1988, then renamed as Greenery Day after Hirohito's death in 1989. It is usually marked as the first day of "Golden Week", a week-long holiday period.
* Formerly Koninginnedag in the Netherlands / Kingdom of the Netherlands  April 30, for the last time celebrated in 2013, now celebrated as Koningsdag at April 27th. 
*Arbor Day  last Friday of April in some states in the United States http://www.arborday.org/
*Take Our Daughters And Sons To Work Day, usually fourth Thursday (United States)
*London Marathon  usually fourth Sunday
*Opening Day  first Sunday in April
*Independence day (Syria)  April 17
*Record Store Day  usually celebrated on the third Saturday
*Financial Literacy Month (United States)

The "Days of April" (journes d'avril) is a name appropriated in French history to a series of insurrections at Lyons, Paris and elsewhere, against the government of Louis Philippe in 1834, which led to violent repressive measures, and to a famous trial known as the procs d'avril.

==April symbols==

* April's birthstone is the diamond.
* The birth flower is typically listed as either the Daisy (Bellis perennis) or the Sweet Pea. Kipfer, Barbara Ann (1997) The Order of Things. New York: Random House SHGresources.com 
* The zodiac signs for the month of April are Aries (until April 20) and Taurus (April 21 onwards).

==See also==
* Germanic calendar
* List of historical anniversaries

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources
* 

==External links==

* http://www.arborday.org/

 04
 

[[August]]

Depiction of harvesting in the August calendar page of the Queen Mary Psalter (fol. 78v), ca. 1310.
August ( ) is the eighth month of the year (between July and September) in the Julian and Gregorian calendars and one of seven months with a length of 31 days. "August." Encyclopdia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 23 September 2008. 

In the Southern Hemisphere, August is the seasonal equivalent of February in the Northern Hemisphere.

In common years no other month starts on the same day of the week as August, though in leap years February starts on the same day. August ends on the same day of the week as November every year. March and November of the previous year starts on the same day of the week as August of the current year as a common year and June of the previous year starts on the same day of the week as August of the current year as a leap year. In years immediately before common years, August starts and ends on the same day of the week as May of the following year while in years immediately before leap years, August starts on the same day of as October of the following year and ends on the same day of the week as February and October of the following year. 

This month was originally named Sextili in Latin, because it was the sixth month in the original ten-month Roman calendar under Romulus in 753 BC, when March was the first month of the year. About 700 BC it became the eighth month when January and February were added to the year before March by King Numa Pompilius, who also gave it 29 days. Julius Caesar added two days when he created the Julian calendar in 45 BC giving it its modern length of 31 days. In 8 BC it was renamed in honor of Augustus (despite common belief, he did not take a day from February; see the debunked theory on month lengths). According to a Senatus consultum quoted by Macrobius, he chose this month because it was the time of several of his great triumphs, including the conquest of Egypt. Year of Julius Caesar, A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1890), William Smith, LLD, William Wayte, G. E. Marindin, Ed. 

==Events in August==
August, from the Trs Riches Heures du Duc de Berry showing a group of travelers and the Duc's Chteau d'tampes in the background
* In the neopagan wheel of the year August begins at or near Lughnasadh (also known as Lammas) in the northern hemisphere and Imbolc (also known as Candlemas) in the southern hemisphere.
* 14 August is Pakistan's Independence Day since 1947.
* India got independence on 15 August 1947. 
* Some of Ireland's most famous battles have been fought in this month. They include: the Second Battle of Athenry (1316); the battle of Knockdoe (1504); the Battle of the Yellow Ford (1596); the First Battle of Curlew Pass (1599); the Battle of Dungans Hill (1647); the Battle of Castlebar (1798), and the Battle of the Bogside (1969).

===Monthlong events in August===
* Edinburgh Festival is an internationally famous arts festival that takes place during August
* National Immunization Awareness Month
* National Psoriasis Awareness Month
* National Water Quality Month
* In many European countries, August is the holiday month for most workers
* The Philippines celebrates August as the 
* In the United States, August is National Back to School month. Some US School districts and systems return to school in August.
* In the United States, August is National Goat Cheese Month. Bober, Mike. Celebrate National Goat Cheese Month with Local Favorites, dcfoodies.com 
* American Adventures Month
* Audio Appreciation Month
* Black Business Month
* Cataract Awareness Month
* Children's Eye Health and Safety Month
* Children's Vision and Learning Month
* Get Ready for Kindergarten Month
* Happiness Happens Month
* Neurosurgery Outreach Month
* Panini Month
* Spinal Muscular Atrophy Awareness Month
* What Will Be Your Legacy Month
* Win with Civility Month MHprofessional.com 

===Weeklong events in August===
* During the first week of August in Wales, the National Eisteddfod of Wales is held, in which many aspects of Welsh art and culture are celebrated.
* During the first week of August in Sweden, the Medieval Week of Wisby in Gotland is held each year.
* During the first week of August is World Breastfeeding Week.
* The Sturgis Motorcycle Rally is held the first full week in August each year.
* The middle week of August is the peak of the Perseid meteor shower.
* The Pennsic War, a massive gathering of the Society for Creative Anachronism, takes place about the first week of August every year.
* The first week of August is "Indian Week" for the Penobscot Tribe in Old Town, Maine. In this week, members of the Penobscot Tribe from all over Maine venture to the Penobscot Indian Island Reservation in Old Town and take part in games, Native American arts and crafts, pow-wows, cook-outs, etc.

===Other August events===
* The first full weekend in August each year, Twinsburg, Ohio, celebrates Twins Days.
*Bon festival  (Obon Festival) is a Japanese traditional Buddhist custom, evolved into a family reunion holiday. Many Japanese manufacturers and firms give their employees three to five days off around the 15th of August.
*Indian Independence day on August 15
* The Glorious Twelfth, the start of the shooting season for Red Grouse in the United Kingdom August 12th
* International Lefthanders Day August 13th
*Pakistan's Independence day on August 14th
* Vietnam Veterans' Day (Australia) marking the Battle of Long Tan (18 August 1966)
* World Humanitarian Day is a day dedicated to recognize humanitarian personnel and those who have lost their lives working for humanitarian causes on August 19th
* Black Ribbon Day, commemorating the peaceful political demonstration in 1989 when two million people joined hands across the Baltic states of Estonian SSR, Latvian SSR, and Lithuanian SSR August 23rd
* The International Day against Nuclear Tests August 29th
* The International Day of the Disappeared, drawing attention to the fate of individuals imprisoned at places and under poor conditions unknown to their relatives and/or legal representatives August 30th
* Kilkenny Arts Week in Kilkenny, Ireland. http://www.kilkennyarts.ie/ 

===Daily events in August===
* 1 August is Swiss National Day.
* 6 August is Independence Day in Jamaica since 1962.
* 9 August is the National Day of Singapore.
* 15 August is Indian Independence Day since 1947.
* 14 August is Pakistan's Independence Day since 1947.
* The Philippines celebrates National Heroes Day in commemoration of the First Cry of the Philippine Revolution on August 23, 1896.
* 27 August is Moldova National Day
* 31 August is the National Day of Malaysia.

===Islamic holidays===
* Ramadan runs from July 8 to August 7 2013
* Laylat al-Qadr on August 14, 2012
* August 8, 2013 is Eid ul-Fitr.
* Note: the Islamic holidays vary from year to year. The dates given above are for 2013.

==August symbols==
Gladiolus
*August's birthstones are the peridot and sardonyx.
*Its birth flower is the gladiolus or poppy, meaning beauty, strength of character, love, marriage and family. Birth months, flowers, and gemstones, shgresources.com 
*The zodiac signs for the month of August are Leo (until August 21) and Virgo (from August 22 onwards).

==References==

==Further reading==
* August: Let's get rid of it, by David Plotz, Slate Magazine, slate.com

 08
 

[[Aaron]]

In the Hebrew Bible and the Quran, Aaron (; ) was the older brother of Moses, (Exodus 6:16-20, 7:7; Qur'an 28:34 ), a prophet of God. He represented the priestly functions of his tribe, becoming the first High Priest of the Israelites. While Moses was receiving his education at the Egyptian royal court, and during his exile among the Midianites, Aaron and his sister Miriam remained with their kinsmen in the eastern border-land of Egypt (Goshen). There, Aaron gained a name for eloquent and persuasive speech, so that when the time came for the demand upon Pharaoh to release Israel from captivity, Aaron became his brother's "prophet" to Pharaoh. () Various dates for his life have been proposed, ranging from approximately 1600 to 1200 BC. The Jewish Encyclopedia suggests two possible accounts of Aaron's death. The principal one gives a detailed statement that soon after the incident at Meribah, Aaron, with his son Eleazar and Moses, ascended Mount Hor. There Moses stripped Aaron of his priestly garments and transferred them to Eleazar. Aaron died in the top of the mount, and the people mourned for him thirty days. Another account is found in Deuteronomy 10:6, where Moses said that Aaron died at Moserah and was buried there. Aaron is also mentioned in the New Testament of the Bible. 

==Account in the Hebrew Bible==

===Traditional genealogy===
Descended from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob

Great-grandfather: Levi, third of 12 sons and tribes of Israel

Grandfather: Kohath

Father: Amram

Mother: Jochebed

Sister: Miriam

Brother: Moses

Uncles: Izhar, Hebron, Uzziel

Wife: Elisheba

Sons: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, Ithamar

Grandson: Phinehas

===Function===
Aaron's function included the duties of speaker and implied personal dealings with the Egyptian royal court on behalf of Moses. The part played by Aaron in the events that preceded the Exodus was, therefore, ministerial, and not directive. He, along with Moses, performed "signs" before his people which impressed them with a belief in the reality of the divine mission of the brothers (Exodus 4:1516). 

At the command of Moses he stretched out his rod in order to bring on the first of three plagues (Exodus 7:19, 8:1,12). In the infliction of the remaining plagues, he appears to have acted merely as the attendant of Moses, whose outstretched rod drew the divine wrath upon the Pharaoh and his subjects (Exodus 9:23, 10:13,22). The display of potency from Aaron's rod had already been demonstrated in the presence of Pharaoh's magicians; when Aaron's rod was thrown down to the ground it had turned into a snake, so Pharaoh's magicians performed the same act with their own rods. However, Aaron's snake ate up all the other snakes (Exodus 7:9-12) proving his rod was victorious. 

During the journey in the wilderness, Aaron was not always prominent or active; and he sometimes appeared guilty of rebellious or treasonable conduct. At the battle with Amalek, he was chosen with Hur to support the hand of Moses that held the "rod of God" (Exodus 17:9). When the revelation was given to Moses at Mount Sinai, he headed the elders of Israel who accompanied Moses on the way to the summit. Joshua, however, was admitted with his leader to the very presence of the , while Aaron and Hur remained below to look after the people (Exodus 24:9-14). It was during the prolonged absence of Moses that Aaron yielded to the clamors of the people, and made a Golden Calf as a visible image of the divinity who had delivered them from Egypt (Exodus 32:1-6). At the intercession of Moses, Aaron was saved from the plague which smote the people (Deuteronomy 9:20, Exodus 32:35), although it was against Aaron's tribe of Levi that the work of punitive vengeance was committed (Exodus 32:26). 

===Priesthood===
At the time when the tribe of Levi was set apart for the priestly service, Aaron was anointed and consecrated to the priesthood, arrayed in the robes of his office, and instructed in its manifold duties (Exodus 28, Exodus 29). Aaron and his tribe are given control over the Urim and Thummim. 

On the very day of his consecration, his sons, Nadab and Abihu, were consumed by fire from the for having offered incense in an unlawful manner (Leviticus 10:1-10). 

Scholarly consensus is that in Aaron's high priesthood the sacred writer intended to describe a model, the prototype, so to say, of the Jewish high priest. God, on Mount Sinai instituting a worship, also instituted an order of priests. According to the patriarchal customs, the firstborn son in every family used to perform the functions connected with God's worship. It might have been expected, consequently, that Reuben's family would be chosen by God for the ministry of the new altar. However, according to the biblical narrative it was Aaron who was the object of God's choice. To what jealousies this gave rise later, has been indicated above. The office of the Aaronites was at first merely to take care of the lamp that was to burn perpetually before the veil of the tabernacle (Exodus 27:21). A more formal calling soon followed (Exodus 28:1). Aaron and his sons, because of their calling which separated them from the rest of the Israelites, were given holy garments needed for their calling by the Lord. 

Aaron offered the various sacrifices and performed the many ceremonies of the consecration of the new priests, according to divine instructions (Exodus 29) and repeated these rites for seven days, during which Aaron and his sons were entirely separated from the rest of the people. When, on the eighth day, the high priest had inaugurated his office of sacrifice by killing the animals, he blessed the people (very likely according to the prescriptions of Numbers 6:24-26), and, with Moses, entered into the tabernacle to possess it. They "came out and blessed the people: and the glory of the appeared unto all the people: And there came a fire out from before the , and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat "" when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces." (Leviticus 9:23-24). In this way the institution of the Aaronic priesthood was established. 

In later books of the Old Testament, Aaron and his kin are not mentioned as often. In Ezekial, which devotes attention to priestly matters. The group that is mentioned instead of the Aaronites are the Zadokites and the Levites. 

===Rebellion of Korah===
From the time of the sojourn at Mount Sinai, where he became the anointed priest of Israel, Aaron ceased to be the minister of Moses, his place being taken by Joshua. He is mentioned in (Numbers 12:9) in association with Miriam in a jealous complaint against the exclusive claims of Moses as the 's prophet. The presumption of the murmurers was rebuked, and Miriam became leprous, as white as snow. Aaron entreated Moses to intercede for her, at the same time confessing the sin and folly that prompted the uprising. Aaron himself was not struck with the plague on account of sacerdotal immunity; and Miriam, after seven days' quarantine, was healed and restored to favor. Micah a prophet in Judaism, mentions Moses, Aaron, and Miriam as the leaders of Israel after the Exodus (a judgment wholly in accord with the tenor of the narratives). In the present instance it is made clear by the express words of the oracle that Moses was unique among men as the one with whom the spoke face to face. The failure to recognize or concede this prerogative of their brother was the sin of Miriam and Aaron.The validity of the exclusive priesthood of the family of Aaron was attested after the ill-fated rebellion of Korah, who was a first cousin of Aaron. When the earth had opened and swallowed up the leaders of the insurgents (Numbers 16:25-35), Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was commissioned to take charge of the censers of the dead priests. And when the plague had broken out among the people who had sympathized with the rebels, Aaron, at the command of Moses, took his censer and stood between the living and the dead till the plague was stayed (Numbers 17:1-15, 16:36-50). The Blossoming of Aaron's Rod, etching by Augustin Hirschvogel 
Another memorable transaction followed. Each of the tribal princes of Israel took a rod and wrote his name upon it, and the twelve rods were laid up over night in the tent of meeting. God suggests that whomever's rod sprouts will be the chosen tribe for the priesthood. The next morning Aaron's rod was found to have budded and blossomed and produced ripe almonds (Numbers 17:8). The miracle proved merely the prerogative of the tribe of Levi; but now a formal distinction was made in perpetuity between the family of Aaron and the other Levites. While all the Levites (and only Levites) were to be devoted to sacred services, the special charge of the sanctuary and the altar was committed to the Aaronites alone (Numbers 18:1-7). The scene of this enactment is unknown, as is the time mentioned.

===Death===
Aaron, like Moses, was not permitted to enter Canaan with the others. The reason given is that the two brothers showed impatience at Meribah (Kadesh) in the last year of the desert pilgrimage (Numbers 20:12-13), when Moses brought water out of a rock to quench the thirst of the people. The action was construed as displaying a want of deference to the , since they had been commanded to speak to the rock, whereas Moses struck it with the staff, twice (Numbers 20:7-11). 

Of the death of Aaron there are two accounts. The principal one gives a detailed statement that soon after the incident at Meribah, Aaron, with his son Eleazar and Moses, ascended Mount Hor. There Moses stripped Aaron of his priestly garments and transferred them to Eleazar. Aaron died on the summit of the mountain, and the people mourned for him thirty days (Numbers 20:22-29; compare 33:38-39). The other account is found in Deuteronomy 10:6, where Aaron died at Moserah and was buried. There is a significant amount of travel between these two points, as the itinerary in Numbers 33:3137 records seven stages between Moseroth (Mosera) and Mount Hor. Aaron was 123 at the time of his death. 

==Aaron in religious traditions==

===Jewish Rabbinic literature===
The older prophets and prophetical writers beheld in their priests the representatives of a religious form inferior to the prophetic truth; men without the spirit of God and lacking the will-power requisite to resist the multitude in its idolatrous proclivities. Thus Aaron, the first priest, ranks below Moses: he is his mouthpiece, and the executor of the will of God revealed through Moses, although it is pointed out Sifra, Wa-yira, 1 that it is said fifteen times in the Pentateuch that "the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron." Under the influence of the priesthood that shaped the destinies of the nation under Persian rule, a different ideal of the priest was formed, according to Malachi 2:47, and the prevailing tendency was to place Aaron on a footing equal with Moses. "At times Aaron, and at other times Moses, is mentioned first in Scripturethis is to show that they were of equal rank," says Mekilta, who strongly implies this when introducing in his record of renowned men the glowing description of Aaron's ministration. 

====Death====
In fulfilment of the promise of peaceful life, symbolized by the pouring of oil upon his head (Leviticus Rabbah x., Midrash Teh. cxxxiii. 1), Aaron's death, as described in the Haggadah, was of a wonderful tranquility. Accompanied by Moses, his brother, and by Eleazar, his son, Aaron went to the summit of Mount Hor, where the rock suddenly opened before him and a beautiful cave lit by a lamp presented itself to his view. "Take off thy priestly raiment and place it upon thy son Eleazar!" said Moses; "and then follow me." Aaron did as commanded; and they entered the cave, where was prepared a bed around which angels stood. "Go lie down upon thy bed, my brother," Moses continued; and Aaron obeyed without a murmur. Then his soul departed as if by a kiss from God. The cave closed behind Moses as he left; and he went down the hill with Eleazar, with garments rent, and crying: "Alas, Aaron, my brother! thou, the pillar of supplication of Israel!" When the Israelites cried in bewilderment, "Where is Aaron?" angels were seen carrying Aaron's bier through the air. A voice was then heard saying: "The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found on his lips: he walked with me in righteousness, and brought many back from sin" (Malachi 2:6). He died, according to Seder Olam Rabbah ix., R. H. 2, 3a, on the first of Ab." The pillar of cloud which proceeded in front of Israel's camp disappeared at Aaron's death (see Seder 'Olam, ix. and R. H. 2b-3a). The seeming contradiction between Numbers 20:22 et seq. and Deuteronomy 10:6 is solved by the rabbis in the following manner: Aaron's death on Mount Hor was marked by the defeat of the people in a war with the king of Arad, in consequence of which the Israelites fled, marching seven stations backward to Mosera, where they performed the rites of mourning for Aaron; wherefore it is said: "There Mosera died Aaron." See Mek., Beshalla, Wayassa', i.; Tan., Huat, 18; Yer. Soah, i. 17c, and Targum Yer. Num. and Deut. on the abovementioned passages. 

The rabbis also dwell with special laudation on the brotherly sentiment which united Aaron and Moses. When the latter was appointed ruler and Aaron high priest, neither betrayed any jealousy; instead they rejoiced in one another's greatness. When Moses at first declined to go to Pharaoh, saying: "O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send" (Exodus 4:13), he was unwilling to deprive Aaron, his brother, of the high position the latter had held for so many years; but the Lord reassured him, saying: "Behold, when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart" (). Indeed, Aaron was to find his reward, says Shimon bar Yochai; for that heart which had leaped with joy over his younger brother's rise to glory greater than his was decorated with the Urim and Thummim, which were to "be upon Aaron's heart when he goeth in before the Lord" (Canticles Rabbah i. 10). Moses and Aaron met in gladness of heart, kissing each other as true brothers (Exodus 4:27; compare Song of Songs 8:1), and of them it is written: "Behold how good and how pleasant is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" (Psalms 133:1). Of them it is said: "Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed other" (Psalms 85:10); for Moses stood for righteousness, according to Deuteronomy 33:21, and Aaron for peace, according to . Again, mercy was personified in Aaron, according to Deuteronomy 33:8, and truth in Moses, according to Numbers 12:7 . (Tan., Shemot, ed. Buber, 24-26) 

When Moses poured the oil of anointment upon the head of Aaron, Aaron modestly shrank back and said: "Who knows whether I have not cast some blemish upon this sacred oil so as to forfeit this high office." Then the Shekhinah spoke the words: "Behold the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard of Aaron, that even went down to the skirts of his garment, is as pure as the dew of Hermon" () . (Sifra, Shemini, Milluim; Tan., Korah, ed. Buber, 14) 

====Moses====
According to Tanhuma, ed. Buber, 2:12 Aaron's activity as a prophet began earlier than that of Moses. Hillel held Aaron up as an example, saying: "Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace; love your fellow creatures and draw them nigh unto the Law!" Abot, 1:12 This is further illustrated by the tradition preserved in Abot de-Rabbi Natan 12, Sanhedrin 6b, and elsewhere, according to which Aaron was an ideal priest of the people, far more beloved for his kindly ways than was Moses. While Moses was stern and uncompromising, brooking no wrong, Aaron went about as peacemaker, reconciling man and wife when he saw them estranged, or a man with his neighbor when they quarreled, and winning evil-doers back into the right way by his friendly intercourse. The mourning of the people at Aaron's death was greater, therefore, than at that of Moses; for whereas, when Aaron died the whole house of Israel wept, including the women, (Numbers 20:29) Moses was bewailed by "the sons of Israel" only (Deuteronomy 34:8). Even in the making of the Golden Calf the rabbis find extenuating circumstances for Aaron. Sanhedrin 7a His fortitude and silent submission to the will of God on the loss of his two sons are referred to as an excellent example to men how to glorify God in the midst of great affliction. Zebahim 115b Especially significant are the words represented as being spoken by God after the princes of the Twelve Tribes had brought their dedication offerings into the newly reared Tabernacle: "Say to thy brother Aaron: Greater than the gifts of the princes is thy gift; for thou art called upon to kindle the light, and, while the sacrifices shall last only as long as the Temple lasts, thy light shall last forever." Tanhuma, ed. Buber, , 6 

===Christianity===
Russian icon of Aaron (18th century, Iconostasis of Kizhi monastery, Karelia, Russia).
While Aaron and his descendants were the high priests of Judaism, Melchizedek, a person who lived more than seven centuries before Moses, is considered a high priest and Christ is said to be of the same rite of Melchizedek of the New Covenant (see the Book of Hebrews).

However, in the Eastern Orthodox and Maronite churches, Aaron is venerated as a saint whose feast day is shared with his brother Moses and celebrated on September 4. (Those churches that follow the traditional Julian Calendar celebrate this day on September 17 of the modern Gregorian Calendar). Aaron is also commemorated with other Old Testament saints on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, the Sunday before Christmas.

Aaron is commemorated as one of the Holy Forefathers in the Calendar of Saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 30. He is commemorated on July 1 in the modern Latin calendar and in the Syriac Calendar.

In the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Aaronic order is the lesser order of priesthood, comprising the grades (from lowest to highest) of deacon, teacher, and priest. The chief office of the Aaronic priesthood is the presiding bishopric; the head of the priesthood is the bishop. Each ward includes a quorum of one or more of each office of the Aaronic priesthood. 

In Community of Christ, the Aaronic order of priesthood is regarded as an appendage to the Melchisedec order, and consists of the priesthood offices of deacon, teacher, and priest. While differing in responsibilities, these offices, along with those of the Melchisidec order, are regarded as equal before God. The Presiding Bishop of the Church is regarded as the president of the entire Aaronic order.

===Islam===

Aaron (Arabic: , Hrn) is also mentioned in the Quran as a prophet of God. The Quran praises Aaron repeatedly, calling him a "believing servant" as well as one who was "guided" and one of the "victors". Aaron is important in Islam for his role in the events of the Exodus, in which, according to the Quran and Muslim tradition, he preached with his brother Moses to the Pharaoh of the Exodus. Aaron's significance in Islam, however, is not limited to his role as the helper of Moses. Islamic tradition also accords Aaron the role of a patriarch, as tradition records that the priestly descent came through Aaron's lineage, which included the entire House of Amran.

====Aaron in the Quran====
The Qur'an contains numerous references to Aaron, both by name and without name. It says that he was a descendant of Abraham (Qur'an 4: 163) and makes it clear that both he and Moses were sent together to warn the Pharaoh about God's punishment (Qur'an 10: 75). It further adds that Moses had earlier prayed to God to strengthen his own ministry with Aaron (Qur'an 20: 29-30) and that Aaron helped Moses as he too was a prophet (Qur'an 19: 53) and was very eloquent in matters of speech and discourse (Qur'an 28: 34). The Qur'an adds that both Moses and Aaron were entrusted to establish places of dwelling for the Israelites in Egypt, and to convert those houses into places of worship for God (Qur'an 10: 87).

The incident of the Golden Calf as it is narrated in the Qur'an paints Aaron in a positive light. The Qur'an says that Aaron was entrusted the leadership of Israel while Moses was up on Mount Sinai for a period of forty days (Qur'an 7: 142). It adds that Aaron tried his best to stop the worship of the Golden Calf, which was built not by Aaron but by a wicked man by the name of Samiri (Qur'an 19: 50). When Moses returned from Mount Sinai, he rebuked Aaron for allowing the worship of the idol, to which Aaron pleaded with Moses to not blame him when he had no role in its construction (Qur'an 7: 150). The Qur'an then adds that Moses here lamented the sins of Israel and said he only had the power to protect himself and Aaron (Qur'an 5: 25).

Aaron is later commemorated in the Qur'an as one who had a "clear authority" (Qur'an 23: 45) and one who was "guided to the Right Path" (Qur'an 37: 118). It further adds that Aaron's memory was left for people who came after him (Qur'an 37: 119) and he is blessed by God along with his brother (Qur'an 37: 120). The Qur'an also calls the Virgin Mary a "sister of Aaron" (Qur'an 19: 28). Muslim scholars debated as to who exactly this "Aaron" was in terms of his historical persona, with some saying that it was a reference to Aaron of the Exodus, and the term "sister" designating only a metaphorical or spiritual link between the two figures, all the more evident when Mary was a descendant of the priestly lineage of Aaron, while others held it to be another righteous man living at the time of Christ by the name of "Aaron". Most scholars have agreed to the former perspective, and have linked Mary spiritually with the actual sister of Aaron, her namesake Miriam, whom she resembled in many ways. The Qur'an also narrates that, centuries later, when the Ark of the Covenant returned to Israel, it contained "relics from the family of Moses and relics from the family of Aaron" (Qur'an 2: 248).

====Aaron in Muhammad's time====
Muhammad, in many of his sayings, speaks of Aaron. In the event of the Mi'raj, his miraculous ascension through the Heavens, Muhammad is said to have encountered Aaron in the fifth heaven. According to old scholars, including Ibn Hisham, Muhammad, in particular, mentioned the beauty of Aaron when he encountered him in Heaven. Martin Lings, in his biographical Muhammad, speaks of Muhammad's wonderment at seeing fellow prophets in their heavenly glory:

Aaron was also mentioned by Muhammad in likeness to Ali. Muhammad had left Ali to look after his family, but the hypocrites of the time begun to spread the rumor that the prophet found Ali a burden and was relieved to be rid of his presence. Ali, grieved at hearing this wicked taunt, told Muhammad what the local people were saying. In reply, the Prophet said: "They lie, I bade thee remain for the sake of what I had left behind me. So return and represent me in my family and in thine. Art thou not content, O Ali, that thou should be unto me as Aaron was unto Moses, save that after me there is no prophet. "

====Burial Place====

A 14th-century shrine built on top of the supposed grave of Aaron on Jabal Hrn in Petra, Jordan.
According to Islamic tradition the tomb of Aaron is located on Jabal Harun, or Aaron's Mountain, near Petra in Jordan. At 1350 meters above sea-level it is the highest peak in the area; and it is a place of great sanctity to the local people for here. A 14th-century Mamluk mosque stands here with its white dome visible from most areas in and around Petra.

===Baha'i===
Although his father is described as both an apostle and a prophet, Aaron is merely described as a prophet. The Kitab-I-Iqan describes Imran as being his father. 

==Descendants==
Aaron married Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon (Exodus 6:23) of the tribe of Judah. The sons of Aaron were Eleazar, Ithamar, and Nadab and Abihu. A descendant of Aaron is an Aaronite, or Kohen, meaning Priest. Any non-Aaronic Levitei.e., descended from Levi but not from Aaron assisted the Levitical priests of the family of Aaron in the care of the tabernacle; later of the temple. According to Samaritan sources, a civil war once broke out between the sons of Itamar Eli (Bible) and the sons of Phineas that resulted in a division of those who followed Eli and those who followed High Priest Uzzi ben Bukki at Mount Gerizim Bethel. (A third group followed neither.) Ironically, and likewise according to Samaritan sources, the high priests' line of the sons of Phineas died out in 1624 CE with the death of the 112th High Priest, Shlomyah ben Pinhas, at which time the priesthood was transferred to the sons of Itamar. See article Samaritan for list of High Priests from 1613 to 2004the 131st high priest of the Samaritans is Elazar ben Tsedaka ben Yitzhaq. Also see article, Samaritan 

==Art history==
Depictions of Aaron within art history are rare. Other than Aaron's inclusion in the crowd of revelers around the Golden Calf ceremonymost notably in Nicolas Poussin's "The Adoration of the Golden Calf" (ca. 163334, National Gallery London)there is little else. The depictions that we do have usually follow Exodus 28 in portraying Aaron with a breastplate with twelve stones that hangs from the shoulder by gold chains over the ephod, as well as a mitre on his head with a gold plate bearing the Hebrew words for "Holiness to the Lord." Some portraits also feature the "holy crown" of Exodus 29:6, sometimes with a pair of high horns that curve in toward each other (example). Examples are in the "Aaron" category at Wikimedia Commons.The recent discovery in 1991 of Pier Francesco Mola's "Aaron, Holy to the Lord" (ca. 1650, Private Collection, New York: image available for study at Fred R. Kline Gallery Archives) adds to the Aaronic mythos. The painting offers a portrayal of the single figure of Aaron in his priestly garments celebrating Yom Kippur in the wilderness Tabernacle. The Mola "Aaron" is considered the unique single figure of Aaron to have been painted by an old master artist, circa 15th18th centuries (A.Pigler, "Barockthemen" Vol. 1; although unknown to Pigler). The carefully rendered Judaic iconographic details in the Mola painting are rare and may have importance in relationship to mid-17th-century Jewish history. "Aaron, Holy to the Lord" was originally commissioned along with a now lost pendant of Moses (both from Mola) by the nobel Colonna family, wealthy Catholic art patrons living in Rome. 

==Historicity==
See the Exodus.

==See also==
*Harun
*Kohen
*Y-chromosomal Aaron
*Moses in rabbinic literature

==Notes==

==Footnotes==

==References==

* 

* 

* 

*

* 

* 

*

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

;Attribution
* 

==Further reading==
* 

* Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. Translated by Henrietta Szold and Paul Radin. 7 vols. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 19091938.

* Kaufmann, Yehezkel. The Religion of Israel. Translated by Moshe Greenberg. New York: Schocken Books, 1960.

* 
*"Aaron", McCurdy, J. F. and Kaufmann Kohler. Jewish Encyclopedia. Funk and Wagnalls, 19011906; which cites
** Numbers Rabbah 9
** Leviticus Rabbah 10
** in Jellinek's Bet ha-Midrash, 1:9195
** 764
** Sabine Baring-Gould, Legends of Old Testament Characters
** Chronicles of Jerahmeel, ed. M. Gaster, pp. cx1:130133
** Holweck, F. G., A Biographical Dictionary of the Saint. St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co. 1924.

* Meek, Theophile James. "Aaronites and Zadokites." The American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures 45 (April, 1920): 149-166.

* Meek, Theophile James. Hebrew Origins. Rev. ed. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1950.

===References in the Qur'an===
* Aaron's prophecy: , ,

* Aaron is made helper of Moses: , , , , 

* Aaron and Moses sent to Pharaoh: , , , 

* Praise for Aaron: , , , , , 

* The Golden Calf: , 

== External links ==
* 

* 

* 
* MFnames.com - Origin and Meaning of Aaron
* "Aaron" at the Christian Iconography website

*Main



[[April 6]]

 
==Events==
*46 BC &ndash; Julius Caesar defeats Caecilius Metellus Scipio and Marcus Porcius Cato (Cato the Younger) in the battle of Thapsus.
* 402 &ndash; Stilicho stymies the Visigoths under Alaric in the Battle of Pollentia.
*1199 &ndash; King Richard I of England dies from an infection following the removal of an arrow from his shoulder.
*1250 &ndash; Seventh Crusade: Ayyubids of Egypt capture King Louis IX of France in the Battle of Fariskur.
*1320 &ndash; The Scots reaffirm their independence by signing the Declaration of Arbroath.
*1327 &ndash; The poet Petrarch first sees his idealized love, Laura, in the church of Saint Clare in Avignon.
*1385 &ndash; John, Master of the Order of Aviz, is made king John I of Portugal.
*1453 &ndash; Mehmed II begins his siege of Constantinople (Istanbul), which falls on May 29.
*1580 &ndash; One of the largest earthquakes recorded in the history of England, Flanders, or Northern France, takes place.
*1652 &ndash; At the Cape of Good Hope, Dutch sailor Jan van Riebeeck establishes a resupply camp that eventually becomes Cape Town.
*1667 &ndash; An earthquake devastates Dubrovnik, then an independent city-state.
*1712 &ndash; The New York Slave Revolt of 1712 begins near Broadway.
*1776 &ndash; American Revolutionary War: Ships of the Continental Navy fail in their attempt to capture a Royal Navy dispatch boat.
*1782 &ndash; King Buddha Yodfa Chulaloke (Rama I) of Siam (modern day Thailand) founded the Chakri dynasty.
*1793 &ndash; During the French Revolution, the Committee of Public Safety becomes the executive organ of the republic.
*1808 &ndash; John Jacob Astor incorporates the American Fur Company, that would eventually make him America's first millionaire.
*1812 &ndash; British forces under the command of the Duke of Wellington assault the fortress of Badajoz. This would be the turning point in the Peninsular War against Napoleon-led France.
*1814 &ndash; Nominal beginning of the Bourbon Restoration; anniversary date that Napoleon abdicates and is exiled to Elba.
*1830 &ndash; Church of Christ, the original church of the Latter Day Saint movement, is organized by Joseph Smith, Jr. and others at Fayette or Manchester, New York.
*1860 &ndash; The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saintslater renamed Community of Christis organized by Joseph Smith III and others at Amboy, Illinois
*1861 &ndash; First performance of Arthur Sullivan's debut success, his suite of incidental music for The Tempest, leading to a career that included the famous Gilbert and Sullivan operas.
*1862 &ndash; American Civil War: The Battle of Shiloh begins &ndash; in Tennessee, forces under Union General Ulysses S. Grant meet Confederate troops led by General Albert Sidney Johnston.
*1865 &ndash; American Civil War: The Battle of Sayler's Creek &ndash; Confederate General Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia fights its last major battle while in retreat from Richmond, Virginia.
*1866 &ndash; The Grand Army of the Republic, an American patriotic organization composed of Union veterans of the American Civil War, is founded. It lasts until 1956.
*1869 &ndash; Celluloid is patented.
*1888 &ndash; Thomas Green Clemson dies, bequeathing his estate to the State of South Carolina to establish Clemson Agricultural College.
*1893 &ndash; Salt Lake Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is dedicated by Wilford Woodruff.
*1895 &ndash; Oscar Wilde is arrested in the Cadogan Hotel, London after losing a libel case against the Marquess of Queensberry.
*1896 &ndash; In Athens, the opening of the first modern Olympic Games is celebrated, 1,500 years after the original games are banned by Roman Emperor Theodosius I.
*1909 &ndash; Robert Peary and Matthew Henson reach the North Pole.
*1911 &ndash; During the Battle of Deiq, Ded Gjon Luli Dedvukaj, leader of the Malsori Albanians, raises the Albanian flag in the town of Tuzi, Montenegro, for the first time after George Kastrioti (Skenderbeg).
*1917 &ndash; World War I: The United States declares war on Germany (see President Woodrow Wilson's address to Congress).
*1919 &ndash; Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi orders a general strike.
*1923 &ndash; The first Prefects Board in Southeast Asia is formed in Victoria Institution, Malaysia.
*1924 &ndash; First round-the-world flight commences.
*1926 &ndash; Varney Airlines makes its first commercial flight (Varney is the root company of United Airlines).
*1929 &ndash; Huey P. Long Governor of Louisiana is impeached by the Louisiana House of Representatives.
*1930 &ndash; Gandhi raises a lump of mud and salt and declares, "With this, I am shaking the foundations of the British Empire," beginning the Salt Satyagraha.
*1936 &ndash; Tupelo-Gainesville tornado outbreak: Another tornado from the same storm system as the Tupelo tornado hits Gainesville, Georgia, killing 203.
*1941 &ndash; World War II: Nazi Germany launches Operation 25 (the invasion of Kingdom of Yugoslavia) and Operation Marita (the invasion of Greece).
*1945 &ndash; World War II: Sarajevo is liberated from German and Croatian forces by the Yugoslav Partisans.
* 1945 &ndash; World War II: the Battle of Slater's Knoll on Bougainville comes to an end.
*1947 &ndash; The first Tony Awards are presented for theatrical achievement.
*1957 &ndash; Greek shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis buys the Hellenic National Airlines (TAE) and founds Olympic Airlines.
*1962 &ndash; Leonard Bernstein causes controversy with his remarks from the podium during a New York Philharmonic concert featuring Glenn Gould performing Brahms' First Piano Concerto.
*1965 &ndash; Launch of Early Bird, the first communications satellite to be placed in geosynchronous orbit.
* 1965 &ndash; The British Government announces the cancellation of the TSR-2 aircraft project.
*1968 &ndash; In Richmond, Indiana's downtown district, a double explosion kills 41 and injures 150.
* 1968 &ndash; Pierre Elliot Trudeau wins the Liberal Leadership Election, and becomes Prime Minister of Canada soon after.
*1970 &ndash; Newhall Incident: Four California Highway Patrol officers are killed in a shootout.
*1972 &ndash; Vietnam War: Easter Offensive &ndash; American forces begin sustained air strikes and naval bombardments.
*1973 &ndash; Launch of Pioneer 11 spacecraft.
* 1973 &ndash; The American League of Major League Baseball begins using the designated hitter.
*1974 &ndash; The Swedish pop band ABBA wins the Eurovision Song Contest 1974 with the song "Waterloo", launching their international career.
*1982 &ndash; Estonian Communist Party bureau declares "fight against bourgeois TV"meaning Finnish TVa top priority of the propagandists of Estonian SSR
*1984 &ndash; Members of Cameroon's Republican Guard unsuccessfully attempt to overthrow the government headed by Paul Biya.
*1994 &ndash; The Rwandan Genocide begins when the aircraft carrying Rwandan president Juvnal Habyarimana and Burundian president Cyprien Ntaryamira is shot down.
*1998 &ndash; Pakistan tests medium-range missiles capable of reaching India.
* 1998 &ndash; Travelers Group announces an agreement to undertake the $76 billion merger between Travelers and Citicorp, and the merger is completed on October 8, of that year, forming Citibank.
*2004 &ndash; Rolandas Paksas becomes the first president of Lithuania to be peacefully removed from office by impeachment.
*2005 &ndash; Kurdish leader Jalal Talabani becomes Iraqi president; Shiite Arab Ibrahim al-Jaafari is named premier the next day.
*2008 &ndash; 2008 Egyptian general strike starts led by Egyptian workers later to be adopted by April 6 Youth Movement and Egyptian activities .
*2009 &ndash; A 6.3 magnitude earthquake strikes near L'Aquila, Italy, killing 307.
*2010 &ndash; Maoist rebels kill 76 CRPF officers in Dantewada district, India.
*2011 &ndash; In San Fernando, Tamaulipas, Mexico, over 193 bodies were exhumed from several mass graves made by Los Zetas.
*2012 &ndash; Azawad declares itself independent from the Republic of Mali.

==Births==
*1483 &ndash; Raphael, Italian painter and architect (d. 1520)
*1632 &ndash; Maria Leopoldine of Austria (d. 1649)
*1651 &ndash; Andr Dacier, French scholar (d. 1722)
*1660 &ndash; Johann Kuhnau, German organist and composer (d. 1722)
*1664 &ndash; Arvid Horn, Swedish soldier and politician (d. 1742)
*1671 &ndash; Jean-Baptiste Rousseau, French poet (d. 1741)
*1672 &ndash; Andr Cardinal Destouches, French composer (d. 1749)
*1706 &ndash; Louis de Cahusac, French playwright (d. 1759)
*1708 &ndash; Georg Reutter II, Austrian composer (d. 1772)
*1725 &ndash; Pasquale Paoli, French politician (d. 1807)
*1726 &ndash; Gerard Majella, Italian saint (d. 1755)
*1741 &ndash; Nicolas Chamfort, French author and playwright (d. 1794)
*1766 &ndash; Wilhelm von Kobell, German painter (d. 1853)
*1773 &ndash; James Mill, Scottish historian, economist, and philosopher (d. 1836)
*1810 &ndash; Philip Henry Gosse, English biologist (d. 1888)
*1812 &ndash; Alexander Herzen, Russian philosopher and author (d. 1870)
*1815 &ndash; Robert Volkmann, German composer (d. 1883)
*1818 &ndash; Aasmund Olavsson Vinje, Norwegian journalist and poet (d. 1870)
*1820 &ndash; Nadar, French photographer, journalist, and author (d. 1910)
*1823 &ndash; Joseph Medill, Canadian-American publisher and politician, 26th Mayor of Chicago (d. 1899)
*1826 &ndash; Gustave Moreau, French painter (d. 1898)
*1841 &ndash; Karl Binding, German jurist and author (d. 1920)
*1851 &ndash; Guillaume Bigourdan, French astronomer (d. 1932)
*1855 &ndash; Charles Huot, Canadian painter and illustrator (d. 1930)
*1860 &ndash; Ren Lalique, French sculptor (d. 1945)
*1861 &ndash; Stanislas de Guaita, French poet (d. 1897)
*1864 &ndash; William Bate Hardy, English biochemist (d. 1934)
*1866 &ndash; Felix-Raymond-Marie Rouleau, Canadian cardinal (d. 1931)
*1869 &ndash; Levon Shant, Armenian author, poet, and playwright (d. 1951)
*1878 &ndash; Erich Mhsam, German author, poet, and playwright (d. 1934)
*1881 &ndash; Karl Staaf, Swedish pole vaulter and hammer thrower (d. 1953)
*1884 &ndash; Walter Huston, Canadian-American actor (d. 1950)
* 1884 &ndash; J. G. Parry-Thomas, Welsh race car driver and engineer (d. 1927)
*1886 &ndash; Patriarch Athenagoras I of Constantinople (d. 1972)
* 1886 &ndash; Walter Dandy, American neurosurgeon (d. 1946)
* 1886 &ndash; Osman Ali Khan, Asaf Jah VII, Indian ruler (d. 1967)
*1888 &ndash; Hans Richter, Swiss painter, illustrator, and director (d. 1976)
* 1888 &ndash; Gerhard Ritter, German historian (d. 1967)
*1890 &ndash; Anthony Fokker, Dutch engineer and businessman, founded Fokker Aircraft Manufacturer (d. 1939)
*1892 &ndash; Donald Wills Douglas, Sr., American businessman, founded the Douglas Aircraft Company (d. 1981)
* 1892 &ndash; Lowell Thomas, American journalist (d. 1981)
*1894 &ndash; Gertrude Baines, American super-centenarian (d. 2009)
*1895 &ndash; Dudley Nichols, American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1960)
*1898 &ndash; Jeanne Hbuterne, French painter (d. 1920)
*1900 &ndash; Leo Robin, American composer and songwriter (d. 1984)
*1901 &ndash; Pier Giorgio Frassati, Italian activist (d. 1925)
*1902 &ndash; Julien Torma, French author, poet, and playwright (d. 1933)
*1903 &ndash; Mickey Cochrane, American baseball player and manager (d. 1962)
* 1903 &ndash; Harold Eugene Edgerton, American engineer and academic (d. 1990)
*1904 &ndash; Kurt Georg Kiesinger, German politician, 3rd Chancellor of Germany (d. 1988)
*1908 &ndash; Marcel-Marie Desmarais, Canadian preacher, author, and broadcaster (d. 1994)
*1909 &ndash; William M. Branham, American minister (d. 1965)
* 1909 &ndash; Hermann Lang, German race car driver (d. 1987)
*1911 &ndash; Feodor Felix Konrad Lynen, German biochemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1979)
*1913 &ndash; Shannon Boyd-Bailey McCune, North Korean-American geographer (d. 1993)
*1915 &ndash; Tadeusz Kantor, Polish director, painter, and set designer (d. 1990)
*1916 &ndash; Phil Leeds, American actor (d. 1998)
* 1916 &ndash; Vincent Ellis McKelvey, American geologist (d. 1987)
*1917 &ndash; Leonora Carrington, English-Mexican painter and author (d. 2011)
*1918 &ndash; Alfredo Ovando Canda, Bolivian general and politician, 56th President of Bolivia (d. 1982)
*1918 &ndash; Big Walter Horton, American harmonica player (d. 1981)
*1919 &ndash; Georgios Mylonas, Greek politician (d. 1998)
*1920 &ndash; Jack Cover, American pilot and physicist, invented the Taser gun (d. 2009)
* 1920 &ndash; Edmond H. Fischer, Chinese-American biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1926 &ndash; Sergio Franchi, Italian-American singer and actor (d. 1990)
* 1926 &ndash; Gil Kane, Latvian-American author and illustrator (d. 2000)
* 1926 &ndash; Ian Paisley, Irish minister and politician, 2nd First Minister of Northern Ireland
*1927 &ndash; Gerry Mulligan, American saxophonist, clarinet player, and composer (d. 1996)
*1928 &ndash; James Watson, American biologist, geneticist, and zoologist, Nobel Prize laureate
*1929 &ndash; Willis Hall, English playwright and author (d. 2005)
* 1929 &ndash; Joi Lansing, American model, actress, and singer (d. 1972)
* 1929 &ndash; Andr Previn, German-American pianist, composer, and conductor
*1931 &ndash; Ram Dass, American author and educator
* 1931 &ndash; Ivan Dixon, American actor, director, and producer (d. 2008)
* 1931 &ndash; Suchitra Sen, Indian actress (d. 2014)
*1932 &ndash; Connie Broden, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2013)
* 1932 &ndash; Helmut Griem, German actor and director (d. 2004)
*1933 &ndash; Roy Goode, English lawyer and academic
* 1933 &ndash; Tom C. Korologos, American diplomat, United States Ambassador to Belgium
* 1933 &ndash; Eduardo Malapit, American politician, Mayor of Kauai (d. 2007)
* 1933 &ndash; Dudley Sutton, English actor
*1934 &ndash; Enrique lvarez Flix, Mexican actor (d. 1996)
* 1934 &ndash; Anton Geesink, Dutch martial artist (d. 2010)
* 1934 &ndash; Guy Peellaert, Belgian painter, illustrator, and photographer (d. 2008)
*1935 &ndash; Douglas Hill, Canadian author (d. 2007)
*1936 &ndash; Helen Berman, Dutch-Israeli painter and illustrator
* 1936 &ndash; Jean-Pierre Changeux, French biologist
*1937 &ndash; Merle Haggard, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Strangers and The Buckaroos)
* 1937 &ndash; Terrence Hardiman, English actor
* 1937 &ndash; Peter Maivia, Samoan-American wrestler (d. 1982)
* 1937 &ndash; Billy Dee Williams, American actor and singer
*1938 &ndash; Paul Daniels, English magician
* 1938 &ndash; Roy Thinnes, American actor
*1939 &ndash; Andr Ouellet, Canadian politician, 1st Minister of Foreign Affairs for Canada
* 1939 &ndash; John Sculley, American businessman
*1940 &ndash; Homero Aridjis, Mexican journalist, author, and poet
* 1940 &ndash; Pedro Armendriz, Jr., Mexican-American actor (d. 2011)
*1941 &ndash; Christopher Allsopp, English economist
* 1941 &ndash; Phil Austin, American comedian, actor, and screenwriter
* 1941 &ndash; Hans W. Geiendrfer, German director and producer
* 1941 &ndash; Don Prudhomme, American race car driver
* 1941 &ndash; Gheorghe Zamfir, Romanian flute player and composer
*1942 &ndash; Barry Levinson, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
*1943 &ndash; Max Clifford, English journalist and publicist
* 1943 &ndash; Roger Cook, New Zealand-English journalist and academic
* 1943 &ndash; Mitchell Melton, American politician (d. 2013)
*1944 &ndash; Anita Pallenberg, Italian-English model, actress, and fashion designer
* 1944 &ndash; Felicity Palmer, English soprano and educator
*1945 &ndash; Rodney Bickerstaffe, English union leader
* 1945 &ndash; Neal Boortz, American radio host and author
* 1945 &ndash; Peter Hill, English journalist
*1946 &ndash; Paul Beresford, New Zealand-English dentist and politician
*1947 &ndash; John Ratzenberger, American actor
* 1947 &ndash; Andr Weinfeld, French-American director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1947 &ndash; Mike Worboys, English mathematician and computer scientist
*1948 &ndash; Patrika Darbo, American actress
*1949 &ndash; Alyson Bailes, English-Irish academic and diplomat
* 1949 &ndash; Patrick Hernandez, French singer-songwriter
* 1949 &ndash; Horst Ludwig Strmer, German physicist, Nobel Prize laureate
*1950 &ndash; Cleo Odzer, American author (d. 2001)
*1951 &ndash; Bert Blyleven, Dutch-American baseball player and sportscaster
* 1951 &ndash; Jean-Marc Boivin, French skier, mountaineer, and pilot (d. 1990)
* 1951 &ndash; Pascal Rog, French pianist
*1952 &ndash; Udo Dirkschneider, German singer-songwriter (Accept and U.D.O.)
* 1952 &ndash; Marilu Henner, American actress, producer, and author
* 1952 &ndash; Michel Larocque, Canadian ice hockey player and manager (d. 1992)
*1953 &ndash; Patrick Doyle, Scottish actor and composer
* 1953 &ndash; Christopher Franke, German-American drummer and songwriter (Tangerine Dream and Agitation Free)
*1955 &ndash; Rob Epstein, American director and producer
* 1955 &ndash; Keith Hunter Jesperson, Canadian-American serial killer
* 1955 &ndash; Cathy Jones, Canadian comedian and actor
* 1955 &ndash; Blind Mississippi Morris, American singer and harmonica player
* 1955 &ndash; Michael Rooker, American actor
*1956 &ndash; Michele Bachmann, American politician
* 1956 &ndash; Normand Corbeil, Canadian composer (d. 2013)
* 1956 &ndash; Lee Scott, English politician
* 1956 &ndash; Sebastian Spreng, Argentinian-American painter and journalist
* 1956 &ndash; Dilip Vengsarkar, Indian cricketer
*1957 &ndash; Jaroslava Maxov, Czech soprano
* 1957 &ndash; Paolo A. Nespoli, Italian soldier, engineer, and astronaut
*1958 &ndash; Graeme Base, Australian author and illustrator
*1959 &ndash; Gail Shea, Canadian politician
*1960 &ndash; Batem, Congolese-Belgian illustrator
* 1960 &ndash; Adriana Altaras, Croatian-German actress and director
* 1960 &ndash; Warren Haynes, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Allman Brothers Band, Gov't Mule, and The Dead)
* 1960 &ndash; John Pizzarelli, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1961 &ndash; Rory Bremner, Scottish actor and screenwriter
* 1961 &ndash; Peter Jackson, English footballer and manager
*1962 &ndash; Iris Hussler, German sculptor
* 1962 &ndash; Marco Schllibaum, Swiss footballer, coach, and manager
*1963 &ndash; Rafael Correa, Ecuadorian politician, 54th President of Ecuador
*1964 &ndash; Phil Gayle, English journalist
*1965 &ndash; Black Francis, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Pixies and Grand Duchy)
* 1965 &ndash; Sterling Sharpe, American football player
* 1965 &ndash; Lieve Slegers, Belgian runner
*1966 &ndash; Vince Flynn, American author (d. 2013)
* 1966 &ndash; Young Man Kang, South Korean-American director and producer
*1967 &ndash; Julian Anderson, English composer and educator
* 1967 &ndash; Tanya Byron, English psychologist and academic
* 1967 &ndash; Jonathan Firth, English actor
* 1967 &ndash; Mika Koivuniemi, Finnish-American bowler
*1968 &ndash; Affonso Giaffone, Brazilian race car driver
*1969 &ndash; Bret Boone, American baseball player and manager
* 1969 &ndash; Jack Canfora, American actor, singer, and playwright
* 1969 &ndash; Bison Dele, American basketball player (d. 2002)
* 1969 &ndash; Ari Meyers, Puerto Rican-American actress
* 1969 &ndash; Philipp Peter, Austrian race car driver
* 1969 &ndash; Paul Rudd, American actor, producer, and screenwriter
* 1969 &ndash; Louie Spence, English dancer and choreographer
* 1969 &ndash; Spencer Wells, American geneticist and anthropologist
*1970 &ndash; Olaf Klzig, South African-German ice hockey player and coach
* 1970 &ndash; Roy Mayorga, American drummer, songwriter, and producer (Stone Sour, Soulfly, Amebix, Black President, and Nausea)
* 1970 &ndash; Huang Xiaomin, Chinese swimmer
*1971 &ndash; Lou Merloni, American baseball player and radio host
* 1971 &ndash; Sanjay Suri, Indian actor and producer
*1972 &ndash; Scott Martin Brooks, American actor
* 1972 &ndash; Chad Eaton, American football player and coach
* 1972 &ndash; Jason Hervey, American actor and producer
* 1972 &ndash; Ami James, Israeli-American tattoo artist
* 1972 &ndash; Anders Thomas Jensen, Danish director and screenwriter
* 1972 &ndash; Dickey Simpkins, American basketball player
* 1972 &ndash; Jo Van Daele, Belgian discus thrower
*1973 &ndash; Donnie Edwards, American football player
* 1973 &ndash; Randall Godfrey, American football player
* 1973 &ndash; Lori Heuring, American actress
* 1973 &ndash; Joe Machine, English painter and poet
* 1973 &ndash; Rie Miyazawa, Japanese model and actress
* 1973 &ndash; Sun Wen, Chinese footballer
*1974 &ndash; Camilla Dallerup, Danish-English dancer and model
* 1974 &ndash; Flash Flanagan, American wrestler
* 1974 &ndash; rica Garca, Argentinian-American singer-songwriter and actress (Fool's Gold)
* 1974 &ndash; Robert Kova, Croatian footballer and coach
* 1974 &ndash; Jeff Tymoschuk, Canadian composer
* 1974 &ndash; Gina Yashere, English comedian and actor
*1975 &ndash; Zach Braff, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1975 &ndash; Hal Gill, American ice hockey player
* 1975 &ndash; Sonia Lopes, Cape Verdean runner
* 1975 &ndash; Joel West, American actor
*1976 &ndash; Candace Cameron Bure, American actress and producer
* 1976 &ndash; James Fox, Welsh singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor
* 1976 &ndash; Chris Hoke, American football player
* 1976 &ndash; Georg Hlm, Icelandic bass player (Sigur Rs)
* 1976 &ndash; Hirotada Ototake, Japanese author and educator
*1977 &ndash; Ville Nieminen, Finnish ice hockey player
* 1977 &ndash; Andy Phillips, American baseball player and coach
* 1977 &ndash; Teddy Sears, American actor
*1978 &ndash; Tim Hasselbeck, American football player and sportscaster
* 1978 &ndash; Myleene Klass, English singer, pianist, and model (Hear'Say)
* 1978 &ndash; Martin Mendez, Uruguayan bass player and songwriter (Opeth)
* 1978 &ndash; Blaine Neal, American baseball player
* 1978 &ndash; Igor Semshov, Russian footballer
* 1978 &ndash; Kendra Todd, American real estate agent and author
*1979 &ndash; Sam Atwell, Australian actor
* 1979 &ndash; Eilen Jewell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1979 &ndash; Christine Smith, American model and actress
* 1979 &ndash; Lord Frederick Windsor, English journalist and financier
*1980 &ndash; Matthew Carey, American actor
* 1980 &ndash; Tommi Evil, Finnish long jumper
* 1980 &ndash; Tanja Poutiainen, Finnish skier
*1981 &ndash; Eliza Coupe, American actress
* 1981 &ndash; Robert Earnshaw, Zambian-Welsh footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Jeff Faine, American football player
* 1981 &ndash; Kari Jobe, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Gateway Worship)
* 1981 &ndash; Anastassia Morkovkina, Estonian footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Alex Suarez, American bass player (Cobra Starship and This Is Ivy League)
*1982 &ndash; Alana Austin, American actress
* 1982 &ndash; Sofia Boutella, Algerian-American dancer and actress
* 1982 &ndash; Michael Guy Chislett, Australian-American guitarist, songwriter, and producer (The Academy Is... and Hillsong United)
* 1982 &ndash; Herculez Gomez, American soccer player
* 1982 &ndash; Ilan Hall, American chef
* 1982 &ndash; Bret Harrison, American actor and singer
* 1982 &ndash; Travis Moen, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1982 &ndash; Miguel ngel Silvestre, Spanish actor
* 1982 &ndash; Euclides Varela, Cape Verdean runner
*1983 &ndash; Diora Baird, American model and actress
* 1983 &ndash; Mehdi Ballouchy, Moroccan footballer
* 1983 &ndash; Jerome Kaino, New Zealand rugby player
* 1983 &ndash; Mitsuru Nagata, Japanese footballer
* 1983 &ndash; Remi Nicole, English singer-songwriter and actress
* 1983 &ndash; Jekaterina Patjuk, Estonian runner
* 1983 &ndash; Jade Seah, Singaporean model and actress
* 1983 &ndash; Bobbi Starr, American porn actress
* 1983 &ndash; James Wade, English darts player
* 1983 &ndash; Katie Weatherston, Canadian ice hockey player
*1984 &ndash; Max Bemis, American singer-songwriter (Say Anything, Two Tongues, and Max Bemis and the Painful Splits)
* 1984 &ndash; Michal Ciani, French footballer
* 1984 &ndash; Siboniso Gaxa, South African footballer
*1985 &ndash; Clarke MacArthur, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1985 &ndash; Ali Mukaddam, Canadian actor, director, and producer
* 1985 &ndash; Frank Ongfiang, Cameroonian footballer
* 1985 &ndash; Sinqua Walls, American basketball player and actor
*1986 &ndash; Nikolas Asprogenis, Cypriot footballer
* 1986 &ndash; Aaron Curry, American football player
* 1986 &ndash; Ryota Moriwaki, Japanese footballer
* 1986 &ndash; Tara Osseck, American model, Miss Missouri 2009
*1987 &ndash; Benjamin Corgnet, French footballer
* 1987 &ndash; Heidi Mount, American model
* 1987 &ndash; Juan Adriel Ochoa, Mexican footballer
* 1987 &ndash; Levi Porter, English footballer
* 1987 &ndash; Hilary Rhoda, American model
*1988 &ndash; Jucilei, Brazilian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Leigh Adams, Australian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Mike Bailey, English actor and singer
* 1988 &ndash; Melisa Cantiveros, Filipino actress
* 1988 &ndash; Daniele Gasparetto, Italian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Carlton Mitchell, American football player
* 1988 &ndash; Fabrice Muamba, Congolese-English footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Ivonne Orsini, Puerto Rician model, Miss World Puerto Rico 2008
*1989 &ndash; Katie Griffiths, English actress
* 1989 &ndash; Renrs Rode, Latvian footballer
* 1989 &ndash; Rigard van Klooster, Dutch cyclist and speed skater
*1990 &ndash; Charlie McDermott, American actor
* 1990 &ndash; Andrei Veis, Estonian footballer
*1994 &ndash; Adrin Alonso, Mexican actor
*1995 &ndash; Darya Lebesheva, Belarusian tennis player
* 1995 &ndash; Ryutaro Morimoto, Japanese actor and singer (Hey! Say! JUMP)
* 1998 &ndash; Peyton List, American actress
* 1998 &ndash; Spencer List, American actor
*1999 &ndash; Kwesi Boakye, American actor
*2000 &ndash; CJ Adams, American actor

==Deaths==
* 885 &ndash; Saint Methodius, Byzantine missionary and saint (b. 815)
*1147 &ndash; Frederick II, Duke of Swabia (b. 1090)
*1199 &ndash; Richard I of England (b. 1157)
*1340 &ndash; Basil of Trebizond
*1362 &ndash; James I, Count of La Marche (b. 1319)
*1490 &ndash; Matthias Corvinus, Hungarian king (b. 1443)
*1520 &ndash; Raphael, Italian painter and architect (b. 1483)
*1528 &ndash; Albrecht Drer, German painter, engraver, and mathematician (b. 1471)
*1551 &ndash; Joachim Vadian, Swiss scholar and politician (b. 1484)
*1571 &ndash; John Hamilton, Scottish archbishop (b. 1512)
*1590 &ndash; Francis Walsingham, English politician (b. 1532)
*1605 &ndash; John Stow, English historian (b. 1525)
*1655 &ndash; David Blondel, French clergyman and scholar (b. 1591)
*1686 &ndash; Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey, Irish-English politician (b. 1614)
*1707 &ndash; Willem van de Velde the Younger, Dutch painter (b. 1633)
*1755 &ndash; Richard Rawlinson, English minister and historian (b. 1690)
*1790 &ndash; Louis IX, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt (b. 1719)
*1825 &ndash; Vladimir Borovikovsky, Ukrainian-Russian painter (b. 1757)
*1829 &ndash; Niels Henrik Abel, Norwegian mathematician (b. 1802)
*1833 &ndash; Adamantios Korais, Greek scholar (b. 1748)
*1838 &ndash; Jos Bonifcio de Andrada, Brazilian politician (b. 1763)
*1860 &ndash; James Kirke Paulding, American author and politician, 11th United States Secretary of the Navy (b. 1778)
*1862 &ndash; Albert Sidney Johnston, American general (b. 1803)
*1883 &ndash; Benjamin Wright Raymond, American politician, 3rd Mayor of Chicago (b. 1801)
*1899 &ndash; Alvan Wentworth Chapman, American physician and botanist (b. 1809)
*1906 &ndash; Alexander Kielland, Norwegian author (b. 1849)
*1935 &ndash; Edwin Arlington Robinson, American poet (b. 1869)
*1947 &ndash; Herbert Backe, German politician (b. 1896)
*1950 &ndash; Louis Wilkins, American pole vaulter (b. 1882)
*1953 &ndash; Idris Davies, Welsh poet (b. 1905)
*1959 &ndash; Leo Aryeh Mayer, Israeli scholar (b. 1895)
*1961 &ndash; Jules Bordet, Belgian microbiologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1870)
*1963 &ndash; Otto Struve, Russian-American astronomer (b. 1897)
*1970 &ndash; Sam Sheppard, American physician (b. 1923)
* 1970 &ndash; Maurice Stokes, American basketball player (b. 1933)
*1971 &ndash; Igor Stravinsky, Russian-American pianist, composer, and conductor (b. 1882)
*1974 &ndash; Willem Marinus Dudok, Dutch architect (b. 1884)
* 1974 &ndash; Hudson Fysh, Australian pilot and businessman, co-founded Qantas Airways Limited (b. 1895)
*1977 &ndash; Kichi Kido, Japanese politician, 13th Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal of Japan (b. 1889)
*1979 &ndash; Ivan Vasilyov, Bulgarian architect, designed the SS. Cyril and Methodius National Library (b. 1893)
*1984 &ndash; Ral Donner, American singer (b. 1943)
*1992 &ndash; Isaac Asimov, Russian-American author and educator (b. 1920)
*1994 &ndash; Juvnal Habyarimana, Rwandan politician, 3rd President of Rwanda (b. 1937)
* 1994 &ndash; Cyprien Ntaryamira, Burundian politician, 5th President of Burundi (b. 1956)
*1995 &ndash; Ioannis Alevras, Greek politician, President of Greece (b. 1912)
*1996 &ndash; Greer Garson, English-American actress (b. 1904)
*1998 &ndash; Norbert Schmitz, German footballer (b. 1958)
* 1998 &ndash; Wendy O. Williams, American singer-songwriter (Plasmatics) (b. 1949)
* 1998 &ndash; Tammy Wynette, American singer-songwriter (b. 1942)
*1999 &ndash; Red Norvo, American vibraphone player and composer (b. 1908)
*2000 &ndash; Habib Bourguiba, Tunisian politician, 1st President of Tunisia (b. 1903)
*2001 &ndash; Charles Pettigrew, American singer-songwriter (Charles & Eddie) (b. 1963)
*2003 &ndash; David Bloom, American journalist (b. 1963)
* 2003 &ndash; Gerald Emmett Carter, Canadian cardinal (b. 1912)
* 2003 &ndash; Babatunde Olatunji, Nigerian drummer, educator, and activist (b. 1927)
*2004 &ndash; Lou Berberet, American baseball player (b. 1929)
* 2004 &ndash; Larisa Bogoraz, Russian linguist and activist (b. 1929)
* 2004 &ndash; Niki Sullivan, American guitarist (The Crickets) (b. 1937)
*2005 &ndash; Rainier III, Prince of Monaco (b. 1923)
*2006 &ndash; Maggie Dixon, American basketball player and coach (b. 1977)
* 2006 &ndash; Francis L. Kellogg, American diplomat (b. 1917)
* 2006 &ndash; Stefanos Stratigos, Greek actor (b. 1926)
*2007 &ndash; Luigi Comencini, Italian director and producer (b. 1916)
*2009 &ndash; J. M. S. Careless, Canadian historian (b. 1919)
* 2009 &ndash; Shawn Mackay, Australian rugby player (b. 1982)
*2010 &ndash; Wilma Mankiller, American tribal leader (b. 1945)
* 2010 &ndash; Neva Morris, American super-centenarian (b. 1895)
* 2010 &ndash; Corin Redgrave, English actor (b. 1939)
*2011 &ndash; Sujatha, Indian actress (b. 1952)
* 2011 &ndash; Nabi Bux Khan Baloch, Pakistani scholar (b. 1917)
* 2011 &ndash; Gerald Finnerman, American cinematographer (b. 1931)
*2012 &ndash; Roland Guilbault, American admiral (b. 1934)
* 2012 &ndash; Thomas Kinkade, American painter (b. 1958)
* 2012 &ndash; Fang Lizhi, Chinese astrophysicist and academic (b. 1936)
* 2012 &ndash; Michael Sands, American model, actor, and publicist (b. 1945)
* 2012 &ndash; Sheila Scotter, Australian fashion designer and journalist (b. 1920)
* 2012 &ndash; Reed Whittemore, American poet and critic (b. 1919)
*2013 &ndash; Hilda Bynoe, Grenadian politician, 2nd Governor of Grenada (b. 1921)
* 2013 &ndash; Johnny Esaw, Canadian sportscaster (b. 1925)
* 2013 &ndash; Bill Guttridge, English footballer and manager (b. 1931)
* 2013 &ndash; Bigas Luna, Spanish director and screenwriter (b. 1946)
* 2013 &ndash; Michael Norgrove, Zambian-English boxer (b. 1981)
* 2013 &ndash; Miguel Poblet, Spanish cyclist (b. 1928)
* 2013 &ndash; Ottmar Schreiner, German lawyer and politician (b. 1946)
*2014 &ndash; Mary Anderson, American actress (b. 1918)
* 2014 &ndash; Jacques Castrde, French pianist and composer (b. 1926)
* 2014 &ndash; Liv Dommersnes, Norwegian actress (b. 1922)
* 2014 &ndash; Erzsi Kovcs, Hungarian singer (b. 1928)
* 2014 &ndash; Mickey Rooney, American actor, singer, director, and producer (b. 1920)
* 2014 &ndash; Chuck Stone, American soldier, journalist, and academic (b. 1924)
* 2014 &ndash; Massimo Tamburini, Italian motorcycle designer (b. 1943)

==Holidays and observances==
*Birth of Jesus according to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 
*Chakri Day, commemorating the reign of the Chakri Dynasty. (Thailand)
*Christian Feast Day:
**Brychan
**Eutychius of Constantinople (Byzantine Church)
**Marcellinus of Carthage
**Pope Celestine I (Roman Catholic Church)
**Pope Sixtus I
**April 6 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Tartan Day (United States & Canada)

==External links==

* International Day of Sport for Development and Peace
* BBC: On This Day
* 
* On This Day in Canada



[[April 12]]

==Events==
* 238 &ndash; Gordian II loses the Battle of Carthage against the Numidian forces loyal to Maximinus Thrax and is killed. Gordian I, his father, commits suicide.
* 240 &ndash; Shapur I is crowned as king of the Sasanian Empire.
* 467 &ndash; Anthemius is elevated to Emperor of the Western Roman Empire.
* 627 &ndash; King Edwin of Northumbria is converted to Christianity by Paulinus, bishop of York.
*1204 &ndash; The Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade breach the walls of Constantinople and enter the city, which they completely occupy the following day.
*1606 &ndash; The Union Flag is adopted as the flag of English and Scottish ships.
*1776 &ndash; American Revolution: With the Halifax Resolves, the North Carolina Provincial Congress authorizes its Congressional delegation to vote for independence from Britain.
*1820 &ndash; Alexander Ypsilantis is declared leader of Filiki Eteria, a secret organization to overthrow Ottoman rule over Greece.
*1831 &ndash; Soldiers marching on the Broughton Suspension Bridge in Manchester, England cause it to collapse.
*1861 &ndash; American Civil War: The war begins with Confederate forces firing on Fort Sumter, in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina.
*1862 &ndash; American Civil War: The Andrews Raid (the Great Locomotive Chase) occurs, starting from Big Shanty, Georgia (now Kennesaw).
*1864 &ndash; American Civil War: The Fort Pillow massacre: Confederate forces kill most of the African American soldiers that surrendered at Fort Pillow, Tennessee.
*1865 &ndash; American Civil War: Mobile, Alabama, falls to the Union Army.
*1877 &ndash; The United Kingdom annexes the Transvaal.
*1910 &ndash; , one of the last pre-dreadnoughts built by the Austro-Hungarian Navy, is launched.
*1917 &ndash; World War I: Canadian forces successfully complete the taking of Vimy Ridge from the Germans.
*1927 &ndash; April 12 Incident: Chiang Kai-shek orders the Communist Party of China members executed in Shanghai, ending the First United Front.
*1928 &ndash; The Bremen, a German Junkers W33 type aircraft, takes off for the first successful transatlantic aeroplane flight from east to west.
*1934 &ndash; The strongest surface wind gust in the world at 231 mph, is measured on the summit of Mount Washington, New Hampshire.
* 1934 &ndash; The U.S. Auto-Lite Strike begins, culminating in a five-day melee between Ohio National Guard troops and 6,000 strikers and picketers.
*1935 &ndash; First flight of the Bristol Blenheim.
*1937 &ndash; Sir Frank Whittle ground-tests the first jet engine designed to power an aircraft, at Rugby, England.
*1945 &ndash; U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt dies while in office; vice-president Harry Truman is sworn in as the 33rd President.
*1955 &ndash; The polio vaccine, developed by Dr. Jonas Salk, is declared safe and effective.
*1961 &ndash; The Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin becomes the first human to travel into outer space and perform the first manned orbital flight, in Vostok 3KA-2 (Vostok 1).
*1963 &ndash; The Soviet nuclear-powered submarine K-33 collides with the Finnish merchant vessel M/S Finnclipper in the Danish straits.
*1970 &ndash; Soviet submarine K-8, carrying four nuclear torpedoes, sinks in the Bay of Biscay four days after a fire on board.
*1980 &ndash; Samuel Doe takes control of Liberia in a coup d'tat, ending over 130 years of minority Americo-Liberian rule over the country.
* 1980 &ndash; Terry Fox begins his "Marathon of Hope" at St. John's, Newfoundland.
*1981 &ndash; The first launch of a Space Shuttle (Columbia) takes place - the STS-1 mission.
*1990 &ndash; Jim Gary's "Twentieth Century Dinosaurs" exhibition opens at the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.
*1992 &ndash; The Euro Disney Resort officially opens with its theme park Euro Disneyland. The resort and its park's name are subsequently changed to Disneyland Paris.
*1994 &ndash; Canter & Siegel post the first commercial mass Usenet spam.
*1998 &ndash; An earthquake in Slovenia, measuring 5.6 on the Richter scale occurs near the town of Bovec.
*1999 &ndash; US President Bill Clinton is cited for contempt of court for giving "intentionally false statements" in a sexual harassment civil lawsuit.
*2002 &ndash; A female suicide bomber blows herself up at the entrance to Jerusalem's Mahane Yehuda open-air market, killing 7 and wounding 104.
*2007 &ndash; A suicide bomber penetrates the Green Zone and detonates in a cafeteria within a parliament building, killing Iraqi MP Mohammed Awad and wounding more than twenty other people.
*2009 &ndash; Zimbabwe officially abandons the Zimbabwe Dollar as its official currency.
*2010 &ndash; A train derails near Merano, Italy, after running into a landslide, causing nine deaths and injuring 28 people.
*2014 &ndash; A wildfire ravages the Chilean city of Valparaso, killing 16, displacing nearly 10,000, and destroying over 2,000 homes.

==Births==
*1484 &ndash; Antonio da Sangallo the Younger, Italian architect, designed the Apostolic Palace and St. Peter's Basilica (d. 1546)
*1500 &ndash; Joachim Camerarius, German scholar (d. 1574)
*1526 &ndash; Muretus, French philosopher (d. 1585)
*1550 &ndash; Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, English courtier and politician, Lord Great Chamberlain (d. 1604)
*1577 &ndash; Christian IV of Denmark (d. 1648)
*1705 &ndash; William Cookworthy, English minister and pharmacist (d. 1780)
*1710 &ndash; Caffarelli, Italian opera singer (d. 1783)
*1713 &ndash; Guillaume Thomas Franois Raynal, French author (d. 1796)
*1716 &ndash; Felice Giardini, Italian violinist and composer (d. 1796)
*1722 &ndash; Pietro Nardini, Italian violinist and composer (d. 1793)
*1724 &ndash; Lyman Hall, American physician, clergyman, and politician, 16th Governor of Georgia (d. 1790)
*1748 &ndash; Antoine Laurent de Jussieu, French botanist (d. 1836)
*1777 &ndash; Henry Clay, American lawyer and politician, 9th United States Secretary of State (d. 1852)
*1792 &ndash; John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham, English politician, Lord Privy Seal (d. 1840)
*1794 &ndash; Germinal Pierre Dandelin, Belgian mathematician and engineer (d. 1847)
*1796 &ndash; George N. Briggs, American lawyer and politician, 19th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1861)
*1799 &ndash; Henri Druey, Swiss politician (d. 1855)
*1801 &ndash; Joseph Lanner, Austrian composer and conductor (d. 1843)
*1823 &ndash; Alexander Ostrovsky, Russian playwright (d. 1886)
*1839 &ndash; Nikolay Przhevalsky, Russian geographer (d. 1888)
*1848 &ndash; Jos Gautier Bentez, Puerto Rican poet (d. 1880)
*1851 &ndash; Edward Walter Maunder, English astronomer (d. 1928)
*1852 &ndash; Ferdinand von Lindemann, German mathematician (d. 1939)
*1856 &ndash; Martin Conway, 1st Baron Conway of Allington, English mountaineer, cartographer, and politician (d. 1937)
*1866 &ndash; Princess Viktoria of Prussia (d. 1929)
*1868 &ndash; Akiyama Saneyuki, Japanese admiral (d. 1918)
* 1868 &ndash; Ella Gaunt Smith, American businesswoman (d. 1932)
*1869 &ndash; Henri Dsir Landru, French serial killer (d. 1922)
*1871 &ndash; Ioannis Metaxas, Greek general and politician, 130th Prime Minister of Greece (d. 1941)
*1874 &ndash; William B. Bankhead, American politician, 47th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (d. 1940)
*1880 &ndash; Addie Joss, American baseball player (d. 1911)
*1883 &ndash; Dally Messenger, Australian rugby player (d. 1959)
*1884 &ndash; Tenby Davies, Welsh runner (d. 1932)
* 1884 &ndash; Otto Meyerhof, German physician and biochemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1951)
*1885 &ndash; Robert Delaunay, French painter (d. 1941)
*1887 &ndash; Harold Lockwood, American actor (d. 1918)
*1888 &ndash; Kaarlo Koskelo, Finnish wrestler (d. 1953)
* 1888 &ndash; Heinrich Neuhaus, Ukrainian-Russian pianist (d. 1964)
*1892 &ndash; Johnny Dodds, American clarinet player and saxophonist (d. 1940)
*1893 &ndash; Robert Harron, American actor (d. 1920)
*1894 &ndash; Francisco Craveiro Lopes, Portuguese field marshal and politician, 13th President of Portugal (d. 1964)
*1898 &ndash; Lily Pons, French-American soprano and actress (d. 1976)
*1901 &ndash; Lowell Stockman, American politician (d. 1962)
*1902 &ndash; Louis Beel, Dutch politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 1977)
*1903 &ndash; Jan Tinbergen, Dutch economist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1994)
*1907 &ndash; Felix de Weldon, Austrian-American sculptor, designed the Marine Corps War Memorial (d. 2003)
* 1907 &ndash; Hardie Gramatky, American author and painter (d. 1979)
*1908 &ndash; Ida Pollock, British writer (d. 2013)
* 1908 &ndash; Robert Lee Scott, Jr., American pilot and general (d. 2006)
*1911 &ndash; Mahmoud Younis, Egyptian engineer (d. 1976)
*1912 &ndash; Frank Dilio, Canadian businessman (d. 1997)
* 1912 &ndash; Walt Gorney, American actor (d. 2004)
* 1912 &ndash; Hamengkubuwono IX, Indonesian politician, 2nd Vice President of Indonesia (d. 1988)
* 1912 &ndash; Hound Dog Taylor, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1975)
*1913 &ndash; Keiko Fukuda, Japanese-American martial artist (d. 2013)
*1914 &ndash; Armen Alchian, American economist (d. 2013)
*1916 &ndash; Beverly Cleary, American author
* 1916 &ndash; Russell Garcia, American-New Zealand composer (d. 2011)
* 1916 &ndash; Benjamin Libet, American neuropsychologist and academic (d. 2007)
*1917 &ndash; Helen Forrest, American singer (d. 1999)
*1919 &ndash; Istvn Anhalt, Hungarian-Canadian composer (d. 2012)
* 1919 &ndash; Billy Vaughn, American singer and bandleader (d. 1991)
*1921 &ndash; Robert Cliche, Canadian lawyer, judge, and politician (d. 1978)
*1922 &ndash; Simon Kapwepwe, Zambian politician, 2nd Vice President of Zambia (d. 1980)
*1923 &ndash; Ann Miller, American actress, singer, and dancer (d. 2004)
*1924 &ndash; Raymond Barre, French economist and politician, Prime Minister of France (d. 2007)
* 1924 &ndash; Peter Safar, Austrian physician (d. 2003)
*1925 &ndash; Joe Bowman, American target shooter and boot maker (d. 2009)
* 1925 &ndash; Ned Miller, American singer-songwriter
* 1925 &ndash; Oliver Postgate, English animator, puppeteer, and screenwriter (d. 2008)
*1927 &ndash; Thomas Hemsley, English opera singer (d. 2013)
*1928 &ndash; Hardy Krger, German actor
* 1928 &ndash; Jean-Franois Paillard, French conductor (d. 2013)
*1929 &ndash; Elspet Gray, Scottish actress (d. 2013)
* 1929 &ndash; Mukhran Machavariani, Georgian poet (d. 2010)
*1930 &ndash; Manuel Neri, American sculptor and painter
* 1930 &ndash; Micha yczkowski, Polish technician and educator (d. 2006)
* 1930 &ndash; Bryan Magee, English philosopher and politician
*1931 &ndash; Leonid Derbenyov, Russian poet and songwriter (d. 1995)
*1932 &ndash; Lakshman Kadirgamar, Sri Lankan lawyer and politician, 5th Minister of Foreign Affairs for Sri Lanka (d. 2005)
* 1932 &ndash; Jean-Pierre Marielle, French actor
* 1932 &ndash; Julio Ojeda Pascual, Spanish-Peruvian bishop (d. 2013)
* 1932 &ndash; Tiny Tim, American singer and ukulele player (d. 1996)
*1933 &ndash; Montserrat Caball, Spanish soprano and actress
*1934 &ndash; Heinz Schneiter, Swiss footballer and manager
*1935 &ndash; Jimmy Makulis, Greek singer (d. 2007)
* 1935 &ndash; Wendy Savage, English gynaecologist and activist
*1936 &ndash; Charles Napier, American actor (d. 2011)
*1937 &ndash; Dennis Banks, American author and activist
* 1937 &ndash; Igor Volk, Ukrainian-Russian colonel, pilot, and astronaut
*1939 &ndash; Alan Ayckbourn, English director and playwright
* 1939 &ndash; Johnny Raper, Australian rugby player and coach
*1940 &ndash; Bashir Ahmad, Indian-Bangladeshi singer (d. 2014)
* 1940 &ndash; John Hagee, American pastor
* 1940 &ndash; Herbie Hancock, American pianist, composer, and bandleader (Miles Davis Quintet)
*1941 &ndash; Bobby Moore, English footballer and manager (d. 1993)
*1942 &ndash; Frank Bank, American actor (d. 2013)
* 1942 &ndash; Bill Bryden, Scottish actor, director, and screenwriter
* 1942 &ndash; Carlos Reutemann, Argentinian race car driver and politician, Governor of Santa Fe
* 1942 &ndash; Jacob Zuma, South African politician, 4th President of South Africa
*1944 &ndash; Georgios Balanos, Greek author
* 1944 &ndash; Lisa Jardine, English historian, author, and academic
* 1944 &ndash; John Kay, German-Canadian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (The Sparrows and Steppenwolf)
*1945 &ndash; Lee Jong-wook, South Korean physician (d. 2006)
*1946 &ndash; Ed O'Neill, American actor
* 1946 &ndash; George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen, Scottish politician and diplomat, 10th Secretary General of NATO
*1947 &ndash; Roy M. Anderson, English epidemiologist, zoologist, and academic
* 1947 &ndash; Alex Briley, American singer (Village People)
* 1947 &ndash; Tom Clancy, American author (d. 2013)
* 1947 &ndash; Woody Johnson, American businessman and philanthropist
* 1947 &ndash; Dan Lauria, American actor
* 1947 &ndash; David Letterman, American comedian and talk show host
* 1947 &ndash; Wayne Northrop, American actor
*1948 &ndash; Jeremy Beadle, English television host and producer (d. 2008)
* 1948 &ndash; Don Fernando, American porn actor and director
* 1948 &ndash; Joschka Fischer, German politician, Vice Chancellor of Germany
* 1948 &ndash; Marcello Lippi, Italian footballer, manager, and coach
* 1948 &ndash; Lois Reeves, American singer (Martha and the Vandellas)
*1949 &ndash; Scott Turow, American lawyer and author
*1950 &ndash; Flavio Briatore, Italian businessman
* 1950 &ndash; David Cassidy, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor
* 1950 &ndash; Nick Sackman, English composer
*1951 &ndash; Tom Noonan, American actor, director, and screenwriter
*1952 &ndash; Reuben Gant, American football player
* 1952 &ndash; Gary Soto, American author and poet
* 1952 &ndash; Ralph Wiley, American journalist (d. 2004)
*1953 &ndash; Tanino Liberatore, Italian comics author and illustrator
*1954 &ndash; John Faulkner, Australian politician, 52nd Minister of Defence for Australia
* 1954 &ndash; Jon Krakauer, American author
* 1954 &ndash; Pat Travers, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1955 &ndash; Fabian Hamilton, English politician
*1956 &ndash; Andy Garca, Cuban-American actor
* 1956 &ndash; Herbert Grnemeyer, German singer-songwriter and actor
*1957 &ndash; Greg Child, Australian mountaineer and author
* 1957 &ndash; Vince Gill, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Pure Prairie League and The Notorious Cherry Bombs)
*1958 &ndash; J. Alexander, American-French model
* 1958 &ndash; Will Sergeant, English guitarist (Echo & the Bunnymen and Electrafixion)
*1959 &ndash; Howard Stableford, English radio and television host
* 1959 &ndash; Tracy Torm, American screenwriter and producer
*1960 &ndash; Ron MacLean, Canadian sportscaster
*1961 &ndash; Enedina Arellano Flix, Mexican drug lord
* 1961 &ndash; Corrado Fabi, Italian race car driver
* 1961 &ndash; Lisa Gerrard, Australian singer-songwriter (Dead Can Dance)
* 1961 &ndash; Charles Mann, American football player
* 1961 &ndash; Magda Szubanski, English-Australian actress
*1962 &ndash; Art Alexakis, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor (Everclear, Colorfinger, and The Easy Hoes)
* 1962 &ndash; Carlos Sainz, Spanish race car driver
* 1962 &ndash; Nobuhiko Takada, Japanese mixed martial artist and wrestler
*1963 &ndash; Lydia Cacho, Mexican journalist
*1964 &ndash; Amy Ray, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Indigo Girls)
* 1964 &ndash; Mark Simmonds, English politician
*1965 &ndash; Kim Bodnia, Danish actor
* 1965 &ndash; Tom O'Brien, American actor and producer
* 1965 &ndash; Chi Onwurah, English politician
* 1965 &ndash; Mihai Stoica, Romanian footballer and manager
*1967 &ndash; Sarah Cracknell, English singer-songwriter (Saint Etienne)
* 1967 &ndash; Mellow Man Ace, Cuban-American rapper (Cypress Hill)
*1968 &ndash; Alicia Coppola, American actress
* 1968 &ndash; Toby Gad, German-American songwriter and producer
* 1968 &ndash; Adam Graves, Canadian ice hockey player
*1969 &ndash; Jrn Lenz, German footballer and manager
* 1969 &ndash; Lucas Radebe, South African footballer
*1970 &ndash; Sylvain Bouchard, Canadian speed skater
*1971 &ndash; Nicholas Brendon, American actor
* 1971 &ndash; Shannen Doherty, American actress, director, and producer
* 1971 &ndash; Eyal Golan, Israeli singer
* 1971 &ndash; Nick Hexum, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (311)
*1972 &ndash; ebnem Ferah, Turkish singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1972 &ndash; Dimitrios Kokotis, Greek high jumper
* 1972 &ndash; Paul Lo Duca, American baseball player
*1973 &ndash; J. Scott Campbell, American author and illustrator
* 1973 &ndash; Claudia Jordan, American model and actress
* 1973 &ndash; Ryan Kisor, American trumpet player and composer
* 1973 &ndash; Christina Moore, American actress
* 1973 &ndash; Antonio Osuna, Mexican-American baseball player
*1974 &ndash; Sylvinho, Brazilian footballer and manager
* 1974 &ndash; Belinda Emmett, Australian actress and singer (d. 2006)
* 1974 &ndash; Roman Hamrlk, Czech ice hockey player
* 1974 &ndash; Marley Shelton, American actress
*1976 &ndash; Brad Miller, American basketball player
*1977 &ndash; Giovanny Espinoza, Ecuadorian footballer
* 1977 &ndash; Sarah Jane Morris, American actress
* 1977 &ndash; Jason Price, Welsh footballer
* 1977 &ndash; Glenn Rogers, Australian-Scottish cricketer
* 1977 &ndash; Jordana Spiro, American actress
*1978 &ndash; Guy Berryman, Scottish bass player and producer (Coldplay and Apparatjik)
* 1978 &ndash; Cheeming Boey, Singaporean-Malaysian illustrator
* 1978 &ndash; Scott Crary, American director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1978 &ndash; Riley Smith, American actor and singer
* 1978 &ndash; Robin Walker, English politician
*1979 &ndash; Claire Danes, American actress
* 1979 &ndash; Jordan De Jong, American baseball player
* 1979 &ndash; Elena Grosheva, Russian gymnast
* 1979 &ndash; Mateja Keman, Serbian footballer
* 1979 &ndash; Jennifer Morrison, American actress and producer
* 1979 &ndash; Paul Nicholls, English actor
* 1979 &ndash; Cristian Ranalli, Italian footballer
*1980 &ndash; Argo Aadli, Estonian actor
* 1980 &ndash; Brian McFadden, Irish singer-songwriter (Westlife)
* 1980 &ndash; Erik Mongrain, Canadian guitarist and composer
*1981 &ndash; Nicols Burdisso, Argentinian footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Grant Holt, English footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Brian Vandborg, Danish cyclist
*1982 &ndash; Deen, Bosnian singer
* 1982 &ndash; Easton Corbin, American singer-songwriter
*1983 &ndash; Jelena Dokic, Serbian-Australian tennis player
* 1983 &ndash; Genta Ismajli, Kosovan-Albanian singer-songwriter and actress
* 1983 &ndash; Dwayne Smith, Barbadian cricketer
*1985 &ndash; James Alexandrou, English actor
* 1985 &ndash; Brennan Boesch, American baseball player
* 1985 &ndash; Jesa Chiminazzo, Brazilian model
* 1985 &ndash; Ted Ginn, Jr., American football player
* 1985 &ndash; Anna-Katharina Samsel, German actress
* 1985 &ndash; Olga Seryabkina, Russian singer-songwriter (Serebro)
* 1985 &ndash; Hitomi Yoshizawa, Japanese singer (Morning Musume, Dream Morning Musume, and Hangry & Angry)
*1986 &ndash; Lorena, Spanish singer
* 1986 &ndash; Blerim Demaili, Swiss footballer
* 1986 &ndash; Marcel Granollers, Spanish tennis player
* 1986 &ndash; Athena Lundberg, American model
*1987 &ndash; Brooklyn Decker, American model and actress
* 1987 &ndash; Shawn Gore, Canadian football player
* 1987 &ndash; Brendon Urie, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Panic at the Disco)
*1988 &ndash; Ricardo Gabriel lvarez, Argentinian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Stephen Brogan, English footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Amedeo Calliari, Italian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Jessie James, American singer-songwriter
* 1988 &ndash; April Rose Pengilly, Australian model and actress
*1989 &ndash; T. Mills, American rapper
* 1989 &ndash; Miguel ngel Ponce, American-Mexican footballer
* 1989 &ndash; Dominic Roco, Filipino actor
* 1989 &ndash; Felix Roco, Filipino actor
* 1989 &ndash; Kaitlyn Weaver, Canadian-American ice dancer
*1990 &ndash; Francesca Halsall, English swimmer
*1991 &ndash; Torey Krug, American ice hockey player
* 1991 &ndash; Oliver Norwood, Irish footballer
* 1991 &ndash; Magnus Pjrvi, Swedish ice hockey player
* 1991 &ndash; Jazz Richards, Welsh footballer
*1992 &ndash; Giorgio Cantarini, Italian actor
*1993 &ndash; Dorial Green-Beckham, American football player
* 1993 &ndash; Ryan Nugent-Hopkins, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1993 &ndash; Katelyn Pippy, American actress
*1994 &ndash; Isabelle Drummond, Brazilian actress
* 1994 &ndash; Saoirse Ronan, American-Irish actress
* 1994 &ndash; Airi Suzuki, Japanese actress and singer (Aa!, Cute, and Buono!)
*1996 &ndash; Elizaveta Kulichkova, Russian tennis player
*1997 &ndash; Katelyn Ohashi, American gymnast
*1999 &ndash; Akai Osei, English dancer
*2000 &ndash; Suzanna von Nathusius, Polish actress

==Deaths==
*45 BC &ndash; Gnaeus Pompeius, Roman general and politician (b. 75 BC)
* 238 &ndash; Gordian I, Roman emperor (b. 159)
* 238 &ndash; Gordian II, Roman emperor (b. 192)
* 352 &ndash; Pope Julius I
* 434 &ndash; Archbishop Maximianus of Constantinople
*1125 &ndash; Vladislaus I, Duke of Bohemia (b. 1065)
*1443 &ndash; Henry Chichele, English archbishop (b. 1364)
*1550 &ndash; Claude, Duke of Guise (b. 1496)
*1555 &ndash; Joanna of Castile (b. 1479)
*1675 &ndash; Richard Bennett, English politician, Governor of Virginia (b. 1609)
*1684 &ndash; Nicola Amati, Italian instrument maker (b. 1596)
*1687 &ndash; Ambrose Dixon, English-American soldier (b. 1619)
*1704 &ndash; Jacques-Bnigne Bossuet, French bishop (b. 1627)
*1748 &ndash; William Kent, English architect, designed Holkham Hall and Chiswick House (b. 1685)
*1782 &ndash; Metastasio, Italian poet (b. 1698)
*1788 &ndash; Carlo Antonio Campioni, French composer (b. 1719)
*1795 &ndash; Johann Kaspar Basselet von La Rose, Bavarian general (b. 1710)
*1814 &ndash; Charles Burney, English historian (b. 1726)
*1817 &ndash; Charles Messier, French astronomer (b. 1730)
*1850 &ndash; Adoniram Judson, American missionary (b. 1788)
*1866 &ndash; Peter Hesketh-Fleetwood, English politician, founded Fleetwood (b. 1801)
*1872 &ndash; Nikolaos Mantzaros, Greek composer (b. 1795)
*1878 &ndash; William M. Tweed, American politician (b. 1823)
*1898 &ndash; Elzar-Alexandre Taschereau, Canadian cardinal (b. 1820)
*1902 &ndash; Marie Alfred Cornu, French physicist (b. 1842)
*1906 &ndash; Mahesh Chandra Nyayratna Bhattacharyya, Indian scholar, academic, and philanthropist (b. 1836)
*1912 &ndash; Clara Barton, American nurse and humanitarian, founded the American Red Cross (b. 1821)
*1933 &ndash; Adelbert Ames, American general and politician, 30th Governor of Mississippi (b. 1835)
*1938 &ndash; Feodor Chaliapin, Russian opera singer (b. 1873)
*1943 &ndash; Viktor Puskar, Estonian colonel (b. 1889)
*1945 &ndash; Franklin D. Roosevelt, American lawyer and politician, 32nd President of the United States (b. 1882)
*1953 &ndash; Lionel Logue, Australian actor and therapist (b. 1880)
*1962 &ndash; Ron Flockhart, Scottish race car driver (b. 1923)
*1968 &ndash; Heinrich Nordhoff, German engineer (b. 1899)
*1971 &ndash; Wynton Kelly, American pianist (b. 1931)
* 1971 &ndash; Ed Lafitte, American baseball player (b. 1871)
*1973 &ndash; Arthur Freed, American songwriter and producer (b. 1894)
*1975 &ndash; Josephine Baker, American-French actress, singer, and dancer (b. 1906)
*1977 &ndash; Philip K. Wrigley, American businessman, co-founded Lincoln Park Gun Club (b. 1894)
*1980 &ndash; Clark McConachy, New Zealand snooker player (b. 1895)
* 1980 &ndash; William R. Tolbert, Jr., Liberian politician, 20th President of Liberia (b. 1913)
*1981 &ndash; Prince Yasuhiko Asaka of Japan (b. 1887)
* 1981 &ndash; Joe Louis, American boxer (b. 1914)
*1983 &ndash; Carl Morton, American baseball player (b. 1944)
*1984 &ndash; Edwin T. Layton, American admiral (b. 1903)
*1986 &ndash; Valentin Kataev, Russian author and playwright (b. 1897)
*1987 &ndash; Mike Von Erich, American wrestler (b. 1964)
*1988 &ndash; Colette Deral, French actress and singer (b. 1927)
* 1988 &ndash; Alan Paton, South African author (b. 1903)
*1989 &ndash; Gerald Flood, English actor (b. 1927)
* 1989 &ndash; Abbie Hoffman, American activist, co-founded Youth International Party (b. 1936)
* 1989 &ndash; Sugar Ray Robinson, American boxer (b. 1921)
*1997 &ndash; George Wald, American neurologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906)
*1998 &ndash; Robert Ford, Canadian poet and diplomat (b. 1915)
*1999 &ndash; Marion Albert Pruett, American spree killer (b. 1949)
* 1999 &ndash; Boxcar Willie, American singer-songwriter (b. 1931)
*2001 &ndash; Harvey Ball, American illustrator, created the smiley (b. 1921)
*2002 &ndash; George Shevelov, Ukrainian-American linguist and philologist (b. 1908)
*2003 &ndash; Sydney Lassick, American actor (b. 1922)
*2004 &ndash; Moran Campbell, Canadian physician and academic, invented the venturi mask (b. 1925)
*2005 &ndash; Ehud Manor, Israeli songwriter (b. 1941)
*2006 &ndash; Rajkumar, Indian actor and singer (b. 1929)
* 2006 &ndash; William Sloane Coffin, American clergyman and activist (b. 1924)
* 2006 &ndash; Puggy Pearson, American poker player (b. 1929)
*2007 &ndash; Kevin Crease, Australian journalist (b. 1936)
*2008 &ndash; Cecilia Colledge, English figure skater (b. 1920)
* 2008 &ndash; Patrick Hillery, Irish politician, 6th President of Ireland (b. 1923)
* 2008 &ndash; Jerry Zucker, Israeli-American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1949)
*2009 &ndash; Marilyn Chambers, American porn actress and model (b. 1952)
*2010 &ndash; Palito, Filipino actor (b. 1934)
* 2010 &ndash; Michel Chartrand, Canadian union leader (b. 1916)
* 2010 &ndash; Werner Schroeter, German director and screenwriter (b. 1945)
*2011 &ndash; Karim Fakhrawi, Bahraini journalist, co-founded Al-Wasat (b. 1962)
*2012 &ndash; Elly Deliou, Greek musician (b. 1936)
* 2012 &ndash; Masakre, Mexican wrestler (b. 1954)
* 2012 &ndash; Mohit Chattopadhyay, Indian poet and playwright (b. 1934)
* 2012 &ndash; Linda Cook, American actress (b. 1948)
* 2012 &ndash; Rodgers Grant, American pianist and composer (b. 1935)
* 2012 &ndash; Amy Tryon, American horse rider (b. 1970)
*2013 &ndash; Robert Byrne, American chess player and author (b. 1928)
* 2013 &ndash; Johnny DuPlooy, South African boxer (b. 1964)
* 2013 &ndash; Michael France, American screenwriter (b. 1962)
* 2013 &ndash; Brennan Manning, American priest and author (b. 1934)
* 2013 &ndash; Annamria Szalai, Hungarian journalist and politician (b. 1961)
* 2013 &ndash; William Y. Thompson, American historian and author (b. 1922)
* 2013 &ndash; Ya'akov Yosef, Israeli rabbi and politician (b. 1946)
*2014 &ndash; Pierre Autin-Grenier, French author (b. 1947)
* 2014 &ndash; Fred Ho, American saxophonist and composer (b. 1957)
* 2014 &ndash; Brita Koivunen, Finnish singer (b. 1931)
* 2014 &ndash; Pierre-Henri Menthour, French cyclist (b. 1960)
* 2014 &ndash; Maurcio Alves Peruchi, Brazilian footballer (b. 1990)
* 2014 &ndash; Hal Smith, American baseball player and coach (b. 1931)
* 2014 &ndash; Billy Standridge, American race car driver (b. 1953)

==Holidays and observances==
* Christian Feast Day:
** Alferius
** Blessed Angelo Carletti di Chivasso
** Erkembode
** Adoniram Judson (Episcopal Church (USA))
** Pope Julius I
** Zeno of Verona
** April 12 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Commemoration of first human in space by Yuri Gagarin:
** Cosmonautics Day (Russia)
** Yuri's Night (International)
* Halifax Day (North Carolina)
* The first day of Cerealia (Roman Empire)
* Global Day of Action on Military Spending

==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* 
* On This Day in Canada



[[April 15]]

==Events==
* 769 &ndash; The Lateran Council condemned the Council of Hieria and anathematized its iconoclastic rulings.
*1071 &ndash; Bari, the last Byzantine possession in southern Italy, is surrendered to Robert Guiscard.
*1395 &ndash; TokhtamyshTimur war: Battle of the Terek River: Timur defeats Tokhtamysh of the Golden Horde at the Volga. The Golden Horde capital city, Sarai, is razed to the ground and Timur installs a puppet ruler on the Golden Horde throne. Tokhtamysh escapes to Lithuania.
*1450 &ndash; Battle of Formigny: Toward the end of the Hundred Years' War, the French attack and nearly annihilate English forces, ending English domination in Northern France.
*1632 &ndash; Battle of Rain: Swedes under Gustavus Adolphus defeat the Holy Roman Empire during the Thirty Years' War.
*1638 &ndash; Tokugawa shogunate forces put down the Shimabara Rebellion when they retake Hara Castle from the rebels.
*1642 &ndash; Irish Confederate Wars: A Confederate Irish militia is routed in the Battle of Kilrush when it attempts to halt the progress of a Parliamentarian army.
*1715 &ndash; The Pocotaligo Massacre triggers the start of the Yamasee War in colonial South Carolina.
*1738 &ndash; Serse, an Italian opera by George Frideric Handel receives its premiere performance in London, England.
*1755 &ndash; Samuel Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language is published in London.
*1783 &ndash; Preliminary articles of peace ending the American Revolutionary War (or American War of Independence) are ratified.
*1802 &ndash; William Wordsworth and his sister, Dorothy see a "long belt" of daffodils, inspiring the former to pen I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud.
*1817 &ndash; Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet and Laurent Clerc founded the American School for the Deaf, the first American school for deaf students, in Hartford, Connecticut.
*1861 &ndash; President Abraham Lincoln calls for 75,000 Volunteers to quell the insurrection that soon became the American Civil War
*1865 &ndash; Abraham Lincoln dies after being shot the previous evening by actor John Wilkes Booth.
*1892 &ndash; The General Electric Company is formed. disaster.
*1896 &ndash; Closing ceremony of the Games of the I Olympiad in Athens, Greece.
*1900 &ndash; PhilippineAmerican War: Filipino guerrillas launch a surprise attack on U.S. infantry and begin a four-day siege of Catubig, Philippines.
*1907 &ndash; Triangle Fraternity was founded at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign
*1912 &ndash; The British passenger liner sinks in the North Atlantic at 2:20 a.m., two hours and forty minutes after hitting an iceberg. Only 710 of 2,227 passengers and crew on board survive.
*1920 &ndash; Two security guards are murdered during a robbery in South Braintree, Massachusetts. Anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti would be convicted of and executed for the crime, amid much controversy.
*1921 &ndash; Black Friday: mine owners announce more wage and price cuts, leading to the threat of a strike all across England.
*1922 &ndash; U.S. Senator John B. Kendrick of Wyoming introduces a resolution calling for an investigation of secret land deal, which leads to the discovery of the Teapot Dome scandal.
*1923 &ndash; Insulin becomes generally available for use by people with diabetes.
*1924 &ndash; Rand McNally publishes its first road atlas.
*1927 &ndash; The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the most destructive river flood in U.S. history, begins.
*1935 &ndash; Roerich Pact signed in Washington, D.C.
*1936 &ndash; First day of the Arab revolt in Mandatory Palestine.
* 1936 &ndash; Aer Lingus (Aer Loingeas) is founded by the Irish government as the national airline of the Republic of Ireland.
*1940 &ndash; The Allies begin their attack on the Norwegian town of Narvik which is occupied by Nazi Germany.
*1941 &ndash; In the Belfast Blitz, two-hundred bombers of the German Luftwaffe attack Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom killing one thousand people.
*1942 &ndash; The George Cross is awarded to "to the island fortress of Malta &ndash; its people and defenders" by King George VI.
*1945 &ndash; The Bergen-Belsen concentration camp is liberated.
*1947 &ndash; Jackie Robinson debuts for the Brooklyn Dodgers, breaking baseball's color line.
*1952 &ndash; The maiden flight of the B-52 Stratofortress
*1955 &ndash; McDonald's restaurant dates its founding to the opening of a franchised restaurant by Ray Kroc, in Des Plaines, Illinois
*1957 &ndash; White Rock, British Columbia officially separates from Surrey, British Columbia and is incorporated as a new city.
*1960 &ndash; At Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina, Ella Baker leads a conference that results in the creation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, one of the principal organizations of the African-American Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s.
*1964 &ndash; The first Ford Mustang rolls off the show room floor, two days before it is set to go on sale nationwide.
*1969 &ndash; The EC-121 shootdown incident: North Korea shoots down a United States Navy aircraft over the Sea of Japan, killing all 31 on board.
*1970 &ndash; During the Cambodian Civil War, massacres of the Vietnamese minority results in 800 bodies flowing down the Mekong River into South Vietnam.
*1984 &ndash; The inaugural World Youth Day is held in St. Peter's Square, Vatican City.
*1986 &ndash; The United States launches Operation El Dorado Canyon, its bombing raids against Libyan targets in response to a bombing in West Germany that killed two U.S. servicemen.
*1989 &ndash; Hillsborough disaster: A human crush occurs at Hillsborough Stadium, home of Sheffield Wednesday, in the FA Cup Semi-final, resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans.
* 1989 &ndash; Upon Hu Yaobang's death, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 begin in the People's Republic of China.
*2013 &ndash; Two bombs explode near the finish line at the Boston Marathon in Boston, Massachusetts, killing three people and injuring 264 others.
*2014 &ndash; More than 200 female students are declared missing after a mass kidnapping in Borno State, Nigeria.
* 2014 &ndash; A total lunar eclipse occurs, producing a Blood Moon.

==Births==
*1367 &ndash; Henry IV of England (d. 1413)
*1452 &ndash; Leonardo da Vinci, Italian painter, sculptor, and architect (d. 1519)
*1552 &ndash; Pietro Cataldi, Italian mathematician and astronomer (d. 1626)
*1588 &ndash; Claudius Salmasius, French scholar (d. 1653)
*1641 &ndash; Robert Sibbald, Scottish physician (d. 1722)
*1642 &ndash; Suleiman II, Ottoman sultan (d. 1691)
*1646 &ndash; Christian V of Denmark (d. 1699)
* 1646 &ndash; Pierre Poiret, French mystic and philosopher (d. 1719)
*1684 &ndash; Catherine I of Russia (d. 1727)
*1688 &ndash; Johann Friedrich Fasch, German violinist and composer (d. 1758)
*1707 &ndash; Leonhard Euler, Swiss mathematician and physicist (d. 1783)
*1710 &ndash; William Cullen, Scottish physician and chemist (d. 1790)
*1721 &ndash; Prince William, Duke of Cumberland (d. 1765)
*1741 &ndash; Charles Willson Peale, American painter and soldier (d. 1827)
*1771 &ndash; Nicolas Chopin, French educator (d. 1844)
*1772 &ndash; tienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, French biologist (d. 1844)
*1793 &ndash; Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, German astronomer and academic (d. 1864)
*1800 &ndash; James Clark Ross, English captain and explorer (d. 1862)
*1809 &ndash; Hermann Grassmann, German linguist and mathematician (d. 1877)
*1828 &ndash; Jean Danjou, French captain (d. 1863)
*1832 &ndash; Wilhelm Busch, German poet, painter, and illustrator (d. 1908)
*1841 &ndash; Joseph E. Seagram, Canadian businessman and politician, founded the Seagram Company Ltd (d. 1919)
*1843 &ndash; Henry James, American-English author (d. 1916)
*1851 &ndash; Ponnambalam Ramanathan, Sri Lankan lawyer and politician, 3rd Solicitor General of Sri Lanka (d. 1930)
*1856 &ndash; Jean Moras, Greek poet and critic (d. 1910)
*1858 &ndash; mile Durkheim, French sociologist (d. 1917)
*1861 &ndash; Bliss Carman, Canadian-American poet (d. 1929)
*1874 &ndash; George Harrison Shull, American botanist and geneticist (d. 1954)
* 1874 &ndash; Johannes Stark, German physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1957)
*1875 &ndash; James J. Jeffries, American boxer (d. 1953)
*1878 &ndash; Robert Walser, Swiss author (d. 1956)
*1879 &ndash; Melville Henry Cane, American lawyer and poet (d. 1980)
*1883 &ndash; Stanley Bruce, Australian politician, 8th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1967)
*1885 &ndash; Tadeusz Kutrzeba, Polish general (d. 1947)
*1886 &ndash; Nikolay Gumilev, Russian poet and critic (d. 1921)
*1888 &ndash; Maximilian Kronberger, German poet (d. 1904)
*1889 &ndash; Thomas Hart Benton, American painter (d. 1975)
* 1889 &ndash; A. Philip Randolph, American activist (d. 1979)
*1890 &ndash; Percy Shaw, English businessman, invented the cat's eye (d. 1976)
*1892 &ndash; Theo Osterkamp, German pilot (d. 1975)
* 1892 &ndash; Corrie ten Boom, Dutch-American author and Holocaust survivor (d. 1983)
*1894 &ndash; Nikita Khrushchev, Russian general and politician, 7th Premier of the Soviet Union (d. 1971)
* 1894 &ndash; Bessie Smith, American singer and actress (d. 1937)
*1895 &ndash; Clark McConachy, New Zealand snooker player (d. 1980)
*1896 &ndash; Nikolay Semyonov, Russian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1986)
*1901 &ndash; Joe Davis, English snooker player (d. 1978)
* 1901 &ndash; Ren Pleven, French politician, Prime Minister of France (d. 1993)
*1902 &ndash; Fernando Pessa, Portuguese journalist (d. 2002)
*1904 &ndash; Arshile Gorky, Armenian-American painter (d. 1948)
*1907 &ndash; Nikolaas Tinbergen, Dutch ethologist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1988)
*1908 &ndash; Eden Ahbez, American singer-songwriter (d. 1995)
* 1908 &ndash; Lita Grey, American actress (d. 1995)
*1910 &ndash; Miguel Najdorf, Polish-Argentinian chess player (d. 1997)
*1912 &ndash; Kim Il-sung, North Korean politician, Eternal President of North Korea (d. 1994)
*1916 &ndash; Alfred S. Bloomingdale, American businessman (d. 1982)
* 1916 &ndash; Helene Hanff, American author and screenwriter (d. 1997)
*1917 &ndash; Hans Conried, American actor (d. 1982)
* 1917 &ndash; James Kee, American politician (d. 1989)
*1919 &ndash; Alberto Breccia, Uruguayan-Argentinian author and illustrator (d. 1993)
*1920 &ndash; Godfrey Stafford, English-South African physicist (d. 2013)
* 1920 &ndash; Thomas Szasz, Hungarian-American psychiatrist and academic (d. 2012)
* 1920 &ndash; Richard von Weizscker, German politician, 6th President of Germany
*1921 &ndash; Georgy Beregovoy, Ukrainian-Russian general, pilot, and astronaut (d. 1995)
* 1921 &ndash; Angelo DiGeorge, American physician (d. 2009)
*1922 &ndash; Michael Ansara, Syrian-American actor (d. 2013)
* 1922 &ndash; Joyce Jacobs, English-Australian actress (d. 2013)
* 1922 &ndash; Hasrat Jaipuri, Indian poet and songwriter (d. 1999)
* 1922 &ndash; Harold Washington, American lawyer and politician, 51st Mayor of Chicago (d. 1987)
*1923 &ndash; Artur Alliksaar, Estonian poet (d. 1966)
* 1923 &ndash; Robert DePugh, American activist, founded the Minutemen Organization (d. 2009)
* 1923 &ndash; Douglas Wass, English civil servant
*1924 &ndash; M. Canagaratnam, Sri Lankan politician (d. 1980)
* 1924 &ndash; Neville Marriner, English violinist and conductor
*1925 &ndash; George Shuffler, American guitarist (The Bailey Brothers and the Happy Valley Boys) (d. 2014)
*1926 &ndash; Maurice Shock, English academic
*1927 &ndash; Robert Mills, American physicist (d. 1999)
*1929 &ndash; Grald Beaudoin, Canadian lawyer and politician (d. 2008)
* 1929 &ndash; Adrian Cadbury, English rower and businessman
*1930 &ndash; Georges Descrires, French actor (d. 2013)
* 1930 &ndash; Vigds Finnbogadttir, Icelandic educator and politician, 4th President of Iceland
*1931 &ndash; Kenneth Bloomfield, Irish civil servant 
* 1931 &ndash; Tomas Transtrmer, Swedish poet and psychologist, Nobel Prize laureate
*1932 &ndash; Suresh Bhat, Indian poet (d. 2003)
*1933 &ndash; Roy Clark, American singer and actor
* 1933 &ndash; David Hamilton, English-French photographer and director
* 1933 &ndash; Elizabeth Montgomery, American actress (d. 1995)
* 1933 &ndash; Jim Towers, English footballer (d. 2010)
* 1933 &ndash; Kji Yada, Japanese voice actor (d. 2014)
*1935 &ndash; Stavros Paravas, Greek actor (d. 2008)
*1936 &ndash; Raymond Poulidor, French cyclist
*1937 &ndash; Bob Luman, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1978)
*1938 &ndash; Claudia Cardinale, Tunisian-Italian actress
* 1938 &ndash; Hso Khan Pha, Burmese-Canadian geologist and politician
*1939 &ndash; Marty Wilde, English singer-songwriter and actor
*1940 &ndash; Jeffrey Archer, English author, playwright, and politician
* 1940 &ndash; Sean Caffrey, Irish actor (d. 2013)
* 1940 &ndash; Willie Davis, American baseball player and actor (d. 2010)
* 1940 &ndash; Woodie Fryman, American baseball player (d. 2011)
* 1940 &ndash; Robert Lacroix, Canadian economist and academic
* 1940 &ndash; Yossef Romano, Libyan-Israeli weightlifter (d. 1972)
* 1940 &ndash; Robert Walker, Jr., American actor
*1941 &ndash; Howard Berman, American lawyer and politician
*1942 &ndash; Francis X. DiLorenzo, American bishop
* 1942 &ndash; Walt Hazzard, American basketball player and coach (d. 2011)
* 1942 &ndash; Kenneth Lay, American businessman (d. 2006)
* 1942 &ndash; Tim Lankester, English economist and academic
*1943 &ndash; Robert Lefkowitz, American physician, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1943 &ndash; Hugh Thompson, Jr., American soldier and pilot (d. 2006)
* 1943 &ndash; Veronica Linklater, Baroness Linklater, English politician
*1944 &ndash; Dzhokhar Dudayev, Russian-Chechen general and politician, 1st President of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria (d. 1996)
* 1944 &ndash; Dave Edmunds, Welsh singer, guitarist, and producer (Love Sculpture and Rockpile)
*1946 &ndash; John Lloyd, Scottish journalist
* 1946 &ndash; Pete Rouse, American politician, White House Chief of Staff
* 1946 &ndash; Michael Tucci, American actor
*1947 &ndash; Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, American screenwriter and producer
* 1947 &ndash; Martin Broughton, English businessman
* 1947 &ndash; Lois Chiles, American model and actress
* 1947 &ndash; David Omand, English civil servant and academic
* 1947 &ndash; Cristina Husmark Pehrsson, Swedish nurse and politician
* 1947 &ndash; Woolly Wolstenholme, English singer and keyboard player (Barclay James Harvest) (d. 2010)
*1948 &ndash; Christopher Brown, English curator
* 1948 &ndash; Michael Kamen, American composer and conductor (d. 2003)
*1949 &ndash; Alla Pugacheva, Russian singer-songwriter and actress
* 1949 &ndash; Craig Zadan, American director, producer, and screenwriter
*1950 &ndash; Josiane Balasko, French actress, director, and screenwriter
* 1950 &ndash; Amy Wright, American actress
*1951 &ndash; Heloise, American journalist and author
* 1951 &ndash; John L. Phillips, American captain and astronaut
* 1951 &ndash; Stuart Prebble, English broadcaster
*1952 &ndash; Bengt Gingsj, Swedish swimmer
* 1952 &ndash; Kym Gyngell, Australian actor
* 1952 &ndash; Sam McMurray, American actor
* 1952 &ndash; Brian Muir, English sculptor and set designer
* 1952 &ndash; Avital Ronell, American philosopher
* 1952 &ndash; Glenn Shadix, American actor (d. 2010)
*1954 &ndash; Seka, American porn actress
*1955 &ndash; Mark Damazer, English broadcaster and academic
* 1955 &ndash; Dodi Fayed, Egyptian film producer (d. 1997)
*1956 &ndash; Michael Cooper, American basketball player and coach
*1957 &ndash; Evelyn Ashford, American runner
*1958 &ndash; Keith Acton, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1958 &ndash; Abu Hamza al-Masri, Egyptian-English criminal
* 1958 &ndash; Noni Ioannidou, Greek model and actress
* 1958 &ndash; Memos Ioannou, Greek basketball player and coach
* 1958 &ndash; Sir Robert Smith, 3rd Baronet, Scottish politician
* 1958 &ndash; Benjamin Zephaniah, English actor, author, poet, and playwright
*1959 &ndash; Fruit Chan, Chinese director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1959 &ndash; Kevin Lowe, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager
* 1959 &ndash; Emma Thompson, English actress and screenwriter
* 1959 &ndash; Thomas F. Wilson, American actor
*1960 &ndash; Pierre Aubry, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1960 &ndash; Susanne Bier, Danish director and screenwriter
* 1960 &ndash; Pedro Delgado, Spanish cyclist
* 1960 &ndash; Tony Jones, English snooker player
* 1960 &ndash; Philippe of Belgium
*1961 &ndash; Neil Carmichael, English academic and politician
*1962 &ndash; Surjit Bindrakhia, Indian singer (d. 2003)
* 1962 &ndash; Nawal El Moutawakel, Moroccan hurdler
* 1962 &ndash; Tom Kane, American voice actor
*1963 &ndash; Alex Crawford, Nigerian-South African journalist
* 1963 &ndash; Bobby Pepper, American journalist
*1965 &ndash; Linda Perry, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (4 Non Blondes)
*1966 &ndash; Samantha Fox, English singer and actress
* 1966 &ndash; Mott Green, American businessman, founded the Grenada Chocolate Company (d. 2013)
*1967 &ndash; Frankie Poullain, Scottish bass player and songwriter (The Darkness)
* 1967 &ndash; Dara Torres, American swimmer
*1968 &ndash; Ben Clarke, English rugby player
* 1968 &ndash; Ed O'Brien, English guitarist and songwriter (Radiohead)
* 1968 &ndash; Stacey Williams, American model and actress
*1969 &ndash; Jeromy Burnitz, American baseball player
* 1969 &ndash; Kaisa Roose, Estonian conductor
* 1969 &ndash; Jimmy Waite, Canadian-German ice hockey player
*1970 &ndash; Flex Alexander, American actor
* 1970 &ndash; Chris Huffins, American decathlete
*1971 &ndash; Kate Harbour, English voice actress
* 1971 &ndash; Katy Hill, English television host
* 1971 &ndash; Meelis Loit, Estonian fencer
* 1971 &ndash; Jason Sehorn, American football player
* 1971 &ndash; Karl Turner, English politician
*1972 &ndash; Arturo Gatti, Italian-Canadian boxer (d. 2009)
* 1972 &ndash; Lou Romano, American animator and voice actor
*1974 &ndash; Keith Malley, American comedian and actor
* 1974 &ndash; Kim Min-kyo, South Korean actor and director
* 1974 &ndash; Danny Pino, American actor
* 1974 &ndash; Mike Quinn, American football player
* 1974 &ndash; Douglas Spain, American actor, director, and producer
* 1974 &ndash; Tim Thomas, American ice hockey player
*1975 &ndash; Paul Dana, American race car driver (d. 2006)
* 1975 &ndash; Philip Labonte, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (All That Remains and Shadows Fall)
*1976 &ndash; Jason Bonsignore, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1976 &ndash; Darius Regelskis, Lithuanian footballer
* 1976 &ndash; Kstutis etokas, Lithuanian basketball player
* 1976 &ndash; Susan Ward, American actress
* 1976 &ndash; Steve Williams, English rower
*1977 &ndash; Sudarsan Pattnaik, Indian sculptor
* 1977 &ndash; Brian Pothier, American ice hockey player
*1978 &ndash; Austin Aries, American wrestler
* 1978 &ndash; Milton Bradley, American baseball player
* 1978 &ndash; Tim Corcoran, American baseball player
* 1978 &ndash; Luis Fonsi, Puerto Rican-American singer-songwriter
*1980 &ndash; Patrick Carney, American drummer (The Black Keys and Drummer)
* 1980 &ndash; James Foster, English cricketer
* 1980 &ndash; Michelle L'amour, American dancer
* 1980 &ndash; Ral Lpez, Spanish basketball player
* 1980 &ndash; Willie Mason, Australian rugby player
* 1980 &ndash; Aida Mollenkamp, American chef and author
* 1980 &ndash; Vctor Nez, Costa Rican footballer
* 1980 &ndash; Frnk Schleck, Luxembourger cyclist
* 1980 &ndash; Billy Yates, American football player
*1981 &ndash; Andrs D'Alessandro, Argentinian footballer
*1982 &ndash; Michael Aubrey, American baseball player
* 1982 &ndash; Anthony Green, American singer-songwriter (Circa Survive, The Sound of Animals Fighting, Saosin, High and Driving, and Zolof the Rock & Roll Destroyer)
* 1982 &ndash; Albert Riera, Spanish footballer
* 1982 &ndash; Seth Rogen, Canadian-American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
*1983 &ndash; Blu, American rapper and producer (All City Chess Club)
* 1983 &ndash; Alice Braga, Brazilian actress
* 1983 &ndash; Matt Cardle, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (Seven Summers and Darwyn)
* 1983 &ndash; Dudu Cearense, Brazilian footballer
* 1983 &ndash; Ilya Kovalchuk, Russian ice hockey player
* 1983 &ndash; Bronson La'Cassie, Australian golfer
* 1983 &ndash; Martin Pedersen, Danish cyclist
* 1983 &ndash; Anthony Sedlak, Canadian chef (d. 2012)
*1984 &ndash; Cam Janssen, American ice hockey player
* 1984 &ndash; Ben Kasica, American guitarist and producer (Skillet)
* 1984 &ndash; Daniel Paille, Canadian hockey player
*1985 &ndash; Chris Cates, American baseball player
* 1985 &ndash; John Danks, American baseball player
* 1985 &ndash; Ryan Hamilton, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1985 &ndash; Aaron Laffey, American baseball player
* 1985 &ndash; Amy Ried, American porn actress
* 1985 &ndash; Diana Zubiri, Filipino actress
*1986 &ndash; Tom Heaton, English footballer
* 1986 &ndash; Sylvain Marveaux, French footballer
* 1986 &ndash; Quincy Owusu-Abeyie, Ghanaian footballer
*1987 &ndash; Iyaz, Virgin Islander singer-songwriter
* 1987 &ndash; Sapphire Elia, English actress and singer
*1988 &ndash; Thomas Albanese, Italian footballer
* 1988 &ndash; Yann David, French rugby player
* 1988 &ndash; Eliza Doolittle, English singer-songwriter
* 1988 &ndash; Manami Numakura, Japanese voice actress
* 1988 &ndash; Beate Schrott, Austrian hurdler
*1989 &ndash; Andre Kinney, American actor
*1990 &ndash; Lily Carter, American porn actress
* 1990 &ndash; Emma Watson, French-English actress
*1991 &ndash; Daiki Arioka, Japanese actor and singer (Hey! Say! JUMP)
*1992 &ndash; Amy Diamond, Swedish singer and actress
* 1992 &ndash; Kimberly Dos Ramos, Venezuelan actress and singer
* 1992 &ndash; John Guidetti, Swedish footballer
* 1992 &ndash; Richard Sandrak, Ukrainian-American bodybuilder, martial artist, and actor
*1993 &ndash; Madeleine Martin, American actress
*1997 &ndash; Maisie Williams, English actress
*2004 &ndash; Chelokee, American race horse (d. 2014)

==Deaths==
* 628 &ndash; Empress Suiko of Japan (b. 554)
*1053 &ndash; Godwin, Earl of Wessex (b. 1001)
*1220 &ndash; Adolf of Altena, German archbishop (b. 1157)
*1415 &ndash; Manuel Chrysoloras, Greek educator (b. 1355)
*1446 &ndash; Filippo Brunelleschi, Italian sculptor and architect (b. 1377)
*1610 &ndash; Robert Persons, English priest (b. 1546)
*1632 &ndash; George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore, English politician, English Secretary of State (b. 1580)
*1641 &ndash; Domenico Zampieri, Italian painter (b. 1581)
*1652 &ndash; Patriarch Joseph, Russian patriarch
*1659 &ndash; Simon Dach, German poet (b. 1605)
*1704 &ndash; Johannes Hudde, Dutch mathematician and politician (b. 1628)
*1719 &ndash; Franoise d'Aubign, Marquise de Maintenon, French wife of Louis XIV of France (b. 1635)
*1754 &ndash; Jacopo Riccati, Italian mathematician (b. 1676)
*1761 &ndash; Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll, Scottish lawyer and politician (b. 1682)
* 1761 &ndash; William Oldys, English historian and author (b. 1696)
*1764 &ndash; Madame de Pompadour, French mistress of Louis XV of France (b. 1721)
* 1764 &ndash; Peder Horrebow, Danish astronomer and mathematician (b. 1679)
*1765 &ndash; Mikhail Lomonosov, Russian chemist and physicist (b. 1711)
*1788 &ndash; Giuseppe Bonno, Austrian composer (b. 1711)
*1793 &ndash; Ignacije Szentmartony, Croatian priest, mathematician, and astronomer (b. 1718)
*1854 &ndash; Arthur Aikin, English chemist and mineralogist (b. 1773)
*1861 &ndash; Sylvester Jordan, Austrian-German lawyer and politician (b. 1792)
*1865 &ndash; Abraham Lincoln, American captain, lawyer, and politician, 16th President of the United States (b. 1809)
*1888 &ndash; Matthew Arnold, English poet and critic (b. 1822)
*1889 &ndash; Father Damien, Belgian priest and saint (b. 1840)
*1898 &ndash; Te Keepa Te Rangihiwinui, New Zealand commander
*1912 &ndash; Victims of the RMS Titanic disaster
** Thomas Andrews, Irish businessman and shipbuilder (b. 1873)
** John Jacob Astor IV, American colonel, businessman, and author (b. 1864)
** Archibald Butt, American general and journalist (b. 1865)
** Jacques Futrelle, American journalist and author (b. 1875)
** Benjamin Guggenheim American businessman (b. 1865)
** Wallace Hartley, English violinist and bandleader (b. 1878)
** James Paul Moody, English sixth officer (b. 1887)
** William McMaster Murdoch, Scottish sailor and first officer (b. 1873)
** Jack Phillips, English telegraphist (b. 1887)
** Edward Smith, English captain (b. 1850)
** William Thomas Stead English journalist (b. 1849)
** Ida Straus, German-American businesswoman (b. 1849)
** Isidor Straus, German-American businessman and politician (b. 1845)
** John Thayer, American cricketer (b. 1862)
** Henry Tingle Wilde, English chief officer (b. 1872)
*1917 &ndash; Jnos Murkovics, Slovene author, poet, and educator (b. 1839)
*1927 &ndash; Gaston Leroux, French journalist and author (b. 1868)
*1938 &ndash; Csar Vallejo, Peruvian journalist, poet, and playwright (b. 1892)
*1942 &ndash; Robert Musil, Austrian author (b. 1880)
*1943 &ndash; Aristarkh Lentulov, Russian painter and set designer (b. 1882)
*1944 &ndash; Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin, Russian general (b. 1901)
*1945 &ndash; Hermann Florstedt, German SS officer (b. 1895)
*1948 &ndash; Radola Gajda, Montenegrin-Czech general and politician (b. 1892)
*1949 &ndash; Wallace Beery, American actor (b. 1885)
*1957 &ndash; Pedro Infante, Mexican actor and singer (b. 1917)
*1962 &ndash; Clara Blandick, American actress (b. 1880)
* 1962 &ndash; Arsenio Lacson, Filipino journalist and politician, Mayor of Manila (b. 1911)
*1963 &ndash; Edward Greeves, Jr., Australian footballer (b. 1903)
*1967 &ndash; Tot, Italian actor, singer, and screenwriter (b. 1898)
*1969 &ndash; Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg (b. 1887)
*1970 &ndash; Ripper Collins, American baseball player (b. 1904)
*1971 &ndash; Gurgen Boryan, Armenian poet and playwright (b. 1915)
* 1971 &ndash; Dan Reeves, American businessman (b. 1912)
* 1971 &ndash; Friedebert Tuglas, Estonian author and critic (b. 1886)
*1974 &ndash; Giovanni D'Anzi, Italian songwriter (b. 1906)
*1975 &ndash; Richard Conte, American actor (b. 1910)
*1980 &ndash; Raymond Bailey, American actor (b. 1904)
* 1980 &ndash; Jean-Paul Sartre, French philosopher and author, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1905)
*1982 &ndash; Arthur Lowe, English actor (b. 1915)
*1983 &ndash; John Engstead, American photographer (b. 1909)
* 1983 &ndash; Corrie ten Boom, Dutch-American author and holocaust survivor (b. 1892)
*1984 &ndash; Tommy Cooper, Welsh comedian and magician (b. 1921)
* 1984 &ndash; Alexander Trocchi, Scottish author (b. 1925)
*1986 &ndash; Jean Genet, French author and playwright (b. 1910)
*1988 &ndash; Kenneth Williams, English actor (b. 1926)
*1989 &ndash; Nesuhi Ertegun, Turkish-American record producer (b. 1917)
* 1989 &ndash; Charles Vanel, French actor and director (b. 1892)
* 1989 &ndash; Hu Yaobang, Chinese politician (b. 1915)
*1990 &ndash; Greta Garbo, Swedish-American actress (b. 1905)
*1992 &ndash; Otis Barton, American diver and actor (b. 1899)
*1993 &ndash; Leslie Charteris, Singaporean-English author and screenwriter (b. 1907)
* 1993 &ndash; John Tuzo Wilson, Canadian geologist (b. 1908)
*1994 &ndash; John Curry, English figure skater (b. 1949)
*1995 &ndash; Harry Shoulberg, American painter (b. 1903)
*1998 &ndash; Pol Pot, Cambodian politician, 29th Prime Minister of Cambodia (b. 1925)
*1999 &ndash; Harvey Postlethwaite, English engineer (b. 1944)
*2000 &ndash; Edward Gorey, American poet and illustrator (b. 1925)
*2001 &ndash; Joey Ramone, American singer-songwriter (Ramones and Sniper) (b. 1951)
*2002 &ndash; Damon Knight, American author and critic (b. 1922)
* 2002 &ndash; Byron White, American football player, lawyer, and jurist, 4th United States Deputy Attorney General (b. 1917)
*2003 &ndash; Reg Bundy, English actor and dancer (b. 1941)
* 2003 &ndash; Erin Fleming, Canadian-American actress (b. 1941)
*2004 &ndash; Ray Condo, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1950)
* 2004 &ndash; Mitsuteru Yokoyama, Japanese illustrator (b. 1934)
*2005 &ndash; Margaretta Scott, English actress (b. 1912)
*2007 &ndash; Brant Parker, American illustrator (b. 1920)
*2008 &ndash; Sean Costello, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1979)
* 2008 &ndash; Benot Lamy, Belgian director and screenwriter (b. 1945)
* 2008 &ndash; Krister Stendahl, Swedish bishop, theologian, and scholar (b. 1921)
*2009 &ndash; Ed Blake, American baseball player (b. 1925)
* 2009 &ndash; Clement Freud, German-English journalist and politician (b. 1924)
* 2009 &ndash; Lszl Tisza, Hungarian-American physicist and educator (b. 1907)
*2010 &ndash; Jack Herer, American author and activist (b. 1939)
* 2010 &ndash; Michael Pataki, American actor and director (b. 1938)
*2011 &ndash; Vittorio Arrigoni, Italian journalist, author, and activist (b. 1975)
*2012 &ndash; Paul Bogart, American director and producer (b. 1919)
* 2012 &ndash; Bob Perani, Italian-American ice hockey player (b. 1942)
* 2012 &ndash; Murray Rose, English-Australian swimmer and actor (b. 1939)
* 2012 &ndash; Rich Saul, American football player (b. 1948)
* 2012 &ndash; Dwayne Schintzius, American basketball player (b. 1968)
* 2012 &ndash; Bob Wright, American basketball player and coach (b. 1926)
* 2012 &ndash; Tadashi Yamamoto, Japanese businessman (b. 1936)
*2013 &ndash; Sal Castro, American educator and activist (b. 1933)
* 2013 &ndash; Benny Frankie Cerezo, Puerto Rican-American lawyer and politician (b. 1943)
* 2013 &ndash; Richard Collins, Canadian actor (b. 1947)
* 2013 &ndash; Benjamin Fain, Ukrainian-Israeli physicist and academic (b. 1930)
* 2013 &ndash; Joe Francis, American football player and coach (b. 1936)
* 2013 &ndash; Richard LeParmentier, American-English actor and screenwriter (b. 1946)
* 2013 &ndash; Dave McArtney, New Zealand singer-songwriter and guitarist (Hello Sailor) (b. 1951)
* 2013 &ndash; Scott Miller, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Game Theory and The Loud Family) (b. 1960)
* 2013 &ndash; Cleyde Yconis, Brazilian actress (b. 1923)
*2014 &ndash; Jnior, Filipino-Spanish singer and actor (b. 1943)
* 2014 &ndash; Little Joe Cook, American singer-songwriter (b. 1922)
* 2014 &ndash; Shane Gibson, American guitarist (stOrk and Jonathan Davis and the SFA) (b. 1979)
* 2014 &ndash; John Houbolt, American engineer and academic (b. 1919)
* 2014 &ndash; Eliseo Vern, Argentinian sociologist and academic (b. 1935)
* 2014 &ndash; Owen Woodhouse, New Zealand commander and jurist (b. 1916)

==Holidays and observances==
* Christian Feast Day:
** Abbo II of Metz
** Father Damien and Sister Marianne Cope (Episcopal Church (USA))
** Hunna
** Paternus of Avranches
** April 15 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Father Damien Day (Hawaii)
* Earliest day on which Sechseluten can fall, while April 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Monday in April. (Zurich)
* Fordicidia (Roman Empire)
* Hillsborough Disaster Memorial (Anfield at Liverpool)
* Jackie Robinson Day (Major League Baseball)
* Latest day on which New Year festivals in South and Southeast Asian cultures can fall. (see April 14)
* Tax Day, the official deadline for filing an individual tax return (or requesting an extension). (United States, Philippines)
* World Art Day

==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* 
* On This Day in Canada



[[April 30]]

==Events==
* 311 &ndash; The Diocletianic Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire ends.
* 313 &ndash; Battle of Tzirallum: Emperor Licinius defeats Maximinus II and unifies the Eastern Roman Empire.
* 642 &ndash; Chindasuinth is proclaimed king by the Visigothic nobility and bishops.
*1315 &ndash; Enguerrand de Marigny is hanged on the public gallows at Montfaucon.
*1492 &ndash; Spain gives Christopher Columbus his commission of exploration.
*1513 &ndash; Edmund de la Pole, Yorkist pretender to the English throne, is executed on the orders of Henry VIII.
*1557 &ndash; Mapuche leader Lautaro is killed by Spanish forces at the Battle of Mataquito in Chile.
*1598 &ndash; Juan Oate makes a formal declaration of his Conquest of New Mexico.
*1636 &ndash; Eighty Years' War: Dutch Republic forces recapture a strategically important fort from Spain after a nine-month siege.
*1671 &ndash; Petar Zrinski, the Croatian Ban from the Zrinski family, is executed.
*1789 &ndash; On the balcony of Federal Hall on Wall Street in New York City, George Washington takes the oath of office to become the first elected President of the United States.
*1803 &ndash; Louisiana Purchase: The United States purchases the Louisiana Territory from France for $15 million, more than doubling the size of the young nation.
*1812 &ndash; The Territory of Orleans becomes the 18th U.S. state under the name Louisiana.
*1838 &ndash; Nicaragua declares independence from the Central American Federation.
*1863 &ndash; A 65-man French Foreign Legion infantry patrol fights a force of nearly 2,000 Mexican soldiers to nearly the last man in Hacienda Camarn, Mexico.
*1871 &ndash; The Camp Grant massacre takes place in Arizona Territory.
*1885 &ndash; Governor of New York David B. Hill signs legislation creating the Niagara Reservation, New York's first state park, ensuring that Niagara Falls will not be devoted solely to industrial and commercial use.
*1894 &ndash; Coxey's Army reaches Washington, D.C. to protest the unemployment caused by the Panic of 1893.
*1900 &ndash; Hawaii becomes a territory of the United States, with Sanford B. Dole as governor.
* 1900 &ndash; Casey Jones dies in a train wreck in Vaughan, Mississippi, while trying to make up time on the Cannonball Express.
*1904 &ndash; The Louisiana Purchase Exposition World's Fair opens in St. Louis, Missouri.
*1907 &ndash; Honolulu, Hawaii becomes an independent city.
*1920 &ndash; Peru becomes a signatory to the Buenos Aires copyright treaty.
*1925 &ndash; Automaker Dodge Brothers, Inc is sold to Dillon, Read & Company for $146 million plus $50 million for charity.
*1927 &ndash; The Federal Industrial Institute for Women opens in Alderson, West Virginia, as the first women's federal prison in the United States.
* 1927 &ndash; Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford become the first celebrities to leave their footprints in concrete at Grauman's Chinese Theater in Hollywood.
*1937 &ndash; The Philippines holds a plebiscite for Filipino women on whether they should be extended the right to suffrage; over 90% would vote in the affirmative.
*1938 &ndash; The animated cartoon short Porky's Hare Hunt debuts in movie theaters, introducing Happy Rabbit (a prototype of Bugs Bunny).
* 1938 &ndash; The first televised FA Cup Final takes place between Huddersfield Town and Preston North End.
*1939 &ndash; The 1939-40 New York World's Fair opens.
* 1939 &ndash; NBC inaugurates its regularly scheduled television service in New York City, broadcasting President Franklin D. Roosevelt's N.Y. World's Fair opening day ceremonial address.
*1943 &ndash; World War II: Operation Mincemeat: The submarine surfaces in the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Spain to deposit a dead man planted with false invasion plans and dressed as a British military intelligence officer.
*1945 &ndash; World War II: Fhrerbunker: Adolf Hitler and Eva Braun commit suicide after being married for one day. Soviet soldiers raise the Victory Banner over the Reichstag building.
*1947 &ndash; In Nevada, the Boulder Dam is renamed the Hoover Dam a second time.
*1948 &ndash; In Bogot, Colombia, the Organization of American States is established.
*1953 &ndash; In Warner Robins, Georgia, an F4 tornado kills 18 people.
*1956 &ndash; Former Vice President and Senator Alben Barkley dies during a speech in Virginia. He collapses after proclaiming "I would rather be a servant in the house of the lord than sit in the seats of the mighty."
*1961 &ndash; K-19, the first Soviet nuclear submarine equipped with nuclear missiles, is commissioned.
*1963 &ndash; The Bristol Bus Boycott is held in Bristol to protest the Bristol Omnibus Company's refusal to employ Black or Asian bus crews, drawing national attention to racial discrimination in the United Kingdom.
*1966 &ndash; The Church of Satan is established at the Black House in San Francisco, California.
*1967 &ndash; The Aldene Connection opened in Roselle Park, NJ, shutting down the CNJ's Jersey City waterfront terminal and transferring commuters to Newark Penn Station.
*1973 &ndash; Watergate scandal: U.S. President Richard Nixon announces that top White House aides H. R. Haldeman, John Ehrlichman and others have resigned.
*1975 &ndash; Fall of Saigon: Communist forces gain control of Saigon. The Vietnam War formally ends with the unconditional surrender of South Vietnamese president Duong Van Minh.
*1980 &ndash; Beatrix of the Netherlands becomes Queen of the Netherlands.
* 1980 &ndash; The Iranian Embassy Siege begins in London.
*1982 &ndash; The Bijon Setu massacre occurs in Calcutta.
*1993 &ndash; CERN announces World Wide Web protocols will be free.
* 1993 &ndash; Monica Seles is stabbed by Gnter Parche, an obsessed fan, during a quarterfinal match of the 1993 Citizen Cup in Hamburg, Germany
*1994 &ndash; Formula One racing driver Roland Ratzenberger is killed in a crash during the qualifying session of the San Marino Grand Prix run at Autodromo Enzo e Dino Ferrari outside Imola, Italy.
*1995 &ndash; U.S. President Bill Clinton becomes the first President to visit Northern Ireland.
*2004 &ndash; U.S. media release graphic photos of American soldiers abusing and sexually humiliating Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison.
*2008 &ndash; Two skeletal remains found near Yekaterinburg, Russia, are confirmed by Russian scientists to be the remains of Alexei Nikolaevich, Tsarevich of Russia and Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna, one of his sisters.
*2009 &ndash; Chrysler files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
* 2009 &ndash; Seven people are killed and 17 injured at a Queen's Day parade in Apeldoorn, Netherlands in an attempted assassination on Queen Beatrix.
* 2009 &ndash; Azerbaijan State Oil Academy shooting: Twelve people were killed (students and staff members) by an armed attacker. 
*2012 &ndash; An overloaded ferry capsizes on the Brahmaputra River in India killing at least 103 people.
*2013 &ndash; Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands abdicates and Willem-Alexander becomes King of the Netherlands.
*2014 &ndash; A bomb blast in rmqi kills 3 people and injures 79 others.

==Births==
*1245 &ndash; Philip III of France (d. 1285)
*1331 &ndash; Gaston III, Count of Foix (d. 1391)
*1553 &ndash; Louise of Lorraine (d. 1601)
*1623 &ndash; Franois de Laval, French-Canadian bishop and saint (d. 1708)
*1651 &ndash; Jean-Baptiste de La Salle, French priest and saint (d. 1719)
*1662 &ndash; Mary II of England (d. 1694)
*1664 &ndash; Franois Louis, Prince of Conti (d. 1709)
*1710 &ndash; Johann Kaspar Basselet von La Rose, Bavarian general (d. 1795)
*1723 &ndash; Mathurin Jacques Brisson, French zoologist and philosopher (d. 1806)
*1758 &ndash; Emmanuel Vitale, Maltese commander and politician (d. 1802)
*1770 &ndash; David Thompson, English-Canadian cartographer and explorer (d. 1857)
*1777 &ndash; Carl Friedrich Gauss, German mathematician and physicist (d. 1855)
*1803 &ndash; Albrecht von Roon, Prussian soldier and politician, 10th Minister President of Prussia (d. 1879)
*1812 &ndash; Kaspar Hauser, German feral child (d. 1833)
*1829 &ndash; Ferdinand von Hochstetter, Austrian geologist (d. 1884)
*1850 &ndash; George Gibb, Scottish businessman (d. 1925)
*1857 &ndash; Eugen Bleuler, Swiss psychiatrist (d. 1940)
* 1857 &ndash; Walter Simon, German banker and philanthropist (d. 1920)
*1864 &ndash; Jean, duc Decazes, French sailor (d. 1912)
* 1864 &ndash; Juhan Liiv, Estonian poet and author (d. 1913)
*1865 &ndash; Max Nettlau, German historian (d. 1944)
*1869 &ndash; Hans Poelzig, German architect, designed the IG Farben Building and Groes Schauspielhaus (d. 1936)
*1870 &ndash; Franz Lehr, Slovak-Austrian composer (d. 1948)
* 1870 &ndash; Dadasaheb Phalke, Indian director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1944)
*1874 &ndash; Cyriel Verschaeve, Flemish priest (d. 1949)
*1876 &ndash; Orso Mario Corbino, Italian physicist and politician (d. 1937)
*1877 &ndash; Lon Flameng, French cyclist (d. 1917)
* 1877 &ndash; Alice B. Toklas, American-French businesswoman (d. 1967)
*1880 &ndash; Charles Exeter Devereux Crombie, Scottish cartoonist (d. 1967)
*1883 &ndash; Jaroslav Haek, Czech soldier and author (d. 1923)
* 1883 &ndash; Luigi Russolo, Italian painter and composer (d. 1947)
*1884 &ndash; Olof Sandborg, Swedish actor (d. 1965)
*1888 &ndash; John Crowe Ransom, American poet (d. 1974)
*1893 &ndash; Joachim von Ribbentrop, German politician, 14th German Reich Minister for Foreign Affairs (d. 1946)
*1895 &ndash; Philippe Panneton, Canadian physician, academic, and diplomat (d. 1960)
*1896 &ndash; Reverend Gary Davis, American singer and guitarist (d. 1972)
* 1896 &ndash; Hans List, Austrian scientist and businessman, founded the AVL Engineering Company (d. 1996)
*1897 &ndash; Humberto Mauro, Brazilian director and screenwriter (d. 1983)
*1900 &ndash; Erni Krusten, Estonian author (d. 1984)
* 1900 &ndash; David Manners, Canadian-American actor (d. 1998)
*1901 &ndash; Simon Kuznets, Ukrainian-American economist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1985)
*1902 &ndash; Theodore Schultz, American economist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1998)
*1905 &ndash; Sergey Nikolsky, Russian mathematician and academic (d. 2012)
*1908 &ndash; Eve Arden, American actress (d. 1990)
* 1908 &ndash; Bjarni Benediktsson, Icelandic politician, 13th Prime Minister of Iceland (d. 1970)
* 1908 &ndash; Frank Robert Miller, Canadian air marshal and politician (d. 1997)
*1909 &ndash; F. E. McWilliam, Irish sculptor (d. 1992)
* 1909 &ndash; Juliana of the Netherlands (d. 2004)
*1910 &ndash; Levi Celerio, Filipino composer and songwriter (d. 2002)
* 1910 &ndash; Sri Sri, Indian poet and songwriter (d. 1983)
*1913 &ndash; Ilmar Raud, Estonian chess player (d. 1941)
*1914 &ndash; Dorival Caymmi, Brazilian singer-songwriter, actor, and painter (d. 2008)
*1916 &ndash; Claude Shannon, American mathematician and engineer (d. 2001)
* 1916 &ndash; Paul Kuusberg, Estonian author (d. 2003)
* 1916 &ndash; Robert Shaw, American conductor (d. 1999)
*1920 &ndash; Duncan Hamilton, Irish-English race car driver (d. 1994)
*1921 &ndash; Roger L. Easton, American scientist, co-invented the GPS (d. 2014)
* 1921 &ndash; Tove Mas, Danish actress (d. 2010)
*1923 &ndash; Percy Heath, American bassist (Heath Brothers and Modern Jazz Quartet) (d. 2005)
* 1923 &ndash; Kagamisato Kiyoji, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 42nd Yokozuna (d. 2004)
* 1923 &ndash; Al Lewis, American actor (d. 2006)
* 1923 &ndash; Francis Tucker, South African race car driver (d. 2008)
*1924 &ndash; Uno Laht, Estonian KGB officer and author (d. 2008)
*1925 &ndash; Corinne Calvet, French-American actress (d. 2001)
* 1925 &ndash; Johnny Horton, American singer and guitarist (d. 1960)
*1926 &ndash; Shrinivas Khale, Indian composer (d. 2011)
* 1926 &ndash; Cloris Leachman, American actress and singer
*1928 &ndash; Hugh Hood, Canadian author (d. 2000)
*1930 &ndash; Flix Guattari, French psychotherapist and philosopher (d. 1992)
*1933 &ndash; Dickie Davies, English television host
* 1933 &ndash; Charles Sanderson, Baron Sanderson of Bowden, English politician
*1934 &ndash; Jerry Lordan, English singer-songwriter (d. 1995)
* 1934 &ndash; Don McKenney, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
*1937 &ndash; Tony Harrison, English poet and playwright
*1938 &ndash; Gary Collins, American actor and talk show host (d. 2012)
* 1938 &ndash; Juraj Jakubisko, Slovak director and screenwriter
* 1938 &ndash; Larry Niven, American author
*1940 &ndash; Burt Young, American actor
*1941 &ndash; Stavros Dimas, Greek politician, Minister of Foreign Affairs for Greece
* 1941 &ndash; Johnny Farina, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Santo & Johnny)
*1943 &ndash; Frederick Chiluba, Zambian politician, 2nd President of Zambia (d. 2011)
* 1943 &ndash; Bobby Vee, American singer
*1944 &ndash; Jon Bing, Norwegian author, scholar, and academic (d. 2014)
* 1944 &ndash; Jill Clayburgh, American actress (d. 2010)
* 1944 &ndash; Graham Upton, English academic
*1945 &ndash; Annie Dillard, American author and poet
* 1945 &ndash; Mimi Faria, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and activist (d. 2001)
* 1945 &ndash; Michael J. Smith, American captain, pilot, and astronaut (d. 1986)
*1946 &ndash; Lee Bollinger, American lawyer and academic
* 1946 &ndash; Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden
* 1946 &ndash; Bill Plympton, American animator, producer, and screenwriter
* 1946 &ndash; Don Schollander, American swimmer
*1947 &ndash; Paul Fiddes, English theologian and academic
* 1947 &ndash; Leslie Grantham, English actor
* 1947 &ndash; Finn Kalvik, Norwegian singer-songwriter
* 1947 &ndash; Tom Khlert, Danish footballer and manager
* 1947 &ndash; Mats Odell, Swedish economist and politician
*1948 &ndash; Perry King, American actor
* 1948 &ndash; Alexander Onassis, American-Greek son of Aristotle Onassis (d. 1973)
* 1948 &ndash; Pierre Pag, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
*1949 &ndash; Phil Garner, American baseball player and manager
* 1949 &ndash; Antnio Guterres, Portuguese politician, 114th Prime Minister of Portugal
* 1949 &ndash; Karl Meiler, German tennis player (d. 2014)
*1952 &ndash; Jacques Audiard, French director and screenwriter
*1953 &ndash; Merrill Osmond, American singer, bass player, and actor (The Osmonds)
*1954 &ndash; Thom Bray, American actor
* 1954 &ndash; Jane Campion, New Zealand director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1954 &ndash; Kim Darroch, English diplomat
* 1954 &ndash; Frank-Michael Marczewski, German footballer
*1955 &ndash; Nicolas Hulot, French journalist
* 1955 &ndash; David Kitchin, English judge
* 1955 &ndash; Dimitra Liani, Greek wife of Andreas Papandreou
*1956 &ndash; Jorge Chamin, Portuguese opera singer
* 1956 &ndash; Lars von Trier, Danish director and screenwriter
*1957 &ndash; Aviva Chomsky, American historian and author
*1958 &ndash; Charles Berling, French actor, director, and screenwriter
*1959 &ndash; Paul Gross, Canadian actor, singer, producer, and screenwriter
* 1959 &ndash; Stephen Harper, Canadian politician, 22nd Prime Minister of Canada
* 1959 &ndash; W. Thomas Smith, Jr., American journalist and author
*1960 &ndash; Geoffrey Cox, English lawyer and politician
* 1960 &ndash; Kerry Healey, American politician, 70th Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
* 1960 &ndash; David Miscavige, American religious leader
*1961 &ndash; Isiah Thomas, American basketball player, coach, and sportscaster
*1963 &ndash; Andrew Carwood, English tenor and conductor
* 1963 &ndash; Michael Waltrip, American race car driver
*1964 &ndash; Tony Fernandes, Malaysian-Indian businessman, co-founded Tune Group
* 1964 &ndash; Ian Healy, Australian cricketer, coach, and sportscaster
* 1964 &ndash; Kent James, American singer-songwriter and actor
* 1964 &ndash; Barrington Levy, Jamaican rapper
* 1964 &ndash; Lorenzo Staelens, Belgian footballer and manager 
*1965 &ndash; Daniela Costian, Romanian-Australian discus thrower
* 1965 &ndash; Steven Klein, American photographer
* 1965 &ndash; Adrian Pasdar, American actor and director
*1966 &ndash; Jeff Brown, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1966 &ndash; Dave Meggett, American football player
*1967 &ndash; Steven Mackintosh, English actor
*1968 &ndash; Dave Halili, American illustrator and graphic designer
*1969 &ndash; Warren Defever, American bass player and producer (His Name Is Alive and Elvis Hitler)
* 1969 &ndash; Justine Greening, English politician, Secretary of State for International Development
* 1969 &ndash; Paulo Jr., Brazilian bass player and songwriter (Sepultura)
*1971 &ndash; John Boyne, Irish author
* 1971 &ndash; Darren Emerson, English DJ and producer (Underworld)
*1972 &ndash; J. R. Richards, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (Dishwalla)
*1973 &ndash; Leigh Francis, English comedian, actor, and screenwriter
* 1973 &ndash; Kinna McInroe, American actress
* 1973 &ndash; Naomi Novik, American author
* 1973 &ndash; Jamie Staff, English cyclist and coach
* 1973 &ndash; Jeff Timmons, American singer-songwriter and producer (98 Degrees)
*1975 &ndash; Michael Chaturantabut, Thai-American actor and stuntman
* 1975 &ndash; Johnny Galecki, Belgian-American actor
* 1975 &ndash; Tomi Joutsen, Finnish singer-songwriter (Amorphis)
* 1975 &ndash; Elliott Sadler, American race car driver
*1976 &ndash; Davian Clarke, Jamaican sprinter
* 1976 &ndash; Amanda Palmer, American singer-songwriter and pianist (The Dresden Dolls and Evelyn Evelyn)
*1977 &ndash; Jeannie Haddaway, American politician
* 1977 &ndash; Alexandra Holden, American actress
* 1977 &ndash; Pell James, American actress
*1978 &ndash; Tom Fulp, American businessman, co-founded The Behemoth
*1979 &ndash; Gerardo Torrado, Mexican footballer
*1980 &ndash; Luis Scola, Argentinian basketball player
* 1980 &ndash; Jeroen Verhoeven, Dutch footballer
*1981 &ndash; Nicole Kaczmarski, American basketball player
* 1981 &ndash; Kunal Nayyar, English-American actor
* 1981 &ndash; John O'Shea, Irish footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Emma Pierson, English actress
* 1981 &ndash; Megan Reinking, American actress
* 1981 &ndash; Ali Williams, New Zealand rugby player
*1982 &ndash; Lloyd Banks, American rapper and actor (G-Unit)
* 1982 &ndash; Kirsten Dunst, American actress and singer
* 1982 &ndash; Cleo Higgins, English singer-songwriter, dancer, and actress (Cleopatra)
* 1982 &ndash; Drew Seeley, Canadian-American singer-songwriter, dancer, and actor
*1983 &ndash; Chris Carr, American football player
* 1983 &ndash; Tatjana Hfner, German luger
* 1983 &ndash; Marina Tomi, Slovenian hurdler
* 1983 &ndash; Troy Williamson, American football player
*1984 &ndash; Shawn Daivari, American wrestler and manager
* 1984 &ndash; Risto Mtas, Estonian javelin thrower
* 1984 &ndash; Lee Roache, English footballer
*1985 &ndash; Brandon Bass, American basketball player
* 1985 &ndash; Ashley Alexandra Dupr, American prostitute and singer
* 1985 &ndash; Gal Gadot, Israeli model and actress, Miss Israel 2004
*1986 &ndash; Dianna Agron, American actress, singer, and dancer
* 1986 &ndash; Martten Kaldvee, Estonian biathlete
*1987 &ndash; Alipate Carlile, Australian footballer
* 1987 &ndash; Chris Morris, South African cricketer
* 1987 &ndash; Rohit Sharma, Indian cricketer
* 1987 &ndash; Kaspar Taimsoo, Estonian rower
* 1987 &ndash; Nikki Webster, Australian singer and actress
*1988 &ndash; Andy Allen, Australian chef
*1989 &ndash; Baauer, American DJ and producer
* 1989 &ndash; Jang Wooyoung, South Korean singer, dancer, and actor (2PM)
*1990 &ndash; Mac DeMarco, Canadian singer
* 1990 &ndash; Kaarel Kiidron, Estonian footballer
*1991 &ndash; Kaarel Nurmsalu, Estonian ski jumper
*1992 &ndash; Marc-Andr ter Stegen, German footballer
*1994 &ndash; Wang Yafan, Chinese tennis player
*2002 &ndash; Miguel Urdangarn y de Borbn, Spanish son of Infanta Cristina, Duchess of Palma de Mallorca

==Deaths==
* 65 &ndash; Lucan, Roman poet (b. 39)
* 535 &ndash; Amalasuntha of the Ostrogoths (b. 495)
*1030 &ndash; Mahmud of Ghazni (b. 971)
*1063 &ndash; Emperor Renzong of Song (b. 1010)
*1131 &ndash; Adjutor, French knight and saint
*1341 &ndash; John III, Duke of Brittany (b. 1285)
*1439 &ndash; Richard de Beauchamp, 13th Earl of Warwick, English commander (b. 1382)
*1513 &ndash; Edmund de la Pole, 3rd Duke of Suffolk, English son of Elizabeth of York, Duchess of Suffolk (b. 1472)
*1524 &ndash; Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard, French soldier (b. 1473)
*1544 &ndash; Thomas Audley, 1st Baron Audley of Walden, English lawyer and judge, Lord Chancellor of England (b. 1488)
*1550 &ndash; Tabinshwehti, Burmese king (b. 1516)
*1632 &ndash; Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly, Bavarian general (b. 1559)
* 1632 &ndash; Sigismund III Vasa, Swedish-Polish son of John III of Sweden (b. 1566)
*1637 &ndash; Niwa Nagashige, Japanese daimyo (b. 1571)
*1642 &ndash; Dmitry Pozharsky, Russian prince (b. 1578)
*1655 &ndash; Eustache Le Sueur, French painter (b. 1617)
*1660 &ndash; Petrus Scriverius, Dutch historian and scholar (b. 1576)
*1672 &ndash; Marie of the Incarnation, French-Canadian nun and saint, founded the Ursulines of Quebec (b. 1599)
*1696 &ndash; Robert Plot, English chemist (b. 1640)
*1712 &ndash; Philipp van Limborch, Dutch theologian (b. 1633)
*1736 &ndash; Johann Albert Fabricius, German scholar (b. 1668)
*1758 &ndash; Franois d'Agincourt, French organist and composer (b. 1684)
*1792 &ndash; John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich, English politician, Secretary of State for the Northern Department (b. 1718)
*1795 &ndash; Jean-Jacques Barthlemy, French numismatist (b. 1716)
*1806 &ndash; Onogawa Kisabur, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 5th Yokozuna (b. 1758)
*1841 &ndash; Peter Andreas Heiberg, Danish philologist and author (b. 1758)
*1847 &ndash; Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen (b. 1771)
*1863 &ndash; Jean Danjou, French captain (b. 1828)
*1865 &ndash; Robert FitzRoy, English admiral, meteorologist, and politician, 2nd Governor of New Zealand (b. 1805)
*1870 &ndash; Thomas Cooke, Canadian bishop (b. 1792)
*1875 &ndash; Jean-Frdric Waldeck, French explorer, lithographer, and cartographer (b. 1766)
*1879 &ndash; Emma Smith, American wife of Joseph Smith (b. 1804)
*1883 &ndash; douard Manet, French painter (b. 1832)
*1891 &ndash; Joseph Leidy, American paleontologist and author (b. 1823)
*1900 &ndash; Casey Jones, American engineer (b. 1863)
*1903 &ndash; Emily Stowe, Canadian physician and activist (b. 1831)
*1910 &ndash; Jean Moras, Greek poet and critic (b. 1856)
*1936 &ndash; A. E. Housman, English poet and scholar (b. 1859)
*1939 &ndash; Frank Haller, American boxer (b. 1883)
*1941 &ndash; Edgar Aabye, Danish tug of war competitor (b. 1865)
*1943 &ndash; Otto Jespersen, Danish philologist (b. 1860)
* 1943 &ndash; Beatrice Webb, English sociologist and economist (b. 1858)
*1945 &ndash; Eva Braun, German wife of Adolf Hitler (b. 1912)
* 1945 &ndash; Adolf Hitler, Austrian-German politician, Chancellor of Germany (b. 1889)
*1953 &ndash; Jacob Linzbach, Estonian linguist (b. 1874)
*1956 &ndash; Alben W. Barkley, American lawyer and politician, 35th Vice President of the United States (b. 1877)
*1966 &ndash; Richard Faria, American author and singer (b. 1937)
*1970 &ndash; Inger Stevens, Swedish-American actress (b. 1934)
*1972 &ndash; Gia Scala, English-American model and actress (b. 1934)
*1973 &ndash; Vclav Ren, Czech poet and playwright (b. 1911)
*1974 &ndash; Agnes Moorehead, American actress (b. 1900)
*1980 &ndash; Luis Muoz Marn, Puerto Rican journalist and politician, 1st Governor of Puerto Rico (b. 1898)
*1982 &ndash; Lester Bangs, American journalist and author (b. 1949)
*1983 &ndash; George Balanchine, Russian dancer and choreographer (b. 1904)
* 1983 &ndash; Muddy Waters, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and bandleader (b. 1913)
* 1983 &ndash; Edouard Wyss-Dunant, Swiss physician and mountaineer (b. 1897)
*1986 &ndash; Robert Stevenson, English director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1905)
*1989 &ndash; Yi Bangja, Japanese daughter of Prince Nashimoto Morimasa (b. 1901)
* 1989 &ndash; Sergio Leone, Italian director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1929)
*1993 &ndash; Tommy Caton, English footballer (b. 1962)
*1994 &ndash; Roland Ratzenberger, Austrian race car driver (b. 1960)
* 1994 &ndash; Richard Scarry, American author and illustrator (b. 1919)
*1995 &ndash; Maung Maung Kha, Burmese politician, 8th Prime Minister of Burma (b. 1920)
*1996 &ndash; David Opatoshu, American actor and screenwriter (b. 1918)
*1998 &ndash; Nizar Qabbani, Syrian poet (b. 1926)
*1999 &ndash; Darrell Sweet, English drummer (Nazareth) (b. 1947)
*2000 &ndash; Poul Hartling, Danish politician, 36th Prime Minister of Denmark (b. 1914)
*2002 &ndash; Nitsa Tsaganea, Greek actress (b. 1899)
* 2002 &ndash; Charlotte von Mahlsdorf, German founder of the Grnderzeit Museum (b. 1928)
*2003 &ndash; Mark Berger, American economist and educator (b. 1955)
* 2003 &ndash; Possum Bourne, New Zealand race car driver (b. 1956)
*2005 &ndash; Phil Rasmussen, American lieutenant and pilot (b. 1918)
* 2005 &ndash; Ron Todd, English union leader (b. 1927)
*2006 &ndash; Lawrence Patrick, American mechanic and educator (b. 1920)
* 2006 &ndash; Jean-Franois Revel, French journalist and author (b. 1924)
* 2006 &ndash; Beatriz Sheridan, Mexican actress and director (b. 1934)
* 2006 &ndash; Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Indonesian author (b. 1925)
*2007 &ndash; Grgory Lemarchal, French singer (b. 1983)
* 2007 &ndash; Kevin Mitchell, American football player (b. 1971)
* 2007 &ndash; Tom Poston, American actor (b. 1921)
* 2007 &ndash; Gordon Scott, American actor (b. 1927)
* 2007 &ndash; Zola Taylor, American singer (The Platters) (b. 1938)
*2008 &ndash; John Cargher, English-Australian journalist (b. 1919)
*2009 &ndash; Venetia Burney, English girl who named Pluto (b. 1918)
* 2009 &ndash; Henk Nijdam, Dutch cyclist (b. 1935)
*2010 &ndash; Gerry Ryan, Irish radio and television host (b. 1956)
*2011 &ndash; Dorjee Khandu, Indian politician, 6th Chief Minister of Arunachal Pradesh (b. 1955)
* 2011 &ndash; Evald Okas, Estonian painter (b. 1915)
* 2011 &ndash; Ernesto Sabato, Argentinian physicist, author, and painter (b. 1911)
* 2011 &ndash; Harry S. Morgan, German pornographic actor, producer and director (b. 1945)
*2012 &ndash; Ernst Bolldn, Swedish table tennis player (b. 1966)
* 2012 &ndash; Toms Borge, Nicaraguan politician and poet, co-founded the Sandinista National Liberation Front (b. 1930)
* 2012 &ndash; Alexander Dale Oen, Norwegian swimmer (b. 1985)
* 2012 &ndash; Giannis Gravanis, Greek footballer (b. 1958)
* 2012 &ndash; Benzion Netanyahu, Russian-Israeli historian and educator (b. 1910)
* 2012 &ndash; Achala Sachdev, Pakistani-Indian actress (b. 1920)
* 2012 &ndash; Sicelo Shiceka, South African politician (b. 1966)
*2013 &ndash; Roberto Chabet, Filipino painter and sculptor (b. 1937)
* 2013 &ndash; Shirley Firth, Canadian skier (b. 1953)
* 2013 &ndash; Viviane Forrester, French author and critic (b. 1925)
* 2013 &ndash; Emil Frei, American physician and oncologist (b. 1924)
* 2013 &ndash; Mike Gray, American director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1935)
* 2013 &ndash; Andrew J. Offutt, American author (b. 1934)
*2014 &ndash; Khaled Choudhury, Indian set designer (b. 1919)
* 2014 &ndash; Chris Harris, English actor and director (b. 1942)
* 2014 &ndash; Julian Lewis, English biologist (b. 1946)
* 2014 &ndash; Carl E. Moses, American politician (b. 1929)
* 2014 &ndash; Ian Ross, Australian journalist (b. 1940)

==Holidays and observances==
*Armed Forces Day (Georgia)
*Birthday of the King Carl XVI Gustaf, one of the official flag days of Sweden.
*Camarn Day (French Foreign Legion)
*Children's Day (Mexico)

*Christian Feast Day:
**Adjutor
**Aimo
**Amator, Peter and Louis
**Blessed Miles Gerard
**Eutropius of Saintes
**Marie Guyart (Anglican Church of Canada)
**Sarah Josepha Hale (Episcopal Church (USA))
**Maximus of Rome
**Pomponius of Naples
**Quirinus of Neuss
**Suitbert the Younger
**Saint Pope Pius V
**April 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

*Consumer Protection Day (Thailand)
*Earliest day on which Ascension Day can fall, while June 3 is the latest; celebrated 40 days after Easter (Christianity), and its related observances:
**Father's Day (Germany)
**Global Day of Prayer (Western Christianity)
*International Jazz Day (UNESCO)
*May Eve, the eve of the first day of summer in the Northern hemisphere (see May 1):
**Beltane Fire Festival (Calton Hill, Edinburgh)
**Carodejnice (Czech Republic and Slovakia)
**Beltane begins at sunset in the Northern hemisphere, Samhain begins at sunset in the Southern hemisphere. (Neo-Druidic Wheel of the Year)
**Walpurgis Night (Central and Northern Europe)

*National Persian Gulf Day (Iran)
*Reunification Day (Vietnam)
*Teachers' Day (Paraguay)
*Tax Day Canada

==External links==

*BBC: On This Day
*
*On This Day in Canada



[[August 22]]

==Events==
* 392 &ndash; Arbogast has Eugenius elected Western Roman Emperor.
* 476 &ndash; Odoacer is named Rex italiae by his troops.
* 564 &ndash; Columba reports seeing a monster in Loch Ness, Scotland.
* 851 &ndash; Battle of Jengland: Erispoe defeats Charles the Bald near the Breton town of Jengland.
*1138 &ndash; Battle of the Standard between Scotland and England.
*1485 &ndash; The Battle of Bosworth Field, the death of Richard III and the end of the House of Plantagenet.
*1559 &ndash; Bartolom Carranza, Spanish archbishop, is arrested for heresy.
*1639 &ndash; Madras (now Chennai), India, is founded by the British East India Company on a sliver of land bought from local Nayak rulers.
*1642 &ndash; Charles I calls the English Parliament traitors. The English Civil War begins.
*1654 &ndash; Jacob Barsimson arrives in New Amsterdam. He is the first known Jewish immigrant to America.
*1711 &ndash; Ships from British Admiral Hovenden Walker's Quebec Expedition founders on rocks at the mouth of the Saint Lawrence River.
*1717 &ndash; Spanish troops land on Sardinia.
*1770 &ndash; James Cook names and lands on Possession Island, Queensland and claims the east coast of Australia as New South Wales in the name of King George III.
*1777 &ndash; American Revolutionary War: British forces abandon the Siege of Fort Stanwix after hearing rumors of Continental Army reinforcements.
*1780 &ndash; James Cook's ship HMS Resolution returns to England (Cook having been killed on Hawaii during the voyage).
*1791 &ndash; Beginning of the Haitian Slave Revolution in Saint-Domingue.
*1798 &ndash; French troops land in Kilcummin harbour, County Mayo, Ireland to aid Wolfe Tone's United Irishmen's Irish Rebellion.
*1827 &ndash; Jos de la Mar becomes President of Peru.
*1831 &ndash; Nat Turner's slave rebellion commences just after midnight in Southampton County, Virginia, leading to the deaths of more than 50 whites and several hundred African Americans who are killed in retaliation for the uprising.
*1846 &ndash; The Second Federal Republic of Mexico is established.
*1848 &ndash; The United States annexes New Mexico.
*1849 &ndash; The first air raid in history. Austria launches pilotless balloons against the city of Venice.
*1851 &ndash; The first America's Cup is won by the yacht America.
*1864 &ndash; 12 nations sign the First Geneva Convention.
*1875 &ndash; The Treaty of Saint Petersburg between Japan and Russia is ratified, providing for the exchange of Sakhalin for the Kuril Islands.
*1902 &ndash; Cadillac Motor Company is founded.
* 1902 &ndash; Theodore Roosevelt becomes the first President of the United States to ride in an automobile.
*1910 &ndash; Korea is annexed by Japan with the signing of the JapanKorea Treaty of 1910, beginning a period of Japanese rule of Korea that lasted until the end of World War II.
*1922 &ndash; Michael Collins, Commander-in-chief of the Irish Free State Army, is shot dead during an Anti-Treaty ambush at Bal na Blth, County Cork, during the Irish Civil War.
*1932 &ndash; The BBC first experiments with television broadcasting. (See also Timeline of the BBC.)
*1934 &ndash; Bill Woodfull of Australia becomes the only cricket captain to twice regain The Ashes.
*1941 &ndash; World War II: German troops reach Leningrad, leading to the siege of Leningrad.
*1942 &ndash; World War II: Brazil declares war on Germany and Italy.
*1944 &ndash; World War II: Romania is captured by the Soviet Union.
* 1944 &ndash; World War II: Holocaust of Kedros in Crete by German forces
*1949 &ndash; Queen Charlotte earthquake: Canada's largest earthquake since the 1700 Cascadia earthquake
*1950 &ndash; Althea Gibson becomes the first black competitor in international tennis.
*1952 &ndash; The penal colony on Devil's Island is permanently closed.
*1961 &ndash; Ida Siekmann died attempting to cross the Berlin Wall.
*1962 &ndash; An attempt to assassinate French president Charles de Gaulle fails.
*1963 &ndash; American Joe Walker in an X-15 test plane reaches an altitude of 106 km.
*1966 &ndash; Labor movements NFWA and AWOC merge to become the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee (UFWOC), predecessor of the United Farm Workers.
*1968 &ndash; Pope Paul VI arrives in Bogot, Colombia. It is the first visit of a pope to Latin America.
*1971 &ndash; J. Edgar Hoover and John Mitchell announce the arrest of 20 of the Camden 28.
*1972 &ndash; Rhodesia is expelled by the IOC for its racist policies.
*1973 &ndash; The Congress of Chile votes in favour of a resolution condemning President Salvador Allende's government and demands him to resign or else be unseated through force and new elections be called. The first demand is executed eighteen days later in a bloody coup d'etat, commencing 17 years of military rule.
*1978 &ndash; The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FLSN) occupies national palace in Nicaragua.
*1984 &ndash; PC Brian Bishop was a British police officer who was shot in the head by an armed robber in Frinton-on-Sea, Essex. He died from his injuries five days later.
*1985 &ndash; Manchester Air Disaster sees 55 people killed when a fire breaks out on a commercial aircraft at Manchester Airport.
*1989 &ndash; Nolan Ryan strikes out Rickey Henderson to become the first Major League Baseball pitcher to record 5,000 strikeouts.
*1992 &ndash; FBI HRT sniper Lon Horiuchi shoots and kills Vicki Weaver during an 11-day siege at her home at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
*1996 &ndash; Bill Clinton signs welfare reform into law, representing major shift in US welfare policy
*2003 &ndash; Alabama Chief Justice Roy Moore is suspended after refusing to comply with a federal court order to remove a rock inscribed with the Ten Commandments from the lobby of the Alabama Supreme Court building.
*2004 &ndash; Versions of The Scream and Madonna, two paintings by Edvard Munch, are stolen at gunpoint from a museum in Oslo, Norway.
*2006 &ndash; Pulkovo Aviation Enterprise Flight 612 crashes near the Russian border over eastern Ukraine, killing all 170 people on board.
*2007 &ndash; The Texas Rangers rout the Baltimore Orioles 303, the most runs scored by a team in modern MLB history.
* 2007 &ndash; The Storm botnet, a botnet created by the Storm Worm, sends out a record 57 million e-mails in one day
*2012 &ndash; Ethnic clashes over grazing rights for cattle in Kenya's Tana River District result in more than 52 deaths.

==Births==

*1412 &ndash; Frederick II, Elector of Saxony (d. 1464)
*1601 &ndash; Georges de Scudry, French author, poet, and playwright (d. 1667)
*1624 &ndash; Jean Regnault de Segrais, French author and poet (d. 1701)
*1647 &ndash; Denis Papin, French physicist and mathematician, developed pressure cooking (d. 1712)
*1679 &ndash; Pierre Gurin de Tencin, French cardinal (d. 1758)
*1760 &ndash; Pope Leo XII (d. 1829)
*1764 &ndash; Charles Percier, French architect (d. 1838)
*1771 &ndash; Henry Maudslay, English inventor (d. 1831)
*1773 &ndash; Aim Bonpland, French botanist and explorer (d. 1858)
*1778 &ndash; James Kirke Paulding, American politician, 11th United States Secretary of the Navy (d. 1860)
*1800 &ndash; William S. Harney, American general (d. 1889)
* 1800 &ndash; Samuel David Luzzatto, Italian poet and scholar (d. 1865)
*1827 &ndash; Ezra Butler Eddy, Canadian businessman and politician (d. 1906)
*1834 &ndash; Samuel Pierpont Langley, American physicist and astronomer (d. 1906)
*1836 &ndash; Archibald Willard, American painter (d. 1918)
*1845 &ndash; William Lewis Douglas, American businessman and politician, 42nd Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1924)
*1848 &ndash; Melville Elijah Stone, American publisher, founded the Chicago Daily News (d. 1929)
*1854 &ndash; Milan I of Serbia (d. 1901)
*1857 &ndash; Ned Hanlon, American baseball player and manager (d. 1937)
*1860 &ndash; Paul Gottlieb Nipkow, German inventor, created the Nipkow disk (d. 1940)
* 1860 &ndash; Alfred Ploetz, German physician, biologist, and eugenicist (d. 1940)
* 1860 &ndash; Eleonore Reuss of Kstritz (d. 1917)
*1862 &ndash; Claude Debussy, French composer (d. 1918)
*1867 &ndash; Maximilian Bircher-Benner, Swiss physician and nutritionist (d. 1939)
*1873 &ndash; Alexander Bogdanov, Russian physician and philosopher (d. 1928)
*1874 &ndash; Max Scheler, German philosopher (d. 1928)
*1880 &ndash; Gorch Fock, German author and poet (d. 1916)
* 1880 &ndash; George Herriman, American cartoonist (d. 1944)
*1885 &ndash; Thomas Cooke, American soccer player (d. 1964)
*1887 &ndash; Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk, German politician, Foreign Minister of Germany (d. 1977)
*1890 &ndash; Cecil Kellaway, South African born character actor (d. 1973)
*1891 &ndash; Jacques Lipchitz, Lithuanian-Italian sculptor (d. 1973)
*1893 &ndash; Wilfred Kitching, English 7th General of The Salvation Army (d. 1977)
* 1893 &ndash; Dorothy Parker, American poet and author (d. 1967)
*1895 &ndash; Lszl Almsy, Hungarian pilot (d. 1951)
* 1895 &ndash; Paul Comtois, Canadian politician, 21st Lieutenant Governor of Quebec (d. 1966)
*1902 &ndash; Thomas Pelly, American politician (d. 1973)
* 1902 &ndash; Leni Riefenstahl, German actress and director (d. 2003)
* 1902 &ndash; Edward Rowe Snow, American historian and author (d. 1982)
*1903 &ndash; Jerry Iger, American cartoonist, co-founded Eisner & Iger (d. 1990)
*1904 &ndash; Deng Xiaoping, Chinese politician, 1st Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China (d. 1997)
*1908 &ndash; Henri Cartier-Bresson, French photographer and painter (d. 2004)
* 1908 &ndash; Erwin Thiesies, German rugby player and coach (d. 1993)
*1909 &ndash; Julius J. Epstein, American screenwriter and producer (d. 2000)
* 1909 &ndash; Mel Hein, American football player and coach (d. 1992)
* 1909 &ndash; Lucille Ricksen, American actress (d. 1925)
*1913 &ndash; Leonard Pagliero, English businessman and pilot (d. 2008)
* 1913 &ndash; Bruno Pontecorvo, Italian physicist (d. 1993)
*1914 &ndash; Connie B. Gay, American businessman, co-founded the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum (d. 1989) 
*1915 &ndash; David Dellinger, American activist (d. 2004)
* 1915 &ndash; James Hillier, Canadian-American scientist, co-designed the electron microscope (d. 2007)
* 1915 &ndash; Hugh Paddick, English actor (d. 2000)
* 1915 &ndash; Edward Szczepanik, Polish economist and politician, 15th Prime Minister of the Polish Republic in Exile (d. 2005)
*1917 &ndash; John Lee Hooker, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2001)
*1918 &ndash; Mary McGrory, American journalist (d. 2004)
*1920 &ndash; Ray Bradbury, American author (d. 2012)
* 1920 &ndash; Denton Cooley, American surgeon
*1921 &ndash; Sotiria Bellou, Greek singer (d. 1997)
* 1921 &ndash; Dinos Dimopoulos, Greek director and screenwriter (d. 2003)
* 1921 &ndash; Tony Pawson, English cricketer (d. 2012)
*1922 &ndash; Roberto Aizenberg, Argentinian painter and sculptor (d. 1996)
* 1922 &ndash; Theoni V. Aldredge, Greek-American costume designer (d. 2011)
* 1922 &ndash; Harishankar Parsai, Indian author (d. 1995)
* 1922 &ndash; Micheline Presle, French actress
*1925 &ndash; Honor Blackman, English actress and singer
* 1925 &ndash; James Kirkwood, Jr., American playwright and author (d. 1989)
*1928 &ndash; Tinga Seisay, Sierra Leonean diplomat and activist 
* 1928 &ndash; Karlheinz Stockhausen, German composer (d. 2007)
*1929 &ndash; Valery Alekseyev, Russian anthropologist (d. 1991)
* 1929 &ndash; Ulrich Wegener, German general and police officer
*1930 &ndash; Gylmar dos Santos Neves, Brazilian footballer (d. 2013)
*1932 &ndash; Gerald P. Carr, American engineer, colonel, and astronaut
*1934 &ndash; Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr., American general (d. 2012)
*1935 &ndash; Annie Proulx, American journalist and author
*1936 &ndash; Chuck Brown, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (d. 2012)
* 1936 &ndash; John Callaway, American journalist (d. 2009)
* 1936 &ndash; Dale Hawkins, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2010)
* 1936 &ndash; Werner Stengel, German roller coaster designer and engineer, designed the maverick roller coaster 
*1938 &ndash; Jean Berkey, American politician (d. 2013)
* 1938 &ndash; Paul Maguire, American football player and sportscaster 
*1939 &ndash; Valerie Harper, American actress and singer
* 1939 &ndash; George Reinholt, American actor
* 1939 &ndash; Carl Yastrzemski, American baseball player
*1940 &ndash; Bill McCartney, American football player and coach, founded Promise Keepers
*1941 &ndash; Bill Parcells, American football player and coach
* 1941 &ndash; Hannspeter Winter, Austrian physicist (d. 2006)
*1942 &ndash; Uur Mumcu, Turkish journalist and author (d. 1993)
*1943 &ndash; Masatoshi Shima, Japanese computer scientist, co-designed the Intel 4004
*1944 &ndash; Peter Hofmann, Czech-German tenor (d. 2010)
*1945 &ndash; David Chase, American director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1945 &ndash; Ron Dante, American singer-songwriter and producer (The Archies, The Cuff Links, and The Detergents)
* 1945 &ndash; Erol Gelenbe, Turkish computer scientist and mathematician
*1947 &ndash; Donna Jean Godchaux, American singer-songwriter (Grateful Dead, Heart of Gold Band, and Jerry Garcia Band, and Donna Jean Godchaux Band)
* 1947 &ndash; Cindy Williams, American actress, singer, and producer
*1948 &ndash; Eleonora Brown, Italian actress
* 1948 &ndash; David Marks, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Beach Boys)
*1949 &ndash; Doug Bair, American baseball player and coach
* 1949 &ndash; rarinn Eldjrn, Icelandic author and poet
* 1949 &ndash; Diana Nyad, American swimmer and author
*1950 &ndash; Ray Burris, American baseball player and coach
* 1950 &ndash; Scooter Libby, American lawyer, Chief of Staff to the Vice President of the United States
*1951 &ndash; Chandra Prakash Mainali, Nepalese politician
*1952 &ndash; Peter Laughner, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Rocket from the Tombs and Pere Ubu) (d. 1977)
*1953 &ndash; Paul Ellering, American weightlifter and wrestling manager
*1955 &ndash; Chiranjeevi, Indian actor, producer, and politician
* 1955 &ndash; Gordon Liu, Chinese martial artist and actor
*1956 &ndash; Paul Molitor, American baseball player and coach
*1957 &ndash; Steve Davis, English snooker player
*1958 &ndash; Colm Feore, American-Canadian actor
* 1958 &ndash; Stevie Ray, American wrestler
* 1958 &ndash; Vernon Reid, English-American guitarist and songwriter (Living Colour)
*1959 &ndash; Juan Croucier, Cuban-American singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (Ratt and Dokken)
* 1959 &ndash; Pia Gjellerup, Danish politician, Finance Minister of Denmark
* 1959 &ndash; Kidd Kraddick, American radio host (d. 2013)
* 1959 &ndash; Mark Williams, English actor and screenwriter 
*1960 &ndash; Holger Gehrke, German footballer and manager
*1961 &ndash; Andrs Calamaro, Argentinian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (Los Abuelos de la Nada and Los Rodrguez)
* 1961 &ndash; Roland Orzabal, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (Tears for Fears and Graduate)
* 1961 &ndash; Debbi Peterson, American singer and drummer (The Bangles and Kindred Spirit)
*1963 &ndash; Tori Amos, American singer-songwriter, pianist, and producer (Y Kant Tori Read)
* 1963 &ndash; Terry Catledge, American basketball player
*1964 &ndash; Tom Gibis, American voice actor
* 1964 &ndash; Diane Setterfield, English author
* 1964 &ndash; Mats Wilander, Swedish tennis player
* 1964 &ndash; Andrew Wilson, American actor and director
*1965 &ndash; Courtney Gains, American actor and producer
* 1965 &ndash; Chen Liping, Singaporean actress
*1966 &ndash; Gza, American rapper (Wu-Tang Clan)
* 1966 &ndash; Eric Andolsek, American football player (d. 1992)
* 1966 &ndash; Brooke Dillman, American actress
* 1966 &ndash; Rob Witschge, Dutch footballer and manager
*1967 &ndash; Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, English actor
* 1967 &ndash; Ty Burrell, American actor
* 1967 &ndash; Alfred Gough, American screenwriter and producer
* 1967 &ndash; Yukiko Okada, Japanese singer and actress (d. 1986)
* 1967 &ndash; Layne Staley, American singer-songwriter (Alice in Chains, Class of '99, Mad Season, and Sleze) (d. 2002)
* 1967 &ndash; Bill Welke, American baseball umpire
*1968 &ndash; Casper Christensen, Danish comedian, actor, and screenwriter
* 1968 &ndash; Paul Colman, Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist (Newsboys and Paul Colman Trio)
* 1968 &ndash; Aleksandr Mostovoi, Russian footballer
* 1968 &ndash; Horst Skoff, Austrian tennis player (d. 2008)
*1970 &ndash; George Canyon, Canadian singer, guitarist, and actor
* 1970 &ndash; Charlie Connelly, English-Irish author and journalist
* 1970 &ndash; Giada De Laurentiis, Italian-American chef and author
* 1970 &ndash; Tmea Nagy, Hungarian fencer
* 1970 &ndash; Shaun Steels, English drummer and bass player (My Dying Bride and Anathema)
*1971 &ndash; Richard Armitage, English actor
* 1971 &ndash; Craig Finn, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Hold Steady and Lifter Puller)
* 1971 &ndash; Rick Yune, American actor and martial artist
*1972 &ndash; Okkert Brits, South African pole vaulter
* 1972 &ndash; Paul Doucette, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and drummer (Matchbox Twenty, The Break and Repair Method, and Tabitha's Secret)
* 1972 &ndash; Steve Kline, American baseball player and coach
* 1972 &ndash; Pontus Schultz, Swedish journalist (d. 2012)
* 1972 &ndash; Max Wilson, Brazilian race car driver
*1973 &ndash; Sornram Teppitak, Thai actor
*1973 &ndash; Howie Dorough, American singer-songwriter, dancer, and actor (Backstreet Boys)
* 1973 &ndash; Beenie Man, Jamaican rapper and producer
* 1973 &ndash; Kristen Wiig, American actress, producer, and screenwriter
* 1973 &ndash; Eurelijus ukauskas, Lithuanian basketball player
* 1974 &ndash; Agustn Pichot, Argentinian rugby player
* 1974 &ndash; Lee Sheppard, Australian animator
*1975 &ndash; Clint Bolton, Australian footballer
* 1975 &ndash; Davor Krznari, Croatian footballer
* 1975 &ndash; Sheree Murphy, English actress
* 1975 &ndash; Rodrigo Santoro, Brazilian actor
*1976 &ndash; Marius Bezykornovas, Lithuanian footballer
* 1976 &ndash; Bryn Davies, American bassist, cellist, and pianist
* 1976 &ndash; Laurent Hernu, French decathlete
* 1976 &ndash; Randy Wolf, American baseball player
*1977 &ndash; Jenna Leigh Green, American actress and singer
* 1977 &ndash; Keren Cytter, Visual artist and writer
* 1977 &ndash; Heiar Helguson, Icelandic footballer
*1978 &ndash; Robert Levon Been, American singer and guitarist (Black Rebel Motorcycle Club)
* 1978 &ndash; James Corden, English actor, singer, producer, and screenwriter
* 1978 &ndash; Ioannis Gagaloudis, Greek basketball player
* 1978 &ndash; Ed Petrie, English comedian and actor
* 1978 &ndash; Jeff Stinco, Canadian guitarist (Simple Plan)
*1979 &ndash; Brandon Adams, American actor
* 1979 &ndash; Jennifer Finnigan, Canadian actress
* 1979 &ndash; Matt Walters, American football player
*1980 &ndash; Roland Benschneider, German footballer
* 1980 &ndash; Nicolas Macrozonaris, Canadian sprinter
*1981 &ndash; Alex Holmes, American football player
* 1981 &ndash; Jang Hyun-Kyu, South Korean footballer (d. 2012)
* 1981 &ndash; Takumi Saito, Japanese actor and singer
*1982 &ndash; Rodrigo Nehme, Mexican actor
*1983 &ndash; Theo Bos, Dutch cyclist
* 1983 &ndash; Laura Breckenridge, American actress
* 1983 &ndash; Justin Buchholz, American mixed martial artist
* 1983 &ndash; Jahri Evans, American football player
* 1983 &ndash; Dani Thompson, Australian-born, English actress, glamour model and TV presenter
*1984 &ndash; Lee Camp, English footballer
* 1984 &ndash; Missy Monroe, American porn actress
* 1984 &ndash; Lawrence Quaye, Ghanaian-Qatari footballer
*1985 &ndash; Kether Donohue, American actress
* 1985 &ndash; Luke Russert, American journalist
*1986 &ndash; Lacie Heart, American porn actress
* 1986 &ndash; Erika Hebron, American model, Miss Missouri 2010 
* 1986 &ndash; Keiko Kitagawa, Japanese actress
* 1986 &ndash; Janis Vahter, Estonian basketball player
*1987 &ndash; Leonardo Moracci, Italian footballer
* 1987 &ndash; Karlie Simon, English porn actress
*1988 &ndash; Sarah Major, New Zealand actress
Remov* 1989 &ndash; Chariz Solomon, Filipino actress 
*1990 &ndash; Syque Caesar, Bangladeshi gymnast 
* 1990 &ndash; Randall Cobb, American football player
*1991 &ndash; Federico Macheda, Italian footballer
* 1991 &ndash; Brayden Schenn, Canadian ice hockey player
*1994 &ndash; Olli Maatta, Finnish ice hockey player
*1996 &ndash; Shannon Flynn, English actress
*1999 &ndash; Dakota Goyo, Canadian actor

==Deaths==

* 408 &ndash; Stilicho, Roman general (b. 359)
*1155 &ndash; Emperor Konoe of Japan (b. 1139)
*1241 &ndash; Pope Gregory IX, (b. 1143)
*1280 &ndash; Pope Nicholas III (b. 1216)
*1304 &ndash; John II, Count of Holland (b. 1247)
*1350 &ndash; Philip VI of France (b. 1293)
*1358 &ndash; Isabella of France (b. 1295)
*1456 &ndash; Vladislav II of Wallachia
*1485 &ndash; Richard III of England (b. 1452)
*1553 &ndash; John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland, English admiral and politician, Lord President of the Council (b. 1504)
*1572 &ndash; Thomas Percy, 7th Earl of Northumberland, English leader of the Rising of the North (b. 1528)
*1584 &ndash; Jan Kochanowski, Polish poet (b. 1530)
*1599 &ndash; Luca Marenzio, Italian singer-songwriter (b. 1553)
*1607 &ndash; Bartholomew Gosnold, English lawyer and explorer, founded the London Company (b. 1572)
*1652 &ndash; Jacob De la Gardie, Estonian-Swedish soldier and politician, Lord High Constable of Sweden (b. 1583)
*1664 &ndash; Maria Cunitz, Polish astronomer (b. 1610)
*1680 &ndash; John George II, Elector of Saxony (b. 1613)
*1701 &ndash; John Granville, 1st Earl of Bath, English politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (b. 1628)
*1711 &ndash; Louis Franois, duc de Boufflers, French general (b. 1644)
*1752 &ndash; William Whiston, English mathematician, historian, and theologian (b. 1667)
*1793 &ndash; Louis de Noailles, French general (b. 1713)
* 1793 &ndash; Ccilia Weber, German-Austrian mother of Constanze Weber and mother-in-law of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (b. 1727)
*1797 &ndash; Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser, French-Austrian field marshal (b. 1724)
*1806 &ndash; Jean-Honor Fragonard, French painter (b. 1732)
*1818 &ndash; Warren Hastings, English politician, 1st Governor-General of Bengal (b. 1732)
*1828 &ndash; Franz Joseph Gall, Austrian neuroanatomist and physiologist (b. 1758)
*1850 &ndash; Nikolaus Lenau, Romanian-Austrian poet (b. 1802)
*1861 &ndash; Xianfeng Emperor of China (b. 1831)
*1888 &ndash; goston Trefort, Hungarian politician (b. 1817)
*1891 &ndash; Jan Neruda, Czech journalist, author, and poet (b. 1834)
*1903 &ndash; Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury, English politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1830)
*1904 &ndash; Kate Chopin, American author (b. 1850)
*1909 &ndash; Henry Radcliffe Crocker, English dermatologist (b. 1846)
*1914 &ndash; Giacomo Radini-Tedeschi, Italian bishop (b. 1859)
*1918 &ndash; Korbinian Brodmann, German neurologist (b. 1868)
*1922 &ndash; Michael Collins, Irish politician, 2nd Minister of Finance for Ireland (b. 1890)
*1926 &ndash; Charles William Eliot, American academic (b. 1834)
*1933 &ndash; Alexandros Kontoulis, Greek general and diplomat (b. 1858)
*1940 &ndash; Oliver Lodge, English physicist (b. 1851)
* 1940 &ndash; Gerald Strickland, 1st Baron Strickland, Maltese politician, 4th Prime Minister of Malta (b. 1861)
*1942 &ndash; Michel Fokine, Russian dancer and choreographer (b. 1880)
*1946 &ndash; Dme Sztjay, Hungarian general and politician, 35th Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1883)
*1950 &ndash; Kirk Bryan, American geologist (b. 1888)
*1951 &ndash; Jack Bickell, Canadian businessman and philanthropist (b. 1884)
*1953 &ndash; Jim Tabor, American baseball player (b. 1916)
*1958 &ndash; Roger Martin du Gard, French author, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1881)
*1960 &ndash; Johannes Sikkar, Estonian politician (b. 1897)
* 1960 &ndash; Eduard Ptsep, Estonian wrestler (b. 1898)
*1963 &ndash; Lord Nuffield, English motor manufacturer and philanthropist (b. 1877)
*1965 &ndash; Ellen Church, American flight attendant (b. 1904)
*1967 &ndash; Gregory Goodwin Pincus, American biologist, co-created the birth-control pill (b. 1903)
*1970 &ndash; Vladimir Propp, Russian scholar (b. 1895)
*1973 &ndash; Louise Huff, American actress (b. 1895)
*1974 &ndash; Jacob Bronowski, Polish-English mathematician, biologist, and author (b. 1908)
*1976 &ndash; Gina Bachauer, Greek pianist (b. 1913)
* 1976 &ndash; Juscelino Kubitschek, Brazilian physician and politician, 21st President of Brazil (b. 1902)
*1977 &ndash; Sebastian Cabot, English-Canadian actor and singer (b. 1918)
*1978 &ndash; Jomo Kenyatta, Kenyan politician, 1st President of Kenya (b. 1894)
*1979 &ndash; James T. Farrell, American author and poet (b. 1904)
*1980 &ndash; James Smith McDonnell, American pilot, engineer, and businessman, founded McDonnell Aircraft (b. 1899)
*1987 &ndash; Joseph P. Lash, American author and journalist (b. 1909)
*1989 &ndash; Robert Grondelaers, Belgian cyclist (b. 1933)
* 1989 &ndash; Huey P. Newton, American activist, co-founded the Black Panther Party (b. 1942)
*1991 &ndash; Colleen Dewhurst, Canadian-American actress (b. 1924)
* 1991 &ndash; Boris Pugo, Latvian politician, Soviet Interior Minister (b.1937)
*1994 &ndash; Gilles Groulx, Canadian director and screenwriter (b. 1931)
*2003 &ndash; Generosa Ammon, American wife of Ted Ammon (b. 1956)
* 2003 &ndash; Imperio Argentina, Argentinian singer and actress (b. 1906)
* 2003 &ndash; Arnold Gerschwiler, Swiss figure skater and coach (b. 1914)
*2004 &ndash; Konstantin Aseev, Russian chess player (b. 1960)
* 2004 &ndash; Angus Bethune, Australian soldier and politician, 33rd Premier of Tasmania (b. 1908)
* 2004 &ndash; Al Dvorin, American bandleader and talent agent (b. 1922)
* 2004 &ndash; Daniel Petrie, Canadian director and producer (b. 1920)
*2005 &ndash; Luc Ferrari, French-Italian composer (b. 1929)
* 2005 &ndash; Ernest Kirkendall, American chemist and metallurgist (b. 1914)
* 2005 &ndash; Mati Unt, Estonian author and director (b. 1944)
*2006 &ndash; Bruce Gary, American drummer and producer (The Knack) (b. 1951)
*2008 &ndash; Gladys Powers, Canadian soldier (b. 1899)
*2009 &ndash; Elmer Kelton, American journalist and author (b. 1926)
*2010 &ndash; Stjepan Bobek, Croatian footballer and manager (b. 1923)
*2011 &ndash; Nick Ashford, American singer-songwriter and producer (Ashford & Simpson) (b. 1942)
* 2011 &ndash; Gudrun Berend, German hurdler (b. 1955)
* 2011 &ndash; Jack Layton, Canadian educator and politician (b. 1950)
* 2011 &ndash; Jerry Leiber, American songwriter (b. 1933)
*2012 &ndash; Nina Bawden, English author (b. 1925)
* 2012 &ndash; Larry Carp, American lawyer (b. 1926)
* 2012 &ndash; Charles Flores, Cuban-American bassist (b. 1970)
* 2012 &ndash; Paulino Matip Nhial, South Sudanese military leader and politician
* 2012 &ndash; Paul Shan Kuo-hsi, Chinese cardinal (b. 1923)
* 2012 &ndash; Martin Shikuku, Kenyan politician (b. 1933)
* 2012 &ndash; Jeffrey Stone, American actor (b. 1926)
* 2012 &ndash; Andrs Jzsef Szennay, Hungarian clergyman (b. 1921)
*2013 &ndash; Keiko Fuji, Japanese singer and actress (b. 1951)
* 2013 &ndash; Petr Kment, Czech wrestler (b. 1942)
* 2013 &ndash; William McIlroy, English journalist and activist (b. 1928)
* 2013 &ndash; Ronald Motley, American lawyer (b. 1944)
* 2013 &ndash; Jetty Paerl, Dutch singer (b. 1921)
* 2013 &ndash; Paul Poberezny, American pilot and businessman, founded the Experimental Aircraft Association (b. 1921)
* 2013 &ndash; Andrea Servi, Italian footballer (b. 1984)
* 2013 &ndash; Peter Waieng, Papua New Guinea politician (b. 1966)

==Holidays and observances==
*Christian Feast Day:
**Immaculate Heart of Mary
**Queenship of Mary
**Symphorian and Timotheus
**August 22 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Earliest day on which National Heroes' Day can fall, while August 28 is the latest; celebrated on the fourth Monday in August. (Philippines)
*Flag Day (Russia)

==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* 
* On This Day in Canada



[[August 27]]

==Events==
* 410 &ndash; The sacking of Rome by the Visigoths ends after three days.
*1172 &ndash; Henry the Young King and Margaret of France are crowned as junior king and queen of England.
*1232 &ndash; The Formulary of Adjudications is promulgated by Regent Hj Yasutoki. (Traditional Japanese date: August 10, 1232)
*1593 &ndash; Pierre Barrire fails in his attempt to assassinate King Henry IV of France.
*1689 &ndash; The Treaty of Nerchinsk is signed by Russia and the Qing Empire.
*1776 &ndash; Battle of Long Island: in what is now Brooklyn, New York, British forces under General William Howe defeat Americans under General George Washington.
*1793 &ndash; French Revolutionary Wars: the city of Toulon revolts against the French Republic and admits the British and Spanish fleets to seize its port, leading to the Siege of Toulon by French Revolutionary forces.
*1798 &ndash; Wolfe Tone's United Irish and French forces clash with the British Army in the Battle of Castlebar, part of the Irish Rebellion of 1798, resulting in the creation of the French puppet Republic of Connacht.
*1810 &ndash; Napoleonic Wars: The French Navy defeats the British Royal Navy, preventing them from taking the harbour of Grand Port on le de France.
*1813 &ndash; French Emperor Napoleon I defeats a larger force of Austrians, Russians, and Prussians at the Battle of Dresden.
*1828 &ndash; Uruguay is formally proclaimed independent at preliminary peace talks brokered by the United Kingdom between Brazil and Argentina during the Cisplatine War.
*1832 &ndash; Black Hawk, leader of the Sauk tribe of Native Americans, surrenders to U.S. authorities, ending the Black Hawk War.
*1859 &ndash; Petroleum is discovered in Titusville, Pennsylvania leading to the world's first commercially successful oil well.
*1861 &ndash; American Civil War: Union forces attack Cape Hatteras, North Carolina.
*1896 &ndash; Anglo-Zanzibar War: the shortest war in world history (09:00 to 09:45), between the United Kingdom and Zanzibar.
*1914 &ndash; Battle of treux: a British rearguard action by the Royal Munster Fusiliers during the Great Retreat. 
*1916 &ndash; Romania declares war on Austria-Hungary, entering World War I as one of the Allied nations.
*1918 &ndash; Mexican Revolution: Battle of Ambos Nogales  U.S. Army forces skirmish against Mexican Carrancistas and their German advisors in the only battle of World War I fought on American soil.
*1921 &ndash; The British install the son of Sharif Hussein bin Ali (leader of the Arab Revolt of 1916 against the Ottoman Empire) as King Faisal I of Iraq.
*1922 &ndash; Greco-Turkish War: The Turkish army takes the Aegean city of Afyonkarahisar from the Greeks.
*1927 &ndash; Five Canadian women file a petition to the Supreme Court of Canada, asking, "Does the word 'Persons' in Section 24 of the British North America Act, 1867, include female persons?"
*1928 &ndash; The KelloggBriand Pact outlawing war is signed by the first 15 nations to do so. Ultimately sixty-one nations will sign it.
*1939 &ndash; First flight of the turbojet-powered Heinkel He 178, the world's first jet aircraft.
*1943 &ndash; World War II: Japanese forces evacuate New Georgia Island in the Pacific Theater of Operations during World War II.
*1957 &ndash; Malaysia's constitution comes into force.
*1962 &ndash; The Mariner 2 unmanned space mission is launched to Venus by NASA.
*1964 &ndash; The Walt Disney musical film Mary Poppins is released.
*1971 &ndash; An attempted coup d'tat fails in the African nation of Chad. The Government of Chad accuses Egypt of playing a role in the attempt and breaks off diplomatic relations.
*1975 &ndash; The Governor of Portuguese Timor abandons its capital, Dili, and flees to Atauro Island, leaving control to a rebel group.
*1979 &ndash; A Provisional Irish Republican Army bomb kills British retired admiral Louis Mountbatten and three others while they are boating on holiday in Sligo, Republic of Ireland. Shortly after, 18 British Army soldiers are killed in an ambush near Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland.
*1982 &ndash; Turkish military diplomat Colonel Atilla Altkat is shot and killed in Ottawa, Canada's capital city. Justice Commandos Against Armenian Genocide claim responsibility, saying they are avenging the massacre of 1.5 million Armenians in the 1915 Armenian Genocide.
*1985 &ndash; The Nigerian government is peacefully overthrown by Army Chief of Staff Major General Ibrahim Babangida.
*1991 &ndash; The European Community recognizes the independence of the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
* 1991 &ndash; Moldova declares independence from the USSR.
*1993 &ndash; The Rainbow Bridge, connecting Tokyo's Shibaura and the island of Odaiba, is completed.
*2000 &ndash; The 540 m-tall Ostankino Tower in Moscow catches fire, three people are killed.
*2003 &ndash; Mars makes its closest approach to Earth in nearly 60,000 years, passing 34646418 mi distant.
* 2003 &ndash; The first six-party talks, involving South and North Korea, the United States, China, Japan and Russia, convene to find a peaceful resolution to the security concerns as a result of the North Korean nuclear weapons program.
*2006 &ndash; Comair Flight 5191 crashes on takeoff from Blue Grass Airport in Lexington, Kentucky bound for HartsfieldJackson Atlanta International Airport in Atlanta. Of the passengers and crew, 49 of 50 are confirmed dead in the hours following the crash.
*2009 &ndash; The Burmese military junta and ethnic armies begin three days of violent clashes in the Kokang Special Region.
*2013 &ndash; The riots between two religious communities started at Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.

==Births==
*1407 &ndash; Ashikaga Yoshikazu, Japanese shogun (d. 1425)
*1471 &ndash; George, Duke of Saxony (d. 1539)
*1487 &ndash; Anna of Brandenburg (d. 1514)
*1637 &ndash; Charles Calvert, 3rd Baron Baltimore, English politician, 2nd Proprietor of Maryland (d. 1715)
*1665 &ndash; John Hervey, 1st Earl of Bristol, English politician (d. 1751)
*1669 &ndash; Anne Marie d'Orlans, French wife of Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia (d. 1728)
*1677 &ndash; Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun, Austrian general (d. 1748)
*1724 &ndash; John Joachim Zubly, Swiss-American pastor, planter, and politician (d. 1781)
*1730 &ndash; Johann Georg Hamann, German philosopher (d. 1788)
*1770 &ndash; Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, German philosopher (d. 1831)
*1803 &ndash; Edward Beecher, American theologian (d. 1895)
*1809 &ndash; Hannibal Hamlin, American politician, 15th Vice President of the United States (d. 1891)
*1812 &ndash; Bertalan Szemere, Hungarian poet and politician, 3rd Prime Minister of Hungary (d. 1869)
*1845 &ndash; dn Lechner, Hungarian architect, designed the Museum of Applied Arts and the Church of St. Elisabeth (d. 1914)
* 1845 &ndash; Friedrich Martens, Estonian-Russian historian, lawyer, and diplomat (d. 1909)
*1856 &ndash; Ivan Franko, Ukrainian author and poet (d. 1916)
*1858 &ndash; Giuseppe Peano, Italian mathematician (d. 1932)
*1864 &ndash; Hermann Weingrtner, German gymnast (d. 1919)
*1865 &ndash; James Henry Breasted, American archaeologist and historian (d. 1935)
* 1865 &ndash; Charles G. Dawes, American general and politician, 30th Vice President of the United States, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1951)
*1868 &ndash; Hong Beomdo, Korean activist (d. 1943)
*1870 &ndash; Amado Nervo, Mexican journalist, poet, and diplomat (d. 1919)
*1871 &ndash; Theodore Dreiser, American journalist and author (d. 1945
*1874 &ndash; Carl Bosch, German chemist and engineer, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1940)
*1875 &ndash; Katharine McCormick, American biologist, philanthropist, and activist (d. 1967)
*1877 &ndash; Charles Rolls, English engineer and businessman, co-founded Rolls-Royce Limited (d. 1910)
* 1877 &ndash; Ernst Wetter, Swiss politician (d. 1963)
*1878 &ndash; Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel, Russian general (d. 1928)
*1884 &ndash; Vincent Auriol, French politician, 16th President of the French Republic (d. 1966)
*1886 &ndash; Rebecca Clarke, English viola player and composer (d. 1979)
* 1886 &ndash; Eric Coates, English viola player and composer (d. 1957)
*1887 &ndash; George, Crown Prince of Serbia (d. 1972)
*1890 &ndash; Man Ray, American-French photographer and painter (d. 1976)
*1895 &ndash; Andreas Alfldi, Hungarian archaeologist and historian (d. 1981)
*1896 &ndash; Kenji Miyazawa, Japanese author and poet (d. 1933)
* 1896 &ndash; Faina Ranevskaya, Russian actress (d. 1984)
* 1896 &ndash; Lon Theremin, Russian physicist and engineer, invented the Theremin (d. 1993)
*1898 &ndash; Gaspard Fauteux, Canadian politician, 19th Lieutenant Governor of Quebec (d. 1963)
*1899 &ndash; C. S. Forester, Egyptian-English author (d. 1966)
* 1899 &ndash; Byron Foulger, American actor (d. 1970)
*1903 &ndash; Ferenc Keser, Hungarian water polo player (d. 1968)
* 1903 &ndash; Xavier Villaurrutia, Mexican poet and playwright (d. 1950)
*1904 &ndash; Alar Kotli, Estonian architect (d. 1963)
* 1904 &ndash; Norah Lofts, English author (d. 1983)
* 1904 &ndash; John Hay Whitney, American businessman, publisher, and diplomat, founded J.H. Whitney & Company (d. 1982)
*1905 &ndash; Aris Velouchiotis, Greek military leader (d. 1945)
*1906 &ndash; Ed Gein, American murderer (d. 1984)
*1908 &ndash; Donald Bradman, Australian cricketer (d. 2001)
* 1908 &ndash; Lyndon B. Johnson, American commander and politician, 36th President of the United States (d. 1973)
* 1908 &ndash; Kurt Wegner, German painter (d. 1985)
*1909 &ndash; Sylvre Maes, Belgian cyclist (d. 1966)
* 1909 &ndash; Lester Young, American saxophonist and clarinet player (d. 1959)
*1911 &ndash; Kay Walsh, English actress, singer and dancer (d. 2005)
*1912 &ndash; Gloria Guinness, Mexican journalist (d. 1980)
*1913 &ndash; Nina Schenk Grfin von Stauffenberg, Russian-German wife of Claus von Stauffenberg (d. 2006)
*1914 &ndash; Heidi Kabel, German actress and singer (d. 2010)
*1915 &ndash; Norman Foster Ramsey, Jr., American physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2011)
*1916 &ndash; Tony Harris, South African cricketer (d. 1993)
* 1916 &ndash; Martha Raye, American actress and singer (d. 1994)
* 1916 &ndash; Gordon Bashford, English car design and engineer (d. 1991)
*1917 &ndash; Peanuts Lowrey, American baseball player, coach, and manager (d. 1986)
*1918 &ndash; Jelle Zijlstra, Dutch economist and politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 2001)
*1919 &ndash; Thomas Pee Wee Butts, American baseball player (d. 1972)
* 1919 &ndash; Murray Grand, American singer-songwriter and pianist (d. 2007)
*1921 &ndash; Georg Alexander, Duke of Mecklenburg (d. 1996)
* 1921 &ndash; Leo Penn, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1998)
*1922 &ndash; Roelof Kruisinga, Dutch physician and politician, Minister of Defence for The Netherlands (d. 2012)
*1923 &ndash; Jimmy Greenhalgh, English footballer and manager (d. 2013)
*1924 &ndash; David Rowbotham, Australian journalist and poet (d. 2010)
* 1924 &ndash; Rosalie E. Wahl, American lawyer and jurist (d. 2013)
*1925 &ndash; Andrea Cordero Lanza di Montezemolo, Italian cardinal
* 1925 &ndash; Darry Cowl, French actor and composer (d. 2006)
* 1925 &ndash; Nat Lofthouse, English footballer and manager (d. 2011)
* 1925 &ndash; Saiichi Maruya, Japanese author and critic (d. 2012)
*1926 &ndash; Pat Coombs, English actress (d. 2002)
* 1926 &ndash; Kristen Nygaard, Norwegian computer scientist (d. 2002)
*1927 &ndash; Jimmy C. Newman, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1928 &ndash; Pter Boross, Hungarian politician, 54th Prime Minister of Hungary 
* 1928 &ndash; Mangosuthu Buthelezi, South African politician, Chief Minister of KwaZulu
* 1928 &ndash; Joan Kroc, American philanthropist (d. 2003)
*1929 &ndash; Ira Levin, American author, playwright, and composer (d. 2007)
* 1929 &ndash; George Scott, Canadian-American wrestler (d. 2014)
*1930 &ndash; Gholamreza Takhti, Iranian wrestler (d. 1968)
*1931 &ndash; Sri Chinmoy, Bangladeshi-American guru and poet (d. 2007)
* 1931 &ndash; Joe Cunningham, American baseball player
*1932 &ndash; Cor Brom, Dutch footballer and manager (d. 2008)
* 1932 &ndash; Antonia Fraser, English author
*1933 &ndash; Jen Hmori, Hungarian fencer
* 1933 &ndash; Joke Smit, Dutch activist and politician (d. 1981)
*1935 &ndash; Ernie Broglio, American baseball player
* 1935 &ndash; Frank Yablans, American screenwriter and producer
*1936 &ndash; Joel Kovel, American scholar and politician
*1937 &ndash; Alice Coltrane, American pianist and composer (d. 2007)
* 1937 &ndash; Tommy Sands, American actor and singer
*1939 &ndash; William Least Heat-Moon, American author
* 1939 &ndash; Edward Patten, American singer-songwriter and producer (Gladys Knight & the Pips) (d. 2005)
*1940 &ndash; Sonny Sharrock, American guitarist (Last Exit) (d. 1994)
*1941 &ndash; Cesria vora, Cape Verdean singer (d. 2011)
* 1941 &ndash; Jnos Konrd, Hungarian water polo player and swimmer
* 1941 &ndash; Harrison Page, American actor
*1942 &ndash; Daryl Dragon, American keyboard player and songwriter (Captain & Tennille)
* 1942 &ndash; Brian Peckford, Canadian educator and politician, 3rd Premier of Newfoundland and Labrador
*1943 &ndash; Chuck Girard, American singer-songwriter and pianist (Love Song and The Castells)
* 1943 &ndash; Bob Kerrey, American lieutenant and politician, 35th Governor of Nebraska
* 1943 &ndash; Tuesday Weld, American actress and singer
*1944 &ndash; G.W. Bailey, American actor
* 1944 &ndash; Jan Bols, Dutch speed skater
* 1944 &ndash; Barbara Trentham, American actress (d. 2013)
*1945 &ndash; Jan Sloot, Dutch technician (d. 1999)
*1946 &ndash; Tony Howard, Barbadian cricketer and manager
*1947 &ndash; Barbara Bach, American model and actress
* 1947 &ndash; Peter Krieg, German director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2009)
* 1947 &ndash; John Morrison, New Zealand cricketer and politician
* 1947 &ndash; Gavin Pfuhl, South African cricketer and sportscaster (d. 2002)
* 1947 &ndash; Harry Reems, American porn actor (d. 2013)
*1948 &ndash; John Mehler, American drummer (Love Song)
* 1948 &ndash; Sgt. Slaughter, American wrestler and actor
* 1948 &ndash; Philippe Vallois, French director and screenwriter
*1949 &ndash; Jeff Cook, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Alabama)
*1950 &ndash; Charles Fleischer, American comedian, actor, and singer
* 1950 &ndash; Neil Murray, Scottish bass player and songwriter (Whitesnake, Black Sabbath, Colosseum II, and Gogmagog)
*1951 &ndash; Buddy Bell, American baseball player and manager
* 1951 &ndash; Mack Brown, American football player and coach
* 1951 &ndash; Randall Garrison, American-Canadian criminologist and politician
*1952 &ndash; Paul Reubens, American actor, singer, producer, and screenwriter
*1953 &ndash; Alex Lifeson, Canadian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (Rush and Big Dirty Band)
* 1953 &ndash; Peter Stormare, Swedish actor, director, and playwright 
*1954 &ndash; John Lloyd, English tennis player and sportscaster
* 1954 &ndash; Derek Warwick, English race car driver
*1955 &ndash; Laura Fygi, Dutch singer
* 1955 &ndash; Robert Richardson, American cinematographer
* 1955 &ndash; Diana Scarwid, American actress
*1957 &ndash; Jeff Grubb, American game designer and author
* 1957 &ndash; Bernhard Langer, German golfer
*1958 &ndash; Normand Brathwaite, Canadian comedian and actor
* 1958 &ndash; Stalking Cat, American body modifier (d. 2012)
* 1958 &ndash; Sergei Krikalev, Russian engineer and astronaut 
* 1958 &ndash; Tom Lanoye, Belgian author, poet, and playwright
*1959 &ndash; Gerhard Berger, Austrian race car driver
* 1959 &ndash; Downtown Julie Brown, English television host and actress
* 1959 &ndash; Juan Fernando Cobo, Colombian painter and sculptor 
* 1959 &ndash; Andrs Petcz, Hungarian author and poet
* 1959 &ndash; Jeanette Winterson, English author
* 1959 &ndash; Denice Denton, American engineer and academic (d. 2006)
*1961 &ndash; Yolanda Adams, American singer, producer, and actress
* 1961 &ndash; Mark Curry, English television host and actor
* 1961 &ndash; Tom Ford, American fashion designer, actor, and director
* 1961 &ndash; Mark McConnell, American drummer (Blackfoot, Madam X, and Southern Rock Allstars) (d. 2012)
* 1961 &ndash; Urmas Muru, Estonian architect
* 1961 &ndash; Helmut Winklhofer, German footballer
*1962 &ndash; Vic Mignogna, American voice actor, singer, and director
* 1962 &ndash; Adam Oates, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
*1964 &ndash; Paul Bernardo, Canadian murderer and rapist
* 1964 &ndash; Robert Bogue, American actor
* 1964 &ndash; Stephan Elliott, Australian actor, director, and screenwriter
*1965 &ndash; Scott Dibble, American politician
* 1965 &ndash; Wayne James, Zimbabwean cricketer
* 1965 &ndash; Ange Postecoglou, Greek-Australian footballer and coach
*1966 &ndash; Jeroen Duyster, Dutch rower
* 1966 &ndash; Juhan Parts, Estonian politician, 14th Prime Minister of Estonia
*1967 &ndash; Ogie Alcasid, Filipino singer-songwriter, producer, and actor
*1969 &ndash; Mark Ealham, English cricketer
* 1969 &ndash; Cesar Millan, Mexican-American dog trainer
* 1969 &ndash; Reece Shearsmith, English actor, producer, and screenwriter
* 1969 &ndash; Chandra Wilson, American actress and director
*1970 &ndash; Andy Bichel, Australian cricketer and coach
* 1970 &ndash; Peter Ebdon, English snooker player
* 1970 &ndash; Mark Ilott, English cricketer
* 1970 &ndash; Tony Kanal, English-American bass player, songwriter, and producer (No Doubt)
* 1970 &ndash; Jeff Kenna, Irish footballer and manager
* 1970 &ndash; Park Myeong-su, South Korean singer-songwriter and television host
* 1970 &ndash; Jim Thome, American baseball player and manager
* 1970 &ndash; Karl Unterkircher, Italian mountaineer (d. 2008)
*1971 &ndash; Julian Cheung, Hong Kong actor and singer
* 1971 &ndash; Ernest Faber, Dutch footballer and manager
* 1971 &ndash; Aygl zkan, German politician
*1972 &ndash; Jaap-Derk Buma, Dutch field hockey player
* 1972 &ndash; Felix da Housecat, American DJ and producer
* 1972 &ndash; The Great Khali, Indian wrestler and actor
* 1972 &ndash; Denise Lewis, English heptathlete
* 1972 &ndash; Jimmy Pop, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Bloodhound Gang)
*1973 &ndash; Jazz, American wrestler
* 1973 &ndash; Cory Bowles, Canadian actor, singer, and choreographer
* 1973 &ndash; Danny Coyne, Welsh footballer
* 1973 &ndash; Dietmar Hamann, German footballer and manager
* 1973 &ndash; Burak Kut, Turkish singer-songwriter
* 1973 &ndash; Johan Norberg, Swedish historian and author
*1974 &ndash; Michael Mason, New Zealand cricketer
* 1974 &ndash; Jos Vidro, Puerto Rican baseball player
* 1974 &ndash; Mohammad Yousuf, Pakistani cricketer
*1975 &ndash; Blake Adams, American golfer
* 1975 &ndash; Bjrn Gelotte, Swedish guitarist and songwriter (In Flames and All Ends)
* 1975 &ndash; Jonny Moseley, American skier
* 1975 &ndash; Mark Rudan, Australian footballer and manager
*1976 &ndash; Sarah Chalke, Canadian actress
* 1976 &ndash; Milano Collection A.T., Japanese wrestler
* 1976 &ndash; Carlos Moy, Spanish tennis player
* 1976 &ndash; Mark Webber, Australian race car driver
*1977 &ndash; Deco, Brazilian-Portuguese footballer
* 1977 &ndash; Justin Miller, American baseball player (d. 2013)
*1979 &ndash; Giovanni Capitello, American actor and director
* 1979 &ndash; Tian Liang, Chinese diver
* 1979 &ndash; Sarah Neufeld, Canadian violinist (Arcade Fire and Bell Orchestre)
* 1979 &ndash; Aaron Paul, American actor
* 1979 &ndash; Rusty Smith, American speed skater 
*1980 &ndash; Neha Dhupia, Indian model and actress
* 1980 &ndash; Kyle Lowder, American actor
*1981 &ndash; Patrick J. Adams, Canadian actor and producer
* 1981 &ndash; Maxwell Cabelino Andrade, Spanish footballer
* 1981 &ndash; Alessandro Gamberini, Italian footballer
*1982 &ndash; Damien Monier, French cyclist
*1983 &ndash; Bolin Chen, Taiwanese actor
*1984 &ndash; David Bentley, English footballer
* 1984 &ndash; Sulley Muntari, Ghanaian footballer
*1985 &ndash; Kevan Hurst, English footballer
* 1985 &ndash; Nikica Jelavi, Croatian footballer
* 1985 &ndash; Daniel Kblbck, German singer and actor
* 1985 &ndash; Alexandra Nechita, Romanian-American painter
*1986 &ndash; Mario, American singer-songwriter, dancer, and actor
* 1986 &ndash; Nabil El Zhar, French-Moroccan footballer
*1987 &ndash; Darren McFadden, American football player
*1988 &ndash; Alexa Vega, American actress and singer
*1989 &ndash; Juliana Cannarozzo, American figure skater and actress
* 1989 &ndash; Romain Amalfitano, French footballer
*1990 &ndash; Luuk de Jong, Dutch footballer
*1991 &ndash; Rikiya Otaka, Japanese actor
*1992 &ndash; Kim Petras, German singer-songwriter
*1993 &ndash; Sarah Hecken, German figure skater
*1995 &ndash; Cainan Wiebe, Canadian actor 

==Deaths==
* 542 &ndash; Caesarius of Arles, French bishop and saint (b. 470)
* 749 &ndash; Qahtaba ibn Shabib al-Ta'i, Khorasan general
* 827 &ndash; Pope Eugene II
*1312 &ndash; Arthur II, Duke of Brittany (b. 1261)
*1394 &ndash; Emperor Chkei of Japan (b. 1343)
*1450 &ndash; Reginald West, 6th Baron De La Warr, English politician (b. 1395)
*1521 &ndash; Josquin des Prez, Flemish composer (b. 1450)
*1545 &ndash; Piotr Gamrat, Polish archbishop (b. 1487)
*1577 &ndash; Titian, Italian painter (b. 1488)
*1590 &ndash; Pope Sixtus V (b. 1521)
*1635 &ndash; Lope de Vega, Spanish poet and playwright (b. 1562)
*1664 &ndash; Francisco de Zurbarn, Spanish painter (b. 1598)
*1748 &ndash; James Thomson, Scottish poet and playwright (b. 1700)
*1773 &ndash; Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz, Prussian general (b. 1721)
*1828 &ndash; Eise Eisinga, Dutch astronomer, built the Eisinga Planetarium (b. 1744)
*1857 &ndash; Rufus Wilmot Griswold, American anthologist, poet, and critic (b. 1815)
*1865 &ndash; Thomas Chandler Haliburton, Canadian judge and politician (b. 1796)
*1871 &ndash; William Whiting Boardman, American politician (b. 1794)
*1875 &ndash; William Chapman Ralston, American businessman and financier, founded the Bank of California (b. 1826)
*1891 &ndash; Samuel C. Pomeroy, American politician and railroad executive (b. 1816)
*1909 &ndash; Emil Christian Hansen, Danish physiologist and mycologist (b. 1842)
*1929 &ndash; Herman Potonik, Croatian-Austrian engineer (b. 1892)
*1931 &ndash; Frank Harris, Irish-American journalist and author (b. 1856)
* 1931 &ndash; Willem Hubert Nolens, Dutch priest and politician (b. 1860)
* 1931 &ndash; Francis Marion Smith, American miner and businessman (b. 1846)
*1934 &ndash; Linda Agostini, Australian murder victim (b. 1905)
*1944 &ndash; Georg von Boeselager, German soldier (b. 1915)
*1945 &ndash; Hubert Pl lgyay, Hungarian engineer, designed the Petfi Bridge (b. 1894)
*1948 &ndash; Charles Evans Hughes, American lawyer and politician, 11th Chief Justice of the United States (b. 1862)
*1950 &ndash; Cesare Pavese, Italian author, poet, and critic (b. 1908)
*1958 &ndash; Ernest Lawrence, American physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1901)
*1961 &ndash; Klmn Rzsahegyi, Hungarian actor and educator (b. 1873)
*1963 &ndash; W. E. B. Du Bois, American sociologist, historian, and activist (b. 1868)
* 1963 &ndash; Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi, Pakistani mathematician and scholar (b. 1888)
*1964 &ndash; Gracie Allen, American actress and singer (b. 1895)
*1965 &ndash; Le Corbusier, Swiss-French architect, designed the Philips Pavilion (b. 1887)
*1967 &ndash; Brian Epstein, English businessman and manager (b. 1934)
*1968 &ndash; Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark (b. 1906)
*1969 &ndash; Ivy Compton-Burnett, English author (b. 1884)
* 1969 &ndash; Erika Mann, German actress and author (b. 1905)
*1971 &ndash; Bennett Cerf, American publisher, co-founded Random House (b. 1898)
* 1971 &ndash; Margaret Bourke-White, American photographer and journalist (b. 1906)
*1975 &ndash; Haile Selassie I, Ethiopian emperor (b. 1892)
*1976 &ndash; Mukesh, Indian singer (b. 1923)
*1978 &ndash; Ieva Simonaityt, Lithuanian writer (b. 1897)
*1979 &ndash; Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma, English admiral and politician, 44th Governor-General of India (b. 1900)
*1980 &ndash; Douglas Kenney, American actor, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1947)
*1981 &ndash; Valeri Kharlamov, Russian ice hockey player (b. 1948)
*1983 &ndash; Harry A. deButts, American railroad executive
*1984 &ndash; Bernard Youens, English actor (b. 1914)
*1987 &ndash; Scott La Rock, American DJ and producer (Boogie Down Productions) (b. 1962)
*1988 &ndash; Mario Montenegro, Filipino actor (b. 1928)
* 1988 &ndash; William Sargant, English psychiatrist (b. 1907)
*1990 &ndash; Avdy Andresson, Estonian diplomat (b. 1899)
* 1990 &ndash; Stevie Ray Vaughan, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1954)
*1994 &ndash; Frank Jeske, German footballer (b. 1960)
* 1994 &ndash; Boris Malenko, American wrestler (b. 1933)
*1996 &ndash; Greg Morris, American actor (b. 1933)
*1997 &ndash; Sotiria Bellou, Greek singer (b. 1921)
*1998 &ndash; Essie Summers, New Zealand author (b. 1912)
*1999 &ndash; Hlder Cmara, Brazilian archbishop (b. 1909)
*2001 &ndash; Michael Dertouzos, Greek-American academic (b. 1936)
* 2001 &ndash; Abu Ali Mustafa, Palestinian leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (b. 1938)
*2002 &ndash; Edwin Louis Cole, American religious leader and author (b. 1922)
*2003 &ndash; Peter-Paul Pigmans, Dutch record producer (b. 1961)
* 2003 &ndash; Pierre Poujade, French politician (b. 1920)
*2004 &ndash; Willie Crawford, American baseball player (b. 1946)
*2005 &ndash; Giorgos Mouzakis, Greek trumpet player and composer (b. 1922)
* 2005 &ndash; Sen Purcell, Irish footballer (b. 1929)
*2006 &ndash; Mara Capovilla, Ecuadorian super-centenarian (b. 1889)
* 2006 &ndash; Hrishikesh Mukherjee, Indian director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1922)
* 2006 &ndash; Jesse Pintado, Mexican-American guitarist (Napalm Death, Terrorizer, Brujeria, and Lock Up) (b. 1969)
*2007 &ndash; Emma Penella, Spanish actress (b. 1930)
*2008 &ndash; Mark Priestley, Australian actor (b. 1970)
*2009 &ndash; Abdullah al-Asiri, Saudi Arabian terrorist (b. 1986)
* 2009 &ndash; Sergey Mikhalkov, Russian author and poet (b. 1913)
*2010 &ndash; Anton Geesink, Dutch martial artist (b. 1934)
* 2010 &ndash; Luna Vachon, Canadian-American wrestler (b. 1962)
*2012 &ndash; Neville Alexander, South African linguist and activist (b. 1936)
* 2012 &ndash; Aurora Bautista, Spanish actress (b. 1925)
* 2012 &ndash; Malcolm Browne, American journalist and photographer (b. 1931)
* 2012 &ndash; Art Heyman, American basketball player (b. 1941)
* 2012 &ndash; Ivica Horvat, Croatian footballer and manager (b. 1926)
* 2012 &ndash; Richard Kingsland, Australian captain and pilot (b. 1916)
* 2012 &ndash; Gely Korzhev, Russian painter (b. 1925)
* 2012 &ndash; Antoine Redin, French footballer and manager (b. 1934)
* 2012 &ndash; Aboud Rogo, Kenyan cleric (b. 1968)
* 2012 &ndash; Russell Scott, American clown (b. 1921)
* 2012 &ndash; Tao Wei, Chinese footballer and sportscaster (b. 1966)
*2013 &ndash; Helene Brandt, American sculptor (b. 1936)
* 2013 &ndash; Kent Finell, Swedish radio host (b. 1944)
* 2013 &ndash; Maxwell Fuller, Australian chess player (b. 1945)
* 2013 &ndash; Chris Kennedy, Australian director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1948)
* 2013 &ndash; Zoltn Kovcs, Hungarian footballer (b. 1986)
* 2013 &ndash; Chen Liting, Chinese director and playwright (b. 1910)
* 2013 &ndash; Anatoly Onoprienko, Ukrainian murderer (b. 1959)
* 2013 &ndash; Bill Peach, Australian journalist (b. 1935)
* 2013 &ndash; Hctor Sanabria, Argentinian footballer (b. 1985)
* 2013 &ndash; Dave Thomas, Welsh golfer (b. 1934)

==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Baculus of Sorrento
**Caesarius of Arles
**Margaret the Barefooted
**Monica of Hippo, mother of Augustine of Hippo
**Phanourios of Rhodes
**Rufus and Carpophorus
**Thomas Gallaudet and Henry Winter Syle (Episcopal Church (USA))
**August 27 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

*Independence Day, celebrates the independence of Moldova from the USSR in 1991.
*Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (Texas)
*Volturnalia, held in honor of Volturnus. (Roman Empire)

==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* 
* On This Day in Canada



[[Alcohol]]

Ball-and-stick model of the hydroxyl (-OH) functional group in an alcohol molecule (R3COH). The three "R's" stand for carbon substituents or hydrogen atoms. 

The hydroxyl (-OH) functional group with bond angle.
 
In chemistry, an alcohol is an organic compound in which the hydroxyl functional group (-OH) is bound to a carbon atom. In particular, this carbon center should be saturated, having single bonds to three other atoms. 

An important class of alcohols are the simple acyclic alcohols, the general formula for which is CnH2n+1OH. Of these ethanol (C2H5OH) is the alcohol found in alcoholic beverages; in common speech the word alcohol refers to ethanol.

Other alcohols are usually described with a clarifying adjective, as in isopropyl alcohol (propan-2-ol) or wood alcohol (methyl alcohol, or methanol). The suffix -ol appears in the IUPAC chemical name of all substances where the hydroxyl group is the functional group with the highest priority; in substances where a higher priority group is present the prefix hydroxy- will appear in the IUPAC name. The suffix -ol in non-systematic names (such as paracetamol or cholesterol) also typically indicates that the substance includes a hydroxyl functional group and, so, can be termed an alcohol. But many substances, particularly sugars (examples glucose and sucrose) contain hydroxyl functional groups without using the suffix.

In everyday life "alcohol" without qualification usually refers to ethanol, or a beverage based on ethanol (as in the term "alcohol abuse").

==Occurrence in nature==
Alcohol has been found outside the Solar System. It can be found in low densities in star and planetary-system-forming regions of space. 

===Human metabolites===

Studies have found trace quantities of endogenous alcohols of healthy volunteers from exhaled breath with a mean of 450 ppb methanol http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16705261 and 244 ppb ethanol. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16312013 Fruit consumption is a source of endogenous methanol metabolized from pectin; One kilos of apple produces a mean of to 4.5 gram methanol. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9267548 However, methanol should never consumed on its own as it is poisonous to the central nervous system, and may cause blindness, coma, and death. These studies are not guidelines that intentional external consumptions of alcohols are healthy in quantities.

==Toxicity==

Ball-and-stick model of tert-Amyl alcohol, which is 20 times more intoxicating than ethanol and like all tertiary alcohols, cannot be metabolised to toxic aldehydes. 
Most significant of the possible long-term effects of ethanol. In addition, in pregnant women, it causes fetal alcohol syndrome.

Alcoholic beverages have been consumed by humans since prehistoric times for a variety of hygienic, dietary, medicinal, religious, and recreational reasons.

Primary alcohols (R-CH2-OH) can be oxidized either to aldehydes (R-CHO) (e.g. acetaldehyde) or to carboxylic acids (R-CO2H), while the oxidation of secondary alcohols (R1R2CH-OH) normally terminates at the ketone (R1R2C=O) stage. Tertiary alcohols (R1R2R3C-OH) are resistant to oxidation.

Ethanol's toxicity is largely caused by its primary metabolite, acetaldehyde (systematically ethanal) and secondary metabolite, acetic acid. All primary alcohols are broken down into aldehydes then to carboxylic acids whose toxicities are similar to acetaldehyde and acetic acid. Metabolite toxicity is reduced in rats fed N-acetylcysteine and thiamine. 

Tertiary alcohols cannot be metabolized into aldehydes and as a result they cause no hangover or toxicity through this mechanism.

Some secondary and tertiary alcohols are less poisonous than ethanol because the liver is unable to metabolize them into toxic by-products. This makes them more suitable for recreational and medicinal use as the chronic harms are lower. Ethchlorvynol and tert-Amyl alcohol are good examples of tertiary alcohols which saw both medicinal and recreational use. 

Other alcohols are substantially more poisonous than ethanol, partly because they take much longer to be metabolized and partly because their metabolism produces substances that are even more toxic. Methanol (wood alcohol), for instance, is oxidized to formaldehyde and then to the poisonous formic acid in the liver by alcohol dehydrogenase and formaldehyde dehydrogenase enzymes, respectively; accumulation of formic acid can lead to blindness or death. Likewise, poisoning due to other alcohols such as ethylene glycol or diethylene glycol are due to their metabolites, which are also produced by alcohol dehydrogenase. 

Methanol itself, while poisonous (LD50 5628 mg/kg, oral, rat ChemIDplus Advanced - Chemical information with searchable synonyms, structures, and formulas ), has a much weaker sedative effect than ethanol.

Isopropyl alcohol is oxidized to form acetone by alcohol dehydrogenase in the liver but has occasionally been abused by alcoholics, leading to a range of adverse health effects. 

===Treatment===
An effective treatment to prevent toxicity after methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion is to administer ethanol. Alcohol dehydrogenase has a higher affinity for ethanol, thus preventing methanol from binding and acting as a substrate. Any remaining methanol will then have time to be excreted through the kidneys. 

==Nomenclature==

===Systematic names===
In the IUPAC system, the name of the alkane chain loses the terminal "e" and adds "ol", e.g., "methanol" and "ethanol". When necessary, the position of the hydroxyl group is indicated by a number between the alkane name and the "ol": propan-1-ol for CH3CH2CH2OH, propan-2-ol for CH3CH(OH)CH3. Sometimes, the position number is written before the IUPAC name: 1-propanol and 2-propanol. If a higher priority group is present (such as an aldehyde, ketone, or carboxylic acid), then it is necessary to use the prefix "hydroxy", for example: 1-hydroxy-2-propanone (CH3COCH2OH). Organic chemistry IUPAC nomenclature. Alcohols Rule C-201. 

The IUPAC nomenclature is used in scientific publications and where precise identification of the substance is important. In other less formal contexts, an alcohol is often called with the name of the corresponding alkyl group followed by the word "alcohol", e.g., methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol. Propyl alcohol may be n-propyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol, depending on whether the hydroxyl group is bonded to the 1st or 2nd carbon on the propane chain.

Alcohols are classified into 0, primary (1), secondary (2; also italic abbreviated sec- or just s-), and tertiary (3; also italic abbreviated tert- or just t-), based upon the number of carbon atoms connected to the carbon atom that bears the hydroxyl (OH) functional group. The primary alcohols have general formulas RCH2OH; secondary ones are RR'CHOH; and tertiary ones are RR'R"COH, where R, R', and R" stand for alkyl groups. Methanol (C H3O H or CH4O) is a 0 alcohol. Some sources include methanol as a primary alcohol, including the 1911 edition of the Encyclopdia Britannica, but this interpretation is less common in modern texts.

Some examples of simple alcohols and how to name them

===Common names===

 Chemical Formula IUPAC Name Common Name 
 Monohydric alcohols 
 CH3OH Methanol Wood alcohol 
 C2H5OH Ethanol Alcohol 
 C3H7OH Isopropyl alcohol Rubbing alcohol 
 C4H9OH Butyl alcohol Butanol 
 C5H11OH Pentanol Amyl alcohol 
 C16H33OH Hexadecan-1-ol Cetyl alcohol 
 Polyhydric alcohols 
 C2H4(OH)2 Ethane-1,2-diol Ethylene glycol 
 C3H6(OH)2 Propane-1,2-diol Propylene Glycol 
 C3H5(OH)3 Propane-1,2,3-triol Glycerol 
 C4H6(OH)4 Butane-1,2,3,4-tetraol Erythritol, Threitol 
 C5H7(OH)5 Pentane-1,2,3,4,5-pentol Xylitol 
 C6H8(OH)6 Hexane-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexol Mannitol, Sorbitol 
 C7H9(OH)7 Heptane-1,2,3,4,5,6,7-heptol Volemitol 
 Unsaturated aliphatic alcohols 
 C3H5OH Prop-2-ene-1-ol Allyl alcohol 
 C10H17OH 3,7-Dimethylocta-2,6-dien-1-ol Geraniol 
 C3H3OH Prop-2-in-1-ol Propargyl alcohol 
 Alicyclic alcohols 
 C6H6(OH)6 Cyclohexane-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexol Inositol 
 C10H19OH 2 - (2-propyl)-5-methyl-cyclohexane-1-ol Menthol 

====Alkyl chain variations in alcohols====
Short-chain alcohols have alkyl chains of 1-3 carbons. Medium-chain alcohols have alkyl chains of 4-7 carbons. Long-chain alcohols (also known as fatty alcohols) have alkyl chains of 8-21 carbons, and very long-chain alcohols have alkyl chains of 22 carbons or longer. 

====Simple alcohols====
"Simple alcohols" appears to be a completely undefined term. However, simple alcohols are often referred to by common names derived by adding the word "alcohol" to the name of the appropriate alkyl group. For instance, a chain consisting of one carbon (a methyl group, CH3) with an OH group attached to the carbon is called "methyl alcohol" while a chain of two carbons (an ethyl group, CH2CH3) with an OH group connected to the CH2 is called "ethyl alcohol." For more complex alcohols, the IUPAC nomenclature must be used. 

Simple alcohols, in particular ethanol and methanol, possess denaturing and inert rendering properties, leading to their use as anti-microbial agents in medicine, pharmacy, and industry.

====Higher alcohols====
Encyclopdia Britannica states, "The higher alcohols - those containing 4 to 10 carbon atoms  are somewhat viscous, or oily, and they have heavier fruity odours. Some of the highly branched alcohols and many alcohols containing more than 12 carbon atoms are solids at room temperature." 

Like ethanol, butanol can be produced by fermentation processes. (However, the fermenting agent is a bacterium, Clostridium acetobutylicum, that feeds on cellulose, not sugars like the Saccharomyces yeast that produces ethanol.) Saccharomyces yeast are known to produce these higher alcohols at temperatures above 75 F.

===History and etymology===
The word alcohol appears in English as a term for a very fine powder in the 16th century. It was borrowed from French, which took it from medical Latin.

Ultimately the word is from the Arabic (, "kohl, a powder used as an eyeliner"). Al- is the Arabic definitive article, equivalent to the in English; alcohol was originally used for the very fine powder produced by the sublimation of the natural mineral stibnite to form antimony sulfide Sb2S3 (hence the essence or "spirit" of the substance), which was used as an antiseptic, eyeliner, and cosmetic (see kohl (cosmetics)). Bartholomew Traheron, in his 1543 translation of John of Vigo, introduces the word as a term used by "barbarous" (Moorish) authors for "fine powder." Vigo wrote:
the barbarous auctours use alcohol, or (as I fynde it sometymes wryten) alcofoll, for moost fine poudre.

The 1657 Lexicon Chymicum by William Johnson glosses the word as antimonium sive stibium. By extension, the word came to refer to any fluid obtained by distillation, including "alcohol of wine," the distilled essence of wine. Libavius in Alchymia (1594) refers to vini alcohol vel vinum alcalisatum. Johnson (1657) glosses alcohol vini as quando omnis superfluitas vini a vino separatur, ita ut accensum ardeat donec totum consumatur, nihilque fcum aut phlegmatis in fundo remaneat. The word's meaning became restricted to "spirit of wine" (the chemical known today as ethanol) in the 18th century and was extended to the class of substances so-called as "alcohols" in modern chemistry after 1850.

The first alcohol (today known as ethyl alcohol) was discovered by the tenth-century Persian alchemist al-Razi.
The current Arabic name for alcohol (ethanol) is  al-awl  properly meaning "spirit" or "demon"  with the sense "the thing that gives the wine its headiness" (in the Qur'an sura 37 verse 47). 
The term ethanol was invented 1838, modeled on the German word thyl (Liebig), which is in turn based on Greek aither ether and hyle "stuff." 

==Physical and chemical properties==
Alcohols have an odor that is often described as biting and as hanging in the nasal passages. Ethanol has a slightly sweeter (or more fruit-like) odor than the other alcohols.

In general, the hydroxyl group makes the alcohol molecule polar. Those groups can form hydrogen bonds to one another and to other compounds (except in certain large molecules where the hydroxyl is protected by steric hindrance of adjacent groups 
 ). This hydrogen bonding means that alcohols can be used as protic solvents. Two opposing solubility trends in alcohols are: the tendency of the polar OH to promote solubility in water, and the tendency of the carbon chain to resist it. Thus, methanol, ethanol, and propanol are miscible in water because the hydroxyl group wins out over the short carbon chain. Butanol, with a four-carbon chain, is moderately soluble because of a balance between the two trends. Alcohols of five or more carbons (pentanol and higher) are effectively insoluble in water because of the hydrocarbon chain's dominance. All simple alcohols are miscible in organic solvents.

Because of hydrogen bonding, alcohols tend to have higher boiling points than comparable hydrocarbons and ethers. The boiling point of the alcohol ethanol is 78.29 C, compared to 69 C for the hydrocarbon hexane (a common constituent of gasoline), and 34.6 C for diethyl ether.

Alcohols, like water, can show either acidic or basic properties at the -OH group. With a pKa of around 16-19, they are, in general, slightly weaker acids than water, but they are still able to react with strong bases such as sodium hydride or reactive metals such as sodium. The salts that result are called alkoxides, with the general formula RO- M+.

Meanwhile, the oxygen atom has lone pairs of nonbonded electrons that render it weakly basic in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid. For example, with methanol:

Acidity & basicity of methanol

Alcohols can also undergo oxidation to give aldehydes, ketones, or carboxylic acids, or they can be dehydrated to alkenes. They can react to form ester compounds, and they can (if activated first) undergo nucleophilic substitution reactions. The lone pairs of electrons on the oxygen of the hydroxyl group also makes alcohols nucleophiles. For more details, see the reactions of alcohols section below.

As one moves from primary to secondary to tertiary alcohols with the same backbone, the hydrogen bond strength, the boiling point, and the acidity typically decrease.

==Applications==
Total recorded alcohol per capita consumption (15+), in litres of pure alcohol 
Alcohol has a long history of several uses worldwide. It is found in beverages for adults, as fuel, and also has many scientific, medical, and industrial uses. The term alcohol-free is often used to describe a product that does not contain alcohol. Some consumers of some commercially prepared products may view alcohol as an undesirable ingredient, particularly in products intended for children.

===Alcoholic beverages===
Alcoholic beverages, typically containing 1&ndash;50% ethanol by volume, have been produced and consumed by humans since pre-historic times. Other alcohols such as 2-methyl-2-butanol and -hydroxybutyric acid are also consumed by humans for their psychoactive effects.

===Antifreeze===
A 50% v/v (by volume) solution of ethylene glycol in water is commonly used as an antifreeze.

===Antiseptics===
Ethanol can be used as an antiseptic to disinfect the skin before injections are given, often along with iodine. Ethanol-based soaps are becoming common in restaurants and are convenient because they do not require drying due to the volatility of the compound. Alcohol based gels have become common as hand sanitizers.

===Fuels===
Some alcohols, mainly ethanol and methanol, can be used as an alcohol fuel. Fuel performance can be increased in forced induction internal combustion engines by injecting alcohol into the air intake after the turbocharger or supercharger has pressurized the air. This cools the pressurized air, providing a denser air charge, which allows for more fuel, and therefore more power.

===Preservative===
Alcohol is often used as a preservative for specimens in the fields of science and medicine.

===Solvents===
Hydroxyl groups (-OH), found in alcohols, are polar and therefore hydrophilic (water loving) but their carbon chain portion is non-polar which make them hydrophobic. The molecule increasingly becomes overall more nonpolar and therefore less soluble in the polar water as the carbon chain becomes longer. Methanol has the shortest carbon chain of all alcohols (one carbon atom) followed by ethanol (two carbon atoms.)

Alcohols have applications in industry and science as reagents or solvents. Because of its relatively low toxicity compared with other alcohols and ability to dissolve non-polar substances, ethanol can be used as a solvent in medical drugs, perfumes, and vegetable essences such as vanilla. In organic synthesis, alcohols serve as versatile intermediates.

==Production==

===Ziegler and Oxo Processes===
In the Ziegler process, linear alcohols are produced from ethylene and triethylaluminium followed by oxidation and hydrolysis. Jrgen Falbe, Helmut Bahrmann, Wolfgang Lipps, Dieter Mayer "Alcohols, Aliphatic" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology Wiley-VCH Verlag; Weinheim, 2002. An idealized synthesis of 1-octanol is shown:
:Al(C2H5)3 + 9 C2H4  Al(C8H17)3
:Al(C8H17)3 + 3 O + 3 H2O  3 HOC8H17 + Al(OH)3
The process generates a range of alcohols that are separated by distillation.

Many higher alcohols are produced by hydroformylation of alkenes followed by hydrogenation. When applied to a terminal alkene, as is common, one typically obtains a linear alcohol: 
:RCH=CH2 + H2 + CO  RCH2CH2CHO
:RCH2CH2CHO + 3 H2  RCH2CH2CH2OH
Such processes give fatty alcohols, which are useful for detergents.

===Hydration reactions===
Low molecular weight alcohols of industrial importance are produced by the addition of water to alkenes. Ethanol, isopropanol, 2-butanol, and tert-butanol are produced by this general method. Two implementations are employed, the direct and indirect methods. The direct method avoids the formation of stable intermediates, typically using acid catalysts. In the indirect method, the alkene is converted to the sulfate ester, which is subsequently hydrolyzed. The direct hydration using ethylene (ethylene hydration) or other alkenes from cracking of fractions of distilled crude oil.

Hydration is also used industrially to produce the diol ethylene glycol from ethylene oxide.

===Biological routes===
Ethanol is obtained by fermentation using glucose produced from sugar from the hydrolysis of starch, in the presence of yeast and temperature of less than 37 C to produce ethanol. For instance, such a process might proceed by the conversion of sucrose by the enzyme invertase into glucose and fructose, then the conversion of glucose by the enzyme zymase into ethanol (and carbon dioxide).

Several of the benign bacteria in the intestine use fermentation as a form of anaerobic metabolism. This metabolic reaction produces ethanol as a waste product, just like aerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide and water. Thus, human bodies contain some quantity of alcohol endogenously produced by these bacteria. In rare cases, this can be sufficient to cause "auto-brewery syndrome" in which intoxicating quantities of alcohol are produced. 

===Laboratory synthesis===
Several methods exist for the preparation of alcohols in the laboratory.

====Substitution====
Primary alkyl halides react with aqueous NaOH or KOH mainly to primary alcohols in nucleophilic aliphatic substitution. (Secondary and especially tertiary alkyl halides will give the elimination (alkene) product instead). Grignard reagents react with carbonyl groups to secondary and tertiary alcohols. Related reactions are the Barbier reaction and the Nozaki-Hiyama reaction.

====Reduction====
Aldehydes or ketones are reduced with sodium borohydride or lithium aluminium hydride (after an acidic workup). Another reduction by aluminiumisopropylates is the Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley reduction. Noyori asymmetric hydrogenation is the asymmetric reduction of -keto-esters.

====Hydrolysis====
Alkenes engage in an acid catalysed hydration reaction using concentrated sulfuric acid as a catalyst that gives usually secondary or tertiary alcohols. The hydroboration-oxidation and oxymercuration-reduction of alkenes are more reliable in organic synthesis. Alkenes react with NBS and water in halohydrin formation reaction. Amines can be converted to diazonium salts, which are then hydrolyzed.

The formation of a secondary alcohol via reduction and hydration is shown:
:Preparation of a secondary alcohol

==Reactions==

===Deprotonation===
Alcohols can behave as weak acids, undergoing deprotonation. The deprotonation reaction to produce an alkoxide salt is performed either with a strong base such as sodium hydride or n-butyllithium or with sodium or potassium metal.

: 2 R-OH + 2 NaH  2 R-O-Na+ + 2H2

: 2 R-OH + 2 Na  2 R-ONa+ + H2

: 2 CH3CH2-OH + 2 Na  2 CH3-CH2-O-Na+ + H2

Water is similar in pKa to many alcohols, so with sodium hydroxide there is an equilibrium set-up, which usually lies to the left:

: R-OH + NaOH  R-O-Na+ + H2O (equilibrium to the left)

It should be noted, however, that the bases used to deprotonate alcohols are strong themselves. The bases used and the alkoxides created are both highly moisture-sensitive chemical reagents.

The acidity of alcohols is also affected by the overall stability of the alkoxide ion. Electron-withdrawing groups attached to the carbon containing the hydroxyl group will serve to stabilize the alkoxide when formed, thus resulting in greater acidity. On the other hand, the presence of electron-donating group will result in a less stable alkoxide ion formed. This will result in a scenario whereby the unstable alkoxide ion formed will tend to accept a proton to reform the original alcohol.

With alkyl halides alkoxides give rise to ethers in the Williamson ether synthesis.

===Nucleophilic substitution===
The OH group is not a good leaving group in nucleophilic substitution reactions, so neutral alcohols do not react in such reactions. However, if the oxygen is first protonated to give ROH2+, the leaving group (water) is much more stable, and the nucleophilic substitution can take place. For instance, tertiary alcohols react with hydrochloric acid to produce tertiary alkyl halides, where the hydroxyl group is replaced by a chlorine atom by unimolecular nucleophilic substitution. If primary or secondary alcohols are to be reacted with hydrochloric acid, an activator such as zinc chloride is needed. In alternative fashion, the conversion may be performed directly using thionyl chloride.

Some simple conversions of alcohols to alkyl chlorides

Alcohols may, likewise, be converted to alkyl bromides using hydrobromic acid or phosphorus tribromide, for example:

: 3 R-OH + PBr3  3 RBr + H3PO3

In the Barton-McCombie deoxygenation an alcohol is deoxygenated to an alkane with tributyltin hydride or a trimethylborane-water complex in a radical substitution reaction.

===Dehydration===
Alcohols are themselves nucleophilic, so ROH2+ can react with ROH to produce ethers and water in a dehydration reaction, although this reaction is rarely used except in the manufacture of diethyl ether.

More useful is the E1 elimination reaction of alcohols to produce alkenes. The reaction, in general, obeys Zaitsev's Rule, which states that the most stable (usually the most substituted) alkene is formed. Tertiary alcohols eliminate easily at just above room temperature, but primary alcohols require a higher temperature.

This is a diagram of acid catalysed dehydration of ethanol to produce ethene:

550px

A more controlled elimination reaction is the Chugaev elimination with carbon disulfide and iodomethane.

===Esterification===
To form an ester from an alcohol and a carboxylic acid the reaction, known as Fischer esterification, is usually performed at reflux with a catalyst of concentrated sulfuric acid:

: R-OH + R'-COOH  R'-COOR + H2O

In order to drive the equilibrium to the right and produce a good yield of ester, water is usually removed, either by an excess of H2SO4 or by using a Dean-Stark apparatus. Esters may also be prepared by reaction of the alcohol with an acid chloride in the presence of a base such as pyridine.

Other types of ester are prepared in a similar manner  for example, tosyl (tosylate) esters are made by reaction of the alcohol with p-toluenesulfonyl chloride in pyridine.

===Oxidation===

Primary alcohols (R-CH2-OH) can be oxidized either to aldehydes (R-CHO) or to carboxylic acids (R-CO2H), while the oxidation of secondary alcohols (R1R2CH-OH) normally terminates at the ketone (R1R2C=O) stage. Tertiary alcohols (R1R2R3C-OH) are resistant to oxidation.

The direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids normally proceeds via the corresponding aldehyde, which is transformed via an aldehyde hydrate (R-CH(OH)2) by reaction with water before it can be further oxidized to the carboxylic acid.

Mechanism of oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids via aldehydes and aldehyde hydrates

Reagents useful for the transformation of primary alcohols to aldehydes are normally also suitable for the oxidation of secondary alcohols to ketones. These include Collins reagent and Dess-Martin periodinane. The direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids can be carried out using potassium permanganate or the Jones reagent.

==See also==

* Blood alcohol content
* Breathalyzer
* Cooking with alcohol
* Enol
* Ethanol fuel
* Fatty alcohol
* History of alcoholic beverages
* List of countries by alcohol consumption
* 2-Methyl-2-butanol
* Phenols
* Polyol
* Rubbing alcohol
* Sugar alcohol
* Surrogate alcohol
* Transesterification

== Notes ==

== References ==
* 

== External links ==

* Alcohol (Ethanol) at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)

*



[[Achill Island]]

Achill Island (; ) in County Mayo is the largest island off the coast of Ireland, and is situated off the west coast. It has a population of 2,700. Its area is 148 km2. Achill is attached to the mainland by Michael Davitt Bridge, between the villages of Gob an Choire (Achill Sound) and Poll Raithn (Polranny). A bridge was first completed here in 1887, replaced by another structure in 1949, and subsequently replaced with the current bridge which was completed in 2008. Other centres of population include the villages of Keel, Dooagh, Dumha ige (Dooega) and Dugort. The parish's main Gaelic football pitch and two secondary schools are on the mainland at Poll Raithn. Early human settlements are believed to have been established on Achill around 3000 BC. A paddle dating from this period was found at the cranng near Dookinella.
The island is 87% peat bog. The parish of Achill also includes the Curraun peninsula. Some of the people of Curraun consider themselves Achill people, and most natives of Achill refer to this area as being "in Achill". There are between 500-600 native Irish speakers in Achill parish. In the summer of 1996, the RNLI decided to station a lifeboat at Kildownet.

==History==
It is believed that at the end of the Neolithic Period (around 4000 BC), Achill had a population of 5001,000 people. The island would have been mostly forest until the Neolithic people began crop cultivation. Settlement increased during the Iron Age, and the dispersal of small promontory forts around the coast indicate the warlike nature of the times. Megalithic tombs (see picture, right) and forts can be seen at Slievemore, along the Atlantic Drive and on Achillbeg.

===Overlords===
Achill Island lies in the Barony of Burrishoole, in the territory of ancient Umhall (Umhall Uactarach and Umhall Ioctarach), that originally encompassed an area extending from the Galway/Mayo border to Achill Head in Co. Mayo.

The hereditary chieftains of Umhall were the O'Malleys, recorded in the area in 814 AD when they successfully repelled an onslaught by the Vikings in Clew Bay. The Anglo/Norman invasion of Connacht in 1235 AD saw the territory of Umhall taken over by the Butlers and later by the de Burgos. The Butler Lordship of Burrishoole continued into the late 14th century when Thomas le Botiller was recorded as being in possession of Akkyll & Owyll.

===Immigration===
In the 17th and 18th centuries, there was much migration to Achill from other parts of Ireland, particularly Ulster, due to the political and religious turmoil of the time. For a while there were two different dialects of Irish being spoken on Achill. This led to many townlands being recorded as having two names during the 1824 Ordnance Survey, and some maps today give different names for the same place. Achill Irish still has many traces of Ulster Irish.

===Specific historical sites and events===

====Grace O'Malley's Castle====
Grace O'Malley's Kildamhnait Castle is a 15th-century tower house associated with the O'Malley Clan, who were once a ruling family of Achill. Grace O' Malley, or Granuaile, the most famous of the O'Malleys, was born on Clare Island around 1530. Her father was the chieftain of the barony of Murrisk. The O'Malleys were a powerful seafaring family, who traded widely. Grace became a fearless leader and gained fame as a sea captain and pirate. She is reputed to have met with Queen Elizabeth I in 1593. She died around 1603 and is buried in the O'Malley family tomb on Clare Island.

====Achill Mission====
One of Achill's most famous historical sites is that of the Achill Mission or 'the Colony' at Dugort. In 1831 the Church of Ireland Reverend Edward Nangle founded a proselytising mission at Dugort. The Mission included schools, cottages, an orphanage, an infirmary and a guesthouse. The Colony was very successful for a time and regularly produced a newspaper called the Achill Herald and Western Witness. Nangle expanded his mission into Mweelin, where a school was built. The Achill Mission began to decline slowly after Nangle was moved from Achill and was finally closed in the 1880s. Nangle died in 1883.

====Railway====
In 1894, the Westport - Newport railway line was extended to Achill Sound. The train station is now a hostel. The train provided a great service to Achill, but it also fulfilled an ancient prophecy. Brian Rua O' Cearbhain had prophesied that 'carts on iron wheels' would carry bodies into Achill on their first and last journey. In 1894, the first train on the Achill railway carried the bodies of victims of the Clew Bay Drowning. This tragedy occurred when a boat overturned in Clew Bay, drowning thirty two young people. They had been going to meet the steamer which would take them to Scotland for potato picking.

=====Kirkintilloch Fire=====
The Kirkintilloch Fire in 1937 fulfilled the second part of the prophecy, when the bodies of ten victims were carried by rail to Achill. These people had died in a fire in a bothy in Kirkintilloch. This term referred to the temporary accommodation provided for those who went to Scotland to pick potatoes, a migratory pattern that had been established in the early nineteeenth century.

Memorial for the victims of the Clew Bay Drowning on 15 June 1894 at Kildavenet Graveyard

====Kildamhnait====
Kildamhnait on the south east coast of Achill is named after St. Damhnait, or Dymphna, who founded a church there in the 16th century. There is also a holy well just outside the graveyard. The present church was built in the 1700s and the graveyard contains memorials to the victims of two of Achill's greatest tragedies, the Kirchintilloch Fire (1937) and the Clew Bay Drowning (1894).

====The Monastery====
In 1852, Dr. John McHale, Archbishop of Tuam set aside land in Bunnacurry for the building of a monastery. A Franciscan Monastery was built which, for many years provided an education for local children. The ruins of this monastery are still to be seen in Bunnacurry today.

====The Valley House====
The historic Valley House is located in The Valley, near Dugort in the north-east of Achill Island. The present building sits on the site of a hunting lodge built by the Earl of Cavan in the 19th century. Its notoriety arises from an incident in 1894 in which the then owner, an English landlady named Agnes McDonnell, was savagely beaten and the house set alight, allegedly by a local man, James Lynchehaun. Lynchehaun had been employed by McDonnell as her land agent, but the two fell out and he was sacked and told to quit his accommodation on her estate. A lengthy legal battle ensued, with Lynchehaun refusing to leave. At the time, in the 1890s, the issue of land ownership in Ireland was politically charged, and after the events at the Valley House in 1894 Lynchehaun was to claim that his actions were motivated by politics. He escaped custody and fled to the United States, where he successfully defeated legal attempts by the British authorities to have him extradited to face charges arising from the attack and the burning of the Valley House. Agnes McDonnell suffered terrible injuries from the attack but survived and lived for another 23 years, dying in 1923. Lynchehaun is said to have returned to Achill on two occasions, once in disguise as an American tourist, and eventually died in Girvan, Scotland, in 1937. The Valley House is now a hostel.

====The Deserted Village====
Close by Dugort, at the base of Slievemore mountain lies the Deserted Village. There are approximately 80 ruined houses in the village.

The houses were built of unmortared stone, which means that no cement or mortar was used to hold the stones together. Each house consisted of just one room and this room was used as kitchen, living room, bedroom and even stable.

If one looks at the fields around the Deserted Village and right up the mountain, one can see the tracks in the fields of 'lazy beds', which is the way crops like potatoes were grown. In Achill, as in many areas of Ireland, a system called 'Rundale' was used for farming. This meant that the land around a village was rented from a landlord. This land was then shared by all the villagers to graze their cattle and sheep. Each family would then have two or three small pieces of land scattered about the village, which they used to grow crops.

For many years people lived in the village and then in 1845 Famine struck in Achill as it did in the rest of Ireland. Most of the families moved to the nearby village of Dooagh, which is beside the sea, while some others emigrated. Living beside the sea meant that fish and shellfish could be used for food. The village was completely abandoned which is where the name 'Deserted Village' came from.

No one has lived in these houses since the time of the Famine, however the families that moved to Dooagh and their descendants, continued to use the village as a 'booley village'. This means that during the summer season, the younger members of the family, teenage boys and girls, would take the cattle to graze on the hillside and they would stay in the houses of the Deserted Village. This custom continued until the 1940s. Boolying was also carried out in other areas of Achill, including Annagh on Croaghaun mountain and in Curraun.

At Ailt, Kildownet, you can see the remains of a similar deserted village. This village was deserted in 1855 when the tenants were evicted by the local landlord so the land could be used for cattle grazing, the tenants were forced to rent holdings in Currane, Dooega and Slievemore. Others emigrated to America.

===Archaeology===
Keem BayAchill Archaeological Field School is based at the Achill Archaeology Centre in Dooagh, which has served as a catalyst for a wide array of archaeological investigations on the island. It was founded in 1991 and is a training school for students of archaeology and anthropology. Since 1991, several thousand students from 21 countries have come to Achill to study and participate in ongoing excavations. The school is involved in a study of the prehistoric and historic landscape at Slievemore, incorporating a research excavation at a number of sites within the deserted village of Slievemore. Slievemore is rich in archaeological monuments that span a 5,000 year period from the Neolithic to the Post Medieval. Recent archaeological research suggests the village was occupied year-round at least as early as the 19th century, though it is known to have served as a seasonally occupied booley village by the first half of the 20th century. A booley village (a number of which exist in a ruined state on the island) is a village occupied only during part of the year, such as a resort community, a lake community, or (as the case on Achill) a place to live while tending flocks or herds of ruminants during winter or summer pasturing. Deserted village, Slievemore, Achill Island, achill247.com Retrieved on 17 February 2008. Specifically, some of the people of Dooagh and Pollagh would migrate in the summer to Slievemore and then go back to Dooagh in the autumn. The summer 2009 field school excavated Round House 2 on Slievemore Mountain under the direction of archaeologist Stuart Rathbone. Only the outside northwall, entrance way and inside of the Round House were completely excavated. Amanda Burt, member of Achill Field School, Summer 2009. 

From 2004 to 2006, the Achill Island Maritime Archaeology Project directed by Chuck Meide was sponsored by the College of William and Mary, the Institute of Maritime History, the Achill Folklife Centre (now the Achill Archaeology Centre), and the Lighthouse Archaeological Maritime Program (LAMP). This project focused on the documentation of archaeological resources related to Achill's rich maritime heritage. Maritime archaeologists recorded 19th century fishing station, ice house, and boat house ruins, a number of anchors which had been salvaged from the sea, 19th century and more recent currach pens, a number of traditional vernacular watercraft including a possibly 100-year-old Achill yawl, and the remains of four historic shipwrecks. 

==Other places of interest==
Croaghaun, the third highest sea cliff in Europe
Slievemore mountain dominates the centre of the island

Despite some development, the island retains some striking natural beauty. The cliffs of Croaghaun on the western end of the island are the third highest sea cliffs in Europe but are inaccessible by road. Near the westernmost point of Achill, Achill Head, is Keem Bay. Keel Beach is quite popular with tourists and some locals as a surfing location. South of Keem beach is Moytoge Head, which with its rounded appearance drops dramatically down to the ocean. An old British observation post, built during World War I to prevent the Germans from landing arms for the Irish Republican Army, is still standing on Moytoge. During the Second World War this post was rebuilt by the Irish Defence Forces as a Look Out Post for the Coast Watching Service wing of the Defence Forces. It operated from 1939 to 1945. See Michael Kennedy, 'Guarding Neutral Ireland' (Dublin, 2008), p. 50 

The mountain Slievemore (672 m) rises dramatically in the north of the island and the Atlantic Drive (along the south/west of the island) has some dramatically beautiful views. On the slopes of Slievemore, there is an abandoned village (the "Deserted Village") The Deserted Village is traditionally thought to be a remnant village from An Gorta Mr (The Great Hunger of 1845-1849).

The plaque to Johnny Kilbane is situated on Achillbeg and was erected to celebrate 100 years since his first championship win. 
Just west of the deserted village is an old Martello tower, again built by the British to warn of any possible French invasion during the Napoleonic Wars. The area also boasts an approximately 5000-year-old Neolithic tomb. Achillbeg (, Little Achill) is a small island just off Achill's southern tip. Its inhabitants were resettled on Achill in the 1960s. Jonathan Beaumont (2005), Achillbeg: The Life of an Island, ISBN 0-85361-631-0 

The villages of Dooniver and Askill have very picturesque scenery and the cycle route is popular with tourists.

==Economy==
While a number of attempts at setting up small industrial units on the island have been made, the economy of the island is largely dependent on tourism. Subventions from Achill people working abroad, in particular in the United Kingdom the United States and Africa allowed many families to remain living in Achill throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Since the advent of Ireland's "Celtic Tiger" economy fewer Achill people were forced to look for work abroad. Agriculture plays a small role and the fact that the island is mostly bog means that its potential for agriculture is limited largely to sheep farming. In the past, fishing was a significant activity but this aspect of the economy is small now. At one stage, the island was known for its shark fishing, basking shark in particular was fished for its valuable liver oil. There was a big spurt of growth in tourism in the 1960s and 1970s before which life was tough and difficult on the island. Despite healthy visitor numbers each year, the common perception is that tourism in Achill has been slowly declining since its heyday. Currently the largest employers on Achill are two hotels. In late 2009 Ireland's only Turbot farm opened in the Bunnacurry Business Park.

==Religion==
Most people on Achill are either Roman Catholic or Anglican (Church of Ireland). There are three priests on Achill and eight churches in total.

* Catholic:
** Bunnacurry Church (Saint Josephs)
** Valley Church
** Dookinella Church
** Currane Church
** Pollagh Church
** Derreens Church
** Dooega Church
** Belfarsed Church
** Achill Sound Church

* Church of Ireland:
** Dugort Church (St.Thomas's church)
** Innisbiggle Island church

==Education==
Hedge schools existed in most villages of Achill in various periods of history. A university was started by the missions to Achill in Mweelin. In modern age, there used to be two secondary schools in Achill, Mc Hale College and Scoil Damhnait. However in August 2011, the two schools amalgamated to form Colaiste Pobail Acla. For primary education, there are nine National Schools including Bullsmouth NS, Valley NS, Bunnacurry NS, Dookinella NS, Dooagh NS, Saulia NS, Achill Sound NS, Tonragee NS and Curanne NS. National schools closed down include Dooega NS, Crumpaun NS, Ashleam NS.

==Transport==
* Achill railway station opened on 13 May 1895, but finally closed on 1 October 1937. 
* The Great Western Greenway is a greenway rail trail that follows the line of the former Midland Great Western Railway branch line from Westport to Achill via Newport and Mulranny. 
* Bus ireann 440 daily commutes to Westport and beyond from the island's scattered villages.
* Bus ireann provide transport for the areas secondary school children
* There are many Taxicab and Hackney carriage services on the Island

==Cuisine==
As a popular tourist destination Achill has many bars, cafes and restaurants which serve a full range of food. However with the island's Atlantic location seafood is a speciality on Achill with common foods including lobster, mussels, salmon, trout and winkles. With a large sheep population, Achill lamb is a very popular meal on the island too. Furthermore Achill has a big population of cows which produces excellent beef.

==Sport==
Achill has a Gaelic football club which competes in the intermediate championship and division 1C of the Mayo League. There are also an association football club, Achill Rovers, which competes in the Mayo Football League division 1, FAI Club Portal for Achill Rovers and Achill Golf Club. Card games, including Whist and 24 card game are also popular on Achill.
The island's primary recreational outdoor centre is Achill Outdoor Education Centre. achilloutdoor.com Achill Island's rugged landscape and the surrounding ocean offers a prime location for outdoor adventure activities, like surfing, kite-surfing and sea kayaking. Fishing and watersports are popular with tourists and locals alike. Sailing regattas featuring a local vessel type, the Achill Yawl, have been popular since the 19th century, though most present-day yawls, unlike their traditional working boat ancestors, have been structurally modified to promote greater speed under sail. The island's waters and striking underwater sites are occasionally visited by scuba divers, though Achill's unpredictable weather generally has precluded a commercially successful recreational diving industry.

==Population==
In 2006, the population was 2,701. The island's population has declined from around 6,000 before the Great Hunger.

==Architecture==

Because of the inhospitable climate, few inhabited houses date from before the 20th century, though there are many examples of abandoned stone structures dating to the 19th century.
The "Deserted Village" at the foot of Slievemore was a booley village; see Transhumance
The location of the village is relatively sheltered

The best known of these earlier can be seen in the "Deserted Village" ruins near the graveyard at the foot of Slievemore. Even the houses in this village represent a relatively comfortable class of dwelling as, even as recently as a hundred years ago, some people still used "Beehive" style houses (small circular single roomed dwellings with a hole in ceiling to let out smoke).

Many of the oldest and most picturesque inhabited cottages date from the activities of the Congested Districts Board for Irelanda body set up around the turn of the 20th century in Ireland to improve the welfare for inhabitants of small villages and towns. Most of the homes in Achill at the time were very small and tightly packed together in villages. The CDB subsidised the building of new, more spacious (though still small by modern standards) homes outside of the traditional villages.

Some of the recent building development (1980 and onwards) on the island does fit as nicely in the landscape as the earlier style of whitewashed raised gable cottages. Many holiday homes have been built but many of these houses have been built in prominent scenic areas and have damaged traditional views of the island while lying empty for most of the year.

==Notable people==
* Manus Sweeney from Achill was hanged in Newport for his part in the 1798 rebellion. There is a monument to him at the eastern end of Keel beach
* Charles Boycott (18321897) - Unpopular landowner from whom the formerly slang term 'Boycott' arose
* The artist Paul Henry stayed on the island for a number of years in the early 1900s and some of his most famous paintings are of the dramatic landscape of the island. Not long after arriving, he threw his return train ticket into the sea near Purteen Harbour
* The Nobel Prize winning author, Heinrich Bll, visited the island and wrote of his experience in his "Irish Journal" (Irisches Tagebuch). The Blls later bought a cottage near Dugort and lived in it periodically until 2001 when they donated it to be used as an artists' residence
* Novelist Graham Greene, visited and stayed on Achill Island a number of times in the late 1940s. He wrote parts of the novels The Heart of the Matter (subsequently banned in Ireland) and The Fallen Idol in Dooagh, and Achill Island is also said to have inspired Greene to write some of his best poetry. He retained a special affection for Achill Island, which he mentioned frequently in his letters and notes, although this was largely due to the circumstances of his visits, as he was introduced to Achill by his mistress, Catherine Walston. She rented a cottage in Dooagh, with no electricity, one outside tap for water, and a corrugated iron roof on the traditional stone cottage, now since demolished. 
* Artist Robert Henri came to Achill on a regular basis in the early decades of the 20th century. It was during his early trips to Achill prior to the outbreak of World War I that Henri painted extensively and is reputed to have done portraits of almost all the children in Dooagh village. He bought Corrymore House on the hill above Dooagh in 1924. He died in America in 1929. 
* Thomas Patten from Dooega died fighting Francisco Franco's fascist forces during the Siege of Madrid in December 1936. There is a monument to him in his native village.
* English writer Honor Tracy lived there until her death in 1989
* In the centre of Dooagh is a commemoration plaque to Don Allum, the first man to row across the Atlantic Ocean in both directions. He landed close to the memorial on Dooagh beach on 4 September 1987, completing the second leg of his voyage. 
* Singer James Kilbane, also known for his research on traditional Achill watercraft, lives on the island.
* Belgian graphic artist, photographer, printmaker and publisher Francis Van Maele lives and works on the island. He runs fine art publishers Redfox Press in Dugort. 

==Literature==
Heinrich Bll: Irisches Tagebuch, Berlin 1957
Kingston, Bob: The Deserted Village at Slievemore, Castlebar 1990
McDonald, Theresa: Achill: 5000 B.C. to 1900 A.D. Archeology History Folklore, I.A.S. Publications 
Meehan, Rosa: The Story of Mayo, Castlebar 2003
Carney, James: The Playboy & the Yellow lady, 1986 POOLBEG 
Hugo Hamilton: The Island of Talking, The Island of Talking Hugo Hamilton in the footsteps of Heinrich Bll, 50 years after 2007

==See also==
* Achillbeg
* Achill Sound
* Askill
* Bunnacurry
* Connacht Irish
* Darren Fletcher
* Dooagh
* Dooniver
* Gallowglass
* Innisbiggle
* James Kilbane
* Kevin Kilbane
* List of RNLI stations
* Mid West Radio
* Nevin (surname)
* Saula
* Wild Atlantic Way

==References==

==External links==

* Colaiste Pobail Acla students project on the Achill area
* Achill Island Maritime Archaeology Project
* VisitAchill multilingual visitor's site



