[[Honda]]

 is a Japanese public multinational corporation primarily known as a manufacturer of automobiles and motorcycles.

Honda has been the world's largest motorcycle manufacturer since 1959, as well as the world's largest manufacturer of internal combustion engines measured by volume, producing more than 14 million internal combustion engines each year. Honda became the second-largest Japanese automobile manufacturer in 2001. Honda was the eighth largest automobile manufacturer in the world behind General Motors, Volkswagen Group, Toyota, Hyundai Motor Group, Ford, Nissan, and PSA in 2011. 

Honda was the first Japanese automobile manufacturer to release a dedicated luxury brand, Acura, in 1986. Aside from their core automobile and motorcycle businesses, Honda also manufactures garden equipment, marine engines, personal watercraft and power generators, amongst others. Since 1986, Honda has been involved with artificial intelligence/robotics research and released their ASIMO robot in 2000. They have also ventured into aerospace with the establishment of GE Honda Aero Engines in 2004 and the Honda HA-420 HondaJet, which began production in 2012. Honda has three joint-ventures in China (Honda China, Dongfeng Honda, and Guangqi Honda).

In 2013, Honda invested about 5.7% (US$ 6.8 billion) of its revenues in research and development. Le top 20 des entreprises les plus innovantes du monde, Challenges, 22 october 2013 Also in 2013, Honda became the first Japanese automaker to be a net exporter from the United States, exporting 108,705 Honda and Acura models while importing only 88,357. 

== History ==

As a young man, Honda's founder, Soichiro Honda (Honda Sichir) (17 November 1906  5 August 1991) had an interest in automobiles. He worked as a mechanic at the Art Shokai garage, where he tuned cars and entered them in races. In 1937, with financing from his acquaintance Kato Shichir, Honda founded Tkai Seiki (Eastern Sea Precision Machine Company) to make piston rings working out of the Art Shokai garage. After initial failures, Tkai Seiki won a contract to supply piston rings to Toyota, but lost the contract due to the poor quality of their products. After attending engineering school without graduating, and visiting factories around Japan to better understand Toyota's quality control processes, by 1941 Honda was able to mass-produce piston rings acceptable to Toyota, using an automated process that could employ even unskilled wartime laborers. 

Tkai Seiki was placed under control of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (called the Ministry of Munitions after 1943) at the start of World War II, and Soichiro Honda was demoted from president to senior managing director after Toyota took a 40% stake in the company. Honda also aided the war effort by assisting other companies in automating the production of military aircraft propellers. The relationships Honda cultivated with personnel at Toyota, Nakajima Aircraft Company and the Imperial Japanese Navy would be instrumental in the postwar period. A US B-29 bomber attack destroyed Tkai Seiki's Yamashita plant in 1944, and the Itawa plant collapsed in the 1945 Mikawa earthquake, and Soichiro Honda sold the salvageable remains of the company to Toyota after the war for 450,000, and used the proceeds to found the Honda Technical Research Institute in October 1946. With a staff of 12 men working in a 16 m2 shack, they built and sold improvised motorized bicycles, using a supply of 500 two-stroke 50 cc Tohatsu war surplus radio generator engines. When the engines ran out, Honda began building their own copy of the Tohatsu engine, and supplying these to customers to attach their bicycles. This was the Honda Model A, nicknamed the Bata Bata for the sound the engine made. In 1949, the Honda Technical Research Institute was liquidated for 1,000,000, or about 5,000 today; these funds were used to incorporate Honda Motor Co., Ltd. At about the same time Honda hired engineer Kihachiro Kawashima, and Takeo Fujisawa who provided indispensable business and marketing expertise to complement Soichiro Honda's technical bent. The close partnership between Soichiro Honda and Fujisawa lasted until they stepped down together in October 1973. 

The first complete motorcycle, with both the frame and engine made by Honda, was the 1949 Model D, the first Honda to go by the name Dream. Honda Motor Company grew in a short time to become the world's largest manufacturer of motorcycles by 1964.

The first production automobile from Honda was the T360 mini pick-up truck, which went on sale in August 1963. Powered by a small 356-cc straight-4 gasoline engine, it was classified under the cheaper Kei car tax bracket. The first production car from Honda was the S500 sports car, which followed the T360 into production in October 1963. Its chain-driven rear wheels pointed to Honda's motorcycle origins. 

Over the next few decades, Honda worked to expand its product line and expanded operations and exports to numerous countries around the world. In 1986, Honda introduced the successful Acura brand to the American market in an attempt to gain ground in the luxury vehicle market. The year 1991 saw the introduction of the Honda NSX supercar, the first all-aluminum monocoque vehicle that incorporated a mid-engine V6 with variable-valve timing. 

CEO Tadashi Kume was succeeded by Nobuhiko Kawamoto in 1990. Kawamoto was selected over Shoichiro Irimajiri, who oversaw the successful establishment of Honda of America Manufacturing, Inc. in Marysville, Ohio. Both Kawamoto and Irimajiri shared a friendly rivalry within Honda, and Irimajiri would resign in 1992 due to health issues.

Following the death of Soichiro Honda and the departure of Irimajiri, Honda found itself quickly being outpaced in product development by other Japanese automakers and was caught off-guard by the truck and sport utility vehicle boom of the 1990s, all which took a toll on the profitability of the company. Japanese media reported in 1992 and 1993 that Honda was at serious risk of an unwanted and hostile takeover by Mitsubishi Motors, who at the time was a larger automaker by volume and flush with profits from their successful Pajero and Diamante. 

Kawamoto acted quickly to change Honda's corporate culture, rushing through market-driven product development that resulted in recreational vehicles such as the Odyssey and the CR-V, and a refocusing away from some of the numerous sedans and coupes that were popular with Honda's engineers but not with the buying public. The most shocking change to Honda came when Kawamoto ended Honda's successful participation in Formula One after the 1992 season, citing costs in light of the takeover threat from Mitsubishi as well as the desire to create a more environmentally-friendly company image. 

Later, 1995 gave rise to the Honda Aircraft Company with the goal of producing jet aircraft under Honda's name. 

== Corporate profile and divisions ==
Honda headquarters building in Minato, Tokyo
Honda is headquartered in Minato, Tokyo, Japan. Their shares trade on the Tokyo Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange, as well as exchanges in Osaka, Nagoya, Sapporo, Kyoto, Fukuoka, London, Paris and Switzerland.

The company has assembly plants around the globe. These plants are located in China, the United States, Pakistan, Canada, England, Japan, Belgium, Brazil, Mxico, New Zealand, Malaysia, Indonesia, India, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, Turkey, Taiwan, Per and Argentina. As of July 2010, 89 percent of Honda and Acura vehicles sold in the United States were built in North American plants, up from 82.2 percent a year earlier. This shields profits from the yen's advance to a 15-year high against the dollar. 

Honda's Net Sales and Other Operating Revenue by Geographical Regions in 2007 Breakdown of net sales and other operating revenue by geographical markets from company 20Fs 

 Geographic Region Total revenue (in millions of ) 
 Japan 1,681,190 
 North America 5,980,876 
 Europe 1,236,757 
 Asia 1,283,154 
 Others 905,163 

American Honda Motor Company is based in Torrance, California. Honda Racing Corporation (HRC) is Honda's motorcycle racing division. Honda Canada Inc. is headquartered in Markham, Ontario, It was originally planned to be located in Richmond Hill, Ontario, but delays led them to look elsewhere. their manufacturing division, Honda of Canada Manufacturing, is based in Alliston, Ontario. Honda has also created joint ventures around the world, such as Honda Siel Cars and Hero Honda Motorcycles in India, Share Manthan : http://www.sharemanthan.in/index.php/indian-companies/49-auto/2150-hero-honda Guangzhou Honda and Dongfeng Honda in China, Boon Siew Honda in Malaysia and Honda Atlas in Pakistan.

Following the Japanese earthquake and tsunami in March 2011 Honda announced plans to halve production at its UK plants. The decision was made to put staff at the Swindon plant on a 2-day week until the end of May as the manufacturer struggled to source supplies from Japan. It's thought around 22,500 cars were produced during this period.

== Leadership ==

 Name Years 
 Soichiro Honda 19481973 
 Kiyoshi Kawashima 19731983 
 Tadashi Kume 19831990 
 Nobuhiko Kawamoto 19901998 
 Hiroyuki Yoshino 19982003 
 Takeo Fukui 20032009 
 Takanobu Ito 2009present 
 

== Products ==

=== Automobiles ===

2011 Honda Jazz (Indian rampart)
2008 Honda Accord (USA-Canada)
Eighth Generation Honda Civic (Asian Version)
Honda's global lineup consists of the Fit, Civic, Accord, Insight, CR-V, CR-Z, Legend and two versions of the Odyssey, one for North America, and a smaller vehicle sold internationally. An early proponent of developing vehicles to cater to different needs and markets worldwide, Honda's lineup varies by country and may have vehicles exclusive to that region. A few examples are the latest Honda Odyssey minivan and the Ridgeline, Honda's first light-duty uni-body pickup truck. Both were designed and engineered primarily in North America and are produced there. Other example of exclusive models includes the Honda Civic five-door hatchback sold in Europe.

Honda's automotive manufacturing ambitions can be traced back to 1963, with the Honda T360, a kei car truck built for the Japanese market. This was followed by the two-door roadster, the Honda S500 also introduced in 1963. In 1965, Honda built a two-door commercial delivery van, called the Honda L700. Honda's first four-door sedan was not the Accord, but the air-cooled, four-cylinder, gasoline-powered Honda 1300 in 1969. The Civic was a hatchback that gained wide popularity internationally, but it wasn't the first two-door hatchback built. That was the Honda N360, another Kei car that was adapted for international sale as the N600. The Civic, which appeared in 1972 and replaced the N600 also had a smaller sibling that replaced the air-cooled N360, called the Honda Life that was water-cooled.

The Honda Life represented Honda's efforts in competing in the kei car segment, offering sedan, delivery van and small pick-up platforms on a shared chassis. The Life StepVan had a novel approach that, while not initially a commercial success, appears to be an influence in vehicles with the front passengers sitting behind the engine, a large cargo area with a flat roof and a liftgate installed in back, and utilizing a transversely installed engine with a front-wheel-drive powertrain.

As Honda entered into automobile manufacturing in the late 1960s, where Japanese manufacturers such as Toyota and Nissan had been making cars since before WWII, it appears that Honda instilled a sense of doing things a little differently than its Japanese competitors. Its mainstay products, like the Accord and Civic, have always employed front-wheel-drive powertrain implementation, which is currently a long held Honda tradition. Honda also installed new technologies into their products, first as optional equipment, then later standard, like anti lock brakes, speed sensitive power steering, and multi-port fuel injection in the early 1980s. This desire to be the first to try new approaches is evident with the creation of the first Japanese luxury chain Acura, and was also evident with the all aluminum, mid-engined sports car, the Honda NSX, which also introduced variable valve timing technology, Honda calls VTEC.

The Civic is a line of compact cars developed and manufactured by Honda. In North America, the Civic is the second-longest continuously running nameplate from a Japanese manufacturer; only its perennial rival, the Toyota Corolla, introduced in 1968, has been in production longer. The Civic, along with the Accord and Prelude, comprised Honda's vehicles sold in North America until the 1990s, when the model lineup was expanded. Having gone through several generational changes, the Civic has become larger and more upmarket, and it currently slots between the Fit and Accord.

Honda produces Civic hybrid, a hybrid electric vehicle that competes with the Toyota Prius, and also produces the Insight and CR-Z.

In 2008, Honda increased global production to meet demand for small cars and hybrids in the U.S. and emerging markets. The company shuffled U.S. production to keep factories busy and boost car output, while building fewer minivans and sport utility vehicles as light truck sales fell. 

Its first entrance into the pickup segment, the light duty Ridgeline, won Truck of the Year from Motor Trend magazine in 2006. Also in 2006, the redesigned Civic won Car of the Year from the magazine, giving Honda a rare double win of Motor Trend honors.

It is reported that Honda plans to increase hybrid sales in Japan to more than 20% of its total sales in fiscal year 2011, from 14.8% in previous year. 

Five of United States Environmental Protection Agency's top ten most fuel-efficient cars from 1984 to 2010 comes from Honda, more than any other automakers. The five models are: 20002006 Honda Insight (53 mpgus combined), 19861987 Honda Civic Coupe HF (46 mpgus combined), 19941995 Honda Civic hatchback VX (43 mpgus combined), 2006 Honda Civic Hybrid (42 mpgus combined), and 2010 Honda Insight (41 mpgus combined). Scott Doggett Lists Top 10 Most Fuel-Efficient Cars From 1984 to Present" Green car advisor  Edmunds, 10 June 2010. (mpg revised in accordance with 2008 regulation change) The ACEEE has also rated the Civic GX as the greenest car in America for seven consecutive years. 

=== Motorcycles ===

Honda is the largest motorcycle manufacturer in Japan and has been since it started production in 1955. 
At its peak in 1982, Honda manufactured almost three million motorcycles annually. By 2006 this figure had reduced to around 550,000 but was still higher than its three domestic competitors. 

During the 1960s, when it was a small manufacturer, Honda broke out of the Japanese motorcycle market and began exporting to the U.S. Working with the advertising agency Grey Advertising, Honda created an innovative marketing campaign, using the slogan "You meet the nicest people on a Honda." In contrast to the prevailing negative stereotypes of motorcyclists in America as tough, antisocial rebels, this campaign suggested that Honda motorcycles were made for the everyman. The campaign was hugely successful; the ads ran for three years, and by the end of 1963 alone, Honda had sold 90,000 motorcycles. 

Taking Honda's story as an archetype of the smaller manufacturer entering a new market already occupied by highly dominant competitors, the story of their market entry, and their subsequent huge success in the U.S. and around the world, has been the subject of some academic controversy. Competing explanations have been advanced to explain Honda's strategy and the reasons for their success. http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/dick.rumelt/Docs/Papers/HONDA 

The first of these explanations was put forward when, in 1975, Boston Consulting Group (BCG) was commissioned by the UK government to write a report explaining why and how the British motorcycle industry had been out-competed by its Japanese competitors. The report concluded that the Japanese firms, including Honda, had sought a very high scale of production (they had made a large number of motorbikes) in order to benefit from economies of scale and learning curve effects. It blamed the decline of the British motorcycle industry on the failure of British managers to invest enough in their businesses to profit from economies of scale and scope. 

2004 Honda Super Cub
The second explanation was offered in 1984 by Richard Pascale, who had interviewed the Honda executives responsible for the firm's entry into the U.S. market. As opposed to the tightly focused strategy of low cost and high scale that BCG accredited to Honda, Pascale found that their entry into the U.S. market was a story of "miscalculation, serendipity, and organizational learning"  in other words, Honda's success was due to the adaptability and hard work of its staff, rather than any long term strategy. For example, Honda's initial plan on entering the US was to compete in large motorcycles, around 300 cc. Honda's motorcycles in this class suffered performance and reliability problems when ridden the relatively long distances of the US highways. When the team found that the scooters they were using to get themselves around their U.S. base of San Francisco attracted positive interest from consumers that they fell back on selling the Super Cub instead. 

The most recent school of thought on Honda's strategy was put forward by Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad in 1989. Creating the concept of core competencies with Honda as an example, they argued that Honda's success was due to its focus on leadership in the technology of internal combustion engines. For example, the high power-to-weight ratio engines Honda produced for its racing bikes provided technology and expertise which was transferable into mopeds. Honda's entry into the U.S. motorcycle market during the 1960s is used as a case study for teaching introductory strategy at business schools worldwide. 

=== Power equipment ===
Production started in 1953 with H-type engine (prior to motorcycle). 
Honda power equipment reached record sales in 2007 with 6,4 million units. By 2010 (Fiscal year ended 31 March) this figure had decreased to 4,7 million units. Cumulative production of power products has exceeded 85 million units (as of September 2008). 

Honda power equipment includes:

=== Engines ===

Honda Outboard motor on a pontoon boat

Honda engines powered the entire 33-car starting field of the 2010 Indianapolis 500 and for the fifth consecutive race, there were no engine-related retirements during the running of the Memorial Day Classic. 

Honda, despite being known as an engine company, has never built a V8 for passenger vehicles. In the late 1990s, the company resisted considerable pressure from its American dealers for a V8 engine (which would have seen use in top-of-the-line Honda SUVs and Acuras), with American Honda reportedly sending one dealer a shipment of V8 beverages to silence them. Honda considered starting V8 production in the mid-2000s for larger Acura sedans, a new version of the high end NSX sports car (which previously used DOHC V6 engines with VTEC to achieve its high power output) and possible future ventures into the American full-size truck and SUV segment for both the Acura and Honda brands, but this was cancelled in late 2008, with Honda citing environmental and worldwide economic conditions as reasons for the termination of this project. 

=== Robots ===
ASIMO at Expo 2005
ASIMO is the part of Honda's Research & Development robotics program. It is the eleventh in a line of successive builds starting in 1986 with Honda E0 moving through the ensuing Honda E series and the Honda P series. Weighing 54 kilograms and standing 130 centimeters tall, ASIMO resembles a small astronaut wearing a backpack, and can walk on two feet in a manner resembling human locomotion, at up to 6 km/h. ASIMO is the world's only humanoid robot able to ascend and descend stairs independently. Frequently asked questions about ASIMO . Retrieved 28 February 2007. However, human motions such as climbing stairs are difficult to mimic with a machine, which ASIMO has demonstrated by taking two plunges off a staircase.

Honda's robot ASIMO (see below) as an R&D project brings together expertise to create a robot that walks, dances and navigates steps.
2010 marks the year Honda has developed a machine capable of reading a user's brainwaves to move ASIMO. The system uses a helmet covered with electroencephalography and near-infrared spectroscopy sensors that monitor electrical brainwaves and cerebral blood flowsignals that alter slightly during the human thought process. The user thinks of one of a limited number of gestures it wants from the robot, which has been fitted with a Brain Machine Interface. http://www.gadgetrepublic.com/news/item/1938/digital-life/japan-plans-mind-reading-devices 

=== Aircraft ===

Honda has also pioneered new technology in its HA-420 HondaJet, manufactured by its subsidiary Honda Aircraft Company, which allows new levels of reduced drag, increased aerodynamics and fuel efficiency thus reducing operating costs.

=== Solar cells ===
Honda's solar cell subsidiary company Honda Soltec (Headquarters: Kikuchi-gun, Kumamoto; President and CEO: Akio Kazusa) started sales throughout Japan of thin-film solar cells for public and industrial use on 24 October 2008, after selling solar cells for residential use since October 2007. Honda announced in the end of October 2013 that Honda Soltec would cease the business operation except for support for existing customers in Spring 2014 and the subsidiary would be dissolved. 

=== Mountain bikes ===

Honda has also built a downhill racing bicycle known as the Honda RN-01. It is not available for sale to the public. The bike has a gearbox, which replaces the standard derailleur found on most bikes.

Honda has hired several people to pilot the bike, among them Greg Minnaar. The team is known as Team G Cross Honda.

=== ATV ===

Honda also builds all-terrain vehicles (ATV).
450r
400ex
300ex
250r

== Motorsports ==
Honda has been active in motorsports, like Motorcycle Grand Prix, Superbike racing and others.

=== Automobile ===

Rubens Barrichello driving for Honda
Honda entered Formula One as a constructor for the first time in the 1964 season at the German Grand Prix with Ronnie Bucknum at the wheel. 1965 saw the addition of Richie Ginther to the team, who scored Honda's first point at the Belgian Grand Prix, and Honda's first win at the Mexican Grand Prix. 1967 saw their next win at the Italian Grand Prix with John Surtees as their driver. In 1968, Jo Schlesser was killed in a Honda RA302 at the French Grand Prix. This racing tragedy, coupled with their commercial difficulties selling automobiles in the United States, prompted Honda to withdraw from all international motorsport that year.

After a learning year in 1965, Honda-powered Brabhams dominated the 1966 French Formula Two championship in the hands of Jack Brabham and Denny Hulme. As there was no European Championship that season, this was the top F2 championship that year. In the early 1980s Honda returned to F2, supplying engines to Ron Tauranac's Ralt team. Tauranac had designed the Brabham cars for their earlier involvement. They were again extremely successful. In a related exercise, John Judd's Engine Developments company produced a turbo "Brabham-Honda" engine for use in IndyCar racing. It won only one race, in 1988 for Bobby Rahal at Pocono.

Honda returned to Formula One in 1983, initially with another Formula Two partner, the Spirit team, before switching abruptly to Williams in 1984. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Honda powered cars won six consecutive Formula One Constructors Championships. WilliamsF1 won the crown in 1986 and 1987. Honda switched allegiance again in 1988. New partners Team McLaren won the title in 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991. Honda withdrew from Formula One at the end of 1992, although the related Mugen-Honda company maintained a presence up to the end of 1999, winning four races with Ligier and Jordan Grand Prix.

Honda debuted in the CART IndyCar World Series as a works supplier in 1994. The engines were far from competitive at first, but after development, the company powered six consecutive drivers championships. In 2003, Honda transferred its effort to the rival IRL IndyCar Series. In 2004, Honda-powered cars overwhelmingly dominated the IndyCar Series, winning 14 of 16 IndyCar races, including the Indianapolis 500, and claimed the IndyCar Series Manufacturers' Championship, Drivers' Championship and Rookie of the Year titles. In 2006, Honda became the sole engine supplier for the IndyCar Series, including the Indianapolis 500. In the 2006 Indianapolis 500, for the first time in Indianapolis 500 history, the race was run without a single engine problem. 

During 1998, Honda considered returning to Formula One with their own team. The project was aborted after the death of its technical director, Harvey Postlethwaite. Honda instead came back as an official engine supplier to British American Racing (BAR) and Jordan Grand Prix. Honda bought a stake in the BAR team in 2004 before buying the team outright at the end of 2005, becoming a constructor for the first time since the 1960s. Honda won the 2006 Hungarian Grand Prix with driver Jenson Button.

It was announced on 5 December 2008, that Honda would be exiting Formula One with immediate effect due to the 2008 global economic crisis. The team was sold to former team principal Ross Brawn, renamed Brawn GP and subsequently Mercedes. 

Honda became an official works team in the British Touring Car Championship in 2010.

Honda made an official announcement on 16 May 2013 that it will re-enter Formula One racing in 2015 as an engine supplier to the McLaren team. 

=== Motorcycles ===

Honda RC212V raced by Dani Pedrosa
Honda Racing Corporation (HRC) was formed in 1982. The company combines participation in motorcycle races throughout the world with the development of high potential racing machines. Its racing activities are an important source for the creation of leading edge technologies used in the development of Honda motorcycles. HRC also contributes to the advancement of motorcycle sports through a range of activities that include sales of production racing motorcycles, support for satellite teams, and rider education programs.

Soichiro Honda, being a race driver himself, could not stay out of international motorsport. In 1959, Honda entered five motorcycles into the Isle of Man TT race, the most prestigious motorcycle race in the world. While always having powerful engines, it took until 1961 for Honda to tune their chassis well enough to allow Mike Hailwood to claim their first Grand Prix victories in the 125 and 250 cc classes. Hailwood would later pick up their first Senior TT wins in 1966 and 1967. Honda's race bikes were known for their "sleek & stylish design" and exotic engine configurations, such as the 5-cylinder, 22,000 rpm, 125 cc bike and their 6-cylinder 250 cc and 297 cc bikes.

In 1979, Honda returned to Grand Prix motorcycle racing with the monocoque-framed, four-stroke NR500. The FIM rules limited engines to four cylinders, so the NR500 had non-circular, 'race-track', cylinders, each with 8 valves and two connecting rods, in order to provide sufficient valve area to compete with the dominant two-stroke racers. Unfortunately, it seemed Honda tried to accomplish too much at one time and the experiment failed. For the 1982 season, Honda debuted their first two-stroke race bike, the NS500 and in 1983, Honda won their first 500 cc Grand Prix World Championship with Freddie Spencer. Since then, Honda has become a dominant marque in motorcycle Grand Prix racing, winning a plethora of top level titles with riders such as Mick Doohan and Valentino Rossi.

In the Motocross World Championship, Honda has claimed six world championships. In the World Enduro Championship, Honda has captured eight titles, most recently with Stefan Merriman in 2003 and with Mika Ahola from 2007 to 2010. In observed trials, Honda has claimed three world championships with Belgian rider Eddy Lejeune.

== Electric and alternative fuel vehicles ==
2009 Honda Civic GX hooked up to Phill refueling system
Top: Brazilian flexible-fuel Honda Civic. Below: U.S. Honda Civic Hybrid.

2010 Honda Insight hybrid electric vehicle (Second generation).
Honda FCX Clarity hydrogen fuel cell vehicle

=== Compressed natural gas ===
The Honda Civic GX is the only purpose-built natural gas vehicle (NGV) commercially available in some parts of the U.S. The Honda Civic GX first appeared in 1998 as a factory-modified Civic LX that had been designed to run exclusively on compressed natural gas. The car looks and drives just like a contemporary Honda Civic LX, but does not run on gasoline. In 2001, the Civic GX was rated the cleanest-burning internal combustion engine in the world by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). "Sixth Biannual Report On The Early Action Compact For Northeast Texas", p.5. "Natural Gas Myths", Myth 2. 

First leased to the City of Los Angeles, in 2005, Honda started offering the GX directly to the public through factory trained dealers certified to service the GX. Before that, only fleets were eligible to purchase a new Civic GX. In 2006, the Civic GX was released in New York, making it the second state where the consumer is able to buy the car. "Honda Press Release", 19 October 2006 Home refueling is available for the GX with the addition of the Phill Home Refueling Appliance. 

=== Flexible-fuel ===
Honda's Brazilian subsidiary launched flexible-fuel versions for the Honda Civic and Honda Fit in late 2006. As other Brazilian flex-fuel vehicles, these models run on any blend of hydrous ethanol (E100) and E20-E25 gasoline. Initially, and in order to test the market preferences, the carmaker decided to produce a limited share of the vehicles with flex-fuel engines, 33 percent of the Civic production and 28 percent of the Fit models. Also, the sale price for the flex-fuel version was higher than the respective gasoline versions, around US$1,000 premium for the Civic, and US$650 for the Fit, despite the fact that all other flex-fuel vehicles sold in Brazil had the same tag price as their gasoline versions. In July 2009, Honda launched in the Brazilian market its third flexible-fuel car, the Honda City. 

During the last two months of 2006, both flex-fuel models sold 2,427 cars against 8,546 gasoline-powered automobiles, See Table 08 for flex-fuel sales and Table 07 for gasoline sales. jumping to 41,990 flex-fuel cars in 2007, See Table 08. and reaching 93,361 in 2008. See Table 08. Due to the success of the flex versions, by early 2009 a hundred percent of Honda's automobile production for the Brazilian market is now flexible-fuel, and only a small percentage of gasoline version is produced in Brazil for exports. Up to February 2009. See "Produo por Tipo, Empresa e Combustvel " Tables 6 (gasoline) and 7 (flex-fuel). All gasoline vehicles were exported (see Table 01 Exportao de Autoveculos por Empresa, Tipo e Modelo  2009). 

In March 2009, Honda launched in the Brazilian market the first flex-fuel motorcycle in the world. Produced by its Brazilian subsidiary Moto Honda da Amaznia, the CG 150 Titan Mix is sold for around US$2,700. 

=== Hybrid electric ===
In late 1999, Honda launched the first commercial hybrid electric car sold in the U.S. market, the Honda Insight, just one month before the introduction of the Toyota Prius, and initially sold for US$20,000. The first-generation Insight was produced from 2000 to 2006 and had a fuel economy of 70 mpgus for the EPA's highway rating, the most fuel-efficient mass-produced car at the time. Total global sales for the Insight amounted to only around 18,000 vehicles. 

Honda introduced the second-generation Insight in its home nation of Japan in February 2009, and released it in other markets through 2009 and in the U.S. market in April 2009. At $19,800 as a five-door hatchback it will be the least expensive hybrid available in the U.S. Honda expects to sell 200,000 of the vehicles each year, with half of those sales in the United States. 

Since 2002, Honda has also been selling the Honda Civic Hybrid (2003 model) in the U.S. market. It was followed by the Honda Accord Hybrid, offered in model years 2005 through 2007. Sales of the Honda CR-Z began in Japan in February 2010, becoming Honda's third hybrid electric car in the market. 

In an interview in early February 2011, a Honda executive disclosed that Honda produces around 200,000 hybrids a year in Japan. 

=== Hydrogen fuel cell ===
In Takanezawa, Japan, on 16 June 2008, Honda Motors produced the first assembly-line FCX Clarity, a hybrid hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. More efficient than a gas-electric hybrid vehicle, the FCX Clarity combines hydrogen and oxygen from ordinary air to generate electricity for an electric motor.

The vehicle itself does not emit any pollutants and its only by products are heat and water. The FCX Clarity also has an advantage over gas-electric hybrids in that it does not use an internal combustion engine to propel itself. Like a gas-electric hybrid, it uses a lithium ion battery to assist the fuel cell during acceleration and capture energy through regenerative braking, thus improving fuel efficiency. The lack of hydrogen filling stations throughout developed countries will keep production volumes low. Honda will release the vehicle in groups of 150. California is the only U.S. market with infrastructure for fueling such a vehicle, though the number of stations is still limited. Building more stations is expensive, as the California Air Resources Board (CARB) granted $6.8 million for four H2 fueling stations, costing $1.7 million USD each. 

== Marketing ==

=== Japan ===
Honda Clio (Saitama, Saitama, Japan)

Starting in 1978, Honda in Japan decided to diversify their sales distribution channels, and created Honda Verno, which sold established products with a higher content of standard equipment and a more sporting nature. Honda Honda 20051214 HondaHonda Honda The establishment of Honda Verno coincided with its new sports compact, called the Honda Prelude. Later, the Honda Vigor, the Honda Ballade, and the Honda Quint were added to Honda Verno stores. This approach was implemented due to efforts in place by rival Japanese automakers Toyota and Nissan.

As sales progressed, Honda created two more sales channels, called Honda Clio in 1984, and Honda Primo in 1985. The Honda Clio chain sold products that were traditionally associated with Honda dealerships before 1978, like the Honda Accord, and Honda Primo sold the Honda Civic, kei cars, such as the Honda Today, superminis like the Honda Capa, along with other Honda products, such as farm equipment, lawn mowers, portable generators, marine equipment, motorcycles, and scooters. A styling tradition was established when Honda Primo and Clio began operations, in that all Verno products had the rear license plate installed in the rear bumper, while Primo and Clio products had the rear license plate installed on the trunk lid or rear door for minivans.

As time progressed and sales began to diminish partly due to the collapse of the Japanese "bubble economy", "supermini" and "kei" vehicles that were specific to Honda Primo were "badge engineered" and sold at the other two sales channels, thereby providing smaller vehicles that sold better at both Honda Verno and Honda Clio locations. As of March 2006, the three sales chains were discontinued, with the establishment of Honda Cars dealerships. 

Honda sells genuine accessories through a separate retail chain called Honda Access for both their motorcycle, scooter and automobile products. In cooperation with corporate "keiretsu" partner Pioneer, Honda sells an aftermarket line of audio and in-car navigation equipment that can be installed in any vehicle under the brand name Gathers, which is available at Honda Access locations as well as Japanese auto parts retailers, such as Autobacs. Buyers of used vehicles are directed to a specific Honda retail chain that sells only used vehicles called Honda Auto Terrace.

In the spring of 2012, Honda in Japan introduced Honda Cars Small Store (Japanese) which is devoted to compact cars like the Honda Fit, and kei vehicles like the Honda Today.

*All cars sold at Honda Verno
Prelude, Integra, CR-X, Vigor, Saber, Ballade, Quint, Crossroad, Element, NSX, HR-V, Mobilio Spike, S2000, CR-V, That's, MDX, Rafaga, Capa, and the Torneo

*All cars sold at Honda Clio
Accord, Legend, Inspire, Avancier, S-MX, Lagreat, Stepwgn, Elysion, Stream, Odyssey (int'l), Domani, Concerto, Accord Tourer, Logo, Fit, Insight, That's, Mobilio, and the City

*All cars sold at Honda Primo
Civic, Life, Acty, Vamos, Hobio, Ascot, Ascot Innova, Torneo, Civic Ferio, Freed, Mobilio, Orthia, Capa, Today, Z, and the Beat

=== International efforts ===
In 2003, Honda released its Cog advertisement in the UK and on the Internet. To make the ad, the engineers at Honda constructed a Rube Goldberg Machine made entirely out of car parts from a Honda Accord Touring. To the chagrin of the engineers at Honda, all the parts were taken from two of only six hand-assembled pre-production models of the Accord. The advertisement depicted a single cog which sets off a chain of events that ends with the Honda Accord moving and Garrison Keillor speaking the tagline, "Isn't it nice when things just... work?" It took 606 takes to get it perfect. 

In 2004, they produced the Grrr advert, usually immediately followed by a shortened version of the 2005 Impossible Dream advert.
A post 2005 style Honda dealership in Moncton, Canada

In December 2005, Honda released The Impossible Dream a two-minute panoramic advertisement filmed in New Zealand, Japan and Argentina which illustrates the founder's dream to build performance vehicles. While singing the song "Impossible Dream", a man reaches for his racing helmet, leaves his trailer on a minibike, then rides a succession of vintage Honda vehicles: a motorcycle, then a car, then a powerboat, then goes over a waterfall only to reappear piloting a hot air balloon, with Garrison Keillor saying "I couldn't have put it better myself" as the song ends. The song is from the 1960s musical Man Of La Mancha, sung by Andy Williams.

In 2006, Honda released its Choir advertisement, for the UK and the internet. This had a 60-person choir who sang the car noises as film of the Honda Civic are shown.

In the mid to late 2000s in the United States, during model close-out sales for the current year before the start of the new model year, Honda's advertising has had an animated character known simply as Mr. Opportunity, voiced by Rob Paulsen. The casual looking man talked about various deals offered by Honda and ended with the phrase "I'm Mr. Opportunity, and I'm knockin'", followed by him "knocking" on the television screen or "thumping" the speaker at the end of radio ads. In addition, commercials for Honda's international hatchback, the Jazz, are parodies of well-known pop culture images such as Tetris and Thomas The Tank Engine.

In late 2006, Honda released an ad with ASIMO exploring a museum, looking at the exhibits with almost childlike wonderment (spreading out its arms in the aerospace exhibit, waving hello to an astronaut suit that resembles him, etc.), while Garrison Keillor ruminates on progress. It concludes with the tagline: "More forwards please".

Honda also sponsored ITV's coverage of Formula One in the UK for 2007. However they had announced that they would not continue in 2008 due to the sponsorship price requested by ITV being too high.

In May 2007, focuses on their strengths in racing and the use of the Red H badge  a symbol of what is termed as "Hondamentalism". The campaign highlights the lengths that Honda engineers go to in order to get the most out of an engine, whether it is for bikes, cars, powerboats  even lawnmowers. Honda released its Hondamentalism campaign. In the TV spot, Garrison Keillor says, "An engineer once said to build something great is like swimming in honey", while Honda engineers in white suits walk and run towards a great light, battling strong winds and flying debris, holding on to anything that will keep them from being blown away. Finally one of the engineers walks towards a red light, his hand outstretched. A web address is shown for the Hondamentalism website. The digital campaign aims to show how visitors to the site share many of the Hondamentalist characteristics.

At the beginning of 2008, Honda released  the Problem Playground. The advert outlines Honda's environmental responsibility, demonstrating a hybrid engine, more efficient solar panels and the FCX Clarity, a hydrogen powered car. The 90 second advert has large scale puzzles, involving Rubik's Cubes, large shapes and a 3-dimensional puzzle.

On 29 May 2008, Honda, in partnership with Channel 4, broadcast a live advertisement. It showed skydivers jumping from an aeroplane over Spain and forming the letters H, O, N, D and A in mid-air. This live advertisement is generally agreed to be the first of its kind on British television. The advert lasted three minutes. 

In 2009, American Honda released the Dream the Impossible documentary series, a collection of 58 minute web vignettes that focus on the core philosophies of Honda. Current short films include Failure: The Secret to Success, Kick Out the Ladder and Mobility 2088. They have Honda employees as well as Danica Patrick, Christopher Guest, Ben Bova, Chee Pearlman, Joe Johnston and Orson Scott Card. The film series plays at dreams.honda.com.

=== Sports ===
In Australia, Honda advertised heavily during most motor racing telecasts, and was the official sponsor of the 2006 FIA Formula 1 telecast on broadcaster channel "Ten". In fact, it was the only manufacturer involved in the 2006 Indy Racing League season. In a series of adverts promoting the history of Honda's racing heritage, Honda claimed it "built" cars that won 72 Formula 1 Grand Prix. Skeptics have accused Honda of interpreting its racing history rather liberally, saying that virtually all of the 72 victories were achieved by Honda powered (engined) machines, whereas the cars themselves were designed and built by Lotus F1, Williams F1, and McLaren F1 teams, respectively. However, former and current staff of the McLaren F1 team have reiterated that Honda contributed more than just engines and provided various chassis, tooling, and aerodynamic parts as well as funding. .

The late F1 driver Ayrton Senna stated that Honda probably played the most significant role in his three world championships. He had immense respect for founder, Soichiro Honda, and had a good relationship with Nobuhiko Kawamoto, the chairman of Honda at that time. Senna once called Honda "the greatest company in the world".

As part of its marketing campaign, Honda is an official partner and sponsor of the National Hockey League, the Anaheim Ducks of the NHL, and the arena named after it: Honda Center. Honda also sponsors The Honda Classic golf tournament and is a sponsor of Major League Soccer. The "Honda Player of the Year" award is presented in United States soccer. The "Honda Sports Award" is given to the best female athlete in each of twelve college sports in the United States. One of the twelve Honda Sports Award winners is chosen to receive the Honda-Broderick Cup, as "Collegiate Woman Athlete of the Year."

Honda will sponsoring La Liga club Valencia CF starting from 2014-15 season. Valencia CF will carry Honda Cars Valencia insignia at their football kits. 

Honda has been a presenting sponsor of the Los Angeles Marathon since 2010 in a three-year sponsorship deal with winners of the LA Marathon receiving a free Honda Accord. Since 1989, the Honda Campus All-Star Challenge has been a quizbowl tournament for Historically black colleges and universities.

== Facilities (partial list) ==

== Mainstream models ==

== US sales ==

 Calendar year Total US sales http://www.honda.com/newsandviews/local_news_content/%5B5147d%5D_Honda_2012_Digital_FactBook.pdf 
 1992 768,845 
 1993 716,546 
 1994 788,230 
 1995 794,579 
 1996 843,928 
 1997 940,386 
 1998 1,009,600 
 1999 1,076,893 
 2000 1,158,860 
 2001 1,207,639 
 2002 1,247,834 
 2003 1,349,847 
 2004 1,394,398 
 2005 1,462,472 
 2006 1,509,358 
 2007 1,551,542 
 2008 1,284,261 American Honda Reports 2008 Annual and December Monthly Sales 
 2009 1,150,784 
 2010 1,230,480 
 2011 1,147,000 
 2012 1,422,000 
 2013 1,525,312 http://hondanews.com/channels/corporate-headlines/releases/honda-sets-all-time-december-sales-record-to-earn-2nd-best-annual-sales-total-for-american-honda-acura-light-trucks-post-best-year-in-brand-history 

== Production numbers ==

 Calendar year Global production 
 2009 3,012,000 
 2010 3,643,000 
 2011 2,909,000 
 2012 4,110,000 

== See also ==

*Comparison of Honda water-pumps
*Honda advanced technology
*Honda Airport
*Honda Battle of the Bands
*Honda F.C. (Football (soccer) club)
*Honda Heat (Rugby union club)
*Honda Type R
*List of Honda assembly plants
*List of Honda transmissions
*Internavi

== Notes ==

== References ==
*"Move Over, Volvo: Honda Sets New Safety Standard for Itself", an article in the "News" section of the March 2004 issue of Motor Trend, on page 32
*
*The story of Honda's entry and growth in the American market is documented in Terry Sanders' film . Honda
*Honda's Midlife Crisis: Honda's slipping market position and views of Fukui Takeo (Chief Executive magazine, December 2005 issue)
*Honda's Corporate History

== External links ==

*Honda Worldwide site
*Honda Press Library (Japanese, but with graphical timelines of car and bike models)
*
*

 



[[Handball]]

Handball (also known as team handball, Olympic handball, European team handball, European handball, or Borden ball ) is a team sport in which two teams of seven players each (six outfield players and a goalkeeper on each team) pass a ball to throw it into the goal of the other team. A standard match consists of two periods of 30 minutes, and the team that scores more goals wins.

Modern handball is played on a court 40 by, with a goal in the center of each end. The goals are surrounded by a 6-meter zone where only the defending goalkeeper is allowed; the goals must be scored by throwing the ball from outside the zone or while "diving" into it. The sport is usually played indoors, but outdoor variants exist in the forms of field handball and Czech handball (which were more common in the past) and beach handball (also called sandball). The game is quite fast and includes body contact, as the defenders try to stop the attackers from approaching the goal. Goals are scored quite frequently; usually both teams score at least 20 goals each, and it is not uncommon for both teams to score more than 30 goals.

The game was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europe, chiefly in Scandinavia and Germany. The modern set of rules was published in 1917 in Germany, and had several revisions since. The first international games were played under these rules for men in 1925 and for women in 1930. Men's field handball was first played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, and the next time at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, and has been an Olympics sport since. Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics.

The International Handball Federation was formed in 1946, and has 174 member federations. The sport is most popular in continental Europe, whose countries have won every single medal in men's world championships since 1938, and all women's titles until 2013, when Brazil broke the series. The game also enjoys popularity in Far East, north Africa and Brazil.

==Origins and development==
Public during a women's international handball game in Metz.
There are records of handball-like games in medieval France, and among the Inuit in Greenland, in the Middle Ages. By the 19th century, there existed similar games of hndbold from Denmark, hzen in the Czech Republic, hdzan in Slovakia, gandbol in Ukraine, and torball in Germany.

The team handball game of today was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europeprimarily in Denmark, Germany, Norway and Sweden. The first written set of team handball rules was published in 1906 by the Danish gym teacher, lieutenant and Olympic medalist Holger Nielsen from Ordrup grammar school north of Copenhagen. The modern set of rules was published on 29 October 1917 by Max Heiser, Karl Schelenz, and Erich Konigh from Germany. After 1919 these rules were improved by Karl Schelenz. The first international games were played under these rules, between Germany and Belgium for men in 1925 and between Germany and Austria for women in 1930.

In 1926, the Congress of the International Amateur Athletics Federation nominated a committee to draw up international rules for field handball. The International Amateur Handball Federation was formed in 1928, and the International Handball Federation was formed in 1946.

Men's field handball was played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin. During the next several decades, indoor handball flourished and evolved in the Scandinavian countries. The sport re-emerged onto the world stage as team handball for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich. Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics. Due to its popularity in the region, the Eastern European countries that refined the event became the dominant force in the sport when it was reintroduced.

The International Handball Federation organised the men's world championship in 1938 and every 4 (sometimes 3) years from World War II to 1995. Since the 1995 world championship in Iceland, the competition has been every two years. The women's world championship has been played since 1957. The IHF also organizes women's and men's junior world championships. By July 2009, the IHF listed 166 member federations - approximately 795,000 teams and 19 million players.

==Rules==
The rules are laid out in the IHF's set of rules. 

===Summary===

Two teams of seven players (six field players plus one goalkeeper) take the field and attempt to score points by putting the game ball into the opposing team's goal. In handling the ball, players are subject to the following restrictions:

* After receiving the ball, players can pass, keep possession, or shoot the ball.
* If possessing the ball, players must dribble (similar to a basketball dribble), or can take up to three steps for up to three seconds at a time without dribbling.
* No attacking or defending players other than the defending goalkeeper are allowed to touch the floor of the goal area (within six metres of the goal). A shot or pass in the goal area is valid if completed before touching the floor. Goalkeepers are allowed outside the goal area, but are not allowed to cross the goal area boundary with the ball in their hands.
* The ball may not be passed back to the goalkeeper when they are positioned in the goal area.

Notable scoring opportunities can occur when attacking players jump into the goal area. For example, an attacking player may catch a pass while launching inside the goal area, and then shoot or pass before touching the floor. Doubling occurs when a diving attacking player passes to another diving team-mate.

===Playing field===
Schematic diagram of a handball playing field (German captions).

Handball is played on a court 40 x, with a goal in the center of each end. The goals are surrounded by a near-semicircular area, called the zone or the crease, defined by a line six meters from the goal. A dashed near-semicircular line nine metres from the goal marks the free-throw line. Each line on the court is part of the area it encompasses. This implies that the middle line belongs to both halves at the same time.

====Goals====
Each goal has a rectangular clearance area of three meters in width and two meters in height. It must be securely bolted either to the floor or the wall behind.

The goal posts and the crossbar must be made out of the same material (e.g., wood or aluminium) and feature a quadratic cross section with sides of 8 cm. The three sides of the beams visible from the playing field must be painted alternatingly in two contrasting colors which both have to contrast against the background. The colors on both goals must be the same.

Each goal must feature a net. This must be fastened in a such a way that a ball thrown into does not leave or pass the goal under normal circumstances. If necessary, a second net may be clasped to the back of the net on the inside.

====D-Zone====
The goals are surrounded by the crease. This area is delineated by two quarter circles with a radius of six metres around the far corners of each goal post and a connecting line parallel to the goal line. Only the defending goalkeeper is allowed inside this zone. However, the court players may catch and touch the ball in the air within it as long as the player starts his jump outside the zone and releases the ball before he lands (landing inside the perimeter is allowed in this case as long as the ball has been released).

If a player contacts the ground inside the goal perimeter, or the line surrounding the perimeter, he must take the most direct path out of it. However, should a player cross the zone in an attempt to gain an advantage (e.g., better position) their team cedes the ball. Similarly, violation of the zone by a defending player is penalized only if they do so in order to gain an advantage in defending.

====Substitution area====
Outside of one long edge of the playing field to both sides of the middle line are the substitution areas for each team. The areas usually contain the benches as seating opportunities. Team officials, substitutes, and suspended players must wait within this area. The area always lies to the same side as the team's own goal. During half-time, substitution areas are swapped. Any player entering or leaving the play must cross the substitution line which is part of the side line and extends 4.5 meters from the middle line to the team's side.

===Duration===
Team timeout. A standard match for all teams of 16 and older has two periods of 30 minutes with an interval of 1015 minutes. At half-time, teams switch sides of the court as well as benches. For youths the length of the halves is reduced25 minutes at ages 12 to 16, and 20 minutes at ages 8 to 12; though national federations of some countries may differ in their implementation from the official guidelines.

If a decision must be reached in a particular match (e.g., in a tournament) and it ends in a draw after regular time, there are at maximum two overtimes of five minutes with a one-minute break each. Should these not decide the game either, the winning team is determined in a penalty shootout (best-of-five rounds; if still tied, extra rounds afterwards until won by one team).

The referees may call timeout according to their sole discretion; typical reasons are injuries, suspensions, or court cleaning. Penalty throws should trigger a timeout only for lengthy delays, such as a change of the goalkeeper.

Each team may call one team timeout (TTO) per period which lasts one minute. This right may only be invoked by team in ball possession. To do so, the representative of the team lays a green card marked with a black T on the desk of the timekeeper. The timekeeper then immediately interrupts the game by sounding an acoustic signal and stops the time. 
As of 2012, rule changes allow three TTOs, and two of them can be used in either period of the game or overtime.

===Referees===
A handball match is led by two equal referees, namely the goal line referee and the court referee. Some national bodies allow games with only a single referee in special cases like illness on short notice. Should the referees disagree on any occasion, a decision is made on mutual agreement during a short timeout; or, in case of punishments, the more severe of the two comes into effect. The referees are obliged to make their decisions "on the basis of their observations of facts". Official rules, rule 17:11 Their judgements are final and can be appealed against only if not in compliance with the rules.

The referees (blue shirts) keep both teams between them. The referees position themselves in such a way that the team players are confined between them. They stand diagonally aligned so that each can observe one side line. Depending on their positions, one is called field referee and the other goal referee. These positions automatically switch on ball turnover. They physically exchange their positions approximately every 10 minutes (long exchange), and change sides every five minutes (short exchange).

The IHF defines 18 hand signals for quick visual communication with players and officials. The signal for warning or disqualification is accompanied by a yellow or red card, Official rules, hand signal 13 respectively. The referees also use whistle blows to indicate infractions or to restart the play.

The referees are supported by a scorekeeper and a timekeeper who attend to formal things such as keeping track of goals and suspensions, or starting and stopping the clock, respectively. They also keep an eye on the benches and notify the referees on substitution errors. Their desk is located in between the two substitutions areas.

===Team players, substitutes, and officials===
Each team consists of seven players on court and seven substitute players on the bench. One player on the court must be the designated goalkeeper, differing in his clothing from the rest of the field players. Substitution of players can be done in any number and at any time during game play. An exchange takes place over the substitution line. A prior notification of the referees is not necessary.

Some national bodies, such as the Deutsche Handball Bund (DHB, "German Handball Federation"), allow substitution in junior teams only when in ball possession or during timeouts. This restriction is intended to prevent early specialization of players to offence or defence.

====Field players====
Field players are allowed to touch the ball with any part of their bodies above and including the knee. As in several other team sports, a distinction is made between catching and dribbling. A player who is in possession of the ball may stand stationary for only three seconds, and may take only three steps. They must then either shoot, pass, or dribble the ball. Taking more than three steps at any time is considered travelling, and results in a turnover. A player may dribble as many times as they want (though, since passing is faster, it is the preferred method of attack), as long as during each dribble the hand contacts only the top of the ball. Therefore, carrying is completely prohibited, and results in a turnover. After the dribble is picked up, the player has the right to another three seconds or three steps. The ball must then be passed or shot, as further holding or dribbling will result in a double dribble turnover and a free throw for the other team. Other offensive infractions that result in a turnover include charging, setting an illegal screen, or carrying the ball into the six-meter zone.

====Goalkeeper====
Only the goalkeepers are allowed to move freely within the goal perimeter, although they may not cross the goal perimeter line while carrying or dribbling the ball. Within the zone, they are allowed to touch the ball with all parts of their bodies including their feet. The goalkeepers may participate in the normal play of their teammates. They may be substituted by a regular field player if their team elects to use this scheme in order to outnumber the defending players. This field player becomes the designated goalkeeper on the court; and must wear some vest or bib to be identified as such.

If either goalkeeper deflects the ball over the outer goal line, their team stays in possession of the ball, in contrast to other sports like association football. The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from within the zone ("goalkeeper throw"). Passing to one's own goalkeeper results in a turnover. Throwing the ball against the head of the goalkeeper when he is not moving is to be punished by disqualification ("red card").

====Team officials====
Each team is allowed to have a maximum of four team officials seated on the benches. An official is anybody who is neither player nor substitute. One official must be the designated representative who is usually the team manager. The representative may call a team timeout once every period and may address the scorekeeper, timekeeper, and referees. As of 2012, the representative may call a total of three team timeouts, with a maximum of two per period. Other officials typically include physicians or managers. Neither official is allowed to enter the playing court without the permission of the referees.

===Ball===
A size III handball. The ball is spherical and must be made either of leather or a synthetic material. It is not allowed to have a shiny or slippery surface. As the ball is intended to be operated by a single hand, its official sizes vary depending on age and gender of the participating teams.

 Size Class Circumference (cm) Weight (g) 
 III Men and male over-16s 5960 425475 
 II Women, male over-12s, and female over-14s 5456 325375 
 I Over-8s 5052 290330 

Resin product used to improve ball handling.
Though this is not officially regulated, the ball is usually resinated. The resin improves the ability of the players to manipulate the ball with a single hand, as in spinning trick shots. Some indoor arenas prohibit the usage of resin, since many products leave sticky stains on the floor.

===Awarded throws===
The referees may award a special throw to a team. This usually happens after certain events such as scored goals, off-court balls, turnovers and timeouts. All of these special throws require the thrower to obtain a certain position, and pose restrictions on the positions of all other players. Sometimes the execution must wait for a whistle blow by the referee.

;Throw-off: A throw-off takes place from the center of the court. The thrower must touch the middle line with one foot, and all the other offensive players must stay in their half until the referee restarts the game. The defending players must keep a distance of at least three meters from the thrower. A throw-off occurs at the beginning of each period and after the opposing team scores a goal. It must be cleared by the referees.

:Modern handball introduced the "fast throw-off" concept; i.e., the play will be immediately restarted by the referees as soon as the executing team fulfills its requirements. Many teams leverage this rule to score easy goals before the opposition has time to form a stable defense line.

;Throw-in: The team which did not touch the ball last is awarded a throw-in when the ball fully crosses the side line or touches the ceiling. If the ball crosses the outer goal line, a throw-in is awarded only if the defending field players touched the ball last. Execution requires the thrower to place one foot on the nearest outer line to the cause. All defending players must keep a distance of three meters. However, they are allowed to stand immediately outside their own goal area even when the distance is less than three meters.

;Goalkeeper-throw: If the ball crosses the outer goal line without interference from the defending team or when deflected by the defending team's goalkeeper, or when the attacking team violates the D-zone as described above, a goalkeeper-throw is awarded to the defending team. This is the most common turnover. The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from anywhere within the goal area.

;Free-throw: A free-throw restarts the play after an interruption by the referees. It takes places from the spot where the interruption was caused, as long as this spot is outside of the free-throw line of the opposing team. In the latter case, the throw is deferred to the nearest spot on the free-throw line. Free-throws are the equivalent to free-kicks in association football; however, making them is typically not seen as poor sportsmanship for the defending side, and in itself, they carry no major disadvantages. (In particular, being awarded a free throw while being on warning for passive play will not reset the warning, whereas a shot on goal will.) The thrower may take a direct attempt for a goal which, however, is rarely feasible if the defending team has organised a defense. However, if a free throw is awarded and the half or game ends, a direct throw at the goal is typically attempted, which occasionally goes in.

A seven-metre throw.
;Seven-meter throw: A seven-meter throw is awarded when a clear chance of scoring is illegally prevented anywhere on the court by an opposing team player, official, or spectator. It is awarded also when the referees have interrupted a legitimate scoring chance for any reason. The thrower steps with one foot behind the seven-meter line with only the defending goalkeeper between him and the goal. The goalkeeper must keep a distance of three meters, which is marked by a short tick on the floor. All other players must remain behind the free-throw line until execution. The thrower must await the whistle blow of the referee. A seven-meter throw is the equivalent to a penalty kick in association football; however, it is far more common and typically occurs several times in a single game.

===Penalties===
Yellow card shown in a handball match.
Penalties are given to players, in progressive format, for fouls that require more punishment than just a free-throw. Actions directed mainly at the opponent and not the ball (such as reaching around, holding, pushing, hitting, tripping, and jumping into opponent) as well as contact from the side, from behind a player or impeding the opponent's counterattack are all considered illegal and are subject to penalty. Any infraction that prevents a clear scoring opportunity will result in a seven-meter penalty shot.

Typically the referee will give a warning yellow card for an illegal action; but, if the contact was particularly dangerous, like striking the opponent in the head, neck or throat, the referee can forego the warning for an immediate two-minute suspension. A player can get only one warning before receiving a two-minute suspension. One player is only permitted two two-minute suspensions; after the third time, they will be shown the red card.

A red card results in an ejection from the game and a two-minute penalty for the team. A player may receive a red card directly for particularly rough penalties. For instance, any contact from behind during a fast break is now being treated with a red card. A red-carded player has to leave the playing area completely. A player who is disqualified may be substituted with another player after the two-minute penalty is served. A coach or official can also be penalized progressively. Any coach or official who receives a two-minute suspension will have to pull out one of their players for two minutesnote: the player is not the one punished, and can be substituted in again, as the penalty consists of the team playing with a one player less than the opposing team.

After having lost the ball during an attack, the ball has to be laid down quickly or else the player not following this rule will face a two-minute suspension. Also, gesticulating or verbally questioning the referee's order, as well as arguing with the officials' decisions, will normally result in a two-minute suspension. If this is done in a very provocative way, the player can be given a double two-minute suspension if they do not walk straight off the field to the bench after being given a suspension, or if the referee deems the tempo deliberately slow. Illegal substitution (that is, any substitution that does not take place in the specified substitution area, or where the entering player enters before the exiting player exits) is also punishable by a two-minute suspension.

==Gameplay==

===Formations===
Positions of attacking (red) and defending players (blue), in a 5-1 defense formation. (German captions)
Players are typically referred to by the position they are playing. The positions are always denoted from the view of the respective goalkeeper, so that a defender on the right opposes an attacker on the left. However, not all of the following positions may be occupied depending on the formation or potential suspensions.

;Offence:
* Left and right wingman. These typically are fast players who excel at ball control and wide jumps from the outside of the goal perimeter in order to get into a better shooting angle at the goal. Teams usually try to occupy the left position with a right-handed player and vice versa.
* Left and right backcourt. Goal attempts by these players are typically made by jumping high and shooting over the defenders. Thus, it is usually advantageous to have tall players with a powerful shot for these positions.
* Centre backcourt. A player with experience is preferred on this position who acts as playmaker and the handball equivalent of a basketball point guard.
* Pivot (left and right, if applicable). This player tends to intermingle with the defence, setting picks and attempting to disrupt the defence's formation. This positions requires the least jumping skills; but ball control and physical strength are an advantage.

;Defence:
* Far left and far right. The opponents of the wingmen.
* Half left and half right. The opponents of the left and right backcourts.
* Back center (left and right). Opponent of the pivot.
* Front center. Opponent of the center backcourt, may also be set against another specific backcourt player.

===Offensive play===
Attacks are played with all field players on the side of the defenders. Depending on the speed of the attack, one distinguishes between three attack waves with a decreasing chance of success:

Women's handball - a jump shot completes a fast-break.
Men's handball - a jump shot (Kiril Lazarov, world record-holder for the number of goals scored in one world championship) .
;First wave: First wave attacks are characterised by the absence of defending players around their goal perimeter. The chance of success is very high, as the throwing player is unhindered in his scoring attempt. Such attacks typically occur after an intercepted pass or a steal, and if the defending team can switch fast to offence. The far left or far right will usually try to run the attack, as they are not as tightly bound in the defence. On a turnover, they immediately sprint forward and receive the ball halfway to the other goal. Thus, these positions are commonly held by quick players.

;Second wave: If the first wave is not successful and some defending players have gained their positions around the zone, the second wave comes into play: the remaining players advance with quick passes to locally outnumber the retreating defenders. If one player manages to step up to the perimeter or catches the ball at this spot, he becomes unstoppable by legal defensive means. From this position, the chance of success is naturally very high. Second wave attacks became much more important with the "fast throw-off" rule.

;Third wave: The time during which the second wave may be successful is very short, as then the defenders closed the gaps around the zone. In the third wave, the attackers use standardized attack patterns usually involving crossing and passing between the back court players who either try to pass the ball through a gap to their pivot, take a jumping shot from the backcourt at the goal, or lure the defense away from a wingman.

The third wave evolves into the normal offensive play when all defenders not only reach the zone, but gain their accustomed positions. Some teams then substitute specialized offence players. However, this implies that these players must play in the defence should the opposing team be able to switch quickly to offence. The latter is another benefit for fast playing teams.

If the attacking team does not make sufficient progress (eventually releasing a shot on goal), the referees can call passive play (since about 1995, the referee gives a passive warning some time before the actual call by holding one hand up in the air, signalling that the attacking team should release a shot soon), turning control over to the other team. A shot on goal or an infringement leading to a yellow card or two-minute penalty will mark the start of a new attack, causing the hand to be taken down; but a shot blocked by the defense or a normal free throw will not. If it were not for this rule, it would be easy for an attacking team to stall the game indefinitely, as it is difficult to intercept a pass without at the same time conceding dangerous openings towards the goal.

===Defensive play===
The usual formations of the defense are 6-0, when all the defense players line up between the 6-meter and 9-meter lines to form a wall; the 5-1, when one of the players cruises outside the 9-meter perimeter, usually targeting the center forwards while the other 5 line up on the 6-meter line; and the less common 4-2 when there are two such defenders out front. Very fast teams will also try a 3-3 formation which is close to a switching man-to-man style. The formations vary greatly from country to country, and reflect each country's style of play. 6-0 is sometimes known as "flat defense", and all other formations are usually called "offensive defense".

==Organisation==
Handball teams are usually organised as clubs. On a national level, the clubs are associated in federations which organize matches in leagues and tournaments.

===International body===
The International Handball Federation (IHF) is the administrative and controlling body for international handball. The federation organizes world championships, held in uneven years, with separate competitions for men and women. 

The IHF World Men's Handball Championship 2009 and 2011 title holders were France; the 2013 title holders are Spain. Mens World Championships Fixtures and Results. IHF 2013 

The IHF World Women's Handball Championship 2009 title holders were Russia; the IHF 2011 Womens World Championship title holders are Norway. The IHF 2013 Womens World Championship will be hosted in Serbia, December 622. Host nation elect to play their group matches in a handball stronghold alongside Denmark and Brazil. IHF 6/15/2013 

The IHF is composed of five continental federations which organize continental championships held every other second year. In addition to these competitions between national teams, the federations arrange international tournaments between club teams. The federations and their corresponding tournaments and members are summarize in the following table:

 International Handball Federation (IHF) 
 Championship IHF World Men's Handball Championship  IHF World Women's Handball Championship 
 Club IHF Super Globe 
 Members 
 Asia  Asian Handball Federation (AHF) 
 Championship Asian Women's Handball Championship  Asian Men's Handball Championship 
 Club Asian Club League Handball Championship 
 Members * Afghanistan * Bahrain * Bangladesh * China * Chinese Taipei * Hong Kong * India * Iran * Iraq * Japan * Jordan * Kazakhstan * Kuwait * Kyrgyzstan * Lebanon * Macau * Malaysia * Mongolia * Nepal * North Korea * Oman * Pakistan * Palestinian Authority * Philippines * Qatar * Saudi Arabia * Singapore * South Korea * Syria * Tajikistan * Thailand * Turkmenistan * United Arab Emirates * Uzbekistan * Vietnam * Yemen 
 Africa  African Handball Confederation (CAHB) 
 Championship African Men's Handball Championship  African Women's Handball Championship 
 Club Champions League  Cup Winners' Cup  African Handball Super Cup 
 Members * Algeria * Angola * Burundi * Benin * Cameroon * Republic of Cape Verde * Central African Republic * Chad * Comoros * Congo * Cte d'Ivoire * Democratic Republic of the Congo * Djibouti * Egypt * Ethiopia * Gabon * Gambia * Ghana * Guinea * Guinea-Bissau * Kenya * Lesotho * Liberia * Libya * Madagascar * Mali * Mauritania * Mauritius * Morocco * Mozambique * Namibia * Nigeria * Niger * Rwanda * Senegal * Seychelles * Sierra Leone * Somalia * South Africa * Sudan * Tanzania * Togo * Tunisia * Uganda * Zambia * Zimbabwe 
 Americas  Pan-American Team Handball Federation (PATHF) 
 Championship Pan American Men's Handball Championship  Pan American Women's Handball Championship 
 Members * Argentina * Barbados * Brazil * Canada * Chile * Colombia * Costa Rica * Cuba * Dominican Republic * Ecuador * El Salvador * Greenland * Guatemala * Haiti * Honduras * Mexico * Nicaragua * Panama * Paraguay * Puerto Rico * Trinidad and Tobago * United States * Uruguay * Venezuela 
 Oceania  Oceania Handball Federation (OHF) 
 Championship Oceania Handball Nations Cup 
 Club Oceania Champions Cup 
 Members * Australia * Cook Islands * New Zealand * Samoa * Vanuatu * French Polynesia * New Caledonia * Wallis and Futuna 
 Europe  European Handball Federation (EHF) 
 Championship European Women's Handball Championship  European Men's Handball Championship 
 Club Women * Champions League * Cup Winners' Cup * EHF Cup * Challenge Cup * Champions Trophy 
 Men * Champions League * Cup Winners' Cup * EHF Cup * Challenge Cup * Champions Trophy 
 Members * Albania * Armenia * Austria * Azerbaijan * Belarus * Belgium * Bosnia and Herzegovina * Bulgaria * Croatia * Cyprus * Czech Republic * Denmark * England * Estonia * Faroe Islands * Finland * France * Georgia * Germany * Greece * Hungary * Iceland * Ireland * Israel * Italy * Latvia * Liechtenstein * Lithuania * Luxembourg * Macedonia * Malta * Moldova * Monaco * Montenegro * Netherlands * Norway * Poland * Portugal * Romania * Russia * Scotland * Serbia * Slovakia * Slovenia * Spain * Sweden * Switzerland * Turkey * Ukraine * Great Britain * Kosovo 

Handball is an Olympic sport played during the Summer Olympics. It is also played during the Pan American Games, All-Africa Games, and Asian Games. It is also played on Mediterranean games.

===National competitions===
* Bosnia and Herzegovina: Handball Championship of Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Croatia: Croatian First League of Handball
* Czech: Zubr extraliga
* Denmark: GuldBageren Ligaen, Jack & Jones Ligaen
* England England Handball Association
* France: Ligue Nationale de Handball
* Germany: Handball-Bundesliga
* Greece: Greek Men's handball championship
* Hungary: Nemzeti Bajnoksg I (men), Nemzeti Bajnoksg I (women)
* Iceland: N1 deildin
* Macedonia: Macedonian Handball Super League
* Montenegro: First League (men), First League (women), Second League (women)
* Netherlands: NHV Eredivisie (men), Eredivisie (women)
* Norway: Postenligaen
* Poland: Polish Ekstraklasa Men's Handball League, Polish Ekstraklasa Women's Handball League
* Portugal: Andebol 1 (men), 1 Diviso Feminino (women)
* Romania: Liga Naional (men), Liga Naional (women)
* Scotland: Scottish Handball League
* Serbia: Serbian First League of Handball
* Slovakia: Slovensk hadzanrska extraliga
* Slovenia: Slovenian First League of Handball, Handball Cup of Slovenia
* Spain: Liga ASOBAL, Divisin de Plata de Balonmano
* Sweden: Elitserien
* Turkey: Turkish Handball Super League
* United States: U.S. intercollegiate handball championships
* India: Indian Handball super league Team Noida college of physical Education. (G)

==Attendance records==
The current worldwide attendance record for seven-a-side handball was set on 21 May 2011, during the Danish Cup final between AG Kbenhavn (Copenhagen) and Bjerringbro-Silkeborg Elitehndbold. The game drew 36,651 spectators to Parken Stadium.
On 20 April 2012, the EHF Champions League attendance record was also set at Parken, albeit in a different seating configuration. 21,293 spectators saw AG Kbenhavn host defending champions FC Barcelona Handbol in a quarterfinal game. 

==Commemorative coins==
Handball commemorative coin
Handball events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the 10 Greek Handball commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. On the coin, the modern athlete directs the ball in his hands towards his target, while in the background the ancient athlete is just about to throw a ball, in a game known as cheirosphaira, in a representation taken from a black-figure pottery vase of the Archaic period.

The most recent commemorative coin featuring handball is the British 50 pence coin, part of the series of coins commemorating the London 2012 Olympic Games UK 2012 Olympics commemorative coin

==References==
Notes

==External links==

* International Handball Federation (IHF)
* USA Team Handball
* Australian Handball Federation (AHF)
* European Handball Federation (EHF)
* EHF Champions League
* Official rules in English, French and German
* WorldHandball.com
* Team Handball News - Handball news and commentary
* FAQ - Frequently Asked Questions concerning the sport, its organisation and popularity
* Street Handball

*



[[Hilbert's basis theorem]]

In mathematics, specifically commutative algebra, Hilbert's basis theorem says that a polynomial ring over a Noetherian ring is Noetherian.
==Statement==

If R is a ring, let R denote the ring of polynomials in the indeterminate X over R. Hilbert proved that if R is "not too large", in the sense that if R is Noetherian, the same must be true for R. Formally,

Hilbert's Basis Theorem. If R is a Noetherian ring, then R is a Noetherian ring.

Corollary. If R is a Noetherian ring, then R..., Xn is a Noetherian ring.

This can be translated into algebraic geometry as follows: every algebraic set over a field can be described as the set of common roots of finitely many polynomial equations. proved the theorem (for the special case of polynomial rings over a field) in the course of his proof of finite generation of rings of invariants. 

Hilbert produced an innovative proof by contradiction using mathematical induction; his method does not give an algorithm to produce the finitely many basis polynomials for a given ideal: it only shows that they must exist. One can determine basis polynomials using the method of Grbner bases.

==Proof==
:Theorem. If is a left (resp. right) Noetherian ring, then the polynomial ring R is also a left (resp. right) Noetherian ring.

Remark. We will give two proofs, in both only the "left" case is considered, the proof for the right case is similar.

===First Proof===
Suppose a  R were a non-finitely generated left-ideal. Then by recursion (using the axiom of countable choice) there is a sequence {f0, f1, ...} of polynomials such that if b'n is the left ideal generated by f0, ..., f'n1 then fn in a\b'n is of minimal degree. It is clear that {deg(f0), deg(f1), ...}, is a non-decreasing sequence of naturals. Let an be the leading coefficient of fn and let b be the left ideal in generated by {a0, a1, ...}. Since is left-Noetherian, we have that b must be finitely generated; and since the an comprise an -basis, it follows that for a finite amount of them, say {a0, ..., a'N1}, will suffice. So for example, 

: 

Now consider 

: 

whose leading term is equal to that of fN; moreover, g  b'N. However, fN  b'N, which means that fN  g  a\b'N has degree less than fN, contradicting the minimality.

===Second Proof=== 
Let a  R be a left-ideal. Let b be the set of leading coefficients of members of a. This is obviously a left-ideal over , and so is finitely generated by the leading coefficients of finitely many members of a; say f0, ..., f'N1. Let be the maximum of the set {deg(f0), ..., deg(f'N1)}, and let b'k be the set of leading coefficients of members of a, whose degree is  k. As before, the b'k are left-ideals over , and so are finitely generated by the leading coefficients of finitely many members of a, say 

: 

with degrees  k. Now let a*  R be the left-ideal generated by 

: 

We have a*  a and claim also a  a*. Suppose for the sake of contradiction this is not so. Then let h  a\a* be of minimal degree, and denote its leading coefficient by .

:Case 1: deg(h)  d. Regardless of this condition, we have a  b, so is a left-linear combination 

:: 

:of the coefficients of the fj. Consider 

:: 

:which has the same leading term as ; moreover h0  a* while h  a*. Therefore h  h0  a\a* and deg(h  h0) < deg(h), which contradicts minimality.

:Case 2: deg(h) k < d. Then a  b'k so is a left-linear combination 

:: 

:of the leading coefficients of the . Considering 

:: 

:we yield a similar contradiction as in Case 1.

Thus our claim holds, and a a* which is finitely generated.

Note that the only reason we had to split into two cases was to ensure that the powers of multiplying the factors, were non-negative in the constructions.

== Applications ==
Let be a Noetherian commutative ring. Hilbert's basis theorem has some immediate corollaries. 

#By induction we see that R..., X'n1 will also be Noetherian. 
#Since any affine variety over Rn (i.e. a locus-set of a collection of polynomials) may be written as the locus of an ideal a  R..., X'n1 and further as the locus of its generators, it follows that every affine variety is the locus of finitely many polynomials  i.e. the intersection of finitely many hypersurfaces. 
#If is a finitely-generated -algebra, then we know that ring|A  R..., X'n1/(a)], where a a set of polynomials. We can assume that a is an ideal and thus is finitely generated. So is a free -algebra (on generators) generated by finitely many relations A  R..., X'n1/(p0, ..., p'N1).

==Mizar System==
The Mizar project has completely formalized and automatically checked a proof of Hilbert's basis theorem in the HILBASIS file.

==References==
* Cox, Little, and O'Shea, Ideals, Varieties, and Algorithms, Springer-Verlag, 1997.
*



[[Heterocyclic compound]]

Pyridine, a heterocyclic compound
cyclo-octasulfur, a homocyclic compound

A heterocyclic compound is a cyclic compound that has atoms of at least two different elements as members of its ring(s). IUPAC Gold Book heterocyclic compounds The counterparts of heterocyclic compounds are homocyclic compounds, the rings of which are made of a single element.

Although heterocyclic compounds may be inorganic, most contain at least one carbon.
Since in organic chemistry non-carbons usually are considered to replace carbon atoms, they are called heteroatoms, meaning 'different from carbon and hydrogen' (rings of heteroatoms of the same element are homocyclic). The IUPAC recommends the Hantzsch-Widman nomenclature for naming heterocyclic compounds.

Heterocyclic chemistry is the branch of chemistry dealing with synthesis, properties, and applications of heterocycles.

== Classification based on electronic structure ==
Heterocyclic compounds can be usefully classified based on their electronic structure. The saturated heterocycles behave like the acyclic derivatives. Thus, piperidine and tetrahydrofuran are conventional amines and ethers, with modified steric profiles. Therefore, the study of heterocyclic chemistry focuses especially on unsaturated derivatives, and the preponderance of work and applications involves unstrained 5- and 6-membered rings. Included are pyridine, thiophene, pyrrole, and furan. Another large class of heterocycles are fused to benzene rings, which for pyridine, thiophene, pyrrole, and furan are quinoline, benzothiophene, indole, and benzofuran, respectively. Fusion of two benzene rings gives rise to a third large family of compounds, respectively the acridine, dibenzothiophene, carbazole, and dibenzofuran. The unsaturated rings can be classified according to the participation of the heteroatom in the pi system.

== 3-membered rings ==
Heterocycles with three atoms in the ring are more reactive because of ring strain. Those containing one heteroatom are, in general, stable. Those with two heteroatoms are more likely to occur as reactive intermediates.
Common 3-membered heterocycles with one heteroatom are:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Aziridine Azirine 
 Oxygen Oxirane (ethylene oxide, epoxides) Oxirene 
 Sulfur Thiirane (episulfides) Thiirene 

Those with two heteroatoms include:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Diazirine 
 Nitrogen/oxygen Oxaziridine 
 Oxygen Dioxirane 

== 4-membered rings ==
Compounds with one heteroatom:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Azetidine Azete 
 Oxygen Oxetane Oxete 
 Sulfur Thietane Thiete 

Compounds with two heteroatoms:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Diazetidine 
 Oxygen Dioxetane Dioxete 
 Sulfur Dithietane Dithiete 

== 5-membered rings ==
With heterocycles containing five atoms, the unsaturated compounds are frequently more stable because of aromaticity.

Five-membered rings with one heteroatom:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Pyrrolidine (Azolidine is not used) Pyrrole (Azole is not used) 
 Oxygen Tetrahydrofuran(Oxolane is rare) Furan (Oxole is not used) 
 Sulfur Thiolane Thiophene (Thiole is not used) 
 Boron Borolane Borole 
 Phosphorus Phospholane Phosphole 
 Arsenic Arsolane Arsole 
 Antimony Stibolane Stibole 
 Bismuth Bismolane Bismole 
 Silicon Silolane Silole 
 Tin Stannolane Stannole 

The 5-membered ring compounds containing two heteroatoms, at least one of which is nitrogen, are collectively called the azoles. Thiazoles and isothiazoles contain a sulfur and a nitrogen atom in the ring. Dithiolanes have two sulfur atoms.

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated (and partially unsaturated) 
 Nitrogen/nitrogen Imidazolidine Pyrazolidine Imidazole (Imidazoline)Pyrazole (Pyrazoline) 
 Nitrogen/oxygen OxazolidineIsoxazolidine Oxazole (Oxazoline)Isoxazole 
 Nitrogen/sulfur ThiazolidineIsothiazolidine Thiazole (Thiazoline)Isothiazole 
 Oxygen/oxygen Dioxolane 
 Sulfur/sulfur Dithiolane 

A large group of 5-membered ring compounds with three heteroatoms also exists. One example is dithiazoles that contain two sulfur and a nitrogen atom.

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 3  Nitrogen Triazoles 
 2  Nitrogen / 1  oxygen FurazanOxadiazole 
 2  Nitrogen / 1  sulfur Thiadiazole 
 1  Nitrogen / 2  sulfur Dithiazole 

Five-member ring compounds with four heteroatoms:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 4  Nitrogen Tetrazole 
 

With 5-heteroatoms, the compound may be considered inorganic rather than heterocyclic. Pentazole is the all nitrogen heteroatom unsaturated compound.

== 6-membered rings ==
Six-membered rings with a single heteroatom:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Piperidine (Azinane is not used) Pyridine (Azine is not used) 
 Oxygen Oxane Pyran (2H-Oxine is not used) 
 Sulfur Thiane Thiopyran (2H-Thiine is not used) 
 Silicon Salinane Siline 
 Germanium Germinane Germine 
 Tin Stanninane Stannine 
 Boron Borinane Borinine 
 Phosphorus Phosphinane Phosphinine 
 Arsenic Arsinane Arsinine 

With two heteroatoms:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen / nitrogen Piperazine Diazines 
 Oxygen / nitrogen Morpholine Oxazine 
 Sulfur / nitrogen Thiomorpholine Thiazine 
 Oxygen / oxygen Dioxane Dioxine 
 Sulfur / sulfur Dithiane Dithiine 

With three heteroatoms:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Triazine 
 Oxygen Trioxane 
 Sulfur Trithiane 

With four heteroatoms:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Tetrazine 

The hypothetical compound with six nitrogen heteroatoms would be hexazine.

== 7-membered rings ==
With 7-membered rings, the heteroatom must be able to provide an empty pi orbital (e.g., boron) for "normal" aromatic stabilization to be available; otherwise, homoaromaticity may be possible. Compounds with one heteroatom include:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Azepane Azepine 
 Oxygen Oxepane Oxepine 
 Sulfur Thiepane Thiepine 
 

Those with two heteroatoms include:

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Homopiperazine Diazepine 
 Nitrogen/sulfur Thiazepine 

== 8-membered rings ==

 Heteroatom Saturated Unsaturated 
 Nitrogen Azocane Azocine 
 Sulfur 

== Images ==
:Names in italics are retained by IUPAC and they do not follow the Hantzsch-Widman nomenclature

 Saturated Unsaturated 
 Heteroatom Nitrogen Oxygen Sulfur Nitrogen Oxygen Sulfur 
 3-Atom Ring Aziridine Oxirane Thiirane Azirine Oxirene Thiirene 
 Structure of Aziridine Structure of Oxirane Structure of Thiirane Structure of Azirine Structure of Oxirene Structure of Thiirene 
 4-Atom Ring Azetidine Oxetane Thietane Azete Oxete Thiete 
 Structure of Acetidine Structure of Oxetane Structure of Thietane Structure of Azete Structure of Oxete Structure of Thiete 
 5-Atom Ring Pyrrolidine Oxolane Thiolane Pyrrole Furan Thiophene 
 Structure of Pyrrolidine Structure of Oxolane Structure of Thiolane Structure of Pyrrole Structure of Furan Structure of Thiophene 
 6-Atom Ring Piperidine Oxane Thiane Pyridine Pyran Thiopyran 
 Structure of Piperidine Structure of Oxane Structure of Thiane Structure of Pyridine Structure of Pyran Structure of Thiopyran 
 7-Atom Ring Azepane Oxepane Thiepane Azepine Oxepine Thiepine 
 Structure of Azepane Structure of Oxepane Structure of Thiepane Structure of Azepine Structure of Oxepine Structure of Thiepine 

== Fused rings ==
Heterocyclic rings systems that are formally derived by fusion with other rings, either carbocyclic or heterocyclic, have a variety of common and systematic names. For example, with the benzo-fused unsaturated nitrogen heterocycles, pyrrole provides indole or isoindole depending on the orientation. The pyridine analog is quinoline or isoquinoline. For azepine, benzazepine is the preferred name. Likewise, the compounds with two benzene rings fused to the central heterocycle are carbazole, acridine, and dibenzoazepine.

== History of heterocyclic chemistry ==
The history of heterocyclic chemistry began in the 1800s, in step with the development of organic chemistry. Some noteworthy developments: E. Campaigne "Adrien Albert and the Rationalization of Heterocyclic Chemistry" J. Chemical Education 1986, Volume 6, 860. 
1818: Brugnatelli isolates alloxan from uric acid
1832: Dobereiner produces furfural (a furan) by treating starch with sulfuric acid
1834: Runge obtains pyrrole ("fiery oil") by dry distillation of bones
1906: Friedlander synthesizes indigo dye, allowing synthetic chemistry to displace a large agricultural industry
1936: Treibs isolates chlorophyl derivatives from crude oil, explaining the biological origin of petroleum.
1951: Chargaff's rules are described, highlighting the role of heterocyclic compounds (purines and pyrimidines) in the genetic code.

== Commercial exploitation ==
Leading companies with a vast number of patents related to heterocyclic compounds are Bayer, Merck, Ciba-Geigy, Pfizer, Eli Lily, BASF, Hoffmann La Roche, ER Sqibb, Warner Lambert and Hoechst. Companies with the highest number of patents related to heterocyclic compounds. 

== References ==

== External links ==

* Hantzsch-Widman nomenclature, IUPAC
* Heterocyclic amines in cooked meat, US CDC
* List of known and probable carcinogens, American Cancer Society
* List of known carcinogens by the State of California, Proposition 65 (more comprehensive)

 



[[Harry Connick, Jr.]]

Joseph Harry Fowler Connick, Jr. (born September 11, 1967) is an American singer, musician and actor. He has sold over 28 million albums worldwide. Connick is ranked among the top 60 best-selling male artists in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America, with 16 million in certified sales. He has seven top-20 US albums, and ten number-1 US jazz albums, earning more number-one albums than any other artist in the US jazz chart history. Chart Beat, Billboard, April 9, 2009 

Connick's best selling album in the United States is his 1993 Christmas album When My Heart Finds Christmas, which also is one of the best selling Christmas albums in the United States. His highest charting album, is his 2004 release Only You which reached No. 5 in the U.S. and No. 6 in Britain. He has won three Grammy awards and two Emmy Awards. He played Grace's husband, Dr. Leo Markus, on the TV sitcom Will & Grace from 2002 to 2006.

Connick began his acting career as a tail gunner in the World War II film Memphis Belle in 1990. He played a serial killer in Copycat in 1995, before being cast as jet fighter pilot in the 1996 blockbuster Independence Day. Connick's first role as a leading man was in 1998's Hope Floats with Sandra Bullock. His first thriller film since Copycat came in 2003 in the film Basic with John Travolta. Additionally, he played the violent ex-husband in Bug, before two romantic comedies, 2007's P.S. I Love You, and the leading man in New in Town with Rene Zellweger in 2009. In 2011, he appeared in the family film Dolphin Tale as Dr. Clay Haskett and in the 2014 sequel, Dolphin Tale 2.

==Early life==
Harry Connick, Jr. was born and raised in New Orleans, Louisiana. His mother, Anita Frances (ne Levy; later Livingston; Stated on Finding Your Roots, PBS, March 25, 2012 May 22, 1926  July 1981), was a lawyer and judge in New Orleans and, later, a Louisiana Supreme Court justice. His father, Joseph Harry Fowler Connick, Sr., was the district attorney of Orleans Parish from 19732003. His parents also owned a record store. Connick's father is a Catholic of Irish, English, and German ancestry. Musician balancing his work as actor|The Columbus Dispatch. Dispatch.com (2009-02-02). Retrieved on 2012-05-08. http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001065/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm Connick's mother, who died from ovarian cancer, was Jewish (her parents had immigrated from Minsk and Vienna, respectively). Stephanie Mansfield, "Deconstructing Harry", Vogue, April 1998: pp. 211, 214, 216; online posting, connick.com. Retrieved July 17, 2007. Genealogy Data, p. 39 (Family Pages). Paulmlieberman.org. Retrieved on 2012-05-08. Connick has a sister, Suzanna; the siblings were raised in the Lakeview neighborhood of New Orleans. Connick is a first cousin of both Jefferson Parish District Attorney, Paul Connick, and State Representative Patrick Connick (of Harvey, Jefferson Parish). 

Connick's musical talents soon came to the fore when he started learning the keyboards at age three, playing publicly at age five, and recording with a local jazz band at ten. When Connick was nine years old, he performed the Piano Concerto No. 3 Opus 37 of Beethoven with the New Orleans Symphony Orchestra (now the Louisiana Philharmonic), and later played a duet with Eubie Blake at the Royal Orleans Esplanade Lounge in New Orleans. The song was "I'm Just Wild About Harry". This was recorded for a Japanese documentary called Jazz Around the World. MDHS  The Eubie Blake Collection, Maryland Historical Society The clip was also shown in a Bravo special, called Worlds of Harry Connick, Junior. in 1999. His musical talents were developed at the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts and under the tutelage of Ellis Marsalis, Jr. and James Booker.

Connick attended Jesuit High School, Isidore Newman School, Lakeview School, and the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, all in New Orleans. Following an unsuccessful attempt to study jazz academically, and having given recitals in the classical and jazz piano programs at Loyola University, Connick moved to the 92nd Street YMHA in New York City to study at Hunter College and the Manhattan School of Music, where a Columbia Records executive Sr. V.P. of A&R, Dr. George Butler, persuaded him to sign with that label. His first record for the label, Harry Connick Junior., was a mainly instrumental album of standards. He soon acquired a reputation in jazz because of extended stays at high-profile New York venues. His next album, 20, featured his vocals and added to this reputation.

== Career ==

=== When Harry Met Sally..., chart and movie success ===
With Connick's reputation growing, director Rob Reiner asked him to provide a soundtrack for his 1989 romantic comedy, When Harry Met Sally..., starring Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal. The soundtrack consisted of several standards, including "It Had to Be You", "Let's Call the Whole Thing Off" and "Don't Get Around Much Anymore", and achieved double-platinum status in the United States. He won his first Grammy for Best Jazz Male Vocal Performance for his work on the soundtrack.

Connick made his screen debut in Memphis Belle (1990), about a B-17 Flying Fortress bomber crew in World War II. In that year he began a two-year world tour. In addition he released two albums in July 1990: the instrumental jazz trio album Lofty's Roach Souffle and a big-band album of mostly original songs titled We Are in Love, which also went double platinum. We Are in Love earned him his second consecutive Grammy for Best Jazz Male Vocal.

"Promise Me You'll Remember", his contribution to the Godfather III soundtrack, was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe in 1991. In a year of recognition, he was also nominated for an Emmy for Best Performance in a Variety Special for his PBS special Swingin' Out Live, which was also released as a video. In October 1991 he released his third consecutive multi-platinum album, Blue Light, Red Light, on which he wrote and arranged the songs. Also in October 1991 he starred in Little Man Tate, directed by Jodie Foster, playing the friend of a child prodigy who goes to college.

In November 1992, Connick released 25, a solo piano collection of standards that again went platinum. He also re-released the album Eleven. Connick contributed "A Wink and a Smile" to the Sleepless in Seattle soundtrack, released in 1993. His multi-platinum album of holiday songs, When My Heart Finds Christmas, was the best-selling Christmas album in 1993.

=== Mid&ndash;1990s: funk ===
In 1994, Connick decided to branch out. He released She, an album of New Orleans funk that also went platinum. In addition, he released a song called "(I Could Only) Whisper Your Name" for the soundtrack of The Mask, starring Jim Carrey, which is his most successful single in the United States to date.

Connick took his funk music on a tour of the United Kingdom in 1994, an effort that did not please some of his fans, who were expecting a jazz crooner. Connick also took his funk music to the People's Republic of China in 1995, playing at the Shanghai Center Theatre. The performance was televised live in China for what became known as the Shanghai Gumbo special. In his third film Copycat, Connick played a serial killer. Released in 1995, Copycat also starred Holly Hunter and Sigourney Weaver. The following year, he released his second funk album, Star Turtle, which did not sell as well as previous albums, although it did reach No. 38 on the charts. However, he appeared in the most successful movie of 1996, Independence Day, with Will Smith and Jeff Goldblum.

=== Late 1990s: jazz and Hope Floats ===
For his 1997 release To See You, Connick recorded original love songs, touring the United States and Europe with a full symphony orchestra backing him and his piano in each city. As part of his tour, he played at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway, with his final concert of that tour in Paris being recorded for a Valentine's Day special on PBS in 1998. He also continued his film career, starring in Excess Baggage opposite Alicia Silverstone and Benicio del Toro in 1997.

In May 1998, he had his first leading role in director Forest Whitaker's Hope Floats, with Sandra Bullock as his female lead. He released Come By Me, his first album of big band music in eight years in 1999, and embarked on a world tour visiting the United States, Europe, Japan and Australia. In addition, he provided the voice of Dean McCoppin in the animated film The Iron Giant.

=== 200002: Broadway debut, musicals, Will & Grace ===
Connick wrote the score for Susan Stroman's Broadway musical Thou Shalt Not, based on mile Zola's novel Thrse Raquin, in 2000; it premiered in 2001. His music and lyrics earned a Tony Award nomination. He was also the narrator of the film My Dog Skip, released in that year.

In March 2001, Connick starred in a television production of South Pacific with Glenn Close, televised on the ABC network. He also starred in his twelfth movie, Mickey, featuring a screenplay by John Grisham that same year. In October 2001, he again released two albums: Songs I Heard, featuring big band re-workings of children's show themes, and 30, featuring Connick on piano with guest appearances by several other musical artists. Songs I Heard won Connick another Grammy for best traditional pop album and he toured performing songs from the album, holding matinees at which each parent had to be accompanied by a child.

In 2002, he received a for a "system and method for coordinating music display among players in an orchestra." Connick appeared as Grace Adler's boyfriend (and later husband) Leo Markus on the NBC sitcom Will & Grace from 2002 to 2006.

=== 200305: Connick on Piano and Only You ===
In July 2003, Connick released his first instrumental album in fifteen years, Other Hours Connick on Piano Volume 1. It was released on Branford Marsalis' new label Marsalis Music and led to a short tour of nightclubs and small theaters. Connick appeared in the film Basic. In October 2003, he released his second Christmas album, Harry for the Holidays, which went gold and reached No. 12 on the Billboard 200 album chart. He also had a television special on NBC featuring Whoopi Goldberg, Nathan Lane, Marc Anthony and Kim Burrell. Only You, his seventeenth album for Columbia Records, was released in February 2004. A collection of 1950s and 1960s ballads, Only You, went Top Ten on both sides of the Atlantic and was certified gold in the United States in March 2004. The Only You tour with big band went on in America, Australia and a short trip to Asia. Harry for the Holidays was certified platinum in November 2004. A music DVD Harry Connick Jr.  "Only You" in Concert was released in March 2004, after it had first aired as a Great Performances special on PBS. The special won him an Emmy for Outstanding Music Direction. The DVD received a Gold & Platinum Music Video  Long Form awards from the RIAA in November 2005.

An animated holiday special, The Happy Elf, aired on NBC in December 2005, with Connick as the composer, the narrator, and one of the executive producers. Shortly after, it was released on DVD. The holiday special was based on his original song The Happy Elf, from his 2003 album Harry for the Holidays. Another album from Marsalis Music was recorded in 2005, , a duo album with Harry Connick, Jr. on piano together with Branford Marsalis on saxophone. A music DVD, A Duo Occasion, was filmed at the Ottawa International Jazz Festival 2005 in Canada, and released in November 2005.

He appeared in another episode of NBC sitcom Will & Grace in November 2005, and appeared in an additional three episodes in 2006.

=== 200608: The Pajama Game, Bug and P.S. I Love You ===
Harry Connick, Junior in concert, Savannah, Georgia, Feb 27, 2007
Bug, a film directed by William Friedkin, is a psychological thriller filmed in 2005, starring Connick, Ashley Judd, and Michael Shannon. The film was released in 2007. He starred in the Broadway revival of The Pajama Game, produced by the Roundabout Theater Company, along with Michael McKean and Kelli O'Hara, at the American Airlines Theatre in 2006. It ran from February 23 to June 17, 2006, including five benefit performances running from June 13 to June 17. The Pajama Game cast recording was nominated for a Grammy, after being released as part of Connick's double disc album Harry on Broadway, Act I.

He hosted The Weather Channel's mini series 100 Biggest Weather Moments which aired in 2007. He was part of the documentary , released in November 2007. He sat in on piano on Bob French's 2007 album Marsalis Music Honors Series: Bob French. He appeared in the film P.S. I Love You, released in December 2007. A third album in the Connick on Piano series, Chanson du Vieux Carr was released in 2007, and Connick received two Grammy nominations for the track "Ash Wednesday", for the Grammy awards in 2008. Chanson du Vieux Carr was released simultaneously with the album Oh, My NOLA. Connick toured North America and Europe in 2007, and toured Asia and Australia in 2008, as part of his My New Orleans Tour. Connick did the arrangements for, wrote a couple of songs, and sang a duet on Kelli O'Hara's album that was released in May 2008. He was also the featured singer at the Concert of Hope immediately preceding Pope Benedict XVI's Mass at Yankee Stadium in April 2008. He had the starring role of Dr. Dennis Slamon in the 2008 Lifetime TV film Living Proof. His third Christmas album, What a Night!, was released in November 2008.

=== 200911: New in Town, Your Songs ===
Harry Connick Junior and Rene Zellweger at the Rachael Ray show, January 30, 2009.
The film New in Town starring Connick and Rene Zellweger, began filming in January 2008, and was released in January 2009. Connick's album Your Songs was released on CD, September 22, 2009. In contrast to Connick's previous albums, this album is a collaboration with a record company producer, the multiple Grammy Award winning music executive Clive Davis. Harry Connick Jr. Announces New Album Produced by Clive Davis, vintageguitar.com, July 30, 2009 

Connick starred in the Broadway revival of On a Clear Day You Can See Forever, which opened at the St. James Theatre in November 2011 in previews. Jones, Kenneth."On a Clear Day Will Rise at Broadway's St. James Theatre Nov. 12; Harry Connick Jr. Stars" Playbill, June 29, 2011 

==== American Idol (2010) ====
Connick appeared on the May 4, 2010, episode of American Idol season 9 where he acted as a mentor for the top 5 finalists. He appeared again the next night on May 5 to perform "And I Love Her".

=== 2012present: Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, Every Man Should Know ===
On January 6, 2012, NBC president Robert Greenblatt announced at the Television Critics Association winter press tour that Harry Connick Junior had been cast in a four-episode arc of NBC's long-running legal drama, as new Executive ADA, David Haden, a dedicated, straight-shooting prosecutor who is assigned a case with Detective Benson (Mariska Hargitay). 

==== Every Man Should Know ====
On June 11, 2013, Connick released a new album of all original music titled Every Man Should Know. Connick debuted the title track live on the May 2, 2013 episode of American Idol and appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show the following week to discuss his new project. A 2013 US summer tour was announced in support of the album.

==== American Idol (Season 12) ====
Connick returned to American Idol to mentor the top four of season 12. He performed "Every Man Should Know" on the results show the following night. American Idol Top 4 Results Recap (Redux): Don't Know WhyThere's No Sun Up in the Sky TV Line, Retrieved August 31, 2013 

====American Idol (Season 13)====
On September 3, 2013, the officials of American Idol officially announced that Connick will be a part of the judging panel for season 13 alongside former judge Jennifer Lopez and returning judge Keith Urban. Official: J. Lo and Harry Connick Jr. join 'American Idol' Entertainment Weekly, Retrieved September 3, 2013 

=== Touring Big Band members ===
The following musicians have toured as the Harry Connick, Jr., Big Band since its inception in 1990: Interview with Roger Ingram 12/2008 
* Piano and vocals  Harry Connick, Jr.
* Drums  Shannon Powell, Duffy Jackson, Arthur Latin II, (Winard Harper, Jeff "Tain" Watts  subs)
* Bass  Ben Wolfe, Neal Caine
* Lead trumpet  Roger Ingram, (Dave Stahl, Walter White, Walt Johnson  subs)
* 2nd trumpet  Dan Miller, Derrick Gardner, Bijon Watson, Sal Cracchiolo (Earl Gardner, Greg Gisbert, Darryl Shaw  subs)
* 3rd trumpet  Jeremy Davenport, Joe Magnarelli, Mark Braud
* 4th trumpet  Leroy Jones, Mark Braud
* Lead alto saxophone  Brad Leali, Mike Smith, Jon Gordon, Ned Goold, Geoff Burke
* 2nd alto saxophone  Mark Sterbank, Will Campbell, Ned Goold
* 1st tenor saxophone  Jerry Weldon, (Geoff Burke  sub)
* 2nd tenor saxophone  Jimmy Greene, Ned Goold
* Baritone saxophone  Dave Schumacher (Howard Johnson  sub)
* Clarinet  Louis Ford
* Lead trombone  Mark Mullins, John Allred, Jeff Bush
* 2nd trombone  Craig Klein, John Allred
* 3rd trombone  Lucien Barbarin, Craig Klein
* Bass trombone  Joe Barati
* Vocals, trombone, percussion  Lucien Barbarin

== Connick and New Orleans, Hurricane Katrina ==
Connick at the New Orleans Jazz Fest 2007
Connick, a New Orleans native, is a founder of the Krewe of Orpheus, a music-based New Orleans krewe, taking its name from Orpheus of classical mythology. The Krewe of Orpheus parades on St. Charles Avenue and Canal Street in New Orleans on Lundi Gras (Fat Monday)  the day before Mardi Gras (Fat Tuesday).

On September 2, 2005, Harry Connick, Jr., helped to organize, and appeared in, the NBC-sponsored live telethon concert, A Concert for Hurricane Relief, for relief in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. He spent several days touring the city to draw attention to the plight of citizens stranded at the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center and other places. At the concert he paired with host Matt Lauer, and entertainers including Tim McGraw, Faith Hill, Kanye West, Mike Myers, and John Goodman.

On September 6, 2005, Connick was made honorary chair of Habitat for Humanity's Operation Home Delivery, a long-term rebuilding plan for families victimized by Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans and along the Gulf Coast.

Connick's album Oh, My NOLA, and du Vieux Carr : Connick on Piano, Volume 3|Chanson du Vieux Carr] were released in 2007, with a following tour called the My New Orleans Tour.

=== Musicians' Village ===
Musicians' Village in New Orleans, August 20, 2007

Connick and Branford Marsalis devised an initiative to help restore New Orleans' musical heritage. Habitat for Humanity and New Orleans Area Habitat for Humanity, working with Connick and Branford Marsalis announced December 6, 2005, plans for a Musicians' Village in New Orleans. The Musicians' Village includes Habitat-constructed homes, with an Ellis Marsalis Center for Music, as the area's centerpiece. The Habitat-built homes provide musicians, and anyone else who qualifies, the opportunity to buy decent, affordable housing.

In 2012, Connick and Marsalis received the S. Roger Horchow Award for Greatest Public Service by a Private Citizen, an award given out annually byJefferson Awards. http://www.jeffersonawards.org/pastwinners/national 

== Personal life ==
On April 16, 1994, Connick Jr. married former Victoria's Secret model Jill Goodacre, originally from Texas, at the St. Louis Cathedral, New Orleans. Jill is the daughter of sculptor Glenna Goodacre, originally from Lubbock and now Santa Fe, New Mexico. The song "Jill", on the album Blue Light, Red Light (1991) is about her. They have three daughters: Georgia Tatum (born April 17, 1996), Sarah Kate (September 12, 1997), and Charlotte (born June 26, 2002). The family currently resides in New Canaan, Connecticut and New York City. Connick is a practicing Roman Catholic. 

== Arrest ==
In December 1992, he was charged with bringing a gun to the security checkpoint in an airport. Connick was arrested by the Port Authority Police in 1992 and charged with having a 9mm pistol in his possession at JFK International Airport. After spending a day in jail, he agreed to make a public-service television commercial warning against breaking gun laws. The court agreed to drop all charges if Connick stayed out of trouble for six months. 

== Discography ==

* Dixieland Plus (1977)
* Pure Dixieland (1979)
* Harry Connick Jr. (1987)
* 20 (1988)
* When Harry Met Sally (1989)
* We Are In Love (1990)
* Lofty's Roach Souffle (1990)
* Blue Light, Red Light (1991)
* 25 (1992)
* When My Heart Finds Christmas (1993)
* She (1994)
* Star Turtle (1996)
* To See You (1997)
* Come by Me (1999)
* 30 (2001)
* Songs I Heard (2001)
* Thou Shalt Not (2002)
* (2003)
* Harry for the Holidays (2003)
* Only You (2004)
* (2005)
* Harry on Broadway, Act I (2006)
* Oh, My NOLA (2007)
* (2007)
* What a Night! A Christmas Album (2008)
* Your Songs (2009)
* In Concert on Broadway (2011)
* (2011)
* Smokey Mary (2013)
* Every Man Should Know (2013)

== Filmography ==

 Film 
 Year Title Role Notes 
 1990 Memphis Belle Sgt. Clay Busby 
 1991 Little Man Tate Eddie 
 1995 Copycat Daryll Lee Cullum 
 1996 Independence Day Captain Jimmy Wilder 
 1997 Excess Baggage Greg Kistler 
 1998 Hope Floats Justin Matisse 
 1999 The Iron Giant Dean McCoppin Voice only 
 Wayward Son Jesse Banks Rhodes 
 2000 My Dog Skip Narrator 
 2001 South Pacific Lt. Joseph Cable 
 The Simian Line Rick 
 Life Without Dick Daniel Gallagher 
 2003 Basic Pete Vilmer 
 2004 Mickey Glen Ryan (Tripp Spence) 
 2005 The Happy Elf Lil' Farley (narrator) 
 2007 Bug Jerry Goss 
 P.S. I Love You Daniel Connelly 
 2008 Living Proof Dr. Dennis Slamon 
 2009 New in Town Ted Mitchell 
 2011 Dolphin Tale Clay Haskett 
 2013 Angels Sing Michael Walker 
 2014 Dolphin Tale 2 Clay Haskett 

 Television 
 Year Title Role Notes 
 1992 Super Bowl XXVI Himself performed \"The Star Spangled Banner\" 
 Cheers Russell Boyd episode \"Diminished Rebecca with a Suspended Clif\" 
 1994 Ghostwriter Himself episode \"What's Up with Alex?: Part 1\" 
 1997 Action League Now! Big Baby (voice) episode \"Rock-A-Big-Baby\" 
 2001 Evening at Pops Himself 
 2002&ndash;2006 Will & Grace Leo Markus 23 episodes 
 2008 This Old House Himself episode: New Orleans Project: Part 1 
 2009 Hey Hey It's Saturday, The Reunion Himself - guest judge 
 Australian Idol Himself - guest judge 
 2010 American Idol Himself - guest judge 
 2012 Executive A.D.A. David Haden Justice Denied]\" 
 2013 American Idol Himself - guest judge 
 2014 American Idol Himself - judge Season 13 with Jennifer Lopez and Keith Urban 
 

 Non-fictional appearances 
 Year Title Role Notes 
 1990 Carly in Concert: My Romance] Guest artist 
 1993 The Harry Connick Jr. Christmas Special Himself CBS Special 
 1998 Harry Connick Jr.: Romance in Paris Himself PBS special 
 1999 The Worlds of Harry Connick Jr. Himself 
 2003 Harry for the Holidays Himself NBC special 
 2004 Himself PBS special 
 2007 100 Biggest Weather Moments Host 
 Himself 
 2010 Daytona 500 Himself performed \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" 
 2013 World Series Himself performed \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" 

== Broadway ==
* 1990 An Evening with Harry Connick Jr. and His Orchestra (special, concert)
* 2001 Thou Shalt Not (Broadway Musical)  composer
* 2006 The Pajama Game (Broadway Musical)
*  Nice Work If You Can Get It (Broadway Musical) (postponed) Jones, Kenneth."Connick Vehicle Nice Work If You Can Get It Postponed", Playbill, July 25, 2008. Retrieved 7-26-2008. 
* 2010 (special, concert) Tix On Sale Today For Harry Connick, Jr. in Concert on Broadway, broadwayworld.com, May 4, 2010 
* 2011 On a Clear Day You Can See Forever (Broadway Musical)

==References==

==Further reading==
* Harry Connick, Jr. interview by Pete Lewis, 'Blues & Soul' November 2009
* 
* "Harry Connick Jnr discusses playing, singing and arranging." transcript. 2005. The Music Show. Presented by Andrew Ford.
* Audio interview recorded April 2007 in Toronto, Canada
* Article on Connick's United States patent 6,348,648 for a "system and method for coordinating music display among players in an orchestra."

==External links==

* Harry Connick Jr. official website
* Harry Connick Jr. webpage on Marsalis Music
* Harry Connick Jr. website on Sony Music
* 
* 
* 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 



[[List of humorists]]

A humorist (or humourist in British English) is a person who writes or performs humorous material. The material written or performed by humorists tends to be more subtle than the material created by stand-up comics and comedy writers.

Notable humorists include:

==External links==



[[Hydrostatic shock]]

Average time until incapacitation decreases rapidly with pressure wave magnitude as magnitudes approach 500 psi. See: Links between traumatic brain injury and ballistic pressure waves originating in the thoracic cavity and extremities. Brain Injury 21(7): 657662, 2007.

Hydrostatic shock or hydraulic shock is a term which describes the observation that a penetrating projectile can produce remote wounding and incapacitating effects in living targets through a hydraulic effect in their liquid-filled tissues, in addition to local effects in tissue caused by direct impact. Deadly fighting skills of the world, Steve Crawford (1999) pp. 6869 AK-47: the weapon that changed the face of the war, Larry Kahaner, John Wiley and Sons (2007) p. 32 There is scientific evidence that hydrostatic shock can produce remote neural damage and produce incapacitation more quickly than blood loss effects. Proponents of cartridges that are "light and fast" such as the 9x19mm Parabellum versus cartridges that are "slow and heavy" such as the .45 ACP round often refer to this phenomenon.

Human autopsy results have demonstrated brain hemorrhaging from fatal hits to the chest, including cases with handgun bullets. Krajsa, J. Piny vzniku perikapilrnch hemoragi v mozku pi stelnch porannch (Causes of pericapillar brain haemorrhages accompanying gunshot wounds), Institute of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2009. Thirty-three cases of fatal penetrating chest wounds by a single bullet were selected from a much larger set by excluding all other traumatic factors, including past history.

It has often been asserted that hydrostatic shock and other descriptions of remote wounding effects are nothing but myths. An article in the journal, Neurosurgery, reviews the published evidence and concludes that the phenomenon is well-established.

==Origin of the theory==
In the scientific literature, the first discussion of pressure waves created when a bullet hits a living target is presented by E. Harvey Newton and his research group at Princeton University in 1947: An Experimental Study of shock waves resulting from the impact of high velocity missiles on animal tissues, E. Newton Harvey, PhD and Howard McMillen, PhD, Journal of Experimental Medicine, February 1947. Another early mention of hydrostatic shock is Super speed bullets knock em dead, Popular Mechanics, April 1942, p. 9 

Frank Chamberlin, a World War II trauma surgeon and ballistics researcher, noted remote pressure wave effects. Col. Chamberlin described what he called explosive effects and hydraulic reaction of bullets in tissue. ...liquids are put in motion by shock waves or hydraulic effects... with liquid filled tissues, the effects and destruction of tissues extend in all directions far beyond the wound axis. Chamberlin FT, Gun Shot Wounds, in Handbook for Shooters and Reloaders, Vol. II, Ackley PO, ed., Plaza Publishing, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1966. He avoided the ambiguous use of the term shock because it can refer to either a specific kind of pressure wave associated with explosions and supersonic projectiles or to a medical condition in the body.

Col. Chamberlin recognized that many theories have been advanced in wound ballistics. During World War II he commanded an 8,500-bed hospital center that treated over 67,000 patients during the fourteen months that he operated it. P.O. Ackley estimates that 85% of the patients were suffering from gunshot wounds. Ackley PO, Col. Frank T. Chamberlin, in Handbook for Shooters and Reloaders, Vol. II, Ackley PO, ed., Plaza Publishing, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1966. Col. Chamberlin spent many hours interviewing patients as to their reactions to bullet wounds. He conducted many live animal experiments after his tour of duty. On the subject of wound ballistics theories, he wrote:

Other World War II era scientists noted remote pressure wave effects in the peripheral nerves. Livingstone WK, Davis EW, Livingstone KE: Delayed recovery in peripheral nerve lesions caused by high velocity wounding. J. Neurosurg., 2: 170, 1945.
 Puckett WO, Grundfest H, McElroy WD, McMillen JH, Damage to peripheral nerves by high velocity missiles without a direct hit. J. Neurosurg., 3: 294, 1946. There was support for the idea of remote neural effects of ballistic pressure waves in the medical and scientific communities, but the phrase "hydrostatic shock" and similar phrases including shock were used mainly by gunwriters (such as Jack O'Conner OConner J, The Hunting Rifle, McMillian, 1970. ) and the small arms industry (such as Roy Weatherby, Gresham T, Gresham G, Weatherby: The Man, The Gun, The Legend, Cane River Publishing, 1992. and Federal Hydrashock.)

==Fackler's contra-claim==
Dr. Martin Fackler, a Vietnam-era trauma surgeon, wound ballistics researcher, a Colonel in the U.S. Army and the head of the Wound Ballistics Laboratory for the U.S. Armys Medical Training Center, Letterman Institute, claimed that hydrostatic shock had been disproved and that the assertion that a pressure wave plays a role in injury or incapacitation is a myth. Others expressed similar views. Patrick UW: Handgun Wounding Factors and Effectiveness. FBI Firearms training Unit, Quantico, VA. 1989. MacPherson D: Bullet PenetrationModeling the Dynamics and the Incapacitation Resulting From Wound Trauma. Ballistics Publications, El Segundo, CA, 1994.
 

Dr. Fackler based his argument on the lithotriptor, a tool commonly used to break up kidney stones. The lithotriptor uses sonic pressure waves which are stronger than those caused by most handgun bullets, yet it produces no damage to soft tissues whatsoever. Hence, Fackler argued, ballistic pressure waves cannot damage tissue either. Fackler ML, Gunshot Wound Review, Annals of Emergency Medicine 28:2; 1996. 

Dr. Fackler claimed that a study of rifle bullet wounds in Vietnam (Wound Data and Munitions Effectiveness Team) found no cases of bones being broken, or major vessels torn, that were not hit by the penetrating bullet. In only two cases, an organ that was not hit (but was within a few cm of the projectile path), suffered some disruption. Dr. Fackler cited a personal communication with R. F. Bellamy. However, Bellamys published findings the following year Bellamy RF, Zajtchuk R. The physics and biophysics of wound ballistics. In: Zajtchuk R, ed. Textbook of Military Medicine, Part I: Warfare, Weaponry, and the Casualty, Vol. 5, Conventional Warfare: Ballistic, Blast, and Burn Injuries. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General, Department of the Army, United States of America; 1990: 107162. available for download: http://www.bordeninstitute.army.mil/published_volumes/conventional_warfare/conventional_warfare.html estimated that 10% of fractures in the data set might be due to indirect injuries, and one specific case is described in detail (pp. 153154). In addition, the published analysis documents five instances of abdominal wounding in cases where the bullet did not penetrate the abdominal cavity (pp. 149152), a case of lung contusion resulting from a hit to the shoulder (pp. 146149), and a case of indirect effects on the central nervous system (p. 155). Fackler's critics argue that Fackler's evidence does not contradict distant injuries, as Fackler claimed, but the WDMET data from Vietnam actually provides supporting evidence for it. 
Courtney M, Courtney A: Misleading reference to unpublished wound ballistics data regarding
distant injuries, http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.4927 

A summary of the debate was published in 2009 as part of a Historical Overview of Wound Ballistics Research.

==Distant injuries in the WDMET data==

The Wound Data and Munitions Effectiveness Team (WDMET) gathered data on wounds sustained during the Vietnam War. In their analysis of this data published in the Textbook of Military Medicine, Ronald Bellamy and Russ Zajtchuck point out a number of cases which seem to be examples of distant injuries. Bellamy and Zajtchuck describe three mechanisms of distant wounding due to pressure transients: 1) stress waves 2) shear waves and 3) a vascular pressure impulse.

After citing Harvey's conclusion that stress waves probably do not cause any tissue damage (p. 136), Bellamy and Zajtchuck express their view that Harvey's interpretation might not be definitive because they write the possibility that stress waves from a penetrating projectile might also cause tissue damage cannot be ruled out. (p. 136) The WDMET data includes a case of a lung contusion resulting from a hit to the shoulder. The caption to Figure 4-40 (p. 149) says, The pulmonary injury may be the result of a stress wave. They describe the possibility that a hit to a soldier's trapezius muscle caused temporary paralysis due to the stress wave passing through the soldier's neck indirectly cervical cord dysfunction. (p. 155)

In addition to stress waves, Bellamy and Zajtchuck describe shear waves as a possible mechanism of indirect injuries in the WDMET data. They estimate that 10% of bone fractures in the data may be the result of indirect injuries, that is, bones fractured by the bullet passing close to the bone without a direct impact. A Chinese experiment is cited which provides a formula estimating how pressure magnitude decreases with distance. Together with the difference between strength of human bones and strength of the animal bones in the Chinese experiment, Bellamy and Zajtchuck use this formula to estimate that assault rifle rounds passing within a centimeter of a long bone might very well be capable of causing an indirect fracture. (p. 153) Bellamy and Zajtchuck suggest the fracture in Figures 4-46 and 4-47 is likely an indirect fracture of this type. Damage due to shear waves extends to even greater distances in abdominal injuries in the WDMET data. Bellamy and Zajtchuck write, The abdomen is one body region in which damage from indirect effects may be common. (p. 150) Injuries to the liver and bowel shown in Figures 4-42 and 4-43 are described, The damage shown in these examples extends far beyond the tissue that is likely to direct contact with the projectile. (p. 150)

In addition to providing examples from the WDMET data for indirect injury due to propagating shear and stress waves, Bellamy and Zajtchuck expresses an openness to the idea of pressure transients propagating via blood vessels can cause indirect injuries. For example, pressure transients arising from an abdominal gunshot wound might propagate through the vena cavae and jugular venous system into the cranial cavity and cause a precipitous rise in intracranial pressure there, with attendant transient neurological dysfunction. (p. 154) However, no examples of this injury mechanism are presented from the WDMET data. However, the authors suggest the need for additional studies writing, Clinical and experimental data need to be gathered before such indirect injuries can be confirmed. Distant injuries of this nature were later confirmed in the experimental data of Swedish and Chinese researchers, 
Suneson A, Hansson HA, Seeman T: Pressure Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy Missile Extremity Impact: Part I. Local and Distant Effects on the Peripheral Nervous System. A Light and Electron Microscopic Study on Pigs. The Journal of Trauma. 30(3):281294; 1990.
 
Wang Q, Wang Z, Zhu P, Jiang J: Alterations of the Myelin Basic Protein and Ultrastructure in the Limbic System and the Early Stage of Trauma-Related Stress Disorder in Dogs. The Journal of Trauma. 56(3):604610; 2004.
 in the clinical findings of Krajsa and in autopsy findings from Iraq. YS Selman et al., Medico-legal Study of Shockwave Damage by High Velocity Missiles in Firearm Injuries, Fac Med Baghdad 2011; Vol. 53, No. 4 http://www.academia.edu/2087375/Medico-legal_Study_of_Shockwave_Damage_by_High_Velocity_Missiles_in_Firearm_Injuries 

==Autopsy Findings in Iraq==
An 8 month study in Iraq performed in 2010 and published in 2011 reports on autopsies of 30 gunshot victims struck with high-velocity (greater than 2500 fps) rifle bullets. In all 30 cases, autopsies revealed injuries distant from the main wound channel due to hydrostatic shock. The authors determined that the lungs and chest are the most susceptible to distant wounding, followed by the abdomen. The authors conclude:

==Inferences from blast pressure wave observations==
Ballistic pressure waves believed to be the mechanism of hydrostatic shock that were measured with a high speed pressure transducer for the specified loads.
A shock wave can be created when fluid is rapidly displaced by an explosive or projectile. Tissue behaves similarly enough to water that a sonic pressure wave can be created by a bullet impact, generating pressures in excess of 1500 psi. 

Duncan McPherson, a former member of the International Wound Ballistics Association and author of the book, Bullet Penetration, claimed that shock waves cannot result from bullet impacts with tissue. In contrast, Brad Sturtevant, a leading researcher in shock wave physics at Caltech for many decades, found that shock waves can result from handgun bullet impacts in tissue. Other sources indicate that ballistic impacts can create shock waves in tissue. 

Blast and ballistic pressure waves have physical similarities. Prior to wave reflection, they both are characterized by a steep wave front followed by a nearly exponential decay at close distances. They have similarities in how they cause neural effects in the brain. In tissue, both types of pressure waves have similar magnitudes, duration, and frequency characteristics. Both have been shown to cause damage in the hippocampus. It has been hypothesized that both reach the brain from the thoracic cavity via major blood vessels.

For example, Ibolja Cernak, a leading researcher in blast wave injury at the Applied Physics Laboratory at Johns Hopkins University, hypothesized, "alterations in brain function following blast exposure are induced by kinetic energy transfer of blast overpressure via great blood vessels in abdomen and thorax to the central nervous system." This hypothesis is supported by observations of neural effects in the brain from localized blast exposure focused on the lungs in experiments in animals. 

Hydrostatic shock expresses the idea that organs can be damaged by the pressure wave in addition to damage from direct contact with the penetrating projectile. If one interprets the "shock" in the term "hydrostatic shock" to refer to the physiological effects rather than the physical wave characteristics, the question of whether the pressure waves satisfy the definition of shock wave is unimportant, and one can consider the weight of scientific evidence and various claims regarding the possibility of a ballistic pressure wave to create tissue damage and incapacitation in living targets.

==Physics of ballistic pressure waves==
World War II era ballistic pressure wave measurement. Peak is 600 psi, duration is 0.12 ms. Medical Department, United States Army. Wound Ballistics in World War II. Major James C. Beyer. Washington, D.C. : Office of the Surgeon General, Department of the Army, 1962. http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA291697&Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf. 

A number of papers describe the physics of ballistic pressure waves created when a high-speed projectile enters a viscous medium. These results show that ballistic impacts produce pressure waves that propagate at close to the speed of sound.

Lee et al. present an analytical model showing that unreflected ballistic pressure waves are well approximated by an exponential decay, which is similar to blast pressure waves. Lee et al. note the importance of the energy transfer:

The rigorous calculations of Lee et al. require knowing the drag coefficient and frontal area of the penetrating projectile at every instant of the penetration. Since this is not generally possible with expanding handgun bullets, Courtney and Courtney developed a model for estimating the peak pressure waves of handgun bullets from the impact energy and penetration depth in ballistic gelatin. 
Courtney M, Courtney A: Ballistic pressure wave contributions to rapid incapacitation in the Strasbourg goat tests.
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0701267 accessed 29 May 2007.
 This model agrees with the more rigorous approach of Lee et al. for projectiles where they can both be applied. For expanding handgun bullets, the peak pressure wave magnitude is proportional to the bullets kinetic energy divided by the penetration depth.

== Remote cerebral effects of ballistic pressure waves ==

Goransson et al. were the first contemporary researchers to present compelling evidence for remote cerebral effects of extremity bullet impact. 
Gransson AM, Ingvar DH, Kutyna F: Remote Cerebral Effects on EEG in High-Energy Missile Trauma. The Journal of Trauma. 28 (1 Supplement):S204-S205; January 1988. They observed changes in EEG readings from pigs shot in the thigh. A follow-up experiment by Suneson et al. implanted high-speed pressure transducers into the brain of pigs and demonstrated that a significant pressure wave reaches the brain of pigs shot in the thigh. 
Suneson A, Hansson HA, Seeman T: Pressure Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy Missile extremity Impact: Part II. Distant Effects on the Central Nervous System. A Light and Electron Microscopic Study on Pigs. The Journal of Trauma. 30(3):295306; 1990.
 These scientists observed apnea, depressed EEG readings, and neural damage in the brain caused by the distant effects of the ballistic pressure wave originating in the thigh.

The results of Suneson et al. were confirmed and expanded upon by a later experiment in dogs 
which "confirmed that distant effect exists in the central nervous system after a high-energy missile impact to an extremity. A high-frequency oscillating pressure wave with large amplitude and short duration was found in the brain after the extremity impact of a high-energy missile . . ." Wang et al. observed significant damage in both the hypothalamus and hippocampus regions of the brain due to remote effects of the ballistic pressure wave.

==Remote pressure wave effects in the spine and internal organs==
In a study of a handgun injury, Sturtevant found that pressure waves from a bullet impact in the torso can reach the spine and that a focusing effect from concave surfaces can concentrate the pressure wave on the spinal cord producing significant injury. This is consistent with other work showing remote spinal cord injuries from ballistic impacts. Saxon M, Snyder HA, Washington HA, Atypical Brown-Sequard syndrome following gunshot wound to the face, Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 40: 299302, 1982. Taylor RG, Gleave JRW, Incomplete Spinal Cord Injuries, Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, B39:438450, 1957. 

Roberts et al. present both experimental work and finite element modeling showing that there can be considerable pressure wave magnitudes in the thoracic cavity for handgun projectiles stopped by a Kevlar vest. For example, an 8 gram projectile at 360 m/s impacting a NIJ level II vest over the sternum can produce an estimated pressure wave level of nearly 2.0 MPa (280 psi) in the heart and a pressure wave level of nearly 1.5 MPa (210 psi) in the lungs. Impacting over the liver can produce an estimated pressure wave level of 2.0 MPa (280 psi) in the liver.

==Energy transfer required for remote neural effects==
The work of Courtney et al. supports the role of a ballistic pressure wave in incapacitation and injury. 
Courtney A, Courtney M: Links between traumatic brain injury and ballistic pressure waves originating in the thoracic cavity and extremities. Brain Injury 21(7): 657662, 2007. Pre-print: http://www.ballisticstestinggroup.org/tbipwave.pdf 
Courtney M, Courtney A: Review of criticisms of ballistic pressure wave experiments, the Strasbourg goat tests, and the Marshall and Sanow data.
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0701268 accessed 29 May 2007.
 
Courtney M, Courtney A: Relative incapacitation contributions of pressure wave and wound channel in the Marshall and Sanow data set.
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0701266 accessed 29 May 2007.
 
Courtney M, Courtney A: A method for testing handgun bullets in deer. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0702107 accessed 29 May 2007.
 The work of Suneson et al. and Courtney et al. suggest that remote neural effects can occur with levels of energy transfer possible with handguns, about 500 ft.lbf. Using sensitive biochemical techniques, the work of Wang et al. suggests even lower impact energy thresholds for remote neural injury to the brain. In analysis of experiments of dogs shot in the thigh they report highly significant (p < 0.01), easily detectable neural effects in the hypothalamus and hippocampus with energy transfer levels close to 550 ft.lbf. Wang et al. reports less significant (p < 0.05) remote effects in the hypothalamus with energy transfer just under 100 ft.lbf. 

Even though Wang et al. document remote neural damage for low levels of energy transfer, roughly 100 ft.lbf, these levels of neural damage are probably too small to contribute to rapid incapacitation. Courtney and Courtney believe that remote neural effects only begin to make significant contributions to rapid incapacitation for ballistic pressure wave levels above 500 psi (corresponds to transferring roughly 300 ft.lbf in 12 in of penetration) and become easily observable above 1000 psi (corresponds to transferring roughly 600 ft.lbf in 12 in of penetration). Incapacitating effects in this range of energy transfer are consistent with observations of remote spinal injuries, observations of suppressed EEGs and apnea in pigs 
Suneson A, Hansson HA, Seeman T: Peripheral High-Energy Missile Hits Cause Pressure Changes and Damage to the Nervous System: Experimental Studies on Pigs. The Journal of Trauma. 27(7):782789; 1987. Suneson A, Hansson HA, Seeman T: Central and Peripheral Nervous Damage Following High-Energy Missile Wounds in the Thigh. The Journal of Trauma. 28 (1 Supplement):S197-S203; January 1988. and with observations of incapacitating effects of ballistic pressure waves without a wound channel. Courtney M, Courtney A, Experimental Observations of Incapacitation via Ballistic Pressure Wave without a Wound Channel , 2007. http://www.ballisticstestinggroup.org/lotor.pdf 

==Other scientific findings==
The scientific literature contains significant other findings regarding injury mechanisms of ballistic pressure waves. Ming et al. found that ballistic pressure waves can break bones. Ming L, Yu-Yuan M, Ring-Xiang F, Tian-Shun F: The characteristics of pressure waves generated in the soft target by impact and its contribution to indirect bone fractures. The Journal of Trauma 28(1) Supplement: S104-S109; 1988. Tikka et al. reports abdominal pressure changes produced in pigs hit in one thigh. Tikka S, Cederberg A, Rokkanen P: Remote effects of pressure waves in missile trauma: the intra-abdominal pressure changes in anaesthetized pigs wounded in one thigh. Acta Chir. Scand. Suppl. 508: 167173, 1982. Akimov et al. report on injuries to the nerve trunk from gunshot wounds to the extremities. 
Akimov GA, Odinak MM, Zhivolupov SA, et al., The mechanisms of the injuries to the nerve trunk in gunshot wounds of the extremities: Experimental research. Voen Med Zh 80: 34, 1993.
 

==Recommendations==
The FBI recommends that loads intended for self-defense and law enforcement applications meet a minimum penetration requirement of 12 in in ballistic gelatin and explicitly advises against selecting rounds based on hydrostatic shock effects. Patrick UW: Handgun Wounding Factors and Effectiveness. FBI Firearms Training Unit, Quantico, VA. 1989. 

==Hydrostatic shock as a factor in selection of ammunition==
===Ammunition selection for self-defense, military, and law enforcement===
In self-defense, military, and law enforcement communities, opinions vary regarding the importance of remote wounding effects in ammunition design and selection. In his book on hostage rescuers, Leroy Thompson discusses the importance of hydrostatic shock in choosing a specific design of .357 Magnum and 9x19mm Parabellum bullets. Rescuers, Leroy Thompson (1988) p. 207 In Armed and Female, Paxton Quigley explains that hydrostatic shock is the real source of stopping power. Armed and Female, Paxton Quigley, E.P. Dutton, 1989, p. 160 Jim Carmichael, who served as shooting editor for Outdoor Life magazine for 25 years, believes that hydrostatic shock is important to a more immediate disabling effect and is a key difference in the performance of .38 Special and .357 Magnum hollow point bullets. The Womans Guide to Handguns, Jim Carmichael In The search for an effective police handgun, Allen Bristow describes that police departments recognize the importance of hydrostatic shock when choosing ammunition. The search for an effective police handgun, Allen Bristow (1973) p. 69, 91 A research group at West Point suggests handgun loads with at least 500 ft.lbf of energy and 12 in of penetration and recommends: Courtney and Courtney, http://arxiv.org/abs/0803.3053 

A number of law enforcement and military agencies have adopted the 5.7x28mm cartridge, which is reputed to cause considerable hydrostatic shock. http://eliteammunition.com/ecatalog.pdf The FNH Five-seveN Pistol, Chris Boyd, Law Officer, Volume 3, Issue 9, 2007 Sept 1 These agencies include the Navy SEALs Meyr, Eitan (January 06, 1999). "Special Weapons for Counter-terrorist Units". Jane's  Law Enforcement. http://www.janes.com/security/law_enforcement/news/ipi/ipi0312.shtml and the Federal Protective Service branch of the ICE. In contrast, some defense contractors, law enforcement analysts, and military analysts say that hydrostatic shock is an unimportant factor when selecting cartridges for a particular use because any incapacitating effect it may have on a target is difficult to measure and inconsistent from one individual to the next. This is in contrast to factors such as proper shot placement and massive blood loss which are almost always eventually incapacitating for nearly every individual. 

===Ammunition selection for hunting===
Hydrostatic shock is commonly considered as a factor in the selection of hunting ammunition. Peter Capstick explains that hydrostatic shock may have value for animals up to the size of white-tailed deer, but the ratio of energy transfer to animal weight is an important consideration for larger animals. If the animals weight exceeds the bullets energy transfer, penetration in an undeviating line to a vital organ is a much more important consideration than energy transfer and hydrostatic shock. Jim Carmichael, in contrast, describes evidence that hydrostatic shock can affect animals as large as Cape Buffalo in the results of a carefully controlled study carried out by veterinarians in a buffalo culling operation.

Nathan Foster of Terminal Ballistics Research found that it is possible to induce hydrostatic shock in Bovines providing impact velocity is above 2600fps, using controlled expanding projectiles of appropriate weights. Furthermore, using hunting cartridges between 6mm and .338 bore diameters, a nominal velocity of 2600fps or higher produces the same results on most mammals where bullet weights and bullet construction are again appropriately matched to game body weights for optimum energy transfer. During tests, wider bores were capable of producing hydrostatic shock at lower impact velocities than the small bores on medium game- but not heavy game, showing the subtle relationships between bullet frontal area and energy transfer and bullet weights versus game weights. 

Tests revealed that Hydrostatic shock produces an immediate loss of consciousness. This often appears to the viewer as an 'instant kill' But it is the action of loss of consciousness combined with rapid blood loss to the point that life can no longer be sustained, that results in what can be better described as fast, humane killing. Mr Foster also found that results with Hornady TAP ammunition (frangible A-Max projectile) can produce neural trauma on medium sized game at much lower impact velocities than traditional hunting projectiles. http://www.ballisticstudies.com/Knowledgebase/Part+1+Game+Killing.html 

Dr. Randall Gilbert describes hydrostatic shock as an important factor in bullet performance on whitetail deer, When it bullet enters a whitetails body, huge accompanying shock waves send vast amounts of energy through nearby organs, sending them into arrest or shut down. A to Z Guide to White-Tailed Deer and Deer Hunting, Randall Gilbert, 2003, Woods N Water, Inc., p. 106 Dave Ehrig expresses the view that hydrostatic shock depends on impact velocities above 1100 ft per second. Muzzleloading for Deer and Turkey, Dave Ehrig (2005) p. 64 Sid Evans explains the performance of the Nosler Partition bullet and Federal Cartridge Companys decision to load this bullet in terms of the large tissue cavitation and hydrostatic shock produced from the frontal diameter of the expanded bullet. The deer hunters almanac, Sid Evans (1996) p.66 The North American Hunting Club suggests big game cartridges that create enough hydrostatic shock to quickly bring animals down. The Game Rifle, The North American Hunting Club (1992) 

==See also==
*Shock (fluid dynamics)
*Stopping power

==External links==
Terminal Ballistics Research http://www.ballisticstudies.com/Knowledgebase.html

==References==



[[Hadith]]

Hadith (, or ) in religious use is often translated as 'tradition', meaning a report of the teachings, deeds and sayings of Muhammad. The hadith literature was compiled from oral reports that were present in society around the time of their compilation, well after the death of the Prophet Muhammad. Bukhari's collection which is considered by many traditional religious scholars as the most 'reliable' was compiled two centuries after the death of the Prophet. Hadiths reports claim to originate from important characters of the earliest years of Islam such as the companions of Muhammad or Shia Imams/Religious leaders. These hadith narrations have formed the controversial basis of the Shariah models of "Islamic law", despite the contradictions they contain with regards to the Quran itself, such as regarding the punishment for Zina in the hadith (stoning to death) contradicts the Quran, rates of Zakat, definition of Ribba etc. The Hadith has also had a profound influence on molding the commentaries (tafsir) on the Quran. The earliest commentary of the Quran by Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari is mostly sourced from the hadith, in-line with Tabari's Athari creed which considered rational inquiry in matters of religion to be forbidden. As the application of deductive reasoning in deriving laws directly from the Quran was sidelined, the arbitrary authority of the hadith was used to replace the Quran in forming the basis of 'Shariah' Law. Much of early Islamic history available today is also based on the hadith. 

Each hadith is composed of two parts, a chain of authorities reporting the hadith (isnad), and the text itself (matn). Hadiths are regarded by traditional Islamic schools of jurisprudence as important tools for understanding the Quran and in matters of jurisprudence. Ibn Hajar, Ahmad. al-Nukat ala Kitab ibn al-Salah, vol. 1, pg. 90. Maktabah al-Furqan. Hadith were evaluated and gathered into large collections during the 8th and 9th centuries. These works are referred to in matters of Islamic law and history to this day.

The largest denominations of Islam, Sunni, Shia, and Ibadi, rely upon different sets of hadith collections.

Clerics and jurists of all denominations classify individual hadith as sahih (authentic), hasan (good) and da'if (weak). The Future of Muslim Civilisation - Page 26, Ziauddin Sardar - 1979 However, different traditions within each denomination, and different scholars within each tradition, may differ as to which hadith should be included in which category.

==Etymology==

In Arabic the word ( ) means a "report, account, or narrative". Hans Wehr, p. 190 The Arabic plural is adth () (). Hadith also refers to the speech of a person. Lisan al-Arab, by Ibn Manthour, vol. 2, pg. 350; Dar al-Hadith edition. It is a noun. al-Kuliyat by Abu al-Baqa al-Kafawi, pg. 370; Mu'assasah l-Risalah. This last phrase is quoted by al-Qasimi in Qawaid al-Tahdith, pg. 61; Dar al-Nafais. 

==Definition==
In Islamic terminology, the term hadith refers to reports of statements or actions of Muhammad, or of his tacit approval or criticism of something said or done in his presence. "Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam. Classical hadith specialist Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani says that the intended meaning of hadith in religious tradition is something attributed to Muhammad but that is not found in the Quran. Other associated words possess similar meanings including: khabar (news, information) often refers to reports about Muhammad, but sometimes refers to traditions about his companions and their successors from the following generation; conversely, athar (trace, vestige) usually refers to traditions about the companions and successors, though sometimes connotes traditions about Muhammad. The word sunnah (custom) is also used in reference to a normative custom of Muhammad or the early Muslim community. 

===Hadith Qudsi===
Hadith Qudsi (or Sacred Hadith) is a sub-category of hadith which Muslims regard as the words of God (Arabic: Allah), though not included in the Quran. According to as-Sayyid ash-Sharif al-Jurjani, the Hadith Qudsi differ from the Quran in that the former are "expressed in Muhammad's words", whereas the latter are the "direct words of God".

An example of a Hadith Qudsi is the hadith of Abu Hurairah who said that Muhammad said:
When God decreed the Creation He pledged Himself by writing in His book which is laid down with Him: My mercy prevails over My wrath. Related by al-Bukhari, Muslim, an-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah. 

==Components==
The two major aspects of a hadith are the text of the report (the matn), which contains the actual narrative, and the chain of narrators (the isnad), which documents the route by which the report has been transmitted. The sanad, literally 'support', is so named due to the reliance of the hadith specialists upon it in determining the authenticity or weakness of a hadith. Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. 1, pgs. 3941 with abridgement. The isnad consists of a chronological list of the narrators, each mentioning the one from whom they heard the hadith, until mentioning the originator of the matn along with the matn itself.

The first people to hear hadith were the companions who preserved it and then conveyed it to those after them. Then the generation following them received it, thus conveying it to those after them and so on. So a companion would say, "I heard the Prophet say such and such." The Follower would then say, "I heard a companion say, 'I heard the Prophet.'" The one after him would then say, "I heard someone say, 'I heard a Companion say, 'I heard the Prophet..." and so on. Ilm al-Rijal wa Ahimiyatih, by Mualami, pg. 16, Dar al-Rayah. 

==Usage==
The overwhelming majority of Muslims consider hadith to be essential supplements to and clarifications of the Quran, Islam's holy book, as well as in clarifying issues pertaining to Islamic jurisprudence. Ibn al-Salah, a hadith specialist, described the relationship between hadith and other aspect of the religion by saying: "It is the science most pervasive in respect to the other sciences in their various branches, in particular to jurisprudence being the most important of them." Ulum al-Hadith by Ibn al-Salah, pg. 5, Dar al-Fikr, with the verification of Nur al-Din al-Itr. "The intended meaning of 'other sciences' here are those pertaining to religion," explains Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, "Quranic exegesis, hadith, and jurisprudence. The science of hadith became the most pervasive due to the need displayed by each of these three sciences. The need hadith has of its science is apparent. As for Quranic exegesis, then the preferred manner of explaining the speech of God is by means of what has been accepted as a statement of Muhammad. The one looking to this is in need of distinguishing the acceptable from the unacceptable. Regarding jurisprudence, then the jurist is in need of citing as an evidence the acceptable to the exception of the later, something only possible utilizing the science of hadith." 

==History==

Traditions of the life of Muhammad and the early history of Islam were passed down mostly orally for more than a hundred years after Muhammad's death in AD 632. Muslim historians say that Caliph Uthman ibn Affan (the third khalifa (caliph) of the Rashidun Empire, or third successor of Muhammad, who had formerly been Muhammad's secretary), is generally believed to urge Muslims to record the hadith just as Muhammad suggested to some of his followers to write down his words and actions. ^ Tirmidhi, Ilm, 12. ^ Collected in the Musnad of Ahmad (10\15-6\ 6510 and also nos. 6930, 7017 and 1720), Sunan Abu Dawud (Mukhtasar Sunan Abi Dawud (5\246\3499) and elsewhere. 

Uthman's labours were cut short by his assassination, at the hands of aggrieved soldiers, in 656. No sources survive directly from this period so we are dependent on what later writers tell us about this period. Roman, provincial and Islamic law, Patricia Crone, p2 

By the 9th century the number of hadiths had grown exponentially. Islamic scholars of the Abbasid period were faced with a huge corpus of miscellaneous traditions, some of them flatly contradicting each other. Many of these traditions supported differing views on a variety of controversial matters. Scholars had to decide which hadith were to be trusted as authentic and which had been invented for political or theological purposes. To do this, they used a number of techniques which Muslims now call the science of hadith. Islam  the Straight Path, John Eposito, p81 

== Shia and Sunni textual traditions ==

Sunni and Shia hadith collections differ because scholars from the two traditions differ as to the reliability of the narrators and transmitters. Narrators who took the side of Abu Bakr and Umar rather than Ali, in the disputes over leadership that followed the death of Muhammad, are seen as unreliable by the Shia; narrations sourced to Ali and the family of Muhammad, and to their supporters, are preferred. Sunni scholars put trust in narrators, such as Aisha, whom Shia reject. Differences in hadith collections have contributed to differences in worship practices and shari'a law and have hardened the dividing line between the two traditions.

===Extent and nature of the textual corpus in the Sunni tradition===
In the Sunni tradition, the number of such texts is ten thousand plus or minus a few thousand. See the references and discussion by Abdul Fattah Abu Ghuddah Thalathatu rasa'il fi ulum al-hadith; risalat abi dawud ila ahl makkata fi wasf sunanihi, pg 36, footnote. Beirut: Maktaba al-Matbu'at al-Islamiyah: 2nd ed 1426/2005. But if, say, ten companions record a text reporting a single incident in the life of the prophet, hadith scholars can count this as ten hadiths. So Musnad Ahmad, for example, has over 30,000 hadithsbut this count includes texts that are repeated in order to record slight variations within the text or within the chains of narrations. Identifying the narrators of the various texts, comparing their narrations of the same texts to identify both the soundest reporting of a text and the reporters who are most sound in their reporting occupied experts of hadith throughout the 2nd century. In the 3rd century of Islam (from 225/840 to about 275/889), The earliest book, Bukhari's Sahih was composed by 225 since he states that he spent sixteen years composing it (Hady al-Sari, introduction to Fath al-Bari, p. 489, Lahore: Dar Nashr al-Kutub al-Islamiya, 1981/1401) and also that he showed it to Yahya ibn Ma'in (pg. 8, ibid.) who died in 233. Nasa'i, the last to die of the authors of the six books, died in 303/915. He probably completed this work a few decades before his death: by 275 or so. hadith experts composed brief works recording a selection of about two- to five-thousand such texts which they felt to have been most soundly documented or most widely referred to in the Muslim scholarly community. Counting multiple narrations of the same texts as a single text, the number of hadiths each author has recorded roughly as follows: Bukhari (as in Zabidi's Mukhtasar of Bukhari's book) 2134, Muslim (as in Mundhiri's Mukhtasar of Muslim's book) 2200, Tirmidhi 4000, Abu Dawud 4000, Nasa'i 4800, Ibn Majah 4300. There is considerable overlap amongst the six books so that Ibn al-Athir's Jami' al-Usul, which gathers together the hadiths texts of all six books deleting repeated texts, has about 9500 hadiths. The 4th and 5th century saw these six works being commented on quite widely. This auxiliary literature has contributed to making their study the place of departure for any serious study of hadith. In addition, Bukhari and Muslim in particular, claimed that they were collecting only the soundest of sound hadiths. These later scholars tested their claims and agreed to them, so that today, they are considered the most reliable collections of hadith. Muqaddimah Ibn al-Salah, pg. 160 Dar al-Maaarif edition Toward the end of the 5th century, Ibn al-Qaisarani formally standardized the Sunni canon into six pivotal works, a delineation which remains to this day. Ignc Goldziher, Muslim Studies, vol. 2, pg. 240. Halle, 1889-1890. ISBN 0-202-30778-6 Scott C. Lucas, Constructive Critics, adth Literature, and the Articulation of Sunn Islam, pg. 106. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2004. Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary, translated by William McGuckin de Slane. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. Sold by Institut de France and Royal Library of Belgium. Vol. 3, pg. 5. 

Over the centuries, several different categories of collections came into existence. Some are more general, like the muannaf, the mujam, and the jmi, and some more specific, either characterised by the topics treated, like the sunan (restricted to legal-liturgical traditions), or by its composition, like the arbaniyyt (collections of forty hadiths). Muhammad Zubayr Siddiqi, Hadith Literature, Cambridge, Islamic Texts Society, 1993, edited and revised by Abdal Hakim Murad. 

===Extent and nature of the textual corpus in the Shia tradition===
Shi'a Muslims do not use the six major hadith collections followed by the Sunni, as they do not trust many of the Sunni narrators and transmitters. They have their own extensive hadith literature. The best-known hadith collections are The Four Books, which were compiled by three authors who are known as the 'Three Muhammads'. Momen, Moojan, Introduction to Shi'i Islam, Yale University Press, 1985, p.174. The Four Books are: Kitab al-Kafi by Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni al-Razi (329 AH), Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih by Muhammad ibn Babuya and Al-Tahdhib and Al-Istibsar both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi. Shi'a clerics also make use of extensive collections and commentaries by later authors.

==Studies==

Hadith studies are a number of methods of evaluation developed by early Muslim scholars in determining the veracity of reports attributed to Muhammad. This is achieved by analyzing the text of the report, the scale of the report's transmission, the routes through which the report was transmitted, and the individual narrators involved in its transmission. On the basis of these criteria, various classifications were devised for hadith. The earliest comprehensive work in hadith studies was Abu Muhammad al-Ramahurmuzi's al-Muhaddith al-Fasil, while another significant work was al-Hakim al-Naysaburi's Marifat ulum al-hadith. Ibn al-Salah's Ulum al-hadith is considered the standard classical reference on hadith studies. 

===Terminology===

By means of hadith terminology, hadith are categorized as a (sound, authentic), af (weak), or maw (fabricated). Other classifications used also include: asan (good), which refers to an otherwise a report suffering from minor deficiency, or a weak report strengthened due to numerous other corroborating reports; and munkar (denounced) which is a report that is rejected due to the presence of an unreliable transmitter contradicting another more reliable narrator. See:
*"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam Online;
*"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world. Both sahh and hasan reports are considered acceptable for usage in Islamic legal discourse. Classifications of hadith may also be based upon the scale of transmission. Reports that pass through many reliable transmitters at each point in the isnad up until their collection and transcription are known as mutawtir. These reports are considered the most authoritative as they pass through so many different routes that collusion between all of the transmitters becomes an impossibility. Reports not meeting this standard are known as aahad, and are of several different types. 

===Biographical evaluation===

Another area of focus in the study of hadith is biographical analysis (ilm al-rijl, lit. "science of people"), in which details about the transmitter are scrutinized. This includes analyzing their date and place of birth; familial connections; teachers and students; religiosity; moral behaviour; literary output; their travels; as well as their date of death. Based upon these criteria, the reliability (thiqt) of the transmitter is assessed. Also determined is whether the individual was actually able to transmit the report, which is deduced from their contemporaneity and geographical proximity with the other transmitters in the chain. Berg (2000) p. 8 Examples of biographical dictionaries include: Abd al-Ghani al-Maqdisi's Al-Kamal fi Asma' al-Rijal, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani's Tahdhb al-Tahdhb and al-Dhahabi's Tadhkirat al-huffaz. See:
*Robinson (2003) pp. 6970;
*Lucas (2004) p. 15 

==Criticism of Hadith by Islamic Scholars==

Syed Ahmed Khan (18171898) is often considered the founder of the modernist movement within Islam, noted for his application of "rational science" to the Quran and Hadith and his conclusion that the Hadith were not legally binding on Muslims. His student, Chiragh Ali, went further, suggesting nearly all the Hadith were fabrications. Latif, Abu Ruqayyah Farasat. The Quraniyun of the Twentieth Century, Masters Assertion, September 2006 

Ghulam Ahmed Pervez (19031985) was a noted critic of the Hadith and believed that the Quran alone was all that was necessary to discern God's will and our obligations. A fatwa, ruling, signed by more than a thousand orthodox clerics, denounced him as a 'kafir', a non-believer. His seminal work, Maqam-e Hadith argued that the Hadith were composed of "the garbled words of previous centuries", but suggests that he is not against the idea of collected sayings of the Prophet, only that he would consider any hadith that goes against the teachings of Quran to have been falsely attributed to the Prophet. Pervez, Ghulam Ahmed. Maqam-e Hadith, Urdu version 

The 1986 Malaysian book "Hadith: A Re-evaluation" by Kassim Ahmad was met with controversy and some scholars declared him an apostate from Islam for suggesting that "the hadith are sectarian, anti-science, anti-reason and anti-women". Ahmad, Kassim. "Hadith: A Re-evaluation", 1986. English translation 1997 

See: Criticism of the Hadith by Muslims

==Western academic scholarship==
Early Western exploration of Islam consisted primarily of translation of the Qur'an and a few histories. In the 19th century, scholars translated and commented upon a great variety of Muslim religious texts; by the beginning of the 20th century, Western scholars of Islam started to critically engage with these Islamic texts. Ignaz Goldziher is the best known of these turn-of-the-century critics, who also included D. S. Margoliuth, Henri Lammens, and Leone Caetani. Goldziher writes, in his Mohammedan Studies: "... it is not surprising that, among the hotly debated controversial issues of Islam, whether political or doctrinal, there is not one in which the champions of the various views are unable to cite a number of traditions, all equipped with imposing isnads". John Esposito notes that "Modern Western scholarship has seriously questioned the historicity and authenticity of the hadith", maintaining that "the bulk of traditions attributed to the Prophet Muhammad were actually written much later." He mentions Joseph Schacht as one scholar who argues this, claiming that Schacht "found no evidence of legal traditions before 722," from which Schacht concluded that "the Sunna of the Prophet is not the words and deeds of the Prophet, but apocryphal material" dating from later. 

Contemporary Western scholars of hadith include: Herbert Berg, Fred M. Donner and Wilfred Madelung. Madelung has immersed himself in the hadith literature and has made his own selection and evaluation of tradition. Having done this, he is much more willing to trust hadith than many of his contemporaries. Madelung said of hadith: "Work with the narrative sources, both those that have been available to historians for a long time and others which have been published recently, made it plain that their wholesale rejection as late fiction is unjustified and that with without a judicious use of them, a much more reliable and accurate portrait of the period can be drawn than has been realized so far." The Succession to Muhammad, page xi. 

Harald Motzki said: "The mere fact that ahadith and asanid were forged must not lead us to conclude that all of them are fictitious or that the genuine and the spurious cannot be distinguished with some degree of certainty." 

==See also==
* Prophetic biography

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
*
*Swarup, Ram. Understanding Islam through Hadis. Exposition Press, Smithtown, New York USA (n/d).
*
* Recep Senturk, Narrative Social Structure: Anatomy of the Hadith Transmission Network, 610-1505 (Stanford, Stanford UP, 2006).
* Jonathan Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhr and Muslim. The Formation and Function of the Sunn adth (Leiden, Brill, 2007) (Islamic History and Civilization. Studies and Texts, 69).

==Further reading==
*1000 Qudsi Hadiths: An Encyclopedia of Divine Sayings; New York: Arabic Virtual Translation Center; (2012) ISBN 978-1-4700-2994-4
*
*Brown, J. (2007). The Canonization of al-Bukhari and Muslim: The Formation and Function of the Sunni Hadith Canon. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
*Juynboll, G. H. A. (2007). Encyclopedia of Canonical Hadith. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
* 
*Musa, A. Y. Hadith as Scripture: Discussions on The Authority Of Prophetic Traditions in Islam, New York: Palgrave, 2008. ISBN 0-230-60535-4
*Fred M. Donner, Narratives of Islamic Origins (1998)
* Warner, Bill. The Political Traditions of Mohammed: The Hadith for the Unbelievers, CSPI (2006). ISBN 0978552873
* Tottoli, Roberto, "Hadith", in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol I, pp. 231-236.

==External links==

*Importance of hadith
*Hadith Search by keyword and find hadith by narrator.
*Hadith by Narrator Find hadith by narrators.
*Hadith Advanced Search Search by keyword.
*
*

 



[[Hull (watercraft)]]

Half-hull of the 46-gun ship of the line Tigre, build from 1724 in Toulon after plans by Blaise Coulomb

A hull is the watertight body of a ship or boat. Above the hull is the superstructure and/or deckhouse, where present. The line where the hull meets the water surface is called the waterline.

The structure of the hull varies depending on the vessel type. In a typical modern steel ship, the structure consists of watertight and non-tight decks, major transverse and watertight (and also sometimes non-tight or longitudinal) members called bulkheads, intermediate members such as girders, stringers and webs, and minor members called ordinary transverse frames, frames, or longitudinals, depending on the structural arrangement. The uppermost continuous deck may be called the "upper deck", "weather deck", "spar deck", "main deck", or simply "deck". The particular name given depends on the contextthe type of ship or boat, the arrangement, or even where it sails. Not all hulls are decked (for instance a dinghy).

In a typical wooden sailboat, the hull is constructed of wooden planking, supported by transverse frames (often referred to as ribs) and bulkheads, which are further tied together by longitudinal stringers or ceiling. Often but not always there is a centerline longitudinal member called a keel.
In fiberglass or composite hulls, the structure may resemble wooden or steel vessels to some extent, or be of a monocoque arrangement. In many cases, composite hulls are built by sandwiching thin fiber-reinforced skins over a lightweight but reasonably rigid core of foam, balsa wood, impregnated paper honeycomb or other material.
"Hull Form"

==General features==
The shape of the hull is entirely dependent upon the needs of the design. Shapes range from a nearly perfect box in the case of scow barges, to a needle-sharp surface of revolution in the case of a racing multihull sailboat. The shape is chosen to strike a balance between cost, hydrostatic considerations (accommodation, load carrying and stability), hydrodynamics (speed, power requirements, and motion and behavior in a seaway) and special considerations for the ship's role, such as the rounded bow of an icebreaker or the flat bottom of a landing craft.

==Hull shapes==

Hulls come in many varieties and can have composite shape, (e.g., a fine entry forward and inverted bell shape aft), but are grouped primarily as follows:
:* Chined and Hard-chined. Examples are the flat-bottom (chined), v-bottom and multi-bottom hull (hard chined).
::: have at least one pronounced knuckle throughout all or most of their length
:* Moulded, round bilged or soft-chined. Examples are the round bilge, semi-round bilge and s-bottom hull.
::: defined as smooth curves

===Categorization===

After this they can be categorized as:
:* Displacement
::: the hull is supported exclusively or predominantly by buoyancy. Vessels that have this type of hull travel through the water at a limited rate which is defined by the waterline length. They are often heavier than planing types, though not always.
:* Planing
Royal Navy World War II MTB planing at speed on calm water showing its Hard chine hull - note how most of the forepart of the boat is out of the water
::: the planing hull form is configured to develop positive dynamic pressure so that its draft decreases with increasing speed. The dynamic lift reduces the wetted surface and therefore also the drag. They are sometimes flat-bottomed, sometimes V-bottomed and sometimes round-bilged. The most common form is to have at least one chine, which makes for more efficient planing and can throw spray down. Planing hulls are more efficient at higher speeds, although they still require more energy to achieve these speeds. (see: Planing (sailing), Hull speed).

:* Semi-displacement, or semi-planing
::: the hull form is capable of developing a moderate amount of dynamic lift, however, most of the vessel's weight is still supported through buoyancy

===Most used hull forms===
At present, the most widely used form is the round bilge hull. Zeilen: Van beginner tot gevorderde by Karel Heijnen 

The inverted bell shape of the hull, with smaller payload the waterline cross-section is less, hence the resistance is less and the speed is higher. With higher payload the outward bend provides smoother performance in waves. As such, the inverted bell shape is a popular form used with planing hulls.

===Hull forms===

====Chined and hard-chined hulls====

A chined hull consists of straight, smooth, tall, long, or short plates, which are set at an angle to each other. The chined hull is the most simple hull shape because it works with only straight planks. These boards are often bent lengthwise. Most home-made constructed boats are chined hull boats. The Cajun "pirogue" is an example of a craft with hard chines. Benefits of this type of boating activity is the low production cost and the (usually) fairly flat bottom, making the boat faster at planing. Chined hulls can also make use of a daggerboard or attached keel.

Chined hulls can be divided up into 3 shapes: 
* Flat-bottom chined hulls
* Multi-chined hulls
* V-bottom chined hulls.

====Smooth curve hulls====

Smooth curve hulls are hulls which use, just like the curved hulls, a sword or an attached keel.

Semi round bilge hulls are somewhat less round. The advantage of the semi-round is that it is a nice middle between the S-bottom and chined hull. Typical examples of a semi-round bilge hull can be found in the Centaur and Laser cruising dinghies.

(A) S-bottom hullcompared to a(B) hard and(C) soft chine hull

S-bottom hulls are hulls shaped like an s . In the s-bottom, the hull runs smooth to the keel. As there are no sharp corners in the fuselage. Boats with this hull have a fixed keel, or a kielmidzwaard (literally "keel with sword"). This is a short fixed keel, with a swing keel inside. Examples of cruising dinghies that use this s-shape are the Yngling and Randmeer.

==Appendages==

:* Control devices such as a rudder, trim tabs or stabilizing fins may be fitted.
:* A keel may be fitted on a hull to increase the transverse stability, directional stability or to create lift.
:* A protrusion below the waterline forward is called a bulbous bow and is fitted on some hulls to reduce the wave making resistance drag and thus increase fuel efficiency. Bulbs fitted at the stern are less common but accomplish a similar task. (see also: Naval architecture)

==Terms==
* Baseline is an imaginary reference line used to measure vertical distances from.
* Bow is the front part of the hull
* Amidships is the middle portion of the vessel in the fore and aft direction.
* Port is the left side of the vessel when facing the bow
* Starboard is the right side of the vessel when facing the bow
* Stern is the rear part of the hull
* Waterline is an imaginary line circumscribing the hull that matches the surface of the water when the hull is not moving.

==Metrics==
Principal hull measurements
"LWL & LOA"
Hull forms are defined as follows: 

:* Block measures that define the principal dimensions. They are:
::* Beam or breadth (B) is the width of the hull. (ex: BWL is the maximum beam at the waterline)
::* Draft (d) or (T) is the vertical distance from the bottom of the keel to the waterline.
::* Freeboard (FB) is depth plus the height of the keel structure minus draft.
::* Length at the waterline (LWL) is the length from the forwardmost point of the waterline measured in profile to the stern-most point of the waterline.
::* Length between perpendiculars (LBP or LPP) is the length of the summer load waterline from the stern post to the point where it crosses the stem. (see also p/p)
::* Length overall (LOA) is the extreme length from one end to the other.
::* Moulded depth (D) is the vertical distance measured from the top of the keel to the underside of the upper deck at side. , Annex 1, Regulations for determining gross and net tonnages of ships, Reg. 2(2)(a). In ships with rounded gunwales, the upper measurement point is take to the point at which the planes of the deck and side plating intersect. Id., Reg. 2(2)(b). Ships with stepped decks are measured to a line parallel with the upper part. Id., Reg. 2(2)(c). 

:*Form derivatives that are calculated from the shape and the block measures. They are:
::* Displacement () is the weight of water equivalent to the immersed volume of the hull.
::* Longitudinal centre of buoyancy (LCB) is the longitudinal distance from a point of reference (often midships) to the centre of the displaced volume of water when the hull is not moving. Note that the longitudinal centre of gravity or centre of the weight of the vessel must align with the LCB when the hull is in equilibrium.
::* Longitudinal centre of floatation (LCF) is the longitudinal distance from a point of reference (often midships) to the centre of the area of waterplane when the hull is not moving. This can be visualized as being the area defined by the water's surface and the hull.
::* Vertical centre of buoyancy (VCB) is the vertical distance from a point of reference (often the baseline) to the centre of the displaced volume of water when the hull is not moving.
::* Volume (V or ) is the volume of water displaced by the hull.

:* Coefficients help compare hull forms as well:

::1) Block coefficient (Cb) is the volume (V) divided by the LWL x BWL x T. If you draw a box around the submerged part of the ship, it is the ratio of the box volume occupied by the ship. It gives a sense of how much of the block defined by the LWL, beam (B) & draft (T) is filled by the hull. Full forms such as oil tankers will have a high Cb where fine shapes such as sailboats will have a low Cb.
:::

::2) Midship coefficient (Cm or Cx) is the cross-sectional area (Ax) of the slice at midships (or at the largest section for Cx) divided by beam x draft. It displays the ratio of the largest underwater section of the hull to a rectangle of the same overall width and depth as the underwater section of the hull. This defines the fullness of the underbody. A low Cm indicates a cut-away mid-section and a high Cm indicates a boxy section shape. Sailboats have a cut-away mid-section with low Cx whereas cargo vessels have a boxy section with high Cx to help increase the Cb.
:::

::3) Prismatic coefficient (Cp) is the volume (V) divided by Lpp x Ax. It displays the ratio of the immersed volume of the hull to a volume of a prism with equal length to the ship and cross-sectional area equal to the largest underwater section of the hull (midship section). This is used to evaluate the distribution of the volume of the underbody. A low or fine Cp indicates a full mid-section and fine ends, a high or full Cp indicates a boat with fuller ends. Planing hulls and other highspeed hulls tend towards a higher Cp. Efficient displacement hulls travelling at a low Froude number will tend to have a low Cp.
:::

::4) Waterplane coefficient (Cw) is the waterplane area divided by Lpp x B. The waterplane coefficient expresses the fullness of the waterplane, or the ratio of the waterplane area to a rectangle of the same length and width. A low Cw figure indicates fine ends and a high Cw figure indicates fuller ends. High Cw improves stability as well as handling behavior in rough conditions.
:::

::Note:
:::

==History==
Rafts have a hull of sorts, however, hulls of the earliest design are thought to have each consisted of a hollowed out tree bole: in effect the first canoes. Hull form then proceeded to the coracle shape and on to more sophisticated forms as the science of naval architecture advanced.

==See also==

* Anti-fouling paint
* Boat
* Cathedral hull
* Double hull
* Draft
* Froude number

* Hull classification symbol
* Hull speed
* Lift (force)
* Monohull
* Multihull
* Naval architecture

* Ship measurements
* Shipbuilding
* Submarine
* Submarine hull

==Notes==

==References==

*
*



[[Hymn]]

A hymn is a type of song, usually religious, specifically written for the purpose of praise, adoration or prayer, and typically addressed to a deity or deities, or to a prominent figure or personification. The word hymn derives from Greek (hymnos), which means "a song of praise". Collections of hymns are known as hymnals or hymn books.

==Origins==
Ancient hymns include the Egyptian Great Hymn to the Aten, composed by Pharaoh Akhenaten; the Vedas, a collection of hymns in the tradition of Hinduism; and the Psalms, a collection of songs from Judaism. The Western tradition of hymnody begins with the Homeric Hymns, a collection of ancient Greek hymns, the oldest of which were written in the 7th century BC, praising deities of the ancient Greek religions. Surviving from the 3rd century BC is a collection of six literary hymns () by the Alexandrian poet Callimachus.

Patristic writers began applying the term , or hymnus in Latin, to Christian songs of praise, and frequently used the word as a synonym for "psalm". Entry on , Liddell and Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 8th edition 1897, 1985 printing), p. 1849; entry on 'hymnus,' Lewis and Short, A Latin Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1879, 1987 printing), p. 872. 

== Christian hymnody ==
Originally modeled on the Psalms and other poetic passages (commonly referred to as "canticles") in the Scriptures, Christian hymns are generally directed as praise to the monotheistic God. Many refer to Jesus Christ either directly or indirectly.

Since the earliest times, Christians have sung "psalms and hymns and spiritual songs", both in private devotions and in corporate worship (; ; ; ; ; cf. ; ).

One definition of a hymn is "...a lyric poem, reverently and devotionally conceived, which is designed to be sung and which expresses the worshipper's attitude toward God or God's purposes in human life. It should be simple and metrical in form, genuinely emotional, poetic and literary in style, spiritual in quality, and in its ideas so direct and so immediately apparent as to unify a congregation while singing it." 

Christian hymns are often written with special or seasonal themes and these are used on holy days such as Christmas, Easter and the Feast of All Saints, or during particular seasons such as Advent and Lent. Others are used to encourage reverence for the Holy Bible or to celebrate Christian practices such as the eucharist or baptism. Some hymns praise or address individual saints, particularly the Blessed Virgin Mary; such hymns are particularly prevalent in Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and to some extent "High Church" Anglicanism.

A writer of hymns is known as a hymnist or hymnodist, and the practice of singing hymns is called hymnody; the same word is used for the collectivity of hymns belonging to a particular denomination or period (e.g. "nineteenth century Methodist hymnody" would mean the body of hymns written and/or used by Methodists in the 19th century). A collection of hymns is called a hymnal or hymnary. These may or may not include music. A student of hymnody is called a hymnologist, and the scholarly study of hymns, hymnists and hymnody is hymnology. The music to which a hymn may be sung is a hymn tune. 

In many Evangelical churches, traditional songs are classified as hymns while more contemporary worship songs are not considered hymns. The reason for this distinction is unclear, but according to some it is due to the radical shift of style and devotional thinking that began with the Jesus movement and Jesus music.

=== Music and accompaniment ===
In ancient and medieval times, stringed instruments such as the harp, lyre and lute were used with psalms and hymns.

Since there is a lack of musical notation in early writings, Entry on "Hymn: 4. Hymn Sources and Transmission," Warren Anderson, et al. Grove Music Online (20072009) (subscription required). the actual musical forms in the early church can only be surmised. During the Middle Ages a rich hymnody developed in the form of Gregorian chant or plainsong. This type was sung in unison, in one of eight church modes, and most often by monastic choirs. While they were written originally in Latin, many have been translated; a familiar example is the 4th century Of the Father's Heart Begotten sung to the 11th century plainsong Divinum Mysterium.

==== Western church ====
Later hymnody in the Western church introduced four-part vocal harmony as the norm, adopting major and minor keys, and came to be led by organ and choir. It shares many elements with classical music.

Today, except for choirs, more musically inclined congregations and a cappella congregations, hymns are typically sung in unison. In some cases complementary full settings for organ are also published, in others organists and other accompanists are expected to transcribe the four-part vocal score for their instrument of choice.

To illustrate Protestant usage, in the traditional services and liturgies of the Methodist churches, which are based upon Anglican practice, hymns are sung (often accompanied by an organ) during the processional to the altar, during the receiving of the Eucharist, during the recessional, and sometimes at other points during the service. These hymns can be found in the United Methodist Hymnal. The Doxology is also sung after the tithes and offerings are brought up to the altar.

Contemporary Christian worship, as often found in Evangelicalism and Pentecostalism, may include the use of contemporary worship music played with electric guitars and the drum kit, sharing many elements with rock music.

Other groups of Christians have historically excluded instrumental accompaniment, citing the absence of instruments in worship by the church in the first several centuries of its existence, and adhere to an unaccompanied a cappella congregational singing of hymns. These groups include the 'Brethren' (often both 'Open' and 'Exclusive'), the Churches of Christ, Mennonites, Primitive Baptists, and certain Reformed churches, although during the last century or so, several of these, such as the Free Church of Scotland have abandoned this stance.

====Eastern church====
Eastern Christianity (the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches) have a very rich and ancient hymnographical tradition. 

Eastern chant is almost always a cappella, and instrumental accompaniment is rare. The central form of chant in the Eastern Orthodoxy is Byzantine Chant, which is used to chant all forms of liturgical worship. Exceptions include the Coptic Orthodox tradition which makes use of the sistrum, the Indian Orthodox (Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church) which makes use of the organ and the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, which also uses drums, cymbals and other instruments on certain occasions.

=== The development of Christian hymnody ===
Thomas Aquinas, in the introduction to his commentary on the Psalms, defined the Christian hymn thus: "Hymnus est laus Dei cum cantico; canticum autem exultatio mentis de aeternis habita, prorumpens in vocem." ("A hymn is the praise of God with song; a song is the exultation of the mind dwelling on eternal things, bursting forth in the voice.") 

The Protestant Reformation resulted in two conflicting attitudes to hymns. One approach, the regulative principle of worship, favoured by many Zwinglians, Calvinists and some radical reformers, considered anything that was not directly authorised by the Bible to be a novel and Catholic introduction to worship, which was to be rejected. All hymns that were not direct quotations from the Bible fell into this category. Such hymns were banned, along with any form of instrumental musical accompaniment, and organs were ripped out of churches. Instead of hymns, biblical psalms were chanted, most often without accompaniment, to very basic melodies. This was known as exclusive psalmody. Examples of this may still be found in various places, including in some of the Presbyterian churches of western Scotland. 

The other Reformation approach, the normative principle of worship, produced a burst of hymn writing and congregational singing. Martin Luther is notable not only as a reformer, but as the author of many hymns including Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott (A Mighty Fortress Is Our God), which is sung today even by Catholics, and Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (Praise be to You, Jesus Christ) for Christmas. Luther and his followers often used their hymns, or chorales, to teach tenets of the faith to worshipers. The first Protestant hymnal was published in Bohemia in 1532 by the Unitas Fratrum. Count Zinzendorf, the Lutheran leader of the Moravian Church in the 18th century wrote some 2,000 hymns. The earlier English writers tended to paraphrase biblical texts, particularly Psalms; Isaac Watts followed this tradition, but is also credited as having written the first English hymn which was not a direct paraphrase of Scripture. 
Watts (16741748), whose father was an Elder of a dissenter congregation, complained at age 16, that when allowed only psalms to sing, the faithful could not even sing about their Lord, Christ Jesus. His father invited him to see what he could do about it; the result was Watts' first hymn, "Behold the glories of the Lamb". 
Found in few hymnals today, the hymn has eight stanzas in common meter and is based on Revelation 5:6, 8, 9, 10, 12. 

Relying heavily on Scripture, Watts wrote metered texts based on New Testament passages that brought the Christian faith into the songs of the church. Isaac Watts has been called "the father of English hymnody", but Erik Routley sees him more as "the liberator of English hymnody", because his hymns, and hymns like them, moved worshipers beyond singing only Old Testament psalms, inspiring congregations and revitalizing worship. 

Later writers took even more freedom, some even including allegory and metaphor in their texts.

Charles Wesley's hymns spread Methodist theology, not only within Methodism, but in most Protestant churches. He developed a new focus: expressing one's personal feelings in the relationship with God as well as the simple worship seen in older hymns. Wesley wrote:
:Where shall my wondering soul begin?
:How shall I all to heaven aspire?
:A slave redeemed from death and sin,
:A brand plucked from eternal fire,
:How shall I equal triumphs raise,
:Or sing my great deliverer's praise.

Wesley's contribution, along with the Second Great Awakening in America led to a new style called gospel, and a new explosion of sacred music writing with Fanny Crosby, Lina Sandell, Philip Bliss, Ira D. Sankey, and others who produced testimonial music for revivals, camp meetings, and evangelistic crusades. The tune style or form is technically designated "gospel songs" as distinct from hymns. Gospel songs generally include a refrain (or chorus) and usually (though not always) a faster tempo than the hymns. As examples of the distinction, "Amazing Grace" is a hymn (no refrain), but "How Great Thou Art" is a gospel song. During the 19th century the gospel-song genre spread rapidly in Protestantism and, to a lesser but still definite extent, in Roman Catholicism; the gospel-song genre is unknown in the worship per se by Eastern Orthodox churches, which rely exclusively on traditional chants (a type of hymn).

The Methodist Revival of the 18th century created an explosion of hymn-writing in Welsh, which continued into the first half of the 19th century. The most prominent names among Welsh hymn-writers are William Williams Pantycelyn and Ann Griffiths. The second half of the 19th century witnessed an explosion of hymn tune composition and choir singing in Wales. E. Wyn James, 'The Evolution of the Welsh Hymn', in Dissenting Praise, ed. I. Rivers & D. L. Wykes (OUP, 2011) 

Along with the more classical sacred music of composers ranging from Mozart to Monteverdi, the Catholic Church continued to produce many popular hymns such as Lead, Kindly Light, Silent Night, O Sacrament Divine and Faith of our Fathers. 

Many churches today use contemporary worship music which includes a range of styles often influenced by popular music. This often leads to some conflict between older and younger congregants (see contemporary worship). This is not new; the Christian pop music style began in the late 1960s and became very popular during the 1970s, as young hymnists sought ways in which to make the music of their religion relevant for their generation.

This long tradition has resulted in a wide variety of hymns. Some modern churches include within hymnody the traditional hymn (usually describing God), contemporary worship music (often directed to God) and gospel music (expressions of one's personal experience of God). This distinction is not perfectly clear; and purists remove the second two types from the classification as hymns. It is a matter of debate, even sometimes within a single congregation, often between revivalist and traditionalist movements.

====American developments====
African-Americans developed a rich hymnody from spirituals during times of slavery to the modern, lively black gospel style. The first influences of African American Culture into hymns came from Slave Songs of the United States a collection of slave hymns complied by William Francis Allen who had difficulty pinning them down from the oral tradition, and though he succeeded, he points out the awe inspiring effect of the hymns when sung in by their originators. Music, David. Hymnology A Collection of Source Readings. 1. 1. Lanham MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1996. 179/185-186/192/199/206. Print. 

Thomas Symmes spread throughout churches a new idea of how to sing hymns, in which anyone could sing a hymn any way they felt led to; this idea was opposed by the views of Symmes' colleagues who felt it was "like Five Hundred different Tunes roared out at the same time". William Billings, a singing school teacher, created the first tune book with only American born compositions. Within his books, Billings did not put as much emphasis on "common measure" which was the typical way hymns were sung, but he attempted "to have a Sufficiency in each measure". Boston's Handel and Haydn Society aimed at raising the level of church music in America, publishing their "Collection of Church Music". In the late 19th century Ira D. Sankey and Dwight L. Moody developed the relatively new subcategory of Gospel hymns. Music, David. Hymnology A Collection of Source Readings. 1. 1. Lanham MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1996. 

===Hymn meters===

The meter indicates the number of syllables for the lines in each stanza of a hymn. This provides a means of marrying the hymn's text with an appropriate hymn tune for singing. In practice many hymns conform to one of a relatively small number of meters (syllable count and stress patterns). Care must be taken, however, to ensure that not only the metre of words and tune match, but also the stresses on the words in each line. Technically speaking an iambic tune, for instance, cannot be used with words of, say, trochaic metre.

The meter is often denoted by a row of figures besides the name of the tune, such as "87.87.87", which would inform the reader that each verse has six lines, and that the first line has eight syllables, the second has seven, the third line eight, etc. The meter can also be described by initials; L.M. indicates long meter, which is 88.88 (four lines, each eight syllables long); S.M. is short meter (66.86); C.M. is common metre (86.86), while D.L.M., D.S.M. and D.C.M. (the "D" stands for double) are similar to their respective single meters except that they have eight lines in a verse instead of four. 

Also, if the number of syllables in one verse differ from another verse in the same hymn (e.g., the hymn "I Sing a Song of the Saints of God"), the meter is called Irregular.

==Sikh hymnody==

The Sikh holy book, the Guru Granth Sahib Ji ( ), is a collection of hymns (Shabad) or Gurbani describing the qualities of God and why one should meditate on God's name. The Guru Granth Sahib is divided by their musical setting in different ragas into fourteen hundred and thirty pages known as Angs (limbs) in Sikh tradition. Guru Gobind Singh (16661708), the tenth guru, after adding Guru Tegh Bahadur's bani to the Adi Granth affirmed the sacred text as his successor, elevating it to Guru Granth Sahib. The text remains the holy scripture of the Sikhs, regarded as the teachings of the Ten Gurus. The role of Guru Granth Sahib, as a source or guide of prayer, is pivotal in Sikh worship.

==See also==
*Carol
*Chorale
*Contemporary worship music
*Contemporary Catholic liturgical music
*Doxology
*Hymn Society in the United States and Canada
*Hymn Society of Great Britain and Ireland
*Kafi
*List of Chinese Hymn Books
*List of Hymnals
*List of Roman Catholic hymns
*Metrical psalter
*Psalm
*Sacred Harp
*Shape note
*Shabad
*Vedic Chant

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bradley, Ian. Abide with Me: the World of Victorian Hymns. London: S.C.M. Press, 1997. ISBN 0-334-02703-9
* Hughes, Charles, Albert Christ Janer, and Carleton Sprague Smith, eds. American Hymns, Old and New. New York: Columbia University Press, 1989. 2 vols. N.B.: Vol. l, music, harmonized, with words, of the selected hymns of various Christian denominations, sects, and cults; vol. 2, Notes on the Hymns and Biographies of the Authors and Composers. ISBN 0-231-05148-4 set comprising both volumes.

==External links==
The links below are restricted to either material that is historical or resources that are non-denominational or inter-denominational. Denomination-specific resources are mentioned from the relevant denomination-specific articles. 
* 
* Extensive database of hymns and hymnology resources; incorporates the Dictionary of North American Hymnology
* 
* 2000 pages of hymns in both staff and neumatic notation
* Site with extensive hymn searching tools

 



[[History of physics]]

"If I have seen further, it is only by standing on the shoulders of giants." Isaac Newton. Letter to Robert Hooke (15 February 1676 by Gregorian reckonings with January 1 as New Year's Day). equivalent to 5 February 1675 using the Julian calendar with March 25 as New Year's Day 
Physics (from Ancient Greek:  physis "nature") is a branch of science that developed out of philosophy, and was thus referred to as natural philosophy until the late 19th centurya term describing a field of study concerned with "the workings of nature". Currently, physics is traditionally defined as the study of matter, energy, and the relation between them. Physics is, in some senses, the oldest and most basic pure science; its discoveries find applications throughout the natural sciences, since matter and energy are the basic constituents of the natural world. The other sciences are generally more limited in their scope and may be considered branches that have split off from physics to become sciences in their own right. Physics today may be divided loosely into classical physics and modern physics.

==Ancient history==

Elements of what became physics were drawn primarily from the fields of astronomy, optics, and mechanics, which were methodologically united through the study of geometry. These mathematical disciplines began in Antiquity with the Babylonians and with Hellenistic writers such as Archimedes and Ptolemy. Meanwhile, philosophy, including what was called "physics", focused on explanatory (rather than descriptive) schemes, largely developed around the Aristotelian idea of the four types of "causes".

===Ancient Greece===
The move towards a rational understanding of nature began at least since the Archaic period in Greece (650  480 BCE) with the Pre-Socratic philosophers. The philosopher Thales of Miletus (7th and 6th centuries BCE), dubbed "the Father of Science" for refusing to accept various supernatural, religious or mythological explanations for natural phenomena, proclaimed that every event had a natural cause. Singer, C. This shift from ecclesiastical reasoning to scientific reasoning marked the beginning of scientific methodology. A Short History of Science to the 19th Century. Streeter Press, 2008. p. 35. Thales also made advancements in 580 BCE by suggesting that water is the basic element, experimenting with magnets and attraction to rubbed amber, and formulating the first cosmologies. Anaximander, famous for his proto-evolutionary theory, disputed the ideas of Thales and proposed that rather than water, a substance called apeiron was the building block of all matter. Heraclitus (around 500 BCE) proposed that the only basic law governing the universe was the principle of change and that nothing remains in the same state indefinitely. This observation made him one of the first scholars in ancient physics to address the role of time in the universe, one of the most important concepts even in the modern history of physics. The early physicist Leucippus (first half of 5th century BCE) adamantly opposed the idea of direct divine intervention in the universe, instead proposing that natural phenomena had a natural cause. Leucippus and his student, Democritus, were the first to develop the theory of atomism  the idea that everything is composed entirely of various imperishable, indivisible elements called atoms.

Aristotle (384  322 BCE)

During the classical period in Greece (6th, 5th and 4th centuries BCE) and in Hellenistic times, natural philosophy slowly developed into an exciting and contentious field of study. Aristotle (, Aristotls) (384  322 BCE), a student of Plato, promoted the concept that observation of physical phenomena could ultimately lead to the discovery of the natural laws governing them. Aristotle's writings cover physics, metaphysics, poetry, theater, music, logic, rhetoric, linguistics, politics, government, ethics, biology and zoology. He wrote the first work which refers to that line of study as "Physics"  in the 4th century BC, Aristotle founded the system known as Aristotelian physics. He attempted to explain ideas such as motion (and gravity) with the theory of four elements. Aristotle believed that all matter was made up of aether, or some combination of four elements: earth, water, air, and fire. According to Aristotle, these four terrestrial elements are capable of inter-transformation and move toward their natural place, so a stone falls downward toward the center of the cosmos, but flames rise upward toward the circumference. Eventually, Aristotelian physics became enormously popular for many centuries in Europe, informing the scientific and scholastic developments of the Middle Ages. It remained the mainstream scientific paradigm in Europe until the time of Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton.

Early in Classical Greece, that the earth is a sphere ("round"), was generally known by all, and around 240 BCE, Eratosthenes (276  194 BCE) accurately estimated its circumference. In contrast to Aristotle's geocentric views, Aristarchus of Samos (; c. 310  c. 230 BCE) presented an explicit argument for a heliocentric model of the solar system, placing the Sun, not the Earth, at the centre. Seleucus of Seleucia, a follower of the heliocentric theory of Aristarchus, stated that the Earth rotated around its own axis, which in turn revolved around the Sun. Though the arguments he used were lost, Plutarch stated that Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning.

Greek mathematician Archimedes, famous for his ideas regarding fluid mechanics and buoyancyIn the 3rd century BCE, the Greek mathematician Archimedes of Syracuse ( (287  212 BCE)generally considered to be the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all timelaid the foundations of hydrostatics, statics and calculated the underlying mathematics of the lever. A leading scientist of classical antiquity, Archimedes also developed elaborate systems of pulleys to move large objects with a minimum of effort. The Archimedes' screw underpins modern hydroengineering, and his machines of war helped to hold back the armies of Rome in the First Punic War. Archimedes even tore apart the arguments of Aristotle and his metaphysics, pointing out that it was impossible to separate mathematics and nature and proved it by converting mathematical theories into practical inventions. Furthermore, in his work On Floating Bodies, around 250 BCE, Archimedes developed the law of buoyancy, also known as Archimedes' Principle. In mathematics, Archimedes used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi. He also defined the spiral bearing his name, formulae for the volumes of surfaces of revolution and an ingenious system for expressing very large numbers. He also developed the principles of equilibrium states and centers of gravity, ideas that would influence the Islamic scholars, Galileo, and Newton.

Hipparchus (190  120 BCE), focusing on astronomy and mathematics, used sophisticated geometrical techniques to map the motion of the stars and planets, even predicting the times that solar eclipses would happen. In addition, he added calculations of the distance of the sun and moon from the Earth, based upon his improvements to the observational instruments used at that time. Another of the most famous of the early physicists was Ptolemy (90  168 CE), one of the leading minds during the time of the Roman Empire. Ptolemy was the author of several scientific treatises, at least three of which were of continuing importance to later Islamic and European science. The first is the astronomical treatise now known as the Almagest (in Greek,   , "The Great Treatise", originally  , "Mathematical Treatise"). The second is the Geography, which is a thorough discussion of the geographic knowledge of the Greco-Roman world.

Much of the accumulated knowledge of the ancient world was lost. Even of the works of the better known thinkers, few fragments survived. Although he wrote at least fourteen books, almost nothing of Hipparchus' direct work survived. Of the 150 reputed Aristotelian works, only 30 exist, and some of those are "little more than lecture notes".

===India and China===

The Hindu-Arabic numeral system. The inscriptions on the edicts of Ashoka (3rd century BCE) display this number system being used by the Imperial Mauryas.
Important physical and mathematical traditions also existed in ancient Chinese and Indian sciences.

In Indian philosophy, Kanada was the first to systematically develop a theory of atomism around 200 BCE Oliver Leaman, Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy. Routledge, 1999, page 269. though some authors have allotted him an earlier era in the 6th century BCE. It was further elaborated by the Buddhist atomists Dharmakirti and Dignga during the 1st millennium CE. (Stcherbatsky 1962 (1930). Vol. 1. P. 19) Pakudha Kaccayana, a 6th-century BCE Indian philosopher and contemporary of Gautama Buddha, had also propounded ideas about the atomic constitution of the material world. These philosophers believed that other elements (except ether) were physically palpable and hence comprised minuscule particles of matter. The last minuscule particle of matter that could not be subdivided further was termed Parmanu. These philosophers considered the atom to be indestructible and hence eternal. The Buddhists thought atoms to be minute objects unable to be seen to the naked eye that come into being and vanish in an instant. The Vaisheshika school of philosophers believed that an atom was a mere point in space. Indian theories about the atom are greatly abstract and enmeshed in philosophy as they were based on logic and not on personal experience or experimentation. In Indian astronomy, Aryabhata's Aryabhatiya (499 CE) proposed the Earth's rotation, while Nilakantha Somayaji (14441544) of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics proposed a semi-heliocentric model resembling the Tychonic system.

A star map with a cylindrical projection. Su Song's star maps represent the oldest existent ones in printed form.
The study of magnetism in Ancient China dates back to the 4th century BCE. (in the Book of the Devil Valley Master), Li Shu-hua, "Origine de la Boussole 11. Aimant et Boussole", Isis, Vol. 45, No. 2. (Jul., 1954), p.175 A main contributor to this field was Shen Kuo (10311095), a polymath scientist and statesman who was the first to describe the magnetic-needle compass used for navigation, as well as discovering the concept of true north. In optics, Shen Kuo independently developed a camera obscura. Joseph Needham, Volume 4, Part 1, 98. 

===Muslim scientists===
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen), 9651039, Basra

During the period of time known as the Dark Ages (5th to 15th centuries), much scientific progress occurred in the Muslim world. The scientific research of the Islamic scientists is often overlooked due to the conflict of the Crusades and "it's possible, too, that many scholars in the Renaissance later downplayed or even disguised their connection to the Middle East for both political and religious reasons." The Islamic Abbasid caliphs gathered many classic works of antiquity and had them translated into Arabic within the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, Iraq. Islamic philosophers such as Al-Kindi (Alkindus), Al-Farabi (Alpharabius), and Averroes (Ibn Rushd) reinterpreted Greek thought in the context of their religion. Ibn Sina (980  1037), known by the Latin name Avicenna, was a medical researcher from Bukhara, Uzbekistan responsible for important contributions to the disciplines of physics, optics, philosophy and medicine. He is most famous for writing The Canon of Medicine, a text used to teach student doctors in Europe until the 1600s.

The Abbasid Caliphate at its height, in 830 CEImportant contributions were made by Ibn al-Haytham (965  1040), a mathematician from Basra, Iraq considered one of the founders of modern optics. Ptolemy and Aristotle theorised that light either shone from the eye to illuminate objects or that light emanated from objects themselves, whereas al-Haytham (known by the Latin name Alhazen) suggested that light travels to the eye in rays from different points on an object. The works of Ibn al-Haytham and Ab Rayhn Brn eventually passed on to Western Europe where they were studied by scholars such as Roger Bacon and Witelo. Mariam Rozhanskaya and I. S. Levinova (1996), "Statics", p. 642, in :

 Omar Khayym (10481131), a Persian scientist, calculated the length of a solar year to 10 decimal places and was only out by a fraction of a second when compared to our modern day calculations. He used this to compose a calendar considered more accurate than the Gregorian calendar that came along 500 years later. He is classified as one of the world's first great science communicators  he is said to have convinced a Sufi theologist that the world turns on an axis. Muammad ibn Jbir al-arrn al-Battn (858  929), from Harran, Turkey, further developed trigonometry (first conceptualised in Ancient Greece) as an independent branch of mathematics, developing relationships such as tan = sin / cos. His driving force was to obtain the ability to locate Mecca from any given geographical point  aiding in Muslim rituals such as burial and prayer, which require participants to face the holy city, as well as making the pilgrimage to Mecca (known as the hajj).

A page from al-Khwrizm's Algebra
Furthermore, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (12011274), an astronomer and mathematician from Baghdad, authored the Treasury of Astronomy, a remarkably accurate table of planetary movements that reformed the existing planetary model of Roman astronomer Ptolemy by describing a uniform circular motion of all planets in their orbits. This work led to the later discovery, by one of his students, that planets actually have an elliptical orbit. Copernicus later drew heavily on the work of al-Din al-Tusi and his students, but without acknowledgment. The gradual chipping away of the Ptolemaic system paved the way for the revolutionary idea that the Earth actually orbited the Sun (heliocentrism). Jbir ibn Hayyn (721  815) was a chemist and alchemist from Iran who, in his quest to make gold from other metals, discovered strong acids such as sulphuric, hydrochloric and nitric acids. He was the also first person to identify the only substance that can dissolve gold  aqua regis (royal water)  a volatile mix of hydrochloric and nitric acid. It is disputed whether Jabir was the first to use or describe distillation, but he was definitely the first to perform it in the lab using an alembic (from 'al-inbiq'). The most famous Persian mathematician is considered to be Muammad ibn Ms al-Khwrizm (780850), who produced a comprehensive guide to the numbering system developed from the Brahmi system in India, using only 10 digits (09, the so-called "Arabic numerals"). Al-Khwarizmi also used the word algebra ('al-jabr') to describe the mathematical operations he introduced, such as balancing equations, which helped in several problems.

===Medieval Europe===

Awareness of ancient works re-entered the West through translations from Arabic to Latin. Their re-introduction, combined with Judeo-Islamic theological commentaries, had a great influence on Medieval philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas. Scholastic European scholars, who sought to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with Christian theology, proclaimed Aristotle the greatest thinker of the ancient world. In cases where they didn't directly contradict the Bible, Aristotelian physics became the foundation for the physical explanations of the European Churches.

Based on Aristotelian physics, Scholastic physics described things as moving according to their essential nature. Celestial objects were described as moving in circles, because perfect circular motion was considered an innate property of objects that existed in the uncorrupted realm of the celestial spheres. The theory of impetus, the ancestor to the concepts of inertia and momentum, was developed along similar lines by medieval philosophers such as John Philoponus and Jean Buridan. Motions below the lunar sphere were seen as imperfect, and thus could not be expected to exhibit consistent motion. More idealized motion in the "sublunary" realm could only be achieved through artifice, and prior to the 17th century, many did not view artificial experiments as a valid means of learning about the natural world. Physical explanations in the sublunary realm revolved around tendencies. Stones contained the element earth, and earthy objects tended to move in a straight line toward the centre of the earth (and the universe in the Aristotelian geocentric view) unless otherwise prevented from doing so.

==Scientific Revolution==
During the 16th and 17th centuries, a large advancement of scientific progress known as the Scientific Revolution took place in Europe. Dissatisfaction with older philosophical approaches had begun earlier and had produced other changes in society, such as the Protestant Reformation, but the revolution in science began when natural philosophers began to mount a sustained attack on the Scholastic philosophical program and supposed that mathematical descriptive schemes adopted from such fields as mechanics and astronomy could actually yield universally valid characterizations of motion and other concepts.

===Nicolaus Copernicus===
Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus remembered for his development of the heliocentric model of the Solar System

A great breakthrough in astronomy was made by Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (14731543), who proposed in 1543 the heliocentric model of the solar system. This theory stated the Earth orbits around the Sun with other bodies in Earth's galaxy (a large group of stars and other bodies). This heliocentric theory contradicted the ideas of Greek-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy (2nd century CE), who stated that the Earth is the center of the universe. The Ptolemaic system had been accepted for more than 1,400 years. In 270 BCE the Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos (c. 310  c. 230 BCE) had suggested that the Earth revolves around the Sun, but Copernicus's concept was the first to be accepted as a valid scientific possibility. Copernicus's book, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres), published just before his death in 1543, is often regarded as the starting point of modern astronomy and the defining epiphany that began the scientific revolution. Having made the assumption that the Sun was at the center of the universe, Copernicus realized that calculating tables of planetary motion (mathematical charts that describe the movements of planets) was much easier and more accurate. Copernicus's new perspectivealong with the accurate observations of Tycho Brahewas used by German astronomer Johannes Kepler (15711630) to formulate laws regarding planetary motions that are still accepted today. Among Kepler's laws is the idea that planetary orbits are elliptical rather than perfect circles.

===Galileo Galilei===

Galileo Galilei (15641642)
The Italian mathematician, astronomer, and physicist Galileo Galilei (15641642) was the central figure in the Scientific Revolution and famous for his support for Copernianism, his astronomical discoveries, empirical experiments and his improvement of the telescope. As a mathematician, Galileo's role in the university culture of his era was subordinated to the three major topics of study: law, medicine, and theology (which was closely allied to philosophy). Galileo, however, felt that the descriptive content of the technical disciplines warranted philosophical interest, particularly because mathematical analysis of astronomical observationsnotably the radical analysis offered by astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus concerning the relative motions of the Sun, Earth, Moon, and planetsindicated that philosophers' statements about the nature of the universe could be shown to be in error. Galileo also performed mechanical experiments, and insisted that motion itselfregardless of whether that motion was natural or artificialhad universally consistent characteristics that could be described mathematically.

Galileo's early studies at the University of Pisa were in medicine, but he was soon drawn to mathematics and physics. At the age of 19, in the cathedral of Pisa, he timed the oscillations of a swinging lamp by means of his pulse beats and found the time for each swing to be the same, no matter what the amplitude of the oscillation, thus discovering the isochronal nature of the pendulum, which he verified by experiment. Galileo soon became known through his invention of a hydrostatic balance and his treatise on the center of gravity of solid bodies. While teaching (158992) at the University of Pisa, he initiated his experiments concerning the laws of bodies in motion, which brought results so contradictory to the accepted teachings of Aristotle that strong antagonism was aroused. He found that bodies do not fall with velocities proportional to their weights. The famous story in which Galileo is said to have dropped weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa is apocryphal, but he did find that the path of a projectile is a parabola, and he is credited with conclusions foreshadowing Newton's laws of motion (such as discovering the property of inertia). One of these is now known as Galilean relativity: essentially the first precisely formulated statement about properties of the spacetime beyond geometry of the three-dimensional space.

Montage of Jupiter's four Galilean moons, in a composite image comparing their sizes and the size of Jupiter. From top to bottom: Io, Europa, Ganymede, Callisto
Galileo has been called the "Father of Modern Observational Astronomy", (page 217) the "father of modern physics", the "father of science", and "the Father of Modern Science". Finocchiaro (2007). Stephen Hawking says, "Galileo, perhaps more than any other single person, was responsible for the birth of modern science." "Galileo and the Birth of Modern Science, by Stephen Hawking, American Heritage's Invention & Technology, Spring 2009, Vol. 24, No. 1, p. 36 Galileo's support of the Earth revolving around the Sun was controversial, as most people believed in the geocentric model or the Tychonic system. He was tried by the Inquisition, found "vehemently suspect of heresy", forced to recant, and spent the rest of his life under house arrest.

The contributions that Galileo made to observational astronomy include the telescopic confirmation of the phases of Venus, the 1609 discovery of the four largest satellites of Jupiter (named the Galilean moons in his honour), and the observation and analysis of sunspots. Galileo also worked in applied science and technology, inventing an improved military compass and other instruments. Galileo used his telescopic discovery of the moons of Jupiter, as published in his Sidereus Nuncius in 1610, to procure a position in the Medici court with the dual title of mathematician and philosopher. As a court philosopher, he was expected to engage in debates with philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition, and received a large audience for his own publications, such as The Assayer and Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences, which was published abroad after he was placed under house arrest for his publication of Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems in 1632. Galileo's interest in the mechanical experimentation and mathematical description in motion established a new natural philosophical tradition focused on experimentation. This tradition, combining with the non-mathematical emphasis on the collection of "experimental histories" by philosophical reformists such as William Gilbert and Francis Bacon, drew a significant following in the years leading up to and following Galileo's death, including Evangelista Torricelli and the participants in the Accademia del Cimento in Italy; Marin Mersenne and Blaise Pascal in France; Christiaan Huygens in the Netherlands; and Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle in England.

===Ren Descartes===

Ren Descartes (15961650)
The French philosopher Ren Descartes (15961650) was well-connected to, and influential within, the experimental philosophy networks of the day. Descartes had a more ambitious agenda, however, which was geared toward replacing the Scholastic philosophical tradition altogether. Questioning the reality interpreted through the senses, Descartes sought to re-establish philosophical explanatory schemes by reducing all perceived phenomena to being attributable to the motion of an invisible sea of "corpuscles". (Notably, he reserved human thought and God from his scheme, holding these to be separate from the physical universe). In proposing this philosophical framework, Descartes supposed that different kinds of motion, such as that of planets versus that of terrestrial objects, were not fundamentally different, but were merely different manifestations of an endless chain of corpuscular motions obeying universal principles. Particularly influential were his explanations for circular astronomical motions in terms of the vortex motion of corpuscles in space (Descartes argued, in accord with the beliefs, if not the methods, of the Scholastics, that a vacuum could not exist), and his explanation of gravity in terms of corpuscles pushing objects downward. 

Descartes, like Galileo, was convinced of the importance of mathematical explanation, and he and his followers were key figures in the development of mathematics and geometry in the 17th century. Cartesian mathematical descriptions of motion held that all mathematical formulations had to be justifiable in terms of direct physical action, a position held by Huygens and the German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz, who, while following in the Cartesian tradition, developed his own philosophical alternative to Scholasticism, which he outlined in his 1714 work, The Monadology. Descartes has been dubbed the 'Father of Modern Philosophy', and much subsequent Western philosophy is a response to his writings, which are studied closely to this day. In particular, his Meditations on First Philosophy continues to be a standard text at most university philosophy departments. Descartes' influence in mathematics is equally apparent; the Cartesian coordinate system  allowing algebraic equations to be expressed as geometric shapes in a two-dimensional coordinate system  was named after him. He is credited as the father of analytical geometry, the bridge between algebra and geometry, important to the discovery of calculus and analysis.

===Sir Isaac Newton===

Sir Isaac Newton (16421727)
The late 17th and early 18th centuries saw the achievements of the greatest figure of the Scientific Revolution: Cambridge University physicist and mathematician Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), considered by many to be the greatest and most influential scientist who ever lived. Newton, a fellow of the Royal Society of England, combined his own discoveries in mechanics and astronomy to earlier ones to create a single system for describing the workings of the universe. Newton formulated three laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation, the latter of which could be used to explain the behavior not only of falling bodies on the earth but also planets and other celestial bodies in the heavens. To arrive at his results, Newton invented one form of an entirely new branch of mathematics: calculus (also invented independently by Gottfried Leibniz), which was to become an essential tool in much of the later development in most branches of physics. Newton's findings were set forth in his Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy), the publication of which in 1687 marked the beginning of the modern period of mechanics and astronomy.

Newton was able to refute the Cartesian mechanical tradition that all motions should be explained with respect to the immediate force exerted by corpuscles. Using his three laws of motion and law of universal gravitation, Newton removed the idea that objects followed paths determined by natural shapes and instead demonstrated that not only regularly observed paths, but all the future motions of any body could be deduced mathematically based on knowledge of their existing motion, their mass, and the forces acting upon them. However, observed celestial motions did not precisely conform to a Newtonian treatment, and Newton, who was also deeply interested in theology, imagined that God intervened to ensure the continued stability of the solar system.

Gottfried Leibniz (16461716)

Newton's principles (but not his mathematical treatments) proved controversial with Continental philosophers, who found his lack of metaphysical explanation for movement and gravitation philosophically unacceptable. Beginning around 1700, a bitter rift opened between the Continental and British philosophical traditions, which were stoked by heated, ongoing, and viciously personal disputes between the followers of Newton and Leibniz concerning priority over the analytical techniques of calculus, which each had developed independently. Initially, the Cartesian and Leibnizian traditions prevailed on the Continent (leading to the dominance of the Leibnizian calculus notation everywhere except Britain). Newton himself remained privately disturbed at the lack of a philosophical understanding of gravitation, while insisting in his writings that none was necessary to infer its reality. As the 18th century progressed, Continental natural philosophers increasingly accepted the Newtonians' willingness to forgo ontological metaphysical explanations for mathematically described motions. 

Newton built the first functioning reflecting telescope and developed a theory of color (published in his work Opticks) based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the many colours that form the visible spectrum. While Newton explained light as being composed of tiny particles, a rival theory of light which explained its behavior in terms of waves was presented in 1690 by Christiaan Huygens. However, the belief in the mechanistic philosophy together with the great weight of Newton's reputation was such that the wave theory gained relatively little support until the 19th century. Isaac Newton also formulated an empirical law of cooling and studied the speed of sound. He also demonstrated the generalised binomial theorem, developed Newton's method for approximating the roots of a function, and contributed to the study of power series. Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals. Most importantly, Newton showed that the motions of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies are governed by the same set of natural laws, which were neither capricious nor malevolent. By demonstrating the consistency between Kepler's laws of planetary motion and his own theory of gravitation, Newton also removed the last doubts about heliocentrism. By bringing together all the ideas set forth during the Scientific Revolution, Newton effectively established the foundation for modern society in mathematics and science.

===Other achievements===
Other branches of physics also received attention during the period of the Scientific Revolution. Wilbert Gilbert, court physician to Queen Elizabeth I, published an important work on magnetism in 1600, describing how the earth itself behaves like a giant magnet. Robert Boyle (162791) studied the behavior of gases enclosed in a chamber and formulated the gas law named for him; he also contributed to physiology and to the founding of modern chemistry. Another important factor in the scientific revolution was the rise of learned societies and academies in various countries. The earliest of these were in Italy and Germany and were short-lived. More influential were the Royal Society of England (1660) and the Academy of Sciences in France (1666). The former was a private institution in London and included such scientists as John Wallis, William Brouncker, Thomas Sydenham, John Mayow, and Christopher Wren (who contributed not only to architecture but also to astronomy and anatomy); the latter, in Paris, was a government institution and included as a foreign member the Dutchman Huygens. In the 18th century, important royal academies were established at Berlin (1700) and at St. Petersburg (1724). The societies and academies provided the principal opportunities for the publication and discussion of scientific results during and after the scientific revolution. In 1690, James Bernoulli showed that the cycloid is the solution to the tautochrone problem. In 1691, Johann Bernoulli showed that a chain freely suspended from two points will form a catenary. In 1691, James Bernoulli showed that the catenary curve has the lowest center of gravity that any chain hung from two fixed points can have. In 1696, Johann Bernoulli showed that the cycloid is the solution to the brachistochrone problem.

====Early thermodynamics====
A precursor of the engine was designed by the German scientist Otto von Guericke who, in 1650, designed and built the world's first vacuum pump and created the world's first ever vacuum known as the Magdeburg hemispheres experiment. He was driven to make a vacuum to disprove Aristotle's long-held supposition that 'Nature abhors a vacuum'. Shortly thereafter, Irish physicist and chemist Boyle had learned of Guericke's designs and in 1656, in coordination with English scientist Robert Hooke, built an air pump. Using this pump, Boyle and Hooke noticed the pressure-volume correlation for a gas: PV = k, where P is pressure, V is volume and k is a constant: this relationship is known as Boyle's Law. In that time, air was assumed to be a system of motionless particles, and not interpreted as a system of moving molecules. The concept of thermal motion came two centuries later. Therefore Boyle's publication in 1660 speaks about a mechanical concept: the air spring. New Experiments physico-mechanicall, Touching the Spring of the Air and its Effects (1660). Later, after the invention of the thermometer, the property temperature could be quantified. This tool gave Gay-Lussac the opportunity to derive his law, which led shortly later to the ideal gas law. But, already before the establishment of the ideal gas law, an associate of Boyle's named Denis Papin built in 1679 a bone digester, which is a closed vessel with a tightly fitting lid that confines steam until a high pressure is generated.

Later designs implemented a steam release valve to keep the machine from exploding. By watching the valve rhythmically move up and down, Papin conceived of the idea of a piston and cylinder engine. He did not however follow through with his design. Nevertheless, in 1697, based on Papin's designs, engineer Thomas Savery built the first engine. Although these early engines were crude and inefficient, they attracted the attention of the leading scientists of the time. Hence, prior to 1698 and the invention of the Savery Engine, horses were used to power pulleys, attached to buckets, which lifted water out of flooded salt mines in England. In the years to follow, more variations of steam engines were built, such as the Newcomen Engine, and later the Watt Engine. In time, these early engines would eventually be utilized in place of horses. Thus, each engine began to be associated with a certain amount of "horse power" depending upon how many horses it had replaced. The main problem with these first engines was that they were slow and clumsy, converting less than 2% of the input fuel into useful work. In other words, large quantities of coal (or wood) had to be burned to yield only a small fraction of work output. Hence the need for a new science of engine dynamics was born.

==18th-century developments==
During the 18th century, the mechanics founded by Newton was developed by several scientists as more mathematicians learned calculus and elaborated upon its initial formulation. The application of mathematical analysis to problems of motion was known as rational mechanics, or mixed mathematics (and was later termed classical mechanics).

===Mechanics===
Daniel Bernoulli (17001782)
In 1714, Brook Taylor derived the fundamental frequency of a stretched vibrating string in terms of its tension and mass per unit length by solving a differential equation. The Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli (17001782) made important mathematical studies of the behavior of gases, anticipating the kinetic theory of gases developed more than a century later, and has been referred to as the first mathematical physicist. In 1733, Daniel Bernoulli derived the fundamental frequency and harmonics of a hanging chain by solving a differential equation. In 1734, Bernoulli solved the differential equation for the vibrations of an elastic bar clamped at one end. Bernoulli's treatment of fluid dynamics and his examination of fluid flow was introduced in his 1738 work Hydrodynamica.

Rational mechanics dealt primarily with the development of elaborate mathematical treatments of observed motions, using Newtonian principles as a basis, and emphasized improving the tractability of complex calculations and developing of legitimate means of analytical approximation. A representative contemporary textbook was published by Johann Baptiste Horvath. By the end of the century analytical treatments were rigorous enough to verify the stability of the solar system solely on the basis of Newton's laws without reference to divine interventioneven as deterministic treatments of systems as simple as the three body problem in gravitation remained intractable. In 1705, Edmond Halley predicted the periodicity of Halley's Comet, William Herschel discovered Uranus in 1781, and Henry Cavendish measured the gravitational constant and determined the mass of the Earth in 1798. In 1783, John Michell suggested that some objects might be so massive that not even light could escape from them.

In 1739, Leonhard Euler solved the ordinary differential equation for a forced harmonic oscillator and noticed the resonance phenomenon. In 1742, Colin Maclaurin discovered his uniformly rotating self-gravitating spheroids. British work, carried on by mathematicians such as Taylor and Maclaurin, fell behind Continental developments as the century progressed. Meanwhile, work flourished at scientific academies on the Continent, led by such mathematicians as Bernoulli, Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, and Legendre. In 1743, Jean le Rond d'Alembert published his "Traite de Dynamique", in which he introduces the concept of generalized forces for accelerating systems and systems with constraints. In 1747, Pierre Louis Maupertuis applied minimum principles to mechanics. In 1759, Euler solved the partial differential equation for the vibration of a rectangular drum. In 1764, Euler examined the partial differential equation for the vibration of a circular drum and found one of the Bessel function solutions. In 1776, John Smeaton published a paper on experiments relating power, work, momentum and kinetic energy, and supporting the conservation of energy. In 1788, Joseph Louis Lagrange presented Lagrange's equations of motion in Mcanique Analytique. In 1789, Antoine Lavoisier states the law of conservation of mass. Newton's mechanics received brilliant exposition in both Lagrange's 1788 work and the Celestial Mechanics (17991825) of Pierre-Simon Laplace.

===Thermodynamics===
During the 18th century, thermodynamics was developed through the theories of weightless "imponderable fluids", such as heat ("caloric"), electricity, and phlogiston (which was rapidly overthrown as a concept following Lavoisier's identification of oxygen gas late in the century). Assuming that these concepts were real fluids, their flow could be traced through a mechanical apparatus or chemical reactions. This tradition of experimentation led to the development of new kinds of experimental apparatus, such as the Leyden Jar; and new kinds of measuring instruments, such as the calorimeter, and improved versions of old ones, such as the thermometer. Experiments also produced new concepts, such as the University of Glasgow experimenter Joseph Black's notion of latent heat and Philadelphia intellectual Benjamin Franklin's characterization of electrical fluid as flowing between places of excess and deficit (a concept later reinterpreted in terms of positive and negative charges). Franklin also showed that lightning is electricity in 1752.

The accepted theory of heat in the 18th century viewed it as a kind of fluid, called caloric; although this theory was later shown to be erroneous, a number of scientists adhering to it nevertheless made important discoveries useful in developing the modern theory, including Joseph Black (172899) and Henry Cavendish (17311810). Opposed to this caloric theory, which had been developed mainly by the chemists, was the less accepted theory dating from Newton's time that heat is due to the motions of the particles of a substance. This mechanical theory gained support in 1798 from the cannon-boring experiments of Count Rumford (Benjamin Thompson), who found a direct relationship between heat and mechanical energy.

While it was recognized early in the 18th century that finding absolute theories of electrostatic and magnetic force akin to Newton's principles of motion would be an important achievement, none were forthcoming. This impossibility only slowly disappeared as experimental practice became more widespread and more refined in the early years of the 19th century in places such as the newly established Royal Institution in London. Meanwhile, the analytical methods of rational mechanics began to be applied to experimental phenomena, most influentially with the French mathematician Joseph Fourier's analytical treatment of the flow of heat, as published in 1822. Joseph Priestley proposed an electrical inverse-square law in 1767, and Charles-Augustin de Coulomb introduced the inverse-square law of electrostatics in 1798.

At the end of the century, the members of the French Academy of Sciences had attained clear dominance in the field. At the same time, the experimental tradition established by Galileo and his followers persisted. The Royal Society and the French Academy of Sciences were major centers for the performance and reporting of experimental work. Experiments in mechanics, optics, magnetism, static electricity, chemistry, and physiology were not clearly distinguished from each other during the 18th century, but significant differences in explanatory schemes and, thus, experiment design were emerging. Chemical experimenters, for instance, defied attempts to enforce a scheme of abstract Newtonian forces onto chemical affiliations, and instead focused on the isolation and classification of chemical substances and reactions. 

==19th century==
British physicist Michael Faraday (17911867)

In 1800, Alessandro Volta invented the electric battery (known of the voltaic pile) and thus improved the way electric currents could also be studied. A year later, Thomas Young demonstrated the wave nature of lightwhich received strong experimental support from the work of Augustin-Jean Fresneland the principle of interference. In 1813, Peter Ewart supported the idea of the conservation of energy in his paper On the measure of moving force. In 1820, Hans Christian rsted found that a current-carrying conductor gives rise to a magnetic force surrounding it, and within a week after rsted's discovery reached France, Andr-Marie Ampre discovered that two parallel electric currents will exert forces on each other. In 1821, William Hamilton began his analysis of Hamilton's characteristic function. In 1821, Michael Faraday built an electricity-powered motor, while Georg Ohm stated his law of electrical resistance in 1826, expressing the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance in an electric circuit. A year later, botanist Robert Brown discovered Brownian motion: pollen grains in water undergoing movement resulting from their bombardment by the fast-moving atoms or molecules in the liquid.

In 1831 Faraday (and independently Joseph Henry) discovered the reverse effect, the production of an electric potential or current through magnetism  known as electromagnetic induction; these two discoveries are the basis of the electric motor and the electric generator, respectively. In 1834, Carl Jacobi discovered his uniformly rotating self-gravitating ellipsoids. In 1834, John Russell observed a nondecaying solitary water wave (soliton) in the Union Canal near Edinburgh and used a water tank to study the dependence of solitary water wave velocities on wave amplitude and water depth. In 1835, William Hamilton stated Hamilton's canonical equations of motion. In the same year, Gaspard Coriolis examined theoretically the mechanical efficiency of waterwheels, and deduced the Coriolis effect. In 1841, Julius Robert von Mayer, an amateur scientist, wrote a paper on the conservation of energy but his lack of academic training led to its rejection. In 1842, Christian Doppler proposed the Doppler effect. In 1847, Hermann von Helmholtz formally stated the law of conservation of energy. In 1851, Lon Foucault showed the Earth's rotation with a huge pendulum (Foucault pendulum).

There were important advances in continuum mechanics in the first half of the century, namely formulation of laws of elasticity for solids and discovery of NavierStokes equations for fluids.

===Laws of thermodynamics===

William Thomson (18241907), later Lord Kelvin
In the 19th century, the connection between heat and mechanical energy was established quantitatively by Julius Robert von Mayer and James Prescott Joule, who measured the mechanical equivalent of heat in the 1840s. In 1849, Joule published results from his series of experiments (including the paddlewheel experiment) which show that heat is a form of energy, a fact that was accepted in the 1850s. The relation between heat and energy was important for the development of steam engines, and in 1824 the experimental and theoretical work of Sadi Carnot was published. Carnot captured some of the ideas of thermodynamics in his discussion of the efficiency of an idealized engine. Sadi Carnot's work provided a basis for the formulation of the first law of thermodynamicsa restatement of the law of conservation of energywhich was stated around 1850 by William Thomson, later known as Lord Kelvin, and Rudolf Clausius. Lord Kelvin, who had extended the concept of absolute zero from gases to all substances in 1848, drew upon the engineering theory of Lazare Carnot, Sadi Carnot, and mile Clapeyronas well as the experimentation of James Prescott Joule on the interchangeability of mechanical, chemical, thermal, and electrical forms of workto formulate the first law.

Kelvin and Clausius also stated the second law of thermodynamics, which was originally formulated in terms of the fact that heat does not spontaneously flow from a colder body to a hotter. Other formulations followed quickly (for example, the second law was expounded in Thomson and Peter Guthrie Tait's influential work Treatise on Natural Philosophy) and Kelvin in particular understood some of the law's general implications. The second Law was the idea that gases consist of molecules in motion had been discussed in some detail by Daniel Bernoulli in 1738, but had fallen out of favor, and was revived by Clausius in 1857. In 1850, Hippolyte Fizeau and Lon Foucault measured the speed of light in water and find that it is slower than in air, in support of the wave model of light. In 1852, Joule and Thomson demonstrated that a rapidly expanding gas cools, later named the JouleThomson effect or JouleKelvin effect. Hermann von Helmholtz puts forward the idea of the heat death of the universe in 1854, the same year that Clausius established the importance of dQ/T (Clausius's theorem) (though he did not yet name the quantity).

===James Clerk Maxwell===
James Clerk Maxwell (18311879)
In 1859, James Clerk Maxwell discovered the distribution law of molecular velocities. Maxwell showed that electric and magnetic fields are propagated outward from their source at a speed equal to that of light and that light is one of several kinds of electromagnetic radiation, differing only in frequency and wavelength from the others. In 1859, Maxwell worked out the mathematics of the distribution of velocities of the molecules of a gas. The wave theory of light was widely accepted by the time of Maxwell's work on the electromagnetic field, and afterward the study of light and that of electricity and magnetism were closely related. In 1864 James Maxwell published his papers on a dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, and stated that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon in the 1873 publication of Maxwell's Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. This work drew upon theoretical work by German theoreticians such as Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber. The encapsulation of heat in particulate motion, and the addition of electromagnetic forces to Newtonian dynamics established an enormously robust theoretical underpinning to physical observations.

The prediction that light represented a transmission of energy in wave form through a "luminiferous ether", and the seeming confirmation of that prediction with Helmholtz student Heinrich Hertz's 1888 detection of electromagnetic radiation, was a major triumph for physical theory and raised the possibility that even more fundamental theories based on the field could soon be developed. Experimental confirmation of Maxwell's theory was provided by Hertz, who generated and detected electric waves in 1886 and verified their properties, at the same time foreshadowing their application in radio, television, and other devices. In 1887, Heinrich Hertz discovered the photoelectric effect. Research on the transmission of electromagnetic waves began soon after, with many scientists and inventors conducting experiments during the 1890s leading to the first successful commercial wireless telegraphy system developed by Guglielmo Marconi at the end of that decade Michael Windelspecht, Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the 19th Century, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003 page 195 (see invention of radio).

The atomic theory of matter had been proposed again in the early 19th century by the chemist John Dalton and became one of the hypotheses of the kinetic-molecular theory of gases developed by Clausius and James Clerk Maxwell to explain the laws of thermodynamics. The kinetic theory in turn led to the statistical mechanics of Ludwig Boltzmann (18441906) and Josiah Willard Gibbs (18391903), which held that energy (including heat) was a measure of the speed of particles. Interrelating the statistical likelihood of certain states of organization of these particles with the energy of those states, Clausius reinterpreted the dissipation of energy to be the statistical tendency of molecular configurations to pass toward increasingly likely, increasingly disorganized states (coining the term "entropy" to describe the disorganization of a state). The statistical versus absolute interpretations of the second law of thermodynamics set up a dispute that would last for several decades (producing arguments such as "Maxwell's demon"), and that would not be held to be definitively resolved until the behavior of atoms was firmly established in the early 20th century. In 1902, James Jeans found the length scale required for gravitational perturbations to grow in a static nearly homogeneous medium.

==20th century: Birth of Modern Physics==
Marie Skodowska-Curie (18671934)

At the end of the 19th century, physics had evolved to the point at which classical mechanics could cope with highly complex problems involving macroscopic situations; thermodynamics and kinetic theory were well established; geometrical and physical optics could be understood in terms of electromagnetic waves; and the conservation laws for energy and momentum (and mass) were widely accepted. So profound were these and other developments that it was generally accepted that all the important laws of physics had been discovered and that, henceforth, research would be concerned with clearing up minor problems and particularly with improvements of method and measurement. However, around 1900 serious doubts arose about the completeness of the classical theoriesthe triumph of Maxwell's theories, for example, was undermined by inadequacies that had already begun to appearand their inability to explain certain physical phenomena, such as the energy distribution in blackbody radiation and the photoelectric effect, while some of the theoretical formulations led to paradoxes when pushed to the limit. Prominent physicists such as Hendrik Lorentz, Emil Cohn, Ernst Wiechert and Wilhelm Wien believed that some modification of Maxwell's equations might provide the basis for all physical laws. These shortcomings of classical physics were never to be resolved and new ideas were required. At the beginning of the 20th century a major revolution shook the world of physics, which led to a new era, generally referred to as modern physics. 

===Radiation experiments===
J. J. Thomson (18561940) was a British physicist who discovered electrons and isotopes, and invented the mass spectrometer. Thomson was awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physics.
In the 19th century, experimenters began to detect unexpected forms of radiation: Wilhelm Rntgen caused a sensation with his discovery of X-rays in 1895; in 1896 Henri Becquerel discovered that certain kinds of matter emit radiation on their own accord. In 1897, J. J. Thomson discovered the electron, and new radioactive elements found by Marie and Pierre Curie raised questions about the supposedly indestructible atom and the nature of matter. Marie and Pierre coined the term "radioactivity" to describe this property of matter, and isolated the radioactive elements radium and polonium. Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy identified two of Becquerel's forms of radiation with electrons and the element helium. Rutherford identified and named two types of radioactivity and in 1911 interpreted experimental evidence as showing that the atom consists of a dense, positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons. Classical theory, however, predicted that this structure should be unstable. Classical theory had also failed to explain successfully two other experimental results that appeared in the late 19th century. One of these was the demonstration by Albert Michelson and Edward Morleyknown as the MichelsonMorley experimentwhich showed there did not seem to be a preferred frame of reference, at rest with respect to the hypothetical luminiferous ether, for describing electromagnetic phenomena. Studies of radiation and radioactive decay continued to be a preeminent focus for physical and chemical research through the 1930s, when the discovery of nuclear fission opened the way to the practical exploitation of what came to be called "atomic" energy.

===Albert Einstein's theory of relativity===
In 1905 a young, 26-year-old German physicist (then a Bern patent clerk) named Albert Einstein (18791955), showed how measurements of time and space are affected by motion between an observer and what is being observed. To say that Einstein's radical theory of relativity revolutionized science is no exaggeration. Although Einstein made many other important contributions to science, the theory of relativity alone represents one of the greatest intellectual achievements of all time. Although the concept of relativity was not introduced by Einstein, his major contribution was the recognition that the speed of light in a vacuum is constant and an absolute physical boundary for motion. This does not have a major impact on a person's day-to-day life since we travel at speeds much slower than light speed. For objects travelling near light speed, however, the theory of relativity states that objects will move slower and shorten in length from the point of view of an observer on Earth. Einstein also derived the famous equation, E = mc2, which reveals the equivalence of mass and energy.

====Special relativity====
Albert Einstein (18791955), who proposed that gravitation was a result of the presence of mass causing a curvature of space-time, which dictates a path that all freely-moving objects must follow.

Einstein argued that the speed of light was a constant in all inertial reference frames and that electromagnetic laws should remain valid independent of reference frameassertions which rendered the ether "superfluous" to physical theory, and that held that observations of time and length varied relative to how the observer was moving with respect to the object being measured (what came to be called the "special theory of relativity"). It also followed that mass and energy were interchangeable quantities according to the equation E=mc2. In another paper published the same year, Einstein asserted that electromagnetic radiation was transmitted in discrete quantities ("quanta"), according to a constant that the theoretical physicist Max Planck had posited in 1900 to arrive at an accurate theory for the distribution of blackbody radiationan assumption that explained the strange properties of the photoelectric effect.

The special theory of relativity is a formulation of the relationship between physical observations and the concepts of space and time. The theory arose out of contradictions between electromagnetism and Newtonian mechanics and had great impact on both those areas. The original historical issue was whether it was meaningful to discuss the electromagnetic wave-carrying "ether" and motion relative to it and also whether one could detect such motion, as was unsuccessfully attempted in the MichelsonMorley experiment. Einstein demolished these questions and the ether concept in his special theory of relativity. However, his basic formulation does not involve detailed electromagnetic theory. It arises out of the question: "What is time?" Newton, in the Principia (1686), had given an unambiguous answer: "Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its own nature, flows equably without relation to anything external, and by another name is called duration." This definition is basic to all classical physics.

Einstein had the genius to question it, and found that it was incorrect. Instead, each "observer" necessarily makes use of their own scale of time. Furthermore, for two observers in relative motion, their time-scales will differ. This induces a related effect on distance. Both space and time become relative concepts, fundamentally dependent on the observer. Each observer generates their own space-time framework or coordinate system. All observers have equal validity, there being no absolute frame of reference. Motion is relative, but only relative to other observers. What is absolute is stated in Einstein's first relativity postulate: "The basic laws of physics are identical for two observers who have a constant relative velocity with respect to each other."

The special relativity made a profound effect on physics: started as a rethinking of the theory of electromagnetism, it found a new symmetry law of nature, now called Poincar symmetry, that replaced the old Galilean (see above) symmetry.

Another long-lasting effect the special relativity exerted on dynamics. Although at the time it was credited as "unification of mass and energy", now it is evident that relativistic dynamics established indeed a firm distinction between the rest mass that is an intrinsic property of a particle, and energy together with momentum that are conserving quantities. The term mass in particle physics underwent a semantic change ans since late 20th century denotes the rest (or invariant) mass almost exclusively, that has little to do with masses of complex physical bodies. See mass in special relativity for the full story.

====General relativity====

In 1916 Einstein was able to generalise this further, to deal with all states of motion including non-uniform acceleration, which became the general theory of relativity. In this theory Einstein also specified a new concept, the curvature of space-time, which described the gravitational effect at every point in space. In fact, the curvature of space-time completely replaced Newton's universal law of gravitation. According to Einstein there was no such thing as a gravitational force. Rather, the presence of a mass causes a curvature of space-time in the vicinity of the mass, and this curvature dictates the space-time path that all freely-moving objects must follow. It was also predicted from this theory that light should be subject to gravity - all of which was verified experimentally. This aspect of relativity explained the phenomena of light bending around the sun, predicted black holes as well as the Cosmic microwave background radiationa discovery rendering fundamental anomalies in the classic Steady-State hypothesis. For his work on relativity, the photoelectric effect and blackbody radiation, Einstein received the Nobel Prize in 1921.

The gradual acceptance of Einstein's theories of relativity and the quantized nature of light transmission, and of Niels Bohr's model of the atom created as many problems as they solved, leading to a full-scale effort to reestablish physics on new fundamental principles. Expanding relativity to cases of accelerating reference frames (the "general theory of relativity") in the 1910s, Einstein posited an equivalence between the inertial force of acceleration and the force of gravity, leading to the conclusion that space is curved and finite in size, and the prediction of such phenomena as gravitational lensing and the distortion of time in gravitational fields.

===Quantum mechanics===
Max Planck (18581947)

Although relativity resolved the electromagnetic phenomena conflict demonstrated by Michelson and Morley, a second theoretical problem was the explanation of the distribution of electromagnetic radiation emitted by a black body; experiment showed that at shorter wavelengths, toward the ultraviolet end of the spectrum, the energy approached zero, but classical theory predicted it should become infinite. This glaring discrepancy, known as the ultraviolet catastrophe, was solved by the new theory of quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is the theory of atoms and subatomic systems. Approximately the first 30 years of the 20th century represent the time of the conception and evolution of the theory. The basic ideas of quantum theory were introduced in 1900 by Max Planck (18581947), who was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1918 for his discovery of the quantified nature of energy. The quantum theory (which previously relied in the "correspondence" at large scales between the quantized world of the atom and the continuities of the "classical" world) was accepted when the Compton Effect established that light carries momentum and can scatter off particles, and when Louis de Broglie asserted that matter can be seen as behaving as a wave in much the same way as electromagnetic waves behave like particles (waveparticle duality).

Werner Heisenberg (19011976)In 1905, Einstein used the quantum theory to explain the photoelectric effect, and in 1913 the Danish physicist Niels Bohr used the same constant to explain the stability of Rutherford's atom as well as the frequencies of light emitted by hydrogen gas. The quantized theory of the atom gave way to a full-scale quantum mechanics in the 1920s. New principles of a "quantum" rather than a "classical" mechanics, formulated in matrix-form by Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan in 1925, were based on the probabilistic relationship between discrete "states" and denied the possibility of causality. Quantum mechanics was extensively developed by Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Paul Dirac, and Erwin Schrdinger, who established an equivalent theory based on waves in 1926; but Heisenberg's 1927 "uncertainty principle" (indicating the impossibility of precisely and simultaneously measuring position and momentum) and the "Copenhagen interpretation" of quantum mechanics (named after Bohr's home city) continued to deny the possibility of fundamental causality, though opponents such as Einstein would metaphorically assert that "God does not play dice with the universe". The new quantum mechanics became an indispensable tool in the investigation and explanation of phenomena at the atomic level. Also in the 1920s, Satyendra Nath Bose's work on photons and quantum mechanics provided the foundation for BoseEinstein statistics, the theory of the BoseEinstein condensate.

The spinstatistics theorem established that, in quantum mechanics, any particle may be either a boson (that means its statistics is BoseEinstein) or a fermion (that means its statistics is FermiDirac). It was later found that all fundamental bosons transmit forces, like the photon that transmits light.

Fermions are particles "like electrons and nucleons" and generally comprise the matter. FermiDirac statistics later found numerous applications from astrophysics (see degenerate matter) to semiconductors.

==Contemporary and Particle Physics==

===Quantum field theory===
In this Feynman diagram, an electron and a positron annihilate, producing a photon (represented by the blue sine wave) that becomes a quarkantiquark pair. Then one radiates a gluon (represented by the green spiral).

As the philosophically inclined continued to debate the fundamental nature of the universe, quantum theories continued to be produced, beginning with Paul Dirac's formulation of a relativistic quantum theory in 1928. However, attempts to quantize electromagnetic theory entirely were stymied throughout the 1930s by theoretical formulations yielding infinite energies. This situation was not considered adequately resolved until after World War II ended, when Julian Schwinger, Richard Feynman, and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga independently posited the technique of renormalization, which allowed for an establishment of a robust quantum electrodynamics (QED). 

Meanwhile, new theories of fundamental particles proliferated with the rise of the idea of the quantization of fields through "exchange forces" regulated by an exchange of short-lived "virtual" particles, which were allowed to exist according to the laws governing the uncertainties inherent in the quantum world. Notably, Hideki Yukawa proposed that the positive charges of the nucleus were kept together courtesy of a powerful but short-range force mediated by a particle intermediate in mass between the size of an electron and a proton. This particle, called the "pion", was identified in 1947, but it was part of a slew of particle discoveries beginning with the neutron, the positron (a positively charged antimatter version of the electron), and the muon (a heavier relative to the electron) in the 1930s, and continuing after the war with a wide variety of other particles detected in various kinds of apparatus: cloud chambers, nuclear emulsions, bubble chambers, and coincidence counters. At first these particles were found primarily by the ionized trails left by cosmic rays, but were increasingly produced in newer and more powerful particle accelerators. 

Outside of particle physics, significant advances of the time were:
* Invention of lasers (Nobel Prize in Physics of 1964).
* Experimental and theoretical researches of superconductivity, especially invention of a quantum theory of superconductivity by Vitaly Ginzburg and Lev Landau (Nobel Prize of 2002) and, later, its explanation with Cooper pairs (also a Nobel Prize). The Cooper pair was one of early examples of a quasiparticle.

===Unified field theories===

Einstein deemed that all fundamental interactions in nature can be explained in a single theory. Unified field theories were numerous attempts to "merge" several interactions. One of formulations of such theories (as well as field theories in general) is a gauge theory, a generalization of the idea of symmetry. Eventually the Standard Model (see below) succeeded in unification of strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions. All attempts to unify gravitation with something else failed.

===Standard Model===
The Standard Model

The interaction of these particles by scattering and decay provided a key to new fundamental quantum theories. Murray Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne'eman brought some order to these new particles by classifying them according to certain qualities, beginning with what Gell-Mann referred to as the "Eightfold Way". While its further development, the quark model, at first seemed inadequate to describe strong nuclear forces, allowing the temporary rise of competing theories such as the S-Matrix, the establishment of quantum chromodynamics in the 1970s finalized a set of fundamental and exchange particles, which allowed for the establishment of a "standard model" based on the mathematics of gauge invariance, which successfully described all forces except for gravitation, and which remains generally accepted within its domain of application. 

The Standard Model groups the electroweak interaction theory and quantum chromodynamics into a structure denoted by the gauge group SU(3)&times;SU(2)&times;U(1). The formulation of the unification of the electromagnetic and weak interactions in the standard model is due to Abdus Salam, Steven Weinberg and, subsequently, Sheldon Glashow. Electroweak theory was later confirmed experimentally (by observation of neutral weak currents), F. J. Hasert et al. Phys. Lett. 46B 121 (1973). F. J. Hasert et al. Phys. Lett. 46B 138 (1973). F. J. Hasert et al. Nucl. Phys. B73 1(1974). and distinguished by the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics. 

Since the 1970s, fundamental particle physics has provided insights into early universe cosmology, particularly the Big Bang theory proposed as a consequence of Einstein's general theory of relativity. However, starting from the 1990s, astronomical observations have also provided new challenges, such as the need for new explanations of galactic stability (the problem of dark matter), and accelerating expansion of the universe (the problem of dark energy).

While accelerators have confirmed most aspects of the Standard Model by detecting expected particle interactions at various collision energies, no theory reconciling general relativity with the Standard Model has yet been found, although supersymmetry and string theory were believed by many theorists to be a promising avenue forward. The Large Hadron Collider, however, which began operating in 2008, has failed to find any evidence whatsoever that is supportive of supersymmetry and string theory. 

===Cosmology===

Cosmology may be said to have become a serious research question with the publication of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity (1916); although it did not enter the scientific mainstream until a period known as the golden age of general relativity.

About a decade later (in the midst of the Great Debates), Hubble and Slipher discovered the expansion of universe in the 1920s measuring the redshifts of Doppler spectra from galactic nebulae. Using Einstein's general relativity, Lematre and Gamow formulated what would become known as the big bang theory. A rival, called the steady state theory was devised by Hoyle, Gold, Narlikar and Bondi.

Cosmic background radiation was verified in the 1960s by Penzias and Wilson, and this discovery favoured the big bang at the expense of the steady state scenario. Later work was by Smoot et al. (1989), among other contributors, using data from the Cosmic Background explorer (CoBE) and the Wilkinson Microwave Anistropy Probe (WMAP) satellites that refined these observations. The 1980s (the same decade of the COBE measurements) also saw the proposal of inflation theory by Guth.

Recently the problems of dark matter and dark energy have risen to the top of the cosmology agenda.

===Higgs boson===
One possible signature of a Higgs boson from a simulated protonproton collision. It decays almost immediately into two jets of hadrons and two electrons, visible as lines.
On July 4, 2012, physicists working at CERN's Large Hadron Collider announced that they had discovered a new subatomic particle greatly resembling the Higgs boson, a potential key to an understanding of why elementary particles have mass and indeed to the existence of diversity and life in the universe. For now, some physicists are calling it a "Higgslike" particle. Joe Incandela, of the University of California, Santa Barbara, said, "It's something that may, in the end, be one of the biggest observations of any new phenomena in our field in the last 30 or 40 years, going way back to the discovery of quarks, for example." Michael Turner, a cosmologist at the University of Chicago and the chairman of the physics center board, said

Dr. Peter Higgs was one of six physicists, working in three independent groups, who in 1964 invented the notion of the cosmic molasses, or Higgs field. The others were Tom Kibble of Imperial College, London; Carl Hagen of the University of Rochester; Gerald Guralnik of Brown University; and Franois Englert and Robert Brout, both of Universit libre de Bruxelles. 

Although they have never been seen, Higgslike fields play an important role in theories of the universe and in string theory. Under certain conditions, according to the strange accounting of Einsteinian physics, they can become suffused with energy that exerts an antigravitational force. Such fields have been proposed as the source of an enormous burst of expansion, known as inflation, early in the universe and, possibly, as the secret of the dark energy that now seems to be speeding up the expansion of the universe. 

==The physical sciences==
With increased accessibility to and elaboration upon advanced analytical techniques in the 19th century, physics was defined as much, if not more, by those techniques than by the search for universal principles of motion and energy, and the fundamental nature of matter. Fields such as acoustics, geophysics, astrophysics, aerodynamics, plasma physics, low-temperature physics, and solid-state physics joined optics, fluid dynamics, electromagnetism, and mechanics as areas of physical research. In the 20th century, physics also became closely allied with such fields as electrical, aerospace, and materials engineering, and physicists began to work in government and industrial laboratories as much as in academic settings. Following World War II, the population of physicists increased dramatically, and came to be centered on the United States, while, in more recent decades, physics has become a more international pursuit than at any time in its previous history.

==Timeline of important physics publications==

 Name Living time Contribution 
 Aristotle 384  322 BCE Physicae Auscultationes 
 Archimedes 287  212 BCE On Floating Bodies 
 Ptolemy 90  168 Almagest, Geographia, Apotelesmatika 
 Alhazen 965  1040 Book of Optics 
 Copernicus 1473  1543 On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres (1543) 
 Galilei 1564  1642 Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) 
 Descartes 1596  1650 Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) 
 Newton 1643  1727 Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687) 
 Faraday 1791  1867 Experimental Researches in Electricity, vols. i. and ii. (1839, 1844) 
 Maxwell 1831  1879 A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (1873) 
 Einstein 1879  1955 Annus Mirabilis papers (1905) 
 

==Influential physicists==

The following is a gallery of highly influential and important figures in the history of physics. For a list that includes even more people, see list of physicists. 

File:Archimedes (Graphik).gif|Archimedes (c.287  c.212 BCE): described buoyancy, developed formulae for the areas and volumes of spheres, cylinders, parabolas, worked extensively with levers, invented the Archimedes' screw, developed siege engines for warfare to impede the Roman invasion of Syracuse.
File:Ibn al-Haytham.png|Alhazen (9651040): made significant improvements in optics, physical science, and the scientific method. In his book, Book of Optics, he showed through experiment that light travels in straight lines, and carried out various experiments with lenses, mirrors, refraction, and reflection, which earned him the title of the "Father of Modern Optics". 
File:Nikolaus Kopernikus.jpg|Nicolaus Copernicus (14731543): published De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) in 1543often considered the starting point of modern astronomyin which he argued that the Earth and the other planets revolved around the Sun (heliocentrism)
File:Justus Sustermans - Portrait of Galileo Galilei, 1636.jpg|Galileo Galilei (15641642): discovered the uniform acceleration rate of falling bodies, improved on the refracting telescope, discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter, described projectile motion and the concept of weight; known for championing of the Copernican theory of heliocentrism against Church opposition.
File:Johannes Kepler 1610.jpg|Johannes Kepler (1571-1630): used the accurate observations of Tycho Brahe to formulate three fundamental laws of planetary motion, described elliptical motion of planets around the sun, developed early telescopes, invented the convex eyepiece, discovered a means of determining the magnifying power of lenses.
File:Evangelista Torricelli2.jpg|Evangelista Torricelli (160847): invented the barometer (a glass tube of mercury inverted into a dish), found that the change of height of the mercury each day was from atmospheric pressure, worked in geometry and developed integral calculus, published findings on fluid and projectile motion in his 1644 Opera Geometrica (Geometric Works)
File:Blaise pascal.jpg|Blaise Pascal (162362): experimented with fluids, formulated Pascal's law in the 1650s stating that the pressure applied to a fluid taken in a closed container is transmitted with equal force throughout the container, proved that air has weight and that air pressure can produce a vacuum, namesake of the unit of pressure: the pascal (Pa)
Robert Boyle (16271691): formulated Boyle's law, which describes the inversely proportional relationship between the absolute pressure and volume of a gas (if the temperature is kept constant within a closed system), wrote The Sceptical Chymist (seen as cornerstone book in the field of chemistry), regarded as the first modern chemist, one of the founders of modern chemistry
File:Christiaan Huygens-painting.jpeg|Christiaan Huygens (162995): studied the rings of Saturn and discovered its moon Titan, invented the pendulum clock, studied optics and centrifugal force, theorized that light consists of waves (HuygensFresnel principle) which became instrumental in the understanding of wave-particle duality.
File:13 Portrait of Robert Hooke.JPG|Robert Hooke (16351703): formulated the law of elasticity, invented the balance spring, the spiral spring wheel in watches, the Gregorian telescope, and the first screw-divided quadrant, constructed first arithmetical machine, improved cell theory with the microscope
File:GodfreyKneller-IsaacNewton-1689.jpg|Sir Isaac Newton (16421727): established three laws of motion and a law of universal gravitation in his Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687), laid foundations for classical mechanics, built the first practical reflecting telescope (the Newtonian telescope), observed that a prism splits white light into the colors of the visible spectrum, formulated a law of cooling, co-invented calculus
File:Cavendish-walk.jpg|Henry Cavendish (17311810): greatest English chemist and physicist of his age, researched composition of the atmosphere, the properties of different gases, the synthesis of water, the law of electrical attraction and repulsion, a mechanical theory of heat, calculated the weight of the Earth in the Cavendish experiment, determined the universal gravitational constant
File:Coulomb.jpg|Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (17361806): formulated a law in 1785 which described the electrostatic interaction between electrically charged particles (attraction and repulsion) and was essential to the development of the theory of electromagnetism, namesake of the unit of electric charge: the coulomb (C)
File:Alessandro Volta.jpeg|Alessandro Volta (17451827): built the first electric battery (the voltaic pile) in the 19th century, did substantial work with electric currents, namesake of the unit of electric potential: the volt (V)
File:Young Thomas Lawrence.jpg|Thomas Young (17731829): established the principle of interference of light, resurrected the century-old theory that light is a wave, helped decipher the Rosetta Stone
File:H. C. rsted (C. A. Jensen).jpg|Hans Christian rsted (17771851): discovered that electric currents create magnetic fields (an important aspect of electromagnetism), shaped advances in science in the late 19th century, namesake of the oersted (Oe) (the cgs unit of magnetic H-field strength)
File:Andre-marie-ampere2.jpg|Andr-Marie Ampre (17771836): main founder of electrodynamics, showed how an electric current produces a magnetic field, stated that the mutual action of two lengths of current-carrying wire is proportional to their lengths and to the intensities of their currents (Ampre's law), namesake of the unit of electric current (the ampere)
File:Joseph von Fraunhofer.jpg|Joseph von Fraunhofer, (17871826): first to studied the dark lines of the Sun's spectrum, now known as Fraunhofer lines, first to use extensively the diffraction grating (a device that disperses light more effectively than a prism does), set the stage for the development of spectroscopy, making optical glass and achromatic telescope objectives.
File:Georg Simon Ohm3.jpg|Georg Ohm (17891854): found that there is a direct proportionality between the electric current I and the potential difference (voltage) V applied across a conductor, and that this current is inversely proportional to the resistance R in the circuit, or I = V/R, known as Ohm's law, namesake of the unit of electrical resistance (the ohm)
File:Michael Faraday - Project Gutenberg eText 13103.jpg|Michael Faraday (17911867): showed how a changing magnetic field can be used to generate an electric current (Faraday's law of induction), applied this knowledge to the development of several electrical machines, described principles of electrolysis, early pioneer in the field of low temperature study
File:Cdoppler.jpg|Christian Doppler (180353): first described how the observed frequency of light and sound waves is affected by the relative motion of the source and the detector, a phenomenon which became known as the Doppler effect.
File:Joule James sitting.jpg|James Prescott Joule (181889): discovered that heat is a form of energy, ideas led to the theory of conservation of energy, worked with Lord Kelvin to develop the absolute scale of temperature, made observations on magnetostriction, found the relationship between current through resistance and the heat dissipated, now called Joule's law.
File:Lord Kelvin photograph.jpg|William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (18241907): major figure in the history of thermodynamics, helped develop law of conservation of energy, studied wave motion and vortex motion in hydrodynamics and produced a dynamical theory of heat, formulated of the first and second laws of thermodynamics
File:James Clerk Maxwell.png|James Clerk Maxwell (183179): united electricity, magnetism, and optics into a consistent electromagnetic theory, formulated Maxwell's equations to show that electricity, magnetism and light are manifestations of the electromagnetic field, developed the MaxwellBoltzmann distribution (statistical means of describing aspects of the kinetic theory of gases)
File:Ernst Mach 01.jpg|Ernst Mach (18381916): contributed the Mach number, studied shock waves and how airflow is disturbed at the speed of sound, influenced logical positivism, forerunner of Einstein's relativity through his criticism of Newton
File:Boltzmann2.jpg|Ludwig Boltzmann (18441906): developed statistical mechanics (how the properties of atoms  mass, charge, and structure  determine the visible properties of matter, such as viscosity, thermal conductivity, and diffusion), developed the kinetic theory of gases.
File:Roentgen2.jpg|Wilhelm Rntgen (18451923): produced and detected electromagnetic radiation in a wavelength range of X-rays or Rntgen rays in 1895, for which he earned the first Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901, namesake of element 111, Roentgenium 
File:Portrait of Antoine-Henri Becquerel.jpg|Henri Becquerel (18521908): discovered radioactivity along with Marie Skodowska-Curie and Pierre Curie, for which all three won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics.
File:Hendrik Antoon Lorentz.jpg|Hendrik Lorentz (18531928): clarified electromagnetic theory of light, shared the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics with Pieter Zeeman for the discovery and theoretical explanation of the Zeeman effect, developed concept of local time, derived the transformation equations subsequently used by Albert Einstein to describe space and time.
File:J.J Thomson.jpg|J. J. Thomson (18561940): showed in 1897 that cathode rays were composed of a previously unknown negatively charged particle (later named the electron), discovered isotopes, invented the mass spectrometer, awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery of the electron and for his work on the conduction of electricity in gases.
File:Tesla3.jpg|Nikola Tesla (18561943): contributed to alternating current (AC) engineering, developed an AC induction motor. Invented the Tesla coil.
File:Heinrich Rudolf Hertz.jpg|Heinrich Hertz (18571894): clarified and expanded Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light, first to prove the existence of electromagnetic waves by engineering instruments to transmit and receive radio pulses
File:Max Planck (1858-1947).jpg|Max Planck (18581947): founded quantum mechanics in 1900, showed how the energy of a photon is directly proportional to its frequency, won him the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics. He then used his quantum hypothesis to formulate Planck's Law, thereby resolving the ultraviolet catastrophe.
File:Pieter Zeeman.jpg|Pieter Zeeman (18651943): shared the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics with Hendrik Lorentz for discovering the Zeeman effect (splitting a spectral line into several components in the presence of a static magnetic field)
File:Marie Curie c1920.png|Marie Curie (18671934): discovered the existence of radioactivity with Henri Becquerel and her husband Pierre Curie, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics (1903) and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1911), found techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes, isolated plutonium and radium
File:Millikan.jpg|Robert Andrews Millikan (18681953): measured the charge on the electron, worked on the photoelectric effect, performed vital research pertaining to cosmic rays.
File:Ernest Rutherford 1908.jpg|Ernest Rutherford (18711937): considered "Father of Nuclear Physics", showed how the atomic nucleus has a positive charge, first to change one element into another by an artificial nuclear reaction, differentiated and named alpha and beta radiation, awarded Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1908
File:Lise Meitner (1878-1968), lecturing at Catholic University, Washington, D.C., 1946.jpg|Lise Meitner (18781968): worked on radioactivity and nuclear physics, gave the first theoretical explanation for nuclear fission, for which her colleague, chemist Otto Hahn, was awarded the Nobel Prize. She is often mentioned, with Ida Noddack, as one of the most glaring examples of women's scientific achievement overlooked by the Nobel committee.
File:Albert Einstein (Nobel).png|Albert Einstein (18791955): revolutionized physics due to his theories of special and general relativity, described Brownian motion, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for his work on the photoelectric effect, formulated massenergy equivalence formula E = mc2, published more than 300 scientific papers and over 150 non-scientific works, considered the "Father of Modern Physics"
File:Niels Bohr.jpg|Niels Bohr (18851962): used quantum mechanical model (known as the Bohr model) of the atom which theorized that electrons travel in discrete orbits around the nucleus, showed how electron energy levels are related to spectral lines, received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922.
File:Schrodinger.jpg|Erwin Schrdinger (18871961): formulated the Schrdinger equation in 1926 describing how the quantum state of a physical system changes with time, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933, two years later proposed the thought experiment known as Schrdinger's cat
|Edwin Hubble (18891953): discovered of the existence of galaxies other than the Milky Way and galactic red shift, found that the loss in frequencythe redshiftobserved in the spectra of light from other galaxies increased in proportion to a particular galaxy's distance from Earth: Hubble's law
File:Chadwick.jpg|James Chadwick (18911974): James Chadwick's major work is the discovery of the neutron for which received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1935. He was one of the primary British scientists who worked in the Manhattan Project in the United States during World War II. He was knighted in 1945 for achievements in physics.
File:Broglie Big.jpg|Louis de Broglie (18921987): researched quantum theory, discovered the wave nature of electrons, awarded the 1929 Nobel Prize in Physics, ideas on the wave-like behavior of particles used by Erwin Schrdinger in his formulation of wave mechanics.
File:Lemaitre.jpg|Georges Lematre (18941966): first person to propose the theory of the expansion of the Universe, first to derive what is now known as Hubble's law, made the first estimation of what is now called the Hubble constant which he published in 1927 (two years before Hubble's article), proposed the Big Bang theory of the origin of the Universe
File:Pauli.jpg|Wolfgang Pauli (19001958): pioneers of quantum physics, received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1945 (nominated by Albert Einstein), formulated the Pauli exclusion principle involving spin theory (underpinning the structure of matter and the whole of chemistry), published the PauliVillars regularization, formulated the Pauli equation, coined the phrase 'not even wrong'
File:Bundesarchiv Bild183-R57262, Werner Heisenberg.jpg|Werner Heisenberg (19011976): developed method to express ideas of quantum mechanics in terms of matrices in 1925, published his famous uncertainty principle in 1927, awarded Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932
File:Enrico Fermi 1943-49.jpg|Enrico Fermi (19011954): developed first nuclear reactor (Chicago Pile-1), contributed to quantum theory, nuclear and particle physics, and statistical mechanics, awarded the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on induced radioactivity.
File:Dirac 4.jpg|Paul Dirac (19021984): made fundamental contributions to the early development of quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics, formulated the Dirac equation describing the behavior of fermions, predicted the existence of antimatter, shared the 1933 Nobel Prize in Physics with Erwin Schrdinger
File:Bardeen.jpg|John Bardeen (19081991): awarded Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956 with William Shockley and Walter Brattain for the invention of the transistor and again in 1972 with Leon Cooper and John Robert Schrieffer for a fundamental theory of conventional superconductivity known as the BCS theory.
File:Wheeler,John-Archibald 1963 Kopenhagen.jpg|John Wheeler (19112008): revived interest in general relativity in the United States after World War II, worked with Niels Bohr to explain principles of nuclear fission, tried to achieve Einstein's vision of a unified field theory, coined the terms black hole, quantum foam, wormhole, and the phrase "it from bit". 
File:Richard Feynman Nobel.jpg|Richard Feynman (19181988): developed the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, the theory of quantum electrodynamics, and the physics of the superfluidity of supercooled liquid helium, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965 with Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, developed the Feynman diagram representing subatomic particle behavior.
|Abdus Salam (19261996): Salam's major and notable achievements include the PatiSalam model, magnetic photon, vector meson, Grand Unified Theory, work on supersymmetry and, most importantly, electroweak theory, for which he and Steven Weinberg were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics.
File:GerardtHooft.jpg|Gerardus 't Hooft (1946present): a Dutch theoretical physicist and professor at Utrecht University, he shared the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physics with his thesis advisor Martinus J. G. Veltman "for elucidating the quantum structure of electroweak interactions". His work on electroweak theory was crucial to Peter Higgs in the development of higgs boson theory. 
File:Higgs, Peter (1929)3.jpg|Peter Higgs (1929present): Along with Franois Englert, Robert Brout, Gerald Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and Tom Kibble, he developed the theory of Higgs field and Higgs boson, which together form the higgs mechanism that explains how subatomic particles gain their mass. However CERN have been cautious with the results, stating that new tests are needed to confirm the discovery. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2013 for his work on the mentioned mechanism.
File:Stephen Hawking.StarChild.jpg|Stephen Hawking (1942present): provided, with Roger Penrose, theorems of general relativity regarding the occurrence of gravitational singularities (black holes) and theoretically predicted that black holes should emit radiation (Hawking radiation).

==See also==

* List of physicists
* Nobel Prize in physics
*Timeline of fundamental physics discoveries

==Notes==

==References==

* .
* Aristotle Physics translated by Hardie & Gaye
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* 
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* 
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
*.
* .
*.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
*.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
*.

==Further reading==

* "Selected Works about Isaac Newton and His Thought" from The Newton Project.
*
* 
* .
* 
* 
* .
* .
* .
* A selection of 56 articles, written by physicists. Commentaries and notes by Lloyd Motz and Dale McAdoo.
*Nina Byers and Gary Williams, ed., Out of the Shadows: Contributions of Twentieth-Century Women to Physics Cambridge University Press, 2006 ISBN 978-0-521-82197-1
* de Haas, Paul, "Historic Papers in Physics (20th Century)"

 



[[Hydrofoil]]

An older style surface-piercing "hydrofoil"

The term "hydrofoil" can have one of two basic meanings.

Firstly, a hydrofoil is a foil which operates in water. They are similar in appearance and purpose to airfoils. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/hydrofoil 

Second, the term "hydrofoil" is often used to refer to boats using hydrofoil technology. Most of this article is about this meaning of hydrofoil.

==Hydrofoil, as lifting surface==
Hydrofoils can be artificial, such as the rudder or keel on a boat, the diving planes on a submarine, a surfboard fin, or occur naturally, as with fish fins, the flippers of aquatic mammals, the wings of swimming seabirds, or other creatures like the sand dollar.

The term "hydrofoil" is commonly used for the wing-like structure mounted on struts below the hull, or across the keels of a catamaran in a variety of boats (see illustration), which lifts the boat out of the water during forward motion, in order to reduce hull drag.

==Hydrofoil as foil supported craft==
As a hydrofoil-equipped watercraft increases in speed, the hydrofoil elements below the hull(s) develop enough lift to raise the hull up and out of the water. This results in a great reduction in hull drag, and a further corresponding increase in speed and efficiency in operation in terms of fuel consumption.

A wider adoption of the technical innovations of hydrofoils is prevented by the increased complexity of building and maintaining them. Hydrofoils are generally prohibitively more expensive than conventional watercraft. However, the design is simple enough that there are many human-powered hydrofoil designs. Amateur experimentation and development of the concept is popular. http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=hydrofoil+design&search=Search&gl=CA&hl=en 

A boat equipped with hydrofoils is also called a hydroplane (boat). 

==Hydrofoils configurations==
The two types of "hydrofoils"

Since air and water are governed by similar fluid equations, albeit with vastly different levels of viscosity, density, and compressibility, the hydrofoil and airfoil create lift in identical ways (see foil (fluid mechanics)). The foil is shaped to move smoothly through the water causing the flow to be deflected downward which according to Newton's Third Law of Motion exerts an upward force on the foil. This turning of the water causes higher pressure on the bottom and reduced pressure on the top of the foil. This pressure difference is accompanied by a velocity difference, via Bernoulli's principle, so the resulting flowfield about the foil has a higher average velocity on one side than the other.

When used as a lifting element on a "hydrofoil" boat, this upward force lifts the body of the vessel, decreasing drag and increasing speed. The lifting force eventually balances with the weight of the craft, reaching a point where the hydrofoil no longer lifts out of the water, but remains in equilibrium. Since wave resistance and other impeding forces such as various types of drag (physics) on the hull are eliminated as the hull is lifted clear, turbulence and drag act only on the much smaller surface area of the hydrofoil and there is a marked increase in speed.

==Foil configurations==
Early hydrofoils used V-shaped foils. Hydrofoils of this type are known as "surface-piercing" since portions of the V-shape hydrofoils will rise above the water surface when foilborne. Some modern hydrofoils use inverted T-shape foils which are fully submerged. Fully submerged hydrofoils are less subject to the effects of wave action, and are therefore more stable at sea and are more comfortable for the crew and passengers. This type of configuration, however, is not self-stabilizing. The angle of attack on the hydrofoils needs to be adjusted continuously in accordance to the changing conditions, a control process that is performed by sensors, computer and active surfaces.

== History ==
Forlanini's hydrofoil over Lake Maggiore, 1910.

=== Prototypes ===

Italian inventor Enrico Forlanini began working on hydrofoils in 1898, and used a ladder foils system. Forlanini obtained patents in Britain and the United States for his ideas and designs. "Italian Hydroplane of Curious Type." Popular Mechanics, December 1911, p. 927. 

Between 1899 and 1901, British boat designer John Thornycroft worked on a series of models with a stepped hull and single bow foil. In 1909 his company built the full scale 22 ft long boat, Miranda III. Driven by a 60 hp engine, it rode on a bowfoil and flat stern. The subsequent Miranda IV was credited with a speed of 35 kn. 

Bell's HD-4 on a test run, c.1919

A March 1906 Scientific American article by American hydrofoil pioneer William E. Meacham explained the basic principle of hydrofoils. Alexander Graham Bell considered the invention of the hydroplane a very significant achievement, and after reading the article began to sketch concepts of what is now called a hydrofoil boat. With his chief engineer Casey Baldwin, Bell began hydrofoil experiments in the summer of 1908. Baldwin studied the work of the Italian inventor Enrico Forlanini and began testing models based on his designs, which led them to the development of hydrofoil watercraft. During Bell's world tour of 19101911, Bell and Baldwin met with Forlanini in Italy, where they rode in his hydrofoil boat over Lake Maggiore. Baldwin described it as being as smooth as flying. On returning to Bell's large laboratory at his Beinn Bhreagh estate near Baddeck, Nova Scotia, they experimented with a number of designs, culminating in Bell's HD-4. Using Renault engines, a top speed of 87 km/h (54 mph) was achieved, accelerating rapidly, taking waves without difficulty, steering well and showing good stability. Bell's report to the United States Navy permitted him to obtain two 260 kW (350 horsepower) engines. On 9 September 1919 the HD-4 set a world marine speed record of 114 km/h (70.86 mph), a record which stood for two decades. A full-scale replica of Bell's HD-4 is viewable at the Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site museum in Baddeck, Nova Scotia.

In the early 1950s an English couple built a hydrofoil water craft called the White Hawk that was jet powered in an attempt to beat the absolute water speed record. "Jet Hydrofoil Shoots At World Record" Popular Mechanics, August 1953, pp. 70-71 But in tests the White Hawk could barely top the record breaking speed of Bell's 1919 HD-4. The designers had come up against an engineering phenomenon that limits the top speed of even today's modern hydrofoils. Cavitation similar to high speed prop cavitation of the foils that breaks the lift created by the foils as they move through the water at speed above 70 m.p.h. which bends the lifting foil and, basically causes the stall characteristics of fixed wing aircraft when they are moving too slow in flight, only in reverse. The World Water Speed Record by Leo Villa and Kevin Desmond, 1976 

A schematic illustration of self-stabilizing systems for fully submerged hydrofoils. Its computer gathers data for the boom position and current water level to determine the required flap position.

=== First passenger boats ===

German engineer Hanns von Schertel worked on hydrofoils prior to and during World War II in Germany. After the war Schertel's team was captured by the Russians. As Germany was not authorized to build fast boats, Schertel himself went to Switzerland, where he established the Supramar company. In 1952, Supramar launched the first commercial hydrofoil, PT10 "Freccia d'Oro" (Golden Arrow), in Lake Maggiore, between Switzerland and Italy. The PT10 is of surface-piercing type, it can carry 32 passengers and travel at 35 kn. In 1968, Hussain Najadi the Bahraini born banker, acquired the Supramar AG and expanded its operations into Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, the UK, Norway and the US. General Dynamics of the United States became its licensee, and the Pentagon awarded its first R&D naval research project in the field of supercavitation. Hitachi Shipbuilding of Osaka, Japan, was another licensee of Supramar, as well as many leading ship owners and shipyards in the OECD countries.

From 1952 to 1971, Supramar designed many models of hydrofoils: PT20, PT50, PT75, PT100 and PT150. All are of surface-piercing type, except the PT150 combining a surface-piercing foil forward with a fully submerged foil in the aft location. Over 200 of Supramar's design were built, most of them by Rodriquez in Italy.

During the same period the Soviet Union experimented extensively with hydrofoils, constructing hydrofoil river boats and ferries with streamlined designs during the cold war period and into the 1980s. Such vessels include the Raketa (1957) type, followed by the larger Meteor type and the smaller Voskhod type. One of the most successful Soviet designer/inventor in this area was Rostislav Alexeyev who some consider the 'father' of the modern hydrofoil due to his 1950's era high speed hydrofoil designs. Later, circa 1970's, Alexeyev combined his hydrofoil experience with the surface effect principle to create the Ekranoplan.

In 1961, SRI International issued a study on "The Economic Feasibility of Passenger Hydrofoil Craft in U.S. Domestic and Foreign Commerce". Commercial use of hydrofoils in the U.S. first appeared in 1961 when two commuter vessels were commissioned by Harry Gale Nye, Jr.'s North American Hydrofoils to service the route from Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey to the financial district of Lower Manhattan. 

== Uses ==
A Project 206M "Shtorm" (NATO - Turya class) patrol fast attack craft hydrofoil of the Cuban Navy.
Aerial port beam view of the Italian Sparviero class hydrofoil-missile NIBBIO P-421 underway.
USS Aquila, a military hydrofoil. The T-shaped foils are visible just below the water.
HMCS Bras d'Or, a military concept hydrofoil.

=== Military applications ===

In Canada during World War II, Baldwin worked on an experimental smoke laying hydrofoil (later called the Comox Torpedo) that was later superseded by other smoke-laying technology and an experimental target-towing hydrofoil. The forward two foil assemblies of what is believed to be the latter hydrofoil were salvaged in the mid-1960s from a derelict hulk in Baddeck, Nova Scotia by Colin MacGregor Stevens. These were donated to the Maritime Museum in Halifax, Nova Scotia. The Canadian Armed Forces built and tested a number of hydrofoils (e.g. Baddeck and two vessels named Bras d'Or), which culminated in the high-speed anti-submarine hydrofoil HMCS Bras d'Or in the late 1960s. However, the program was cancelled in the early 1970s due to a shift away from anti-submarine warfare by the Canadian military. The Bras d'Or was a surface-piercing type that performed well during her trials, reaching a maximum speed of 63 kn.

The USSR introduced several hydrofoil-based fast attack craft into their navy, principally:
* the Sarancha class missile boat, a unique vessel built in the 1970s
* the Turya class torpedo boat, which was introduced in 1972 and still remains in service today
* the Matka class missile boat, which was introduced in the 1980s and still remains in service today
* the Muravey class patrol boat, which was introduced in the 1980s and still remains in service today

The U.S. Navy began experiments with hydrofoils in the mid-1950s by funding a sailing vessel that used hydrofoils to reach speeds in the 30 mph range. "Sail Boat Stilts Boost Speed." Popular Mechanics, February 1956, p. 136. note - Why the US Navy chose to learn about hydrofoils using a sailing vessel is still a puzzle to many. After a few minor experiments using sailing vessels the US Navy implemented a small number of combat hydrofoils, such as the Pegasus class, from 1977 through 1993. These hydrofoils were fast and well armed, and were capable of sinking all but the largest surface vessels. In their narcotics interdiction role, they were a nightmare for illegal drug runners, as they were very fast and had the ability to stop anything they could not catch, as well as the ability to call in air support.

The Italian Navy has used six hydrofoils of the Sparviero class since the late 1970s. These were armed with a 76 mm gun and two missiles, and were capable of speeds up to 50 kn. Three similar boats were built for the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force.

=== Sailing and sports ===

The French experimental sail powered hydrofoil Hydroptre is the result of a research project that involves advanced engineering skills and technologies. In September 2009, the Hydroptre set new sailcraft world speed records in the 500 m category, with a speed of 51.36 knot and in the one nautical mile (1.9 km) category with a speed of 50.17 knot. http://www.sailspeedrecords.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=104:wssr-newsletter-no-177-hydroptere-world-records-230909&catid=2:news&Itemid=5 http://www.sailspeedrecords.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=105:wssr-newsletter-no-178-hydroptere-nautical-mile-201109&catid=2:news&Itemid=5 

Another trimaran sailboat is the Windrider Rave. The Rave is a commercially available 17 ft, two person, hydrofoil trimaran, capable of reaching speeds of 40 kn. The boat was designed by Jim Brown.

The Moth dinghy has evolved into some radical foil configurations.

Hobie Sailboats once produced a production foiling trimaran. It was and is the fastest production sailboat in history. It is called the Hobie Trifoiler. Trifoilers have clocked speeds upward of thirty knots.

A new kayak design, called Flyak, has hydrofoils that lift the kayak enough to significantly reduce drag, allowing speeds of up to 27 km/h. Some surfers have developed surfboards with hydrofoils called foilboards, specifically aimed at surfing big waves further out to sea. 
 

Ukrainian-built Voskhod on the North Sea Canal, the Netherlands
TurboJET's Urzela JetFoil
TurboJET's Barca Foilcat

==Modern passenger boats ==
Flying Poseidon (1982) and Bodrum Lines Kometas at Rhodes with MV Costa Fortuna 11am 5-8-2011.jpg|thumb|Flying Poseidon (built 1982 http://www.marinetraffic.com/ais/shipdetails.aspx?MMSI=376308000 ) had just berthed at Rhodes from Fethiye when the sister Kometas hydrofoil [http://www.hydrofoils.org/HGal/hgal.htm Russian hydrofoils from Bodrum also arrived from Turkey in 2011.]]Soviet Union built Voskhods are one of the most successful passenger hydrofoil designs. It was developed in the Soviet Union and manufactured in Russia and Ukraine. Currently, they are in service in more than 20 countries. The most recent model Voskhod-2M FFF, also known as Eurofoil, was built in Feodosiya, Ukraine, for the Dutch public transport operator Connexxion. 

The Boeing 929 is widely used in Asia for passenger services between the many islands of Japan, between Hong Kong and Macau and on the Korean peninsula.

=== Current operation ===
Some operators of hydrofoil include:

* TurboJET service, which speeds passengers across the Pearl River Delta between Hong Kong and Macau in less than an hour, with an average speed of 45 knots (83 km/h), mainly using Boeing's Jetfoil. Also services Shenzhen, Guangzhou and Kowloon. Operated by Shun Tak-China Travel Ship Management Limited.
* Voskhod and Polesye service between Tulcea and Sulina on the Danube.
* Meteor and Polesye service in Poland between Szczecin and winoujcie .
* Cometa service between Nijneangarsk and Irkutsk on the Lake Baikal.
* Cometa service between Vladivostok and Slavyanka.
* Polesye service between Mozyr and Turov on the Pripyat River.
* Meteor service between Saint Petersburg, Russia and the Peterhof Palace, a summer palace of Russian tsars.

Hydrofoil high-speed boat docking in St. Petersburg, Russia from a run to Peterhof Palace.
Passenger hydrofoil Flying Dolphin Zeus moving at high speed near Piraeus

* Meteor service between Saint Petersburg, Russia and the Kronstadt, a strongly fortified Russian seaport town, located on Kotlin Island, near the head of the Gulf of Finland. It lies thirty kilometers west of Saint Petersburg. Since 2012 replaced by a catamaran 'Mercury'.
* Meteor, Raketa and Voskhod hydrofoil types operate all over Volga, Don and Kama Rivers in Russia. Also the Lena River and Amur River.
* Meteor hydrofoils are operated by a number of tour operators in Croatia, mostly for packaged tours, but there are also some scheduled services to islands in Adriatic.
* Hydrofoils are regularly operated on the three major Italian Lakes by branches of Ministry Of Transportation: Navigazione Lago Maggiore services routes on the Lake Maggiore between Locarno and Arona, Navigazione Lago di Como services routes on the Lake Como and Navigazione Lago di Garda services routes on the Lake Garda. Three units of the Rodriquez RHS150 type operate on each lake, for a total of nine hydrofoils. Navigazione Lago di Como still operates the last Rodriquez RHS70 in active service in Italy.
* Former Russian hydrofoils are used in southern Italy for connection with islands of Lazio and Campania. SNAV has 5 RHS200, RHS160 and RHS150 used in the connections between Naples and the islands of Capri and Ischia.
* Regular hydrofoil service from Istanbul to Yalova.
* Hellenic Seaways operate their Flying Dolphins service over many routes in the Aegean, between the Cycladic islands, Saronic Gulf islands such as Aegina and Poros and Athens.
* Meteor (2), Polesye (4) and Voskhod (3) hydrofoil types operate in Hungary. MAHART PassNave Ltd. operates scheduled hydrofoil liners between Budapest, Bratislava and Vienna, inland liners between Budapest and the Danube Bend, and theme cruises to Komrom, Solt, Kalocsa and Mohcs.
* Russian hydrofoils of the Kometa type operated on the Bulgarian Black Sea Coast connecting Varna, Nesebar, Burgas, Sozopol, Primorsko, and Tsarevo, and Raketa and Meteor models served the Bulgarian Danube ports between Rousse and Vidin. Both services were discontinued in the 1990s. In 2011 the service reopened between Varna, Nesebar, Burgas and Sozopol by Bulgarian Hydrofoils Ltd.
* Vietnamese Greenline Company operates hourly shuttle service between Ho Chi Minh city, Vung Tau and Con Dao island. Hydrofoil lines using the Russian-built Meteor type also connect Hai Phong, Ha Long and Mong Cai in North Vietnam, Phan Thiet and Phu Quy Island and between Rach Gia and Phu Quoc Island in the South.
*The service between Busan, South Korea and Fukuoka, Japan is operated by the two companies. Japanese JR Kysh Jet Ferry operates Beetle five times a day. Korean Miraejet operates Kobee three to four times a day. All of their fleets are Boeing 929.
*As of February 2008, all of the commercial lines in Japan use Boeing 929. The routes include:
**Sado Kisen operates the route between Sado and Niigata.
**Tkai Kisen operates Seven Island, running between Tokyo and Izu Islands, via Tateyama or Yokosuka. The destinations include Izu shima, Toshima, Niijima, Shikinejima, and Kzushima. The same ship also liks Atami and Izu shima.
**Kysh Ysen operates the route between Fukuoka, Iki, and the two ports of Tsushima.
**Kysh Shsen operates the route between Nagasaki and the two of Got Islands, namely Fukuejima and Nakadrijima.
**Kagoshima Shsen and Cosmo Line operate the various routes between Kagoshima and Tanegashima or Yakushima.
* In 2012, Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department (AFCD) in Hong Kong leased a 12 meter HAWC - Hydrofoil Assisted Water Craft - a catamaran to patrol the Geo Park, a Unesco Sanctioned Marine Park in the Sai Kung areas off Hong Kong

=== Discontinued operations ===
* Until 31 December 2013, Fast Flying Ferries operated by Connexxion provided a regular public transport service over the North Sea Canal between Amsterdam Central Station and Velsen-Zuid in the Netherlands, using Voskhod 2M hydrofoils.

== Disadvantages ==
Hydrofoils had their peak in popularity in the 1960s and 70s. Since then there has been a steady decline in their use and popularity for leisure, military and commercial passenger transport use. There are a number of reasons for this:

* Hydrofoils are sensitive to impacts with floating objects and marine animals. If the hydrofoils hit something the boat will fall off the foils and this often creates a perception of increased danger. However, hydrofoils operating in Hong Kong, reportedly some of the most littered waters, operate relatively trouble free. The Hong Kong Marine department maintains online records of all accidents in its waters.

* Hydrofoils have sharp edges that reside in the water while in operation. These edges can fatally injure marine mammals (e.g. whales) they hit.

* Hydrofoils are expensive to build. A vessel like the Boeing Jetfoil currently costs about 3 times the price of an equivalent catamaran passenger ferry. The increased costs are not always economically justifiable by consumers. Simpler designs such as those of Russian design and those by Rodriquez in Italy are more competitive in price and are still being produced today for operation on ferry routes.

* It is a very conservative industry. Hydrofoils are still considered exotic by many commercial operators of high-speed craft and many will not take the risk of trying such exotic vessels when they have no experience operating them. Those that do have found benefit in their operation.

* They are technically complex and require high maintenance, which has killed most military hydrofoil projects. The US Navy for example developed some of the most technically advanced hydrofoils around but they could never get them to be reliable due to the complex propulsion systems and ride control required. This eventually led to the suspension of their hydrofoil projects. Most other Navy developments followed the same fate. The Russian Navy still operates very large hydrofoils and have been successful in their design, largely because they have opted for simpler systems that might not have the same performance as the US designs but are much more robust and reliable. In Hong Kong, the increasing maintenance cost of keeping the old Jetfoils running is resulting in these vessels slowly being phased out.

== See also ==

* Boeing hydrofoils
* Disco Volante (ship)
* Flyak &ndash; a hydrofoil kayak
* The Hydrofoil Mystery &ndash; historical fiction
* Planing (sailing)
* Raketa (hydrofoil)

* Riverboat
* Sailing hydrofoil
* Sit-down hydrofoil
* Supercavitation
* Trampofoil &ndash; a one-person human-powered hydrofoil
* Voskhod (hydrofoil)

==References==
Notes

==External links==

* Limitations of hydrofoils
* The International Hydrofoil Society
* Fast CC Hydrofoil design by Prof. KG Hoppe, inventor of HYSUCAT technology patented by University of Stellenbosch, S.A.
* Hydrofoil Assisted Water Craft employing HYSUCAT and HYSUWAC patents in their projects and vessels currently in operation
* Hysucat Design, South African originators of Hydrofoil Supported Catamaran technology
* Swiss experimental hydrofoils
* HyRaii - Hydrofoil Sailboat, Student Project ETH Zurich

*



[[Henri Chopin]]

Henri Chopin (18 June 1922  3 January 2008) was an avant-garde poet and musician.

==Life==
Henri Chopin was born in Paris,18 June 1922, one of three brothers, and the son of an accountant. Both his siblings died during the war. One was shot by a German soldier the day after an armistice was declared in Paris, the other while sabotaging a train (Acquaviva 2008).

Chopin was a French practitioner of concrete and sound poetry, well known throughout the second half of the 20th century. His work, though iconoclastic, remained well within the historical spectrum of poetry as it moved from a spoken tradition to the printed word and now back to the spoken word again (Wendt 1996, 112). He created a large body of pioneering recordings using early tape recorders, studio technologies and the sounds of the manipulated human voice. His emphasis on sound is a reminder that language stems as much from oral traditions as from classic literature, of the relationship of balance between order and chaos.

Chopin is significant above all for his diverse spread of creative achievement, as well as for his position as a focal point of contact for the international arts. As poet, painter, graphic artist and designer, typographer, independent publisher, filmmaker, broadcaster and arts promoter, Chopin's work is a barometer of the shifts in European media between the 1950s and the 1970s. 
In 1964 he created OU, one of the most notable reviews of the second half of the 20th century, and he ran it until 1974. OUs contributors included William S. Burroughs, Brion Gysin, Gil J Wolman, Franois Dufrne, Bernard Heidsieck, John Furnival, Tom Phillips, and the Austrian sculptor, writer and Dada pioneer Raoul Hausmann.
His books included Le Dernier Roman du Monde (1971), Portrait des 9 (1975), The Cosmographical Lobster (1976), Posie Sonore Internationale (1979), Les Riches Heures de l'Alphabet (1992) and Graphpoemesmachine (2006). Henri also created many graphic works on his typewriter: the typewriter poems (also known as dactylopomes) feature in international art collections such as those of Francesco Conz in Verona, the Morra Foundation in Naples and Ruth and Marvin Sackner in Miami, and have been the subject of Australian, British and French retrospectives (Aquaviva 2008).

His publication and design of the classic audio-visual magazines Cinquime Saison and OU between 1958 and 1974, each issue containing recordings as well as texts, images, screenprints and multiples, brought together international contemporary writers and artists such as members of Lettrisme and Fluxus, Jiri Kolar, Ian Hamilton Finlay, Tom Phillips, Brion Gysin, William S. Burroughs and many others, as well as bringing the work of survivors from earlier generations such as Raoul Hausmann and Marcel Janco to a fresh audience.

From 1968 to 1986 Henri Chopin lived in Ingatestone, Essex, but with the death of his wife Jean in 1985, he moved back to France. 
In 2001 with his health failing, he returned to England, living with his daughter and family at Dereham, Norfolk (Acquaviva 2008).

==Aesthetics==
Chopin's poesie sonore aesthetics included a deliberate cultivation of a barbarian approach in production, using raw or crude sound manipulations to explore the area between
distortion and intelligibility. He avoided high-quality, professional recording machines, preferring to use very basic equipment and bricolage methods, such as sticking matchsticks in the erase heads of a second-hand tape recorder, or manually interfering with the tape path (Wendt 1985, 1617).

== Books ==
*Chopin, Henri. 1979. Poesie Sonore Internationale, edited by Jean-Michel Place. Paris: Trajectoires.

== References ==
*Acquaviva, Frdric. 2008. "Obituary: Henri Chopin, Avant-garde Pioneer of Sound Poetry". The Guardian (Tuesday 5 February). 
*Wendt, Larry. 1985. "Sound Poetry: I. History of Electro-Acoustic Approaches, II. Connections to Advanced Electronic Technologies". Leonardo 18, no. 1:1123.
*Wendt, Larry. 1996. "Recordings: Marc Battier and Henri Chopin: TransparenceAn Audiopoem". Computer Music Journal 20, no. 1 (Spring): 11113.

==Further reading==

*Jamet, Cdric. 2009. "Limitless Voice(s), Intensive Bodies: Henri Chopin's Poetics of Expansion". Mosaic 42, no. 2 (June): 13551.
*Lentz, Michael. 1996. "'Musik? Poesie? Eigentlich ': Lautmusik/Poesie nach 1945". Neue Zeitschrift fr Musik 157, no. 2 (MarchApril): 4755.
*Norris, Andrew. 2005. "Projections of the Pulseless Body: Don van Vliet and Henri Chopin". Chapter & Verse, no. 3 (Spring).
*Oehlschlgel, Reinhard. 2008. "Henri Chopin gestorben". MusikTexte, no. 116 (February): 87.
*Zurbrugg, Nicholas. 2001. "Programming Paradise: Haraldo de Campos, Concrete Poetry, and the Postmodern Multimedia Avant-Garde". In Writing Aloud: The Sonics of Language, edited by Brandon LaBelle and Christof Migone, 735. Los Angeles: Errant Bodies. ISBN 0-9655570-3-0.

== External links ==
* Sound and video on erratum.org

===Listening===
*UbuWeb Sound: Henri Chopin.

===web===
*The History of ASCII (Text) Art by Joan G. Stark.



[[Hassium]]

Hassium is a chemical element with symbol Hs and atomic number 108, named in honor of the German state of Hesse. It is a synthetic element (an element that can be created in a laboratory but is not found in nature) and radioactive; the most stable known isotope, 269Hs, has a half-life of approximately 9.7 seconds, although an unconfirmed metastable state, 277mHs, may have a longer half-life of about 11 minutes. More than 100 atoms of hassium have been synthesized to date. 

In the periodic table of the elements, it is a d-block transactinide element. It is a member of the 7th period and belongs to the group 8 elements. Chemistry experiments have confirmed that hassium behaves as the heavier homologue to osmium in group 8. The chemical properties of hassium are characterized only partly, but they compare well with the chemistry of the other group 8 elements. In bulk quantities, hassium is expected to be a silvery metal that reacts readily with oxygen in the air, forming a volatile tetroxide.

==History==

Location of Hesse within Germany
The synthesis of element 108 was first attempted in 1978 by a Russian research team led by Yuri Oganessian and Vladimir Utyonkov at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, using reactions that would generate the isotopes hassium-270 and hassium-264. The data was uncertain and they carried out new experiments on hassium five years later, where these two isotopes as well as hassium-263 were produced; the hassium-264 experiment was repeated again and confirmed in 1984. 

Hassium was officially discovered in 1984 by a German research team led by Peter Armbruster and Gottfried Mnzenberg at the Institute for Heavy Ion Research (Gesellschaft fr Schwerionenforschung) in Darmstadt. The team bombarded a target of lead-208 with accelerated nuclei of iron-58 to produce 3 atoms of the isotope hassium-265. 

Due to this issue, a controversy arose over who should be recognized as the official discoverer of the element. The IUPAC/IUPAP Transfermium Working Group (TWG) recognised the GSI collaboration as official discoverers in their 1992 report. They stated that the GSI collaboration was "more detailed and, of itself, carries conviction", and that while the combined data from Dubna and Darmstadt confirmed that hassium had been synthesized, the major credit was awarded to the GSI. This statement came in spite of the combined data also supporting the Russian 1983 discovery claim and the TWG also acknowledging that "very probably element 108 played a role in the Dubna experiment." (Note: for Part I see Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 63, No. 6, pp. 879886, 1991) 

The name hassium was proposed by Peter Armbruster and his colleagues, the officially recognised German discoverers, in 1992, derived from the Latin name (Hassia) for the German state of Hesse where the institute is located. Using Mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements, hassium should be known as eka-osmium or dvi-ruthenium. In 1979, during the Transfermium Wars (but before the synthesis of hassium), IUPAC published recommendations according to which the element was to be called unniloctium (with the corresponding symbol of Uno), a systematic element name as a placeholder, until the element was discovered (and the discovery then confirmed) and a permanent name was decided on. The recommendations were mostly ignored among scientists, who either called it "element 108", with the symbol of (108) or even simply 108, or used the proposed name "hassium". 

In 1994 a committee of IUPAC recommended that element 108 be named hahnium (Hn) after the German physicist Otto Hahn, after an older suggestion of ottohahnium (Oh) in spite of the long-standing convention to give the discoverer the right to suggest a name, so that elements named after Hahn and Lise Meitner (meitnerium) would be next to each other, honoring their joint discovery of nuclear fission. This was because they felt that Hesse did not merit an element being named after it. After protests from the German discoverers and the American Chemical Society, IUPAC relented and the name hassium (Hs) was adopted internationally in 1997. 

==Natural occurrence==
Molybdenite
Hassium is not known to occur naturally on Earth because the half-lives of all its known isotopes are short enough that essentially none of any primordial hassium would have survived to the present day. However, this does not rule out the possibility of as yet unknown longer-lived isotopes or nuclear isomers existing, some of which could, if long-lived enough, still exist in trace quantities today. In the early 1960s, it was predicted that long-lived deformed isomers of hassium might occur naturally on Earth in trace quantities. This was theorized in order to explain the extreme radiation damage in some minerals that could not have been caused by any known natural radioisotopes, but could have been caused by superheavy elements. 

In 1963, Soviet scientist Victor Cherdyntsev, who had previously claimed the existence of primordial curium-247, claimed to have discovered element 108 (specifically, the 267Hs isotope, which supposedly had a half life of 400 to 500 million years) in natural molybdenite and suggested the name sergenium (symbol Sg; at the time, this symbol had not yet been taken by seaborgium) for it, after the ancient city of Serik along the Silk Road in Kazakhstan where his molybdenite samples came from. His rationale for claiming that sergenium was the heavier homologue to osmium was that minerals supposedly containing sergenium formed volatile oxides when boiled in nitric acid, similarly to osmium. His findings were however criticized by V. M. Kulakov on the grounds that some of the properties Cherdyntsev claimed sergenium had were inconsistent with the then-current nuclear physics. 

The chief questions raised by Kulakov were that the claimed alpha decay energy of sergenium was many orders of magnitude lower than expected and the half-life given was eight orders of magnitude shorter than what would be predicted for a nuclide alpha decaying with the claimed decay energy, but at the same time a corrected half-life in the region of 1016 years would be impossible as it would imply that the samples contained about 100 milligrams of sergenium. However, more recently, it has been suggested that the observed alpha decay with energy 4.5 MeV could be due to a low-energy and strongly enhanced transition between different hyperdeformed states of a hassium isotope around 271Hs, thus suggesting that the existence of superheavy elements in nature was at least possible, although unlikely. 

In 2004, the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research conducted a search for natural hassium. This was done underground to avoid interference and false positives from cosmic rays, but no results have been released, strongly implying that no natural hassium was found. The possible extent of primordial hassium on Earth is uncertain; it might now only exist in traces, or could even have completely decayed by now after having caused the radiation damage long ago. 

In 2006, it was hypothesized that an isomer of 271Hs might have a half-life of around (2.50.5)108 y, which would explain the observation of alpha particles with energies of around 4.4 MeV in some samples of molybdenite and osmiride. This isomer of 271Hs could be produced from the beta decay of 271Bh and 271Sg, which, being homologous to rhenium and molybdenum respectively, should occur in molybdenite along with rhenium and molybdenum if they occurred in nature. Since hassium is homologous to osmium, it should also occur along with osmium in osmiride if it occurred in nature. However, the decay chains of these isotopes are very hypothetical and the predicted half-life of this hypothetical hassium isomer is not long enough for any sufficient quantity to remain on Earth. It is possible that more 271Hs may be deposited on the Earth as the Solar System travels through the spiral arms of the Milky Way, which would also explain excesses of plutonium-239 found on the floors of the Pacific Ocean and the Gulf of Finland, but minerals enriched with 271Hs are predicted to also have to have excesses of uranium-235 and lead-207, and would have different proportions of elements that are formed during spontaneous fission, such as krypton, zirconium, and xenon. Thus, the occurrence of hassium in nature in minerals such as molybdenite and osmiride is theoretically possible, but highly unlikely. 

==Isotopes==

+List of hassium isotopes Isotope Half-life Decaymode Discoveryyear Reaction 
 263Hs , SF 2008 208Pb(56Fe,n) 
 264Hs , SF 1986 207Pb(58Fe,n) 
 265Hs , SF 1984 208Pb(58Fe,n) 
 265mHs  1984 208Pb(58Fe,n) 
 266Hs , SF 2000 270Ds(,) 
 267Hs , SF 1995 238U(34S,5n) 
 267mHs  1995 238U(34S,5n) 
 268Hs  2009 238U(34S,4n) 
 269Hs  1996 277Cn(,2) 
 269mHs  2004 248Cm(26Mg,5n) \"Decay properties of 269Hs and evidence for the new nuclide 270Hs\", Turler et al., GSI Annual Report 2001. Retrieved 2008-03-01. 
 270Hs  2004 248Cm(26Mg,4n) 
 271Hs  2004 248Cm(26Mg,3n) 
 272Hs , SF ? unknown  
 273Hs  2004 285Fl(,3) 
 274Hs , SF ? unknown  
 275Hs  2003 287Fl(,3) 
 276Hs , SF ? unknown  
 277Hs  2009 289Fl(,3) Element 114  Heaviest Element at GSI Observed at TASCA 
 277mHs ?  1999 289Fl(,3) 

Hassium has no stable or naturally-occurring isotopes. Several radioactive isotopes have been synthesized in the laboratory, either by fusing two atoms or by observing the decay of heavier elements. Twelve different isotopes have been reported with atomic masses from 263 to 277 (with the exceptions of 272, 274, and 276), four of which, hassium-265, hassium-267, hassium-269, and hassium-277, have known metastable states (although that of hassium-277 is unconfirmed). Most of these decay predominantly through alpha decay, but some also undergo spontaneous fission. 

The lighter isotopes usually have shorter half-lives; half-lives of under 1 ms for 263Hs, 264Hs, and 265mHs were observed. 265Hs and 266Hs are more stable at around 2 ms, 267Hs has a half-life of about 50 ms, 267mHs, 268Hs, 273Hs, and 275Hs live between 0.1 and 1 second, and 269Hs, 269mHs, 270Hs, 271Hs, and 277Hs are more stable, at between 1 and 30 seconds. The unconfirmed 277mHs may have a half-life of about 11 minutes. The unknown isotopes 272Hs, 274Hs, and 276Hs are predicted to have longer half-lives of around 40 seconds, 1 minute and 1 hour respectively. Before its discovery, 271Hs was also predicted to have a long half-life of 40 seconds, but it was found to have a shorter half-life of only about 4 seconds. 

The lightest isotopes were synthesized by direct fusion between two lighter nuclei and as decay products. The heaviest isotope produced by direct fusion is 271Hs; heavier isotopes have only been observed as decay products of elements with larger atomic numbers. In 1999, American scientists at the University of California, Berkeley, announced that they had succeeded in synthesizing three atoms of 293118. These parent nuclei were reported to have successively emitted three alpha particles to form hassium-273 nuclei, which were claimed to have undergone an alpha decay, emitting alpha particles with decay energies of 9.78 and 9.47 MeV and half-life 1.2 s, but their claim was retracted in 2001. The isotope, however, was produced in 2010 by the same team. The new data matched the previous (fabricated) At Lawrence Berkeley, Physicists Say a Colleague Took Them for a Ride George Johnson, The New York Times, 15 October 2002 data. 

===270Hs: prospects for a deformed doubly magic nucleus===
According to calculations, 108 is a proton magic number for deformed nuclei (nuclei that are far from spherical), and 162 is a neutron magic number for deformed nuclei. This means that such nuclei are permanently deformed in their ground state but have high, narrow fission barriers to further deformation and hence relatively long life-times to spontaneous fission. The spontaneous fission half-lives in this region are typically reduced by a factor of 109 in comparison with those in the vicinity of the spherical doubly magic nucleus 298Fl, caused by the narrower fission barrier for such deformed nuclei. Hence, the nucleus 270Hs has promise as a deformed doubly magic nucleus. Experimental data from the decay of the darmstadtium (Z=110) isotopes 271Ds and 273Ds provides strong evidence for the magic nature of the N=162 sub-shell. The recent synthesis of 269Hs, 270Hs, and 271Hs also fully support the assignment of N=162 as a magic number. In particular, the low decay energy for 270Hs is in complete agreement with calculations. 

Evidence for the magicity of the Z=108 proton shell can be obtained from two sources:
# the variation in the partial spontaneous fission half-lives for isotones
# the large gap in the alpha Q value for isotonic nuclei of hassium and darmstadtium. 

For spontaneous fission, it is necessary to measure the half-lives for the isotonic nuclei 268Sg, 270Hs and 272Ds. Since the isotopes 268Sg and 272Ds are not currently known, and fission of 270Hs has not been measured, this method cannot be used to date to confirm the stabilizing nature of the Z=108 shell. However, good evidence for the magicity of the Z=108 shell can be deemed from the large differences in the alpha decay energies measured for 270Hs, 271Ds and 273Ds. More conclusive evidence would come from the determination of the decay energy for the unknown nucleus 272Ds. 

==Predicted properties==
Various calculations show that hassium should be the heaviest known group 8 element, consistent with the periodic law. Its properties should generally match those expected for a heavier homologue of osmium, with a few deviations arising from relativistic effects.

===Physical and atomic===
The previous members of group 8 have relatively high melting points (Fe, 1538 C; Ru, 2334 C; Os, 3033 C). Much like them, hassium is predicted to be a solid at room temperature, although the melting point of hassium has not been precisely calculated. Hassium should crystallize in the hexagonal close-packed structure (c/a = 1.59), similarly to its lighter congener osmium. Pure metallic hassium is calculated to have a bulk modulus (resistance to uniform compression) comparable to that of diamond (442 GPa). Hassium is expected to have a bulk density of 40.7 g/cm3, the highest of any of the 118 known elements and nearly twice the density of osmium, the most dense measured element, at 22.61 g/cm3. J.A. Dean (ed), Lange's Handbook of Chemistry (15th Edition), McGraw-Hill, 1999; Section 3; Table 3.2 Physical Constants of Inorganic Compounds This results from hassium's high atomic weight, the lanthanide and actinide contractions, and relativistic effects, although production of enough hassium to measure this quantity would be impractical, and the sample would quickly decay. Osmium is the densest element of the first 6 periods, and its heavier congener hassium is expected to be the densest element of the first 7 periods. 

The atomic radius of hassium is expected to be around 126 pm. Due to the relativistic stabilization of the 7s orbital and destabilization of the 6d orbital, the Hs+ ion is predicted to have an electron configuration of 5f14 6d5 7s2, giving up a 6d electron instead of a 7s electron, which is the opposite of the behavior of its lighter homologues. On the other hand, the Hs2+ ion is expected to have an electron configuration of 5f14 6d5 7s1, analogous to that calculated for the Os2+ ion. 

===Chemical===

+Stable oxidation states of the group 8 elements , pp. 2728. Element Stable oxidation states 
 iron +6 +3 +2 
 ruthenium +8 +6 +5 +4 +3 +2 
 osmium +8 +5 +4 +3 +2 

Hassium is the sixth member of the 6d series of transition metals and is expected to be much like the platinum group metals. Calculations on its ionization potentials, atomic radius, as well as radii, orbital energies, and ground levels of its ionized states are similar to that of osmium, implying that hassium's properties would resemble those of the other group 8 elements, iron, ruthenium, and osmium. Element 108, hassium, Hs Some of these properties were confirmed by gas-phase chemistry experiments. The group 8 elements portray a wide variety of oxidation states, but ruthenium and osmium readily portray their group oxidation state of +8 (the highest known oxidation state for any element, which is very rare for other elements) and this state becomes more stable as the group is descended. Thus hassium is expected to form a stable +8 state. Analogously to its lighter congeners, hassium is expected to also show other stable lower oxidation states, such as +6, +5, +4, +3, and +2. 

The group 8 elements show a very distinctive oxide chemistry which allows extrapolations to be made easily for hassium. All the lighter members have known or hypothetical tetroxides, MO4. Their oxidising power decreases as one descends the group. FeO4 is not known due to its extraordinarily large electron affinity (the amount of energy released when an electron is added to a neutral atom or molecule to form a negative ion) which results in the formation of the well-known oxoanion ferrate(VI), . Ruthenium tetroxide, RuO4, formed by oxidation of ruthenium(VI) in acid, readily undergoes reduction to ruthenate(VI), . Oxidation of ruthenium metal in air forms the dioxide, RuO2. G.M. Brown & J.H. Butler (1997) New method for the characterization of domain morphology of polymer blends using ruthenium tetroxide staining and low voltage scanning electron microscopy (LVSEM). Polymer 38, (15), 39373945. In contrast, osmium burns to form the stable tetroxide, OsO4, which complexes with the hydroxide ion to form an osmium(VIII) -ate complex, 2. Therefore, eka-osmium properties for hassium should be demonstrated by the formation of a stable, very volatile tetroxide HsO4, which undergoes complexation with hydroxide to form a hassate(VIII), 2. Ruthenium tetroxide and osmium tetroxide are both volatile, due to their symmetrical tetrahedral molecular geometry and their being charge-neutral; hassium tetroxide should similarly be a very volatile solid. The trend of the volatilities of the group 8 tetroxides is expected to be RuO4 < OsO4  HsO4, based on the calculated enthalpies of adsorption (the energy required for the adhesion of atoms, molecules, or ions from a gas, liquid, or dissolved solid to a surface) for the three compounds; this trend remains the same whether or not relativistic effects are taken into account. 

==Experimental atomic gas phase chemistry==
Despite the fact that the selection of a volatile hassium compound (hassium tetroxide) for gas-phase chemical studies was clear from the beginning, the chemical characterization of hassium was considered a difficult task for a long time. Although hassium isotopes were first synthesized in 1984, it was not until 1996 that a hassium isotope long-lived enough to allow chemical studies to be performed was synthesized. Unfortunately, this hassium isotope, 269Hs, was then synthesized indirectly from the decay of 277Cn; not only are indirect synthesis methods not favourable for chemical studies, but also the reaction that produced the isotope 277Cn had a low yield (its cross-section was only 1 pb), and thus did not provide enough hassium atoms for a chemical investigation. The direct synthesis of 269Hs and 270Hs in the reaction 248Cm(26Mg,xn)274xHs (x = 4 or 5) appeared more promising, as the cross-section for this reaction was somewhat larger, at 7 pm. However, this yield was still around an order of magnitude lower than that for the reaction used for the chemical characterization of bohrium. New techniques for irradiation, separation, and detection had to be introduced before hassium could be successfully characterized chemically as a typical member of group 8 in early 2001. 

Ruthenium and osmium have very similar chemistry due to the lanthanide contraction, but iron shows some differences from them: for example, although ruthenium and osmium form stable tetroxides in which the metal is in the +8 oxidation state, iron does not. Consequently, in preparation for the chemical characterization of hassium, researches focused on ruthenium and osmium rather than iron, as hassium was expected to also be similar to ruthenium and osmium due to the actinide contraction. However, in the planned experiment to study hassocene (Hs(C5H5)2), ferrocene may also be used for comparison along with ruthenocene and osmocene. 

Schematic diagram of the IVO-COLD system, which was used to study the gas-phase properties of hassium tetroxide (HsO4) and its lighter homologues ruthenium tetroxide (RuO4) and osmium tetroxide (OsO4). 

The first chemistry experiments were performed using gas thermochromatography in 2001, using 172Os and 173Os as a reference. During the experiment, 5 hassium atoms were synthesized using the reaction 248Cm(26Mg,5n)269Hs. They were then thermalized and oxidized in a mixture of helium and oxygen gas to form the tetroxide.

:269Hs + 2 O2  269HsO4

The measured deposition temperature indicated that hassium(VIII) oxide is less volatile than osmium tetroxide, OsO4, and places hassium firmly in group 8. However, the enthalpy of adsorption for HsO4 measured, (46  2) kJ/mol, was significantly lower than what was predicted, (36.7  1.5) kJ/mol, indicating that OsO4 was more volatile than HsO4, contradicting earlier calculations, which implied that they should have very similar volatilities. For comparison, the value for OsO4 is (39  1) kJ/mol. It is possible that hassium tetroxide interacts differently with the different chemicals (silicon nitride and silicon dioxide) used for the detector; further research is required, including more accurate measurements of the nuclear properties of 269Hs and comparisons with RuO4 in addition to OsO4. 

In order to further probe the chemistry of hassium, scientists decided to assess the reaction between hassium tetroxide and sodium hydroxide to form sodium hassate(VIII), a reaction well-known with osmium. In 2004, scientists announced that they had succeeded in carrying out the first acid-base reaction with a hassium compound, forming sodium hassate(VIII): CALLISTO result 

: + 2 NaOH  

The team from the University of Mainz are planning to study the electrodeposition of hassium atoms using the new TASCA facility at the GSI. The current aim is to use the reaction 226Ra(48Ca,4n)270Hs. Electrodeposition experiments with hassium, J. Even et al., TASCA 08, 7th Workshop on Recoil Separator for Superheavy Element Chemistry October 31, 2008, GSI, Darmstadt, Germany In addition, scientists at the GSI are hoping to utilize TASCA to study the synthesis and properties of the hassium(II) compound hassocene, Hs(C5H5)2, using the reaction 226Ra(48Ca,xn). This compound is analogous to the lighter ferrocene, ruthenocene, and osmocene, and is expected to have the two cyclopentadienyl rings in an eclipsed conformation like ruthenocene and osmocene and not in a staggered conformation like ferrocene. Hassocene was chosen because it has hassium in the low formal oxidation state of +2 (although the bonding between the metal and the rings is mostly covalent in metallocenes) rather than the high +8 state which has been investigated, and relativistic effects were expected to be stronger in the lower oxidation state. Many metals in the periodic table form metallocenes, so that trends could be more easily determined, and the highly symmetric structure of hassocene and its low number of atoms also make relativistic calculations easier. Hassocene should be a stable and highly volatile compound. 

==References==

==External links==
* Hassium Becomes Heaviest Element To Have Its Chemistry Studied: Paul Preuss, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 5 June 2001.
* Hassium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* WebElements.com: Hassium



[[Henry Kissinger]]

Henry Alfred Kissinger (; born Heinz Alfred Kissinger ; May 27, 1923) is an American diplomat and political scientist. A recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (shared with Le Duc Tho, who refused the prize), he served as National Security Advisor and later concurrently as Secretary of State in the administrations of Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. After his term, his opinion was still sought by some subsequent U.S. presidents and other world leaders.

A proponent of Realpolitik, Kissinger played a prominent role in United States foreign policy between 1969 and 1977. During this period, he pioneered the policy of dtente with the Soviet Union, orchestrated the opening of relations with the People's Republic of China, and negotiated the Paris Peace Accords, ending American involvement in the Vietnam War.

Kissinger is still considered an influential public figure. A press release issued by the 45th Munich Conference on Security Policy on February 8, 2009 declared "is voice continues to bear weight and authority throughout the globe." see Munich Security Conference  February 6, 2009 Press Release He is listed among the 500 most powerful people in the world by Foreign Policy. He is the founder and chairman of Kissinger Associates, an international consulting firm.

==Early life and education==
Kissinger was born Heinz Alfred Kissinger in Frth, Bavaria, Germany, in 1923 during the Weimar Republic, to a family of German Jews. Isaacson, pp 20. His father, Louis Kissinger (18871982), was a schoolteacher. His mother, Paula (Stern) Kissinger (19011998), was a homemaker. Kissinger has a younger brother, Walter Kissinger. The surname Kissinger was adopted in 1817 by his great-great-grandfather Meyer Lb, after the Bavarian spa town of Bad Kissingen. As a youth, Heinz enjoyed playing soccer, and even played for the youth side of his favorite club and one of the nation's best clubs at the time, SpVgg Frth. In 1938, fleeing Nazi persecution, his family moved to London, England, before arriving in New York on September 5.

Kissinger spent his high school years in the Washington Heights section of upper Manhattan as part of the German Jewish immigrant community there. Although Kissinger assimilated quickly into American culture, he never lost his pronounced Frankish accent, due to childhood shyness that made him hesitant to speak. Isaacson, pp 37. Following his first year at George Washington High School, he began attending school at night and worked in a shaving brush factory during the day. 

Following high school, Kissinger enrolled in the City College of New York, studying accounting. He excelled academically as a part-time student, continuing to work while enrolled. His studies were interrupted in early 1943, when he was drafted into the U.S. Army. Isaacson, pp 38 

==Army experience==
Kissinger underwent basic training at Camp Croft in Spartanburg, South Carolina. On June 19, 1943, while stationed in South Carolina, at the age of 20 years, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. The army sent him to study engineering at Lafayette College, Pennsylvania, but the program was cancelled, and Kissinger was reassigned to the 84th Infantry Division. There, he made the acquaintance of Fritz Kraemer, a fellow immigrant from Germany who noted Kissinger's fluency in German and his intellect, and arranged for him to be assigned to the military intelligence section of the division. Kissinger saw combat with the division, and volunteered for hazardous intelligence duties during the Battle of the Bulge. Isaacson, pp 3948. 

During the American advance into Germany, Kissinger, only a private, was put in charge of the administration of the city of Krefeld, owing to a lack of German speakers on the division's intelligence staff. Within eight days he had established a civilian administration. Isaacson, pp 48 Kissinger was then reassigned to the Counter Intelligence Corps, with the rank of sergeant. He was given charge of a team in Hanover assigned to tracking down Gestapo officers and other saboteurs, for which he was awarded the Bronze Star. Isaacson, pp 49 In June 1945, Kissinger was made commandant of the Bensheim metro CIC detachment, Bergstrasse district of Hesse, with responsibility for de-Nazification of the district. Although he possessed absolute authority and powers of arrest, Kissinger took care to avoid abuses against the local population by his command. Isaacson, pp 53 

In 1946, Kissinger was reassigned to teach at the European Command Intelligence School at Camp King, continuing to serve in this role as a civilian employee following his separation from the army. Isaacson, pp 55. 

==Academic career==
Henry Kissinger received his AB degree summa cum laude in political science at Harvard College in 1950, where he lived in Adams House and studied under William Yandell Elliott. He received his MA and PhD degrees at Harvard University in 1952 and 1954, respectively. In 1952, while still at Harvard, he served as a consultant to the director of the Psychological Strategy Board. His doctoral dissertation was titled "Peace, Legitimacy, and the Equilibrium (A Study of the Statesmanship of Castlereagh and Metternich)".

Kissinger remained at Harvard as a member of the faculty in the Department of Government and, with Robert R. Bowie, co-founded the Center for International Affairs in 1958. In 1955, he was a consultant to the National Security Council's Operations Coordinating Board. During 1955 and 1956, he was also study director in nuclear weapons and foreign policy at the Council on Foreign Relations. He released his book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy the following year. From 1956 to 1958 he worked for the Rockefeller Brothers Fund as director of its Special Studies Project. He was director of the Harvard Defense Studies Program between 1958 and 1971. He was also director of the Harvard International Seminar between 1951 and 1971. Outside of academia, he served as a consultant to several government agencies, including the Operations Research Office, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and the Department of State, and the Rand Corporation, a think-tank. 

Keen to have a greater influence on U.S. foreign policy, Kissinger became a supporter of, and advisor to, Nelson Rockefeller, Governor of New York, who sought the Republican nomination for president in 1960, 1964 and 1968. Rothbard, Murray, Why the War? The Kuwait Connection (May 1991) After Richard Nixon won the presidency in 1968, he made Kissinger National Security Advisor.

==Foreign policy==
Kissinger being sworn in as Secretary of State by Chief Justice Warren Burger, September 22, 1973. Kissinger's mother, Paula, holds the Bible upon which he was sworn in while President Nixon looks on.

Kissinger served as National Security Advisor and Secretary of State under President Richard Nixon, and continued as Secretary of State under Nixon's successor Gerald Ford. 

A proponent of Realpolitik, Kissinger played a dominant role in United States foreign policy between 1969 and 1977. In that period, he extended the policy of dtente. This policy led to a significant relaxation in U.S.-Soviet tensions and played a crucial role in 1971 talks with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. The talks concluded with a rapprochement between the United States and the People's Republic of China, and the formation of a new strategic anti-Soviet Sino-American alignment. He was awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for helping to establish a ceasefire and U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. The ceasefire, however, was not durable. As National Security Advisor, in 1974 Kissinger directed the much-debated National Security Study Memorandum 200.

===Dtente and the opening to China===

As National Security Advisor under Nixon, Kissinger pioneered the policy of dtente with the Soviet Union, seeking a relaxation in tensions between the two superpowers. As a part of this strategy, he negotiated the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (culminating in the SALT I treaty) and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. Negotiations about strategic disarmament were originally supposed to start under the Johnson Administration but were postponed in protest to the invasion by Warsaw Pact troops of Czechoslovakia in August 1968.
Kissinger, shown here with Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong, negotiated rapprochement with the People's Republic of China.
Kissinger sought to place diplomatic pressure on the Soviet Union. He made two trips to the People's Republic of China in July and October 1971 (the first of which was made in secret) to confer with Premier Zhou Enlai, then in charge of Chinese foreign policy. The USC U.S.-China Institute has collected documents relating to the diplomatic efforts between 1969 and 1971 that led to this successful trip. According to Kissinger's book, "The White House Years", the first secret China trip was arranged through Pakistan's diplomatic and Presidential involvement that paved the way to initial vital contact with the Chinese, since the Americans were unable to communicate directly with the Chinese leaders because of earlier cold relations.

This paved the way for the groundbreaking 1972 summit between Nixon, Zhou, and Communist Party of China Chairman Mao Zedong, as well as the formalization of relations between the two countries, ending 23 years of diplomatic isolation and mutual hostility. The result was the formation of a tacit strategic anti-Soviet alliance between China and the United States.

While Kissinger's diplomacy led to economic and cultural exchanges between the two sides and the establishment of Liaison Offices in the Chinese and American capitals, with serious implications for Indochinese matters, full normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China would not occur until 1979, because the Watergate scandal overshadowed the latter years of the Nixon presidency and because the United States continued to recognize the government of Taiwan.

===Vietnam War===

Kissinger's involvement in Indochina started prior to his appointment as National Security Adviser to Nixon. While still at Harvard, he had worked as a consultant on foreign policy to both the White House and State Department. Kissinger says that "In August 1965... [Henry Cabot Lodge], an old friend serving as Ambassador to Saigon, had asked me to visit Vietnam as his consultant. I toured Vietnam first for two weeks in October and November 1965, again for about ten days in July 1966, and a third time for a few days in October 1966... Lodge gave me a free hand to look into any subject of my choice". He became convinced of the meaninglessness of military victories in Vietnam, "...unless they brought about a political reality that could survive our ultimate withdrawal". In a 1967 peace initiative, he would mediate between Washington and Hanoi.

Nixon had been elected in 1968 on the promise of achieving "peace with honor" and ending the Vietnam War. In office, and assisted by Kissinger, Nixon implemented a policy of Vietnamization that aimed to gradually withdraw U.S. troops while expanding the combat role of the South Vietnamese Army so that it would be capable of independently defending its government against the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam, a Communist guerrilla organization, and North Vietnamese army (Vietnam People's Army or PAVN). Kissinger played a key role in secretly bombing Cambodia to disrupt PAVN and Viet Cong units launching raids into South Vietnam from within Cambodia's borders and resupplying their forces by using the Ho Chi Minh trail and other routes, as well as the 1970 Cambodian Incursion and subsequent widespread bombing of suspected Khmer Rouge targets in Cambodia. The bombing campaign contributed to the chaos of the Cambodian Civil War, which saw the forces of U.S.-backed leader Lon Nol unable to retain foreign support to combat the growing Khmer Rouge insurgency that would overthrow him in 1975. Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the North Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot's then second in command, Nuon Chea. Dmitry Mosyakov, "The Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese Communists: A History of Their Relations as Told in the Soviet Archives", in Susan E. Cook, ed., Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda (Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series No. 1, 2004), p54ff. Available online at: www.yale.edu/gsp/publications/Mosyakov.doc "In AprilMay 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam not by Pol Pot, but by his deputy Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: "Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days." The American bombing of Cambodia killed an estimated 40,000 Cambodian combatants and civilians. Marek Sliwinski, Le Gnocide Khmer Rouge: Une Analyse Dmographique (LHarmattan, 1995), pp41-8. Pol Pot biographer David P. Chandler argues that the bombing "had the effect the Americans wanted  it broke the Communist encirclement of Phnom Penh." Chandler, David 2000, Brother Number One: A Political Biography of Pol Pot, Revised Edition, Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books, pp. 967. 

Along with North Vietnamese Politburo Member Le Duc Tho, Kissinger was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on December 10, 1973, for their work in negotiating the ceasefires contained in the Paris Peace Accords on "Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam," signed the January previous. Tho rejected the award, telling Kissinger that peace had not been really restored in South Vietnam. Le Duc Tho to Henry Kissinger, October 27, 1973. Kissinger wrote to the Nobel Committee that he accepted the award "with humility." 
 The conflict continued until an invasion of the South by the North Vietnamese Army resulted in a North Vietnamese victory in 1975 and the subsequent progression of the Pathet Lao in Laos towards figurehead status.

===1971 IndiaPakistan War===

Aboard Air Force One, Kissinger expresses delight at being named Time magazine's "Man of the Year", along with President Richard Nixon, in 1972.

Under Kissinger's guidance, the United States government supported Pakistan in the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. Kissinger was particularly concerned about the expansion of Soviet influence in South Asia as a result of a treaty of friendship recently signed by India and the USSR, and sought to demonstrate to the People's Republic of China (Pakistan's ally and an enemy of both India and the USSR) the value of a tacit alliance with the United States. 

Kissinger later came under fire for private comments he made to Nixon during the BangladeshPakistan War in which he described Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as a "bitch" and a "witch". He also said "The Indians are bastards," shortly before the war. He also sneered at people who bleed for the dying Bengalis and ignored detailed reporting about the killing from Archer K. Blood, the then United States consul general in East Pakistan. Kissinger has since expressed his regret over the comments. 

===Israeli policy and Soviet Jewry===
According to notes taken by H. R. Haldeman, Nixon "ordered his aides to exclude all Jewish-Americans from policy-making on Israel", including Kissinger. Chait, Jonathan (December 10, 2010) Nixon Disallowed Jewish Advisors From Discussing Israel Policy, The New Republic One note quotes Nixon as saying "get K. out of the playHaig handle it". 

In 1973, Kissinger did not feel that pressing the Soviet Union concerning the plight of Jews being persecuted there was in the interest of U.S. foreign policy. In conversation with Nixon shortly after a meeting with Golda Meir on March 1, 1973, Kissinger stated, "The emigration of Jews from the Soviet Union is not an objective of American foreign policy, and if they put Jews into gas chambers in the Soviet Union, it is not an American concern. Maybe a humanitarian concern." Kissinger argued, however:

That emigration existed at all was due to the actions of "realists" in the White House. Jewish emigration rose from 700 a year in 1969 to near 40,000 in 1972. The total in Nixon's first term was more than 100,000. To maintain this flow by quiet diplomacy, we never used these figures for political purposes. ... The issue became public because of the success of our Middle East policy when Egypt evicted Soviet advisers. To restore its relations with Cairo, the Soviet Union put a tax on Jewish emigration. There was no JacksonVanik Amendment until there was a successful emigration effort. Sen. Henry Jackson, for whom I had, and continue to have, high regard, sought to remove the tax with his amendment. We thought the continuation of our previous approach of quiet diplomacy was the wiser course. ... Events proved our judgment correct. Jewish emigration fell to about a third of its previous high. Kissinger, Henry. "Putting The Nixon Tape In Context". The Washington Post. December 26, 2010. 

====1973 Yom Kippur War====
Documents show that Kissinger delayed telling President Richard Nixon about the start of the Yom Kippur War in 1973 to keep him from interfering. On October 6, 1973, the Israelis informed Kissinger about the attack at 6 am; Kissinger waited nearly 3 and a half hours before he informed Nixon. 

On October 31, 1973, Egyptian Foreign Minister Ismail Fahmi (left) meets with Richard Nixon (middle) and Henry Kissinger (right), about a week after the end of fighting in the Yom Kippur War.

According to Kissinger, in an interview in November 2013, he was notified at 6:30 a.m. (12:30 p.m. Israel time) that war was imminent, and his urgent calls to the Soviets and Egyptians were ineffective. He says Golda Meir's decision not to preempt was wise and reasonable, balancing the risk of Israel looking like the aggressor and Israel's actual ability to strike within such a brief span of time. 

The war began on October 6, 1973, when Egypt and Syria attacked Israel. Kissinger published lengthy telephone transcripts from this period in the 2002 book Crisis. On October 12, under Nixon's direction, and against Kissinger's initial advice, while Kissinger was on his way to Moscow to discuss conditions for a cease-fire, Nixon sent a message to Brezhnev giving Kissinger full negotiating authority. 

Israel regained the territory it lost in the early fighting and gained new territories from Syria and Egypt, including land in Syria east of the previously captured Golan Heights, and additionally on the western bank of the Suez Canal, although they did lose some territory on the eastern side of the Suez Canal that had been in Israeli hands since the end of the Six Day War. Kissinger pressured the Israelis to cede some of the newly captured land back to its Arab neighbors, contributing to the first phases of Israeli-Egyptian non-aggression. The move saw a warming in U.S.Egyptian relations, bitter since the 1950s, as the country moved away from its former independent stance and into a close partnership with the United States. The peace was finalized in 1978 when U.S. President Jimmy Carter mediated the Camp David Accords, during which Israel returned the Sinai Peninsula in exchange for an Egyptian peace agreement that included the recognition of the state of Israel.

===Latin American policy===

Ford and Kissinger conversing on grounds of the White House, August 1974
The United States continued to recognize and maintain relationships with non-left-wing governments, democratic and authoritarian alike. John F. Kennedy's Alliance for Progress was ended in 1973. In 1974, negotiations about new settlement over Panama Canal started. They eventually led to the Torrijos-Carter Treaties and handing the Canal over to Panamanian control.

Kissinger initially supported the normalization of United States-Cuba relations, broken since 1961 (all U.S.Cuban trade was blocked in February 1962, a few weeks after the exclusion of Cuba from the Organization of American States because of U.S. pressure). However, he quickly changed his mind and followed Kennedy's policy. After the involvement of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces in the liberation struggles in Angola and Mozambique, Kissinger said that unless Cuba withdrew its forces relations would not be normalized. Cuba refused.

====Intervention in Chile====

Chilean Socialist Party presidential candidate Salvador Allende was elected by a plurality in 1970, causing serious concern in Washington, D.C. due to his openly socialist and pro-Cuban politics. The Nixon administration, with Kissinger's input, authorized the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to encourage a military coup that would prevent Allende's inauguration, but the plan was not successful. Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders (1975), Church Committee, pages 246247 and 250254. 
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet shaking hands with Kissinger in 1976

United States-Chile relations remained frosty during Salvador Allende's tenure, following the complete nationalization of the partially U.S.-owned copper mines and the Chilean subsidiary of the U.S.-based ITT Corporation, as well as other Chilean businesses. The U.S. claimed that the Chilean government had greatly undervalued fair compensation for the nationalization by subtracting what it deemed "excess profits". Therefore, the U.S. implemented economic sanctions against Chile. The CIA also provided funding for the mass anti-government strikes in 1972 and 1973, and extensive black propaganda in the newspaper El Mercurio. 

The most expeditious way to prevent Allende from assuming office was somehow to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election. Once elected by the congress, Alessandria party to the plot through intermediarieswas prepared to resign his presidency within a matter of days so that new elections could be held. This first, nonmilitary, approach to stopping Allende was called the Track I approach. The CIA's second approach, the Track II approach, was designed to encourage a military overthrow. 

On September 11, 1973, Allende died during a military coup launched by Army Commander-in-Chief Augusto Pinochet, who became President. 
A document released by the CIA in 2000 titled "CIA Activities in Chile" revealed that the United States, acting through the CIA, actively supported the military junta after the overthrow of Allende and that it made many of Pinochet's officers into paid contacts of the CIA or U.S. military. Peter Kornbluh, CIA Acknowledges Ties to Pinochets Repression Report to Congress Reveals U.S. Accountability in Chile, Chile Documentation Project, National Security Archive, September 19, 2000. Retrieved November 26, 2006. 

In 1976, Orlando Letelier, a Chilean opponent of the Pinochet regime, was assassinated in Washington, D.C. with a car bomb. Previously, Kissinger had helped secure his release from prison, but had chosen to cancel a letter to Chile warning them against carrying out any political assassinations. The U.S. ambassador to Chile, David H. Popper, said that Pinochet might take as an insult any inference that he was connected with assassination plots. 

====Argentina====
Kissinger took a similar line as he had toward Chile when the Argentinian military, led by Jorge Videla, toppled the elected government of Isabel Pern in 1976 with a process called the National Reorganization Process by the military, with which they consolidated power, launching brutal reprisals and "disappearances" against political opponents. During a meeting with Argentinian foreign minister Csar Augusto Guzzetti, Kissinger assured him that the United States was an ally, but urged him to "get back to normal procedures" quickly before the U.S. Congress reconvened and had a chance to consider sanctions. "Kissinger to the Argentine Generals in 1976: 'If There Are Things That Have To Be Done, You Should Do Them Quickly. Gwu.edu. Retrieved on November 25, 2011. 

=== Africa ===
In September 1976 Kissinger was actively involved in negotiations regarding the Rhodesian Bush War. Kissinger, along with South Africa's Prime Minister John Vorster, pressured Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith to hasten the transition to black majority rule in Rhodesia. With FRELIMO in control of Mozambique and even South Africa withdrawing its support, Rhodesia's isolation was nearly complete. According to Smith's autobiography, Kissinger told Smith of Mrs. Kissinger's admiration for him, but Smith stated that he thought Kissinger was asking him to sign Rhodesia's "death certificate". Kissinger, bringing the weight of the United States, and corralling other relevant parties to put pressure on Rhodesia, hastened the end of minority-rule. 

===East Timor===

The Portuguese decolonization process brought U.S. attention to the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, which lies within the Indonesian archipelago and declared its independence in 1975. Indonesian president Suharto was a strong U.S. ally in Southeast Asia and began to mobilize the Indonesian army, preparing to annex the nascent state, which had become increasingly dominated by the popular leftist FRETILIN party. In December 1975, Suharto discussed the invasion plans during a meeting with Kissinger and President Ford in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta. Both Ford and Kissinger made clear that U.S. relations with Indonesia would remain strong and that it would not object to the proposed annexation. They only wanted it done "fast" and proposed to delay the invasion until they had returned to Washington. Agence France Press, "US Endorsed Indonesia's East Timor Invasion: Secret Documents", December 6, 2001 Accordingly Suharto delayed the operation for one day. Finally on December 7 Indonesian forces invaded the former Portuguese colony. U.S. arms sales to Indonesia continued, and Suharto went ahead with the annexation plan.

==Later roles==
Kissinger meeting with President Ronald Reagan in the White House family quarters, 1981

Kissinger left office when a Democrat, former Governor of Georgia Jimmy Carter, defeated Republican Gerald Ford in the 1976 presidential elections. Kissinger continued to participate in policy groups, such as the Trilateral Commission, and to maintain political consulting, speaking, and writing engagements.

Shortly after Kissinger left office in 1977, he was offered an endowed chair at Columbia University. There was significant student opposition to the appointment, which eventually became a subject of wide media commentary. Columbia cancelled the appointment as a result.

Kissinger was then appointed to Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies. He taught at Georgetown's Edmund Walsh School of Foreign Service for several years in the late 1970s. In 1982, with the help of a loan from the international banking firm of E.M. Warburg, Pincus and Company, Kissinger founded a consulting firm, Kissinger Associates, and is a partner in affiliate Kissinger McLarty Associates with Mack McLarty, former chief of staff to President Bill Clinton. He also serves on board of directors of Hollinger International, a Chicago-based newspaper group, and as of March 1999, he also serves on the board of directors of Gulfstream Aerospace. 

In 1978, Kissinger was named chairman of the North American Soccer League board of directors. From 1995 to 2001, he served on the board of directors for Freeport-McMoRan, a multinational copper and gold producer with significant mining and milling operations in Papua, Indonesia. In February 2000, then-president of Indonesia Abdurrahman Wahid appointed Kissinger as a political advisor. He also serves as an honorary advisor to the United States-Azerbaijan Chamber of Commerce.

From 20002006, Kissinger served as chairman of the board of trustees of Eisenhower Fellowships. In 2006, upon his departure from Eisenhower Fellowships, he received the Dwight D. Eisenhower Medal for Leadership and Service. 

In November 2002, he was appointed by President George W. Bush to chair the newly established National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States to investigate the September 11 attacks. Kissinger stepped down as chairman on December 13, 2002 rather than reveal his business client list, when queried about potential conflicts of interest. 

===Role in U.S. foreign policy===

====Yugoslav wars====
In several articles of his and interviews that he gave during the Yugoslav wars, he criticized the United States' policies in Southeast Europe, among other things for the recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign state, which he described as a foolish act. Most importantly he dismissed the notion of Serbs, and Croats for that part, being aggressors or separatist, saying that "they can't be separating from something that has never existed". 
In addition, he repeatedly warned the West of inserting itself into a conflict that has its roots at least hundreds of years back in time, and said that the West would do better if it allowed the Serbs and Croats to join their respective countries. 
Kissinger shared similarly critical views on Western involvement in Kosovo. In particular, he held a disparaging view of the Rambouillet Agreement:

However, as the Serbs did not accept the Rambouillet text and NATO bombings started, he opted for a continuation of the bombing as NATO's credibility was now at stake, but dismissed the usage of ground forces, claiming that it was not worth it. 

====Iraq====
Kissinger speaking during Gerald Ford's funeral in January 2007
In 2006, it was reported in the book of Denial: Bush at War, Part III|State of Denial] by Bob Woodward that Kissinger was meeting regularly with President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney to offer advice on the Iraq War. Kissinger confirmed in recorded interviews with Woodward that the advice was the same as he had given in an August 12, 2005 column in The Washington Post: "Victory over the insurgency is the only meaningful exit strategy." 

In a November 19, 2006, interview on BBC Sunday AM, Kissinger said, when asked whether there is any hope left for a clear military victory in Iraq, "If you mean by 'military victory' an Iraqi government that can be established and whose writ runs across the whole country, that gets the civil war under control and sectarian violence under control in a time period that the political processes of the democracies will support, I don't believe that is possible. ... I think we have to redefine the course. But I don't believe that the alternative is between military victory as it had been defined previously, or total withdrawal." 

In an April 3, 2008, interview with Peter Robinson of the Hoover Institution, Kissinger re-iterated that even though he supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq he thought that the Bush administration rested too much of the case for war on Saddam's supposed weapons of mass destruction. Robinson noted that Kissinger had criticized the administration for invading with too few troops, for disbanding the Iraqi Army, and for mishandling relations with certain allies. Kissinger on War & More. Uncommon Knowledge. Filmed on April 3, 2008. Retrieved August 10, 2009. 

====India====
Kissinger said in April 2008 that "India has parallel objectives to the United States" and he called it an ally of the U.S. 

====China====
Kissinger was present at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summer Olympics. He was also in the Chinese capital to attend the inauguration of the new U.S. Embassy complex.

In 2011, Kissinger published On China, chronicling the evolution of Sino-American relations and laying out the challenges to a partnership of 'genuine strategic trust' between the U.S. and China. 

====Iran====
Kissinger's position on this issue of U.S.Iran talks was reported by the Tehran Times to be that "Any direct talks between the U.S. and Iran on issues such as the nuclear dispute would be most likely to succeed if they first involved only diplomatic staff and progressed to the level of secretary of state before the heads of state meet." (Transcript of a Bloomberg reportinterview.) 

===2014 Ukrainian crisis===

On 5 March 2014, before the 16 March referendum in Crimea, the Washington Post published a op-ed piece by Kissinger. washingtonpost.com: "How the Ukraine crisis ends" 5 Mar 2014 In it, he attempted to balance the Ukrainian, Russian and Western desires for a functional state. He made four propositions:
# Ukraine should have the right to choose freely its economic and political associations, including with Europe;
# Ukraine should not join NATO, a repetition of the position he took seven years before;
# Ukraine should be free to create any government compatible with the expressed will of its people. Wise Ukrainian leaders would then opt for a policy of reconciliation between the various parts of their country. He imagined an international position for Ukraine like that of Finland.
# Ukraine should maintain sovereignty over Crimea.

Kissinger also wrote: "The west speaks Ukrainian; the east speaks mostly Russian. Any attempt by one wing of Ukraine to dominate the other  as has been the pattern  would lead eventually to civil war or break up." 

==Public perception==
At the height of Kissinger's prominence, many commented on his wit. In one instance, at the Washington Press Club annual congressional dinner, "Kissinger mocked his reputation as a secret swinger." "Henry Kissinger Off Duty." Time, February 7, 1972. He was quoted as saying "Power is the ultimate aphrodisiac." 

Kissinger has shied away from mainstream media and cable talk shows. He granted a rare interview to the producers of a documentary examining the underpinnings of the 1979 peace treaty between Israel and Egypt entitled . In the film, a candid Kissinger reveals how close he felt the world was to nuclear war during the 1973 Yom Kippur War launched by Egypt and Syria against Israel.

A feature length documentary titled Kissinger, by Scottish historian Niall Ferguson and produced by Chimerica Media, was released in 2011 on the National Geographic Channel.

Since he left office, some efforts have been made to hold Kissinger responsible for perceived injustices of American foreign policy during his tenure in government. These charges have at times inconvenienced his travels. "Why the law wants a word with Kissinger", Fairfax Digital, April 30, 2002 Christopher Hitchens, the late British-American journalist and author, was highly critical of Kissinger, authoring The Trial of Henry Kissinger, in which Hitchens called for the prosecution of Kissinger "for war crimes, for crimes against humanity, and for offenses against common or customary or international law, including conspiracy to commit murder, kidnap, and torture". "The latest Kissinger outrage". Slate. Retrieved November 25, 2011. "Show us the papers, Hitchens". New Statesman. Retrieved November 25, 2011. Christopher Hitchens: Latest Nixon tape buries Kissingers reputation | Full Comment | National Post. Fullcomment.nationalpost.com. Retrieved on November 25, 2011. 

==Family and personal life==
Henry and Nancy Kissinger at the Metropolitan Opera opening in 2008

Kissinger first married Ann Fleischer, with whom he had two children, Elizabeth and David. They divorced in 1964. Ten years later, he married Nancy Maginnes. They now live in Kent, Connecticut and New York City. David Kissinger was an executive with NBC Universal before becoming head of Conaco, Conan O'Brien's production company. 

Since his childhood, Kissinger has been a fan of his hometown's soccer club, SpVgg Greuther Frth. Even during his time in office he inquired after the team's results every Monday morning. He is an honorary member Der berhmteste Fan  Henry A. Kissinger kleeblatt-chronik.de. Retrieved February 25, 2012 with lifetime season tickets. In September 2012, Kissinger attended a home game in which SpVgg Greuther Frth lost, 02, against Schalke after promising years ago he would attend a Greuther Frth home game if they were promoted to the Bundesliga, the top football league in Germany, from the 2. Bundesliga. 

Kissinger described Diplomacy as his favorite game in a 1973 interview. Games & Puzzles magazine, May 1973. 

==Awards, honors and associations==
*Kissinger and Le Duc Tho were jointly awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for their work on the Paris Peace Accords which prompted the withdrawal of American forces from the Vietnam war. (Tho declined to accept because the war itself had not ended.)
*In 1973, Kissinger received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards. 
*In 1976, Kissinger became the first honorary member of the Harlem Globetrotters. 
*On January 13, 1977, Kissinger received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Gerald Ford.President Ford, General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev, and Kissinger speaking informally at the Vladivostok Summit in 1974
*In 1980, Kissinger won the National Book Award in History This was the 1980 award for hardcover History. From 1980 to 1983 there were dual hardcover and paperback awards in most categories, and multiple nonfiction subcategories. Most of the paperback award-winners were reprints, including Kissinger's. for the first volume of his memoirs, The White House Years. "National Book Awards  1980". National Book Foundation. Retrieved March 16, 2012. 
*In 1995, he was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire. Kissinger, Henry Alfred in Who's Who in the Twentieth Century, Oxford University Press, 1999 
*In 1998, his hometown of Frth granted him honorary citizenship.
*In 2000, Kissinger was awarded the Sylvanus Thayer Award at West Point. 
*In 2002, Kissinger became an honour member of the International Olympic Committee. International Olympic Committee: Mr Henry Kissinger. Retrieved February 20, 2014. 
*In 2005, Kissinger was awarded a Gold Medal at the annual Queen Sofia Spanish Institute Gold Medal Gala.
*In April 2006, he received the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service from the Woodrow Wilson Center of the Smithsonian Institution.
*In June 2007, Kissinger received an award from the HopkinsNanjing Center for his contributions to reestablishing SinoAmerican relations.
*In September 2007, he was honored as co-Grand Marshal of the German-American Steuben Parade in New York City, celebrated by tens of thousands of spectators on Fifth Avenue. Former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, meant to share the honor, had to cancel due to health problems and was represented by German Ambassador Klaus Scharioth.
*Kissinger was the first recipient of the Munich Conference on Security Policy's Ewald von Kleist Award.
*In June 2011, the American Council on Germany gave Kissinger a McCloy Lifetime Achievement Award for his contribution to transatlantic relations.
*On March 1, 2012, Kissinger was awarded Israel's President's Medal.
*In October 2013, Kissinger was awarded the Henry A. Grunwald Award for Public Service by Lighthouse International
*Kissinger was a member of the Founding Council of the Rothermere American Institute, University of Oxford. 
*Kissinger is also known to be a member of the following groups:
**Aspen Institute 
**Bilderberg Group 
**Bohemian Club 
**Council on Foreign Relations 
**Center for Strategic and International Studies 

==Writings: major books==

===Memoirs===
*1979. The White House Years. ISBN 0-316-49661-8 (National Book Award, History Hardcover) 
*1982. Years of Upheaval. ISBN 0-316-28591-9
*1999. Years of Renewal. ISBN 0-684-85571-2

===Public policy===
*1957. Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy. ISBN 0-86531-745-3 (1984 edition)
*1961. The Necessity for Choice: Prospects of American Foreign Policy. ISBN 0-06-012410-5
*1965. The Troubled Partnership: A Re-Appraisal of the Atlantic Alliance. ISBN 0-07-034895-2
*1969. Foreign Policy; Three Essays|American Foreign Policy: Three essays]. ISBN 0-297-17933-0
*1973. A World Restored: Metternich, Castlereagh and the Problems of Peace, 181222. ISBN 0-395-17229-2
*1981. For the Record: Selected Statements 19771980. ISBN 0-316-49663-4
*1985. Observations: Selected Speeches and Essays 19821984. ISBN 0-316-49664-2
*1994. Diplomacy. ISBN 0-671-65991-X
*1999. Kissinger Transcripts: The Top Secret Talks With Beijing and Moscow (Henry Kissinger, William Burr). ISBN 1-56584-480-7
*2001. Does America Need a Foreign Policy?: Toward a Diplomacy for the 21st century. ISBN 0-684-85567-4
*2002. Vietnam: A Personal History of America's Involvement in and Extrication from the Vietnam War. ISBN 0-7432-1916-3
*2003. Crisis: The Anatomy of Two Major Foreign Policy Crises: Based on the Record of Henry Kissinger's Hitherto Secret Telephone Conversations. ISBN 0-7432-4910-0
*2011. On China (New York: Penguin Press, 2011). ISBN 978-1-59420-271-1.

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

=== Biographies ===
*1973. Graubard, Stephen Richards, Kissinger: Portrait of a Mind. ISBN 0-393-05481-0
*1974. Kalb, Marvin L. and Kalb, Bernard, Kissinger, ISBN 0-316-48221-8
*1974. Schlafly, Phyllis, Kissinger on the Couch. Arlington House Publishers. ISBN 0-87000-216-3
*1983. Hersh, Seymour, The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House, Summit Books. ISBN 0-671-50688-9. (Awards: National Book Critics Circle, General Non-Fiction Award. Best Book of the Year: New York Times Book Review; Newsweek; San Francisco Chronicle)
*1992. Isaacson, Walter. Kissinger: A Biography. New York. Simon & Schuster (updated, 2005). ISBN 0-671-66323-2
*2004. Hanhimki, Jussi. The Flawed Architect: Henry Kissinger and American Foreign Policy. ISBN 0-19-517221-3
*2007. Kurz, Evi. Die Kissinger-Saga. ISBN 978-3-940405-70-8
*2009. Kurz, Evi. The Kissinger-Saga  Walter and Henry Kissinger. Two Brothers from Fuerth, Germany. London. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-85675-7.

=== Other ===
*Avner, Yehuda, The Prime Ministers: An Intimate Narrative of Israeli Leadership, 2010. ISBN 978-1-59264-278-6
*Bass, Gary,The Blood Telegram: Nixon, Kissinger, and a Forgotten Genocide, 2013. ISBN 0307700208
*Benedetti, Amedeo, Lezioni di politica di Henry Kissinger. Linguaggio, pensiero ed aforismi del pi abile politico di fine Novecento, Genova, Erga, 2005, ISBN 88-8163-391-4
*Berman, Larry, No peace, no honor. Nixon, Kissinger, and Betrayal in Vietnam, New York, NY u.a.: Free Press, 2001. ISBN 0-684-84968-2.
*Dallek, Robert, Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power. HarperCollins, 2007. ISBN 0-06-072230-4
*Graebner, Norman A. "Henry Kissinger and American Foreign Policy: A Contemporary Appraisal." Conspectus of History 1.2 (1975).
*Groth, Alexander J, Henry Kissinger and the Limits of Realpolitik, in: Israel Journal of Foreign Affairs V:I (2011)
*Hanhimki, Jussi M., 'Dr. Kissinger' or 'Mr. Henry'? Kissingerology, Thirty Years and Counting', in: Diplomatic History, Vol. 27, Issue 5, pp. 63776.
*Hitchens, Christopher, The Trial of Henry Kissinger, 2002. ISBN 1-85984-631-9
*Klitzing, Holger, The Nemesis of Stability. Henry A. Kissinger's Ambivalent Relationship with Germany. Trier: WVT 2007, ISBN 3-88476-942-1
* Shannon E. Mohan. "Memorandum for Mr. Bundy": Henry Kissinger as Consultant to the Kennedy National Security Council," Historian, 71,2 (2009), 234257.
*Morris, Roger, Uncertain Greatness: Henry Kissinger and American Foreign Policy. Harper and Row, ISBN 0-06-013097-0
*Schmidt, Helmut, On Men and Power: A Political Memoir.1990. ISBN 0-224-02715-8
*Schulzinger, Robert D. Henry Kissinger. Doctor of Diplomacy. New York: Columbia University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-231-06952-9
*Shawcross, William, Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon, and the Destruction of Cambodia (Revised edition October 2002) ISBN 0-8154-1224-X.
* Suri, Jeremi, Henry Kissinger and the American Century (Harvard, Belknap Press, 2007), ISBN 978-0-674-02579-0.
*Thornton, Richard C., The Nixon-Kissinger Years: Reshaping of America's Foreign Policy. 1989. ISBN 0-88702-051-8
*Tucker, Nancy Bernkopf, Taiwan Expendable? Nixon and Kissinger Go to China, 2005. ISBN 978-0-231-13565-8

==External links==

*Annotated Bibliography for Henry Kissinger from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
*Official Website of Henry A. Kissinger
*
*"Charlie Rose" A conversation with Henry Kissinger, December 16, 2008
*Henry Kissinger speaks at the Asia Society, NYC, February 2007
*Kissinger's political donations
*NPR: Kissinger Speech at National Press Club. Towards the end , he responds to Hitchens.
*Producer of 'The Kissinger-Saga, Walter and Henry Kissinger  Two Brothers from Fuerth/Germany'
*  TV: "In the wake of Kissinger's visit (1976)" (in Russian)
*Linkage and Arms Control. Interview conducted on November 26, 1986 for the War and Peace in the Nuclear Age series.
*Henry Kissinger interviewed by Mike Wallace on The Mike Wallace Interview July 13, 1958
*Uncommon Knowledge: Henry Kissinger
*Interview with CNN's Fareed Zakaria
*Kissinger talks about Vladimir Putin
*"Kissinger Speaks Out On Foreign Policy"
*Interview with Henry Kissinger from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
*"Kissinger interviewed with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton by Charlie Rose as inaugural episode of Rose's 'Conversations on Diplomacy' series"
*The Kissinger Saga. Henry and Walter: Two Brothers from Fuerth/Germany. Documentary, 90 min. (unabridged version), first time aired: Bayerischer Rundfunk (Bavarian Broadcasting Network), January 21, 2007. Summary

|-



[[Hydra (genus)]]

Hydra is a genus of small, simple, fresh-water animals that possess radial symmetry. Hydra are predatory animals belonging to the phylum Cnidaria and the class Hydrozoa. Gilberson, Lance (1999) Zoology Lab Manual, 4th edition. Primis Custom Publishing. Solomon, E., Berg, l., Martin, D. (2002) Biology 6th edition. Brooks/Cole Publishing. They can be found in most unpolluted fresh-water ponds, lakes, and streams in the temperate and tropical regions and can be found by gently sweeping a collecting net through weedy areas. They are multicellular organisms which are usually a few millimetres long and are best studied with a microscope. Biologists are especially interested in Hydra due to their regenerative ability; and that they appear not to age or to die of old age.

==Morphology==
Schematic drawing of a discharging nematocyst
Hydra has a tubular body up to 10 mm long when extended, secured by a simple adhesive foot called the basal disc. Gland cells in the basal disc secrete a sticky fluid that accounts for its adhesive properties.

At the free end of the body is a mouth opening surrounded by one to twelve thin, mobile tentacles. Each tentacle, or cnida (plural: cnidae), is clothed with highly specialised stinging cells called cnidocytes. Cnidocytes contain specialized structures called nematocysts, which look like miniature light bulbs with a coiled thread inside. At the narrow outer edge of the cnidocyte is a short trigger hair called a cnidocil. Upon contact with prey, the contents of the nematocyst are explosively discharged, firing a dart-like thread containing neurotoxins into whatever triggered the release which can paralyse the prey, especially if many hundreds of nematocysts are fired.

Hydra has two main body layers, which makes it "diploblastic". The layers are separated by mesoglea, a gel-like substance. The outer layer is the epidermis, and the inner layer is called the gastrodermis, because it lines the stomach. The cells making up these two body layers are relatively simple. Hydramacin is a bactericide recently discovered in Hydra; it protects the outer layer against infection. 

The nervous system of Hydra is a nerve net, which is structurally simple compared to mammalian nervous systems. Hydra does not have a recognizable brain or true muscles. Nerve nets connect sensory photoreceptors and touch-sensitive nerve cells located in the body wall and tentacles.

Respiration and excretion occur by diffusion everywhere through the epidermis.

==Motion and locomotion==
If Hydra are alarmed or attacked, the tentacles can be retracted to small buds, and the body column itself can be retracted to a small gelatinous sphere. Hydra generally react in the same way regardless of the direction of the stimulus, and this may be due to the simplicity of the nerve net.
Hydra showing sessile behaviour
Hydra are generally sedentary or sessile, but do occasionally move quite readily, especially when hunting. They do this by bending over and attaching themselves to the substrate with the mouth and tentacles and then release the foot, which provides the usual attachment, this process is called looping. The body then bends over and makes a new place of attachment with the foot. By this process of "looping" or "somersaulting", a Hydra can move several inches (c. 100 mm) in a day. Hydra may also move by amoeboid motion of their bases or by simply detaching from the substrate and floating away in the current.

==Reproduction and life cycle==
When food is plentiful, many Hydra reproduce asexually by producing buds in the body wall, which grow to be miniature adults and simply break away when they are mature. When conditions are harsh, often before winter or in poor feeding conditions, sexual reproduction occurs in some Hydra. Swellings in the body wall develop into either a simple ovary or testes. The testes release free-swimming gametes into the water, and these can fertilize the egg in the ovary of another individual. The fertilized eggs secrete a tough outer coating, and, as the adult dies, these resting eggs fall to the bottom of the lake or pond to await better conditions, whereupon they hatch into nymph Hydra. Some, like Hydra circumcincta and Hydra viridissima, are hermaphrodites Holstein, T. (1995) Cnidaria: Hydrozoa Ssswasserfauna von Mitteleuropa. 1/2+ 3. Stuttgart, Jena, NY: Gustav Fisher Verlag. and may produce both testes and an ovary at the same time.

Many members of the Hydrozoa go through a body change from a polyp to an adult form called a medusa.
However, all Hydra, despite being hydrozoans, remain as polyps throughout their lives.

==Feeding==
Hydra mainly feed on small aquatic invertebrates such as Daphnia and Cyclops.

When feeding, Hydra extend their body to maximum length and then slowly extend their tentacles. Despite their simple construction, the tentacles of Hydra are extraordinarily extensible and can be four to five times the length of the body. Once fully extended, the tentacles are slowly manoeuvred around waiting for contact with a suitable prey animal. Upon contact, nematocysts on the tentacle fire into the prey, and the tentacle itself coils around the prey. Within 30 seconds, most of the remaining tentacles will have already joined in the attack to subdue the struggling prey. Within two minutes, the tentacles will have surrounded the prey and moved it into the opened mouth aperture. Within ten minutes, the prey will have been enclosed within the body cavity, and digestion will have started. Hydra is able to stretch its body wall considerably in order to digest prey more than twice its size. After two or three days, the indigestible remains of the prey will be discharged by contractions through the mouth aperture.

The feeding behaviour of Hydra demonstrates the sophistication of what appears to be a simple nervous system.

Some species of Hydra exist in a mutual relationship with various types of unicellular algae. The algae are protected from predators by Hydra and, in return, photosynthetic products from the algae are beneficial as a food source to Hydra.

==Morphallaxis==
 
Hydra undergoes morphallaxis (tissue regeneration) when injured or severed.

==Non-senescence==
Daniel Martinez claimed in a 1998 article in Experimental Gerontology that Hydra are biologically immortal. This publication has been widely cited as evidence that Hydra do not senesce (do not age), and that they are proof of the existence of non-senescing organisms generally. In 2010 Preston Estep published (also in Experimental Gerontology) a letter to the editor arguing that the Martinez data support rather than refute the hypothesis that Hydra senesce. 

The controversial unlimited life span of Hydra has attracted the attention of natural scientists for a long time. Research today appears to confirm Martinez' study. Hydra stem cells have a capacity for indefinite self-renewal. The transcription factor, "forkhead box O" (FoxO) has been identified as a critical driver of the continuous self-renewal of Hydra. A drastically reduced population growth resulted from FoxO down-regulation, so research findings do contribute to both a confirmation and an understanding of Hydra immortality. 

While Hydra immortality is well-supported today, the implications for human aging are still controversial. There is much optimism; however, it appears that researchers still have a long way to go before they are able to understand how the results of their work might apply to the reduction or elimination of human senescence. 

==Genomics==
A draft of the genome of Hydra magnipapillata was reported in 2010. 

== See also ==

* Lernaean Hydra, a Greek mythological aquatic creature
* Turritopsis nutricula, another cnidarian (a jellyfish) that scientists believe to be immortal

== References ==



[[Hydrus]]

Hydrus is a small constellation in the deep southern sky. It was first depicted on a celestial atlas by Johann Bayer in his 1603 Uranometria. The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted the brighter stars and gave their Bayer designations in 1756. Its name means "male water snake", as opposed to Hydra, a much larger constellation that represents a female water snake. It remains below the horizon for most Northern Hemisphere observers.

The brightest star is the 2.8-magnitude Beta Hydri, also the closest reasonably bright star to the south celestial pole. Pulsating between magnitude 3.26 and 3.33, Gamma Hydri is a variable red giant some 60 times the diameter of our Sun. Lying near it is VW Hydri, one of the brightest dwarf novae in the heavens. Four star systems have been found to have exoplanets to date, most notably HD 10180, which could bear up to nine planetary companions.

==History==
Hydrus (lower right) in an extract from Johann Bayer's Uranometria, its first appearance in a celestial atlas.
Hydrus was one of the twelve constellations established by the Dutch astronomer Petrus Plancius from the observations of the southern sky by the Dutch explorers Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman, who had sailed on the first Dutch trading expedition, known as the Eerste Schipvaart, to the East Indies. It first appeared on a 35-cm (14 in) diameter celestial globe published in 1598 in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius. The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in the German cartographer Johann Bayer's Uranometria of 1603. De Houtman included it in his southern star catalogue the same year under the Dutch name De Waterslang, "The Water Snake", it representing a type of snake encountered on the expedition rather than a mythical creature. The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille called it lHydre Mle on the 1756 version of his planisphere of the southern skies, distinguishing it from the feminine Hydra. The French name was retained by Jean Fortin in 1776 for his Atlas Cleste, while Lacaille Latinised the name to Hydrus for his revised Coelum Australe Stelliferum in 1763. 

==Characteristics==
Irregular in shape, Hydrus is bordered by Mensa to the southeast, Eridanus to the east, Horologium and Reticulum to the northeast, Phoenix to the north, Tucana to the northwest and west, and Octans to the south; Lacaille had shortened Hydrus' tail to make space for this last constellation he had drawn up. Covering 243 square degrees and 0.589% of the night sky, it ranks 61st of the 88 constellations in size. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is 'Hyi'. The official constellation boundaries, as set by Eugne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 12 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between and , while the declination coordinates are between 57.85 and 82.06. As one of the deep southern constellations, it remains below the horizon at latitudes north of the 30th parallel in the Northern Hemisphere, and is circumpolar at latitudes south of the 50th parallel in the Southern Hemisphere. Indeed, Herman Melville mentions it and Argo Navis in Moby Dick "beneath effulgent Antarctic Skies", highlighting his knowledge of the southern constellations from whaling voyages. A line drawn between the long axis of the Southern Cross to Beta Hydri and then extended 4.5 times will mark a point due south. Hydrus culminates at midnight around the 26th of October. 

==Notable features==
The constellation Hydrus as it can be seen by the naked eye.

===Stars===

Keyzer and de Houtman assigned 15 stars to the constellation in their Malay and Madagascan vocabulary, with a star that would be later designated as Alpha Hydri marking the head, Gamma the chest and a number of stars that were later allocated to Tucana, Reticulum, Mensa and Horologium marking the body and tail. Lacaille charted and designated 20 stars with the Bayer designations Alpha through to Tau in 1756. Of these, he used the designations Eta, Pi and Tau twice each, for three sets of two stars close together, and omitted Omicron and Xi. He assigned Rho to a star that subsequent astronomers were unable to find. 

Beta Hydri, the brightest star in Hydrus, is a yellow star of apparent magnitude 2.8, lying 24 light-years from Earth. It has about 104% of the mass of the Sun and 181% of the Sun's radius, with more than three times the Sun's luminosity. The spectrum of this star matches a stellar classification of G2 IV, with the luminosity class of 'IV' indicating this is a subgiant star. As such, it is a slightly more evolved star than the Sun, with the supply of hydrogen fuel at its core becoming exhausted. It is the nearest subgiant star to the Sun and one of the oldest stars in the solar neighbourhood. Thought to be between 6.4 and 7.1 billion years old, this star bears some resemblance to what the Sun may look like in the far distant future, making it an object of interest to astronomers. It is also the closest bright star to the south celestial pole. 

Located at the northern edge of the constellation and just southwest of Achernar is Alpha Hydri, a white sub-giant star of magnitude 2.9, situated 72 light-years from Earth. Of spectral type F0IV, it is beginning to cool and enlarge as it uses up its supply of hydrogen. It is twice as massive and 3.3 times as wide as our sun and 26 times more luminous. A line drawn between Alpha Hydri and Beta Centauri is bisected by the south celestial pole. 

In the southeastern corner of the constellation is Gamma Hydri, a red giant of spectral type M2III located 214 light-years from Earth. It is a semi-regular variable star, pulsating between magnitudes 3.26 and 3.33. Observations over five years were not able to establish its periodicity. An ageing star, it is around 1.5 to 2 times as massive as our Sun, yet has expanded to have about 60 times the Sun's diameter. It shines with about 655 times the luminosity of our Sun. Located 3 northeast of Gamma is the VW Hydri, a dwarf nova of the SU Ursae Majoris type. It is a close binary system that consists of a white dwarf and other star, the former drawing off matter from the latter into a bright accretion disk. These systems are characterised by frequent eruptions and less frequent supereruptions. The former are smooth, while the latter exhibit short "superhumps" of heightened activity. One of the brightest dwarf novae in the sky, it has a baseline magnitude of 14.4 and can brighten to magnitude 8.4 during peak activity. BL Hydri is another close binary system composed of a low mass star and a strongly magnetic white dwarf. Known as a polar or AM Herculis variable, these produce polarized optical and infrared emissions and intense soft and hard X-ray emissions to the frequency of the white dwarf's rotation periodin this case 113.6 minutes. 
 
There are two notable optical double stars in Hydrus. Pi Hydri, composed of Pi1 Hydri and Pi2 Hydri, is divisible in binoculars. Around 476 light-years distant, Pi1 is a red giant of spectral type M1III that varies between magnitudes 5.52 and 5.58. Pi2 is an orange giant of spectral type K2III and shining with a magnitude of 5.7, around 488 light-years from Earth. 

Eta Hydri is the other optical double, composed of Eta1 and Eta2. Eta1 is a blue-white main sequence star of spectral type B9V that was suspected of being variable, and is located just over 700 light-years away. Eta2 has a magnitude of 4.7 and is a yellow giant star of spectral type G8.5III around 218 light-years distant, which has evolved off the main sequence and is expanding and cooling on its way to becoming a red giant. Calculations of its mass indicate it was most likely a white A-type main sequence star for most of its existence, around twice the mass of our Sun. A planet, Eta2 Hydri b, greater than 6.5 times the mass of Jupiter was discovered in 2005, orbiting around Eta2 every 711 days at a distance of 1.93 astronomical units (AU). 

Three other systems have been found to have planets, most notably the Sun-like star HD 10180, which has seven planets, plus possibly an additional two for a total of nineas of 2012 more than any other system to date, including our own solar system. Lying around from the Earth, it has an apparent magnitude of 7.33. 

GJ 3021 is a solar twina star very like our own Sunaround 57 light-years distant with a spectral type G8V and magnitude of 6.7. It has a Jovian planet companion (GJ 3021 b). Orbiting about 0.5 AU from its sun, it has a minimum mass 3.37 times that of Jupiter and a period of around 133 days. The system is a complex one as the faint star GJ 3021B orbits at a distance of 68 AU; it is a red dwarf of spectral type M4V. 

HD 20003 is a star of magnitude 8.37. It is a yellow main sequence star of spectral type G8V a little cooler and smaller than our Sun around 143 light-years away. It has two planets that are around 12 and 13.5 times as massive as the Earth with periods of just under 12 and 34 days respectively. 

===Deep-sky objects===
Hydrus contains only faint deep-sky objects. IC 1717 was a deep-sky object discovered by the Danish astronomer John Louis Emil Dreyer in the late 19th century. However, the object at the coordinate Dreyer observed is no longer there, and is now a mystery. It was very likely to have been a faint comet. Known as the white rose galaxy, PGC 6240 is a giant spiral galaxy surrounded by shells resembling rose petals, located around 345 million light years from our Solar System. Unusually, it has cohorts of globular clusters of three distinct ages suggesting bouts of post-starburst formation following a merger with another galaxy. The constellation also contains a spiral galaxy NGC 1511 that lies edge on to observers on Earth and is readily viewed in amateur telescopes. 

Located mostly in Dorado, the Large Magellanic Cloud extends into Hydrus. The globular cluster NGC 1466 is an outlying component of the galaxy, and contains many RR Lyrae-type variable stars. It has a magnitude of 11.59 and is thought to be over 12 billion years old. Two stars, HD 24188 of magnitude 6.3 and HD 24115 of magnitude 9.0, lie nearby in its foreground. NGC 602 is composed of an emission nebula and a young, bright open cluster of stars that is an outlying component on the eastern edge of the Small Magellanic Cloud, a satellite galaxy to the Milky Way. Most of the cloud is located in the neighbouring constellation Tucana. 

== References ==

==External links==

*Chandra information about Hydrus
*The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Hydrus

 



[[Hercules]]

Hercules fight with the Nemeean lion, by Pieter Paul Rubens.

Hercules is the Roman name for the Greek divine hero Heracles, who was the son of Zeus (Roman equivalent Jupiter) and the mortal Alcmene. In classical mythology, Hercules is famous for his strength and for his numerous far-ranging adventures. 

The Romans adapted the Greek hero's iconography and myths for their literature and art under the name Hercules. In later Western art and literature and in popular culture, Hercules is more commonly used than Heracles as the name of the hero. Hercules was a multifaceted figure with contradictory characteristics, which enabled later artists and writers to pick and choose how to represent him. "Hercules," in The Classical Tradition (Harvard University Press, 2010), p. 426. This article provides an introduction to representations of Hercules in the later tradition.

==Labours==
Hercules and the Hydra (ca. 1475) by Antonio del Pollaiuolo; the hero wears his characteristic lionskin and wields a club
J.M. Flix Magdalena (b. 1941)]]
 

Hercules is known for his many adventures, which took him to the far reaches of the Greco-Roman world. One cycle of these adventures became canonical as the "Twelve Labours," but the list has variations. One traditional order of the labours is found in the Bibliotheca as follows: Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 2.5.1-2.5.12. 
# Slay the Nemean Lion.
# Slay the nine-headed Lernaean Hydra.
# Capture the Golden Hind of Artemis.
# Capture the Erymanthian Boar.
# Clean the Augean stables in a single day.
# Slay the Stymphalian Birds.
# Capture the Cretan Bull.
# Steal the Mares of Diomedes.
# Obtain the girdle of Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons.
# Obtain the cattle of the monster Geryon.
# Steal the apples of the Hesperides.
# Capture and bring back Cerberus.

===Side adventures===
Hercules had a greater number of "deeds on the side" (parerga) that have been popular subjects for art, including:

File:Hercules killing Cacus at his Cave.jpg|Killing a fire-breathing Cacus (Sebald Beham, 1545)
File:Taten des Herakles dt 16Jh Atlas.jpg|Holding up the world for Atlas (based on Heinrich Aldegrever, 1550)
File:Annibale Fontana - Plaque with Hercules and Achelous - Walters 4171.jpg|Wrestling with Achelous (16th-century plaque)
File:Herakles Antaeus Couder decoration Louvre INV3378.jpg|Fighting the giant Antaeus (Auguste Couder, 1819)
File:Paul Czanne 045.jpg|Retrieving Alcestis from the underworld (Paul Czanne, 1867)
File:Prometheus and Hercules.jpg|Freeing Prometheus (Christian Griepenkerl, 1878)

==Roman era==

This Roman statuette is a copy after a Greek original that depicts the hero at an advanced age. Walters Art Museum, Baltimore.
The Latin name Hercules was borrowed through Etruscan, where it is represented variously as Heracle, Hercle, and other forms. Hercules was a favorite subject for Etruscan art, and appears often on bronze mirrors. The Etruscan form Herceler derives from the Greek Heracles via syncope. A mild oath invoking Hercules (Hercule! or Mehercle!) was a common interjection in Classical Latin. W. M. Lindsay, "Mehercle and Herc(v)lvs. and Herc(u)lus" The Classical Quarterly 12.2 (April 1918:58). 

Baby Hercules strangling a snake sent to kill him in his cradle (Roman marble, 2nd century CE)
Hercules had a number of myths that were distinctly Roman. One of these is Hercules' defeat of Cacus, who was terrorizing the countryside of Rome. The hero was associated with the Aventine Hill through his son Aventinus. Mark Antony considered him a personal patron god, as did the emperor Commodus. Hercules received various forms of religious veneration, including as a deity concerned with children and childbirth, in part because of myths about his precocious infancy, and in part because he fathered countless children. Roman brides wore a special belt tied with the "knot of Hercules", which was supposed to be hard to untie. Festus 55 (edition of Lindsay); William Warde Fowler, The Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic (London, 1908), p. 142; Karen K. Hersch, The Roman Wedding: Ritual and Meaning in Antiquity (Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 101, 110, 211. The comic playwright Plautus presents the myth of Hercules' conception as a sex comedy in his play Amphitryon; Seneca wrote the tragedy Hercules Furens about his bout with madness. During the Roman Imperial era, Hercules was worshipped locally from Hispania through Gaul.

===Germanic association===
Tacitus records a special affinity of the Germanic peoples for Hercules. In chapter 3 of his Germania, Tacitus states:

... they say that Hercules, too, once visited them; and when going into battle, they sang of him first of all heroes. They have also those songs of theirs, by the recital of this barditus or, baritus, there being scribal variants. In the 17th century, the word entered the German language as barditus and was associated with the Celtic bards. as they call it, they rouse their courage, while from the note they augur the result of the approaching conflict. For, as their line shouts, they inspire or feel alarm.

In the Roman era Hercules' Club amulets appear from the 2nd to 3rd century, distributed over the empire (including Roman Britain, c.f. Cool 1986), mostly made of gold, shaped like wooden clubs. A specimen found in Kln-Nippes bears the inscription "DEO HER", confirming the association with Hercules.

In the 5th to 7th centuries, during the Migration Period, the amulet is theorized to have rapidly spread from the Elbe Germanic area across Europe. These Germanic "Donar's Clubs" were made from deer antler, bone or wood, more rarely also from bronze or precious metals.They are found exclusively in female graves, apparently worn either as a belt pendant, or as an ear pendant. The amulet type is replaced by the Viking Age Thor's hammer pendants in the course of the Christianization of Scandinavia from the 8th to 9th century.

==Medieval mythography==
Hercules and the Nemean lion in the 15th-century Histoires de Troyes
After the Roman Empire became Christianized, mythological narratives were often reinterpreted as allegory, influenced by the philosophy of late antiquity. In the 4th century, Servius had described Hercules' return from the underworld as representing his ability to overcome earthly desires and vices, or the earth itself as a consumer of bodies. Servius, note to Aeneid 6.395; Jane Chance, Medieval Mythography: From Roman North Africa to the School of Chartres, A.D. 4331177 (University Press of Florida, 1994), p. 91. In medieval mythography, Hercules was one of the heroes seen as a strong role model who demonstrated both valor and wisdom, with the monsters he battles as moral obstacles. Chance, Medieval Mythography, pp. 168, 218, 413. One glossator noted that when Hercules became a constellation, he showed that strength was necessary to gain entrance to Heaven. Chance, Medieval Mythography, p. 219. 

Medieval mythography was written almost entirely in Latin, and original Greek texts were little used as sources for Hercules' myths.

==Renaissance mythography==
The Renaissance and the invention of the printing press brought a renewed interest in and publication of Greek literature. Renaissance mythography drew more extensively on the Greek tradition of Heracles, typically under the Romanized name Hercules, or the alternate name Alcides. In a chapter of his book Mythologiae (1567), the influential mythographer Natale Conti collected and summarized an extensive range of myths concerning the birth, adventures, and death of the hero under his Roman name Hercules. Conti begins his lengthy chapter on Hercules with an overview description that continues the moralizing impulse of the Middle Ages:

Hercules, who subdued and destroyed monsters, bandits, and criminals, was justly famous and renowned for his great courage. His great and glorious reputation was worldwide, and so firmly entrenched that he'll always be remembered. In fact the ancients honored him with his own temples, altars, ceremonies, and priests. But it was his wisdom and great soul that earned those honors; noble blood, physical strength, and political power just aren't good enough. Natale Conti, Mythologiae Book 7, Chapter 1, as translated by John Mulryan and Steven Brown (Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2006), vol. 2, p. 566. 

==In art==
In Roman works of art and in Renaissance and post-Renaissance art, Hercules can be identified by his attributes, the lion skin and the gnarled club (his favorite weapon); in mosaic he is shown tanned bronze, a virile aspect. Hercules almost suggests "Hero". The Classical and Hellenistic convention in frescoes and mosaics, adopted by the Romans, is to show women as pale-skinned and men as tanned dark from their outdoor arena of action and exercising in the gymnasium.(See also Reed.edu, jpg file. Reed.edu, subject). 

===Roman era===

File:Heracles Pio-Clementino Inv252.jpg|Hercules of the Forum Boarium (Hellenistic, 2nd century BCE)
File:Hercules and Iolaus mosaic - Anzio Nymphaeum.jpg|Hercules and Iolaus (1st century CE mosaic from the Anzio Nymphaeum, Rome)
File:Hercules Hatra Iraq Parthian period 1st 2nd century CE.jpg|Hercules (Hatra, Iraq, Parthian period, 1st-2nd century CE)
File:Muze 001.jpg|Hercules bronze statuette, 2nd century CE (museum of Alanya, Turkey)
File:Missorium Herakles lion Cdm Paris 56-345 n3.jpg|Hercules and the Nemean Lion (detail), silver plate, 6th century (Cabinet des Mdailles, Paris)

===Modern era===

File:Hendrik Goltzius - De reus Hercules.jpg|The Giant Hercules (1589) by Hendrik Goltzius
File:Peter Paul Rubens cat01.jpg|The Drunken Hercules (1612-1614) by Rubens
File:Brooklyn Museum - Les curies d'Augias - Honor Daumier.jpg|Hercules in the Augean stable (1842, Honor Daumier)
File:Hercules Comic Cover.JPG|Comic book cover (c.1958)
File:Bartholomus Spranger - Hercules, Deianira and the Centaur Nessus - Google Art Project.jpg|Hercules, Deianira and the Centaur Nessus, by Bartholomus Spranger, 1580 - 1582
File:Henry IV en Herculeus terrassant l Hydre de Lerne cad La ligue Catholique Atelier Toussaint Dubreuil circa 1600.jpg|Henry IV of France, as Hercules vanquishing the Lernaean Hydra (i.e. the Catholic League), by Toussaint Dubreuil, circa 1600. Louvre Museum

==In numismatics==
Hercules was among the earliest figures on ancient Roman coinage, and has been the main motif of many collector coins and medals since. One example is the 20 euro Baroque Silver coin issued on September 11, 2002. The obverse side of the coin shows the Grand Staircase in the town palace of Prince Eugene of Savoy in Vienna, currently the Austrian Ministry of Finance. Gods and demi-gods hold its flights, while Hercules stands at the turn of the stairs.

File: Triens 2710028.jpg|Juno, with Hercules fighting a Centaur on reverse (Roman, 21515 BCE)
File:Denarius Publius Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus 1 Obverse.jpg|Club over his shoulder on a Roman denarius (ca. 100 BCE)
File:MAXIMINUS II-RIC VI 77-251201.jpg|Maximinus II and Hercules with club and lionskin (Roman, 313 CE)
5 French francs Hercule de Dupr 1996 F346-2 obverse.jpg|Commemorative 5-franc piece (1996), Hercules in center

==Other cultural references==

File:PillarsHerculesPeutingeriana.jpg|Pillars of Hercules, representing the Strait of Gibraltar (19th-century conjecture of the Tabula Peutingeriana)
File:Maczuga Herkulesa (background Castle Pieskowa Skaa).jpg|The Cudgel of Hercules, a tall limestone rock formation, with Pieskowa Skaa Castle in the background
File:Royal Coat of Arms of Greece.svg|Hercules as heraldic supporters in the royal arms of Greece, in use 18631973. The phrase "  " ("Defenders of the Crown") has pejorative connotations ("chief henchmen") in Greek.

==In films==

A series of nineteen Italian Hercules movies were made in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The actors who played Hercules in these films were Steve Reeves, Gordon Scott, Kirk Morris, Mickey Hargitay, Mark Forest, Alan Steel, Dan Vadis, Brad Harris, Reg Park, Peter Lupus (billed as Rock Stevens) and Michael Lane. A number of English-dubbed Italian films that featured the name of Hercules in their title were not intended to be movies about Hercules.

==See also==
* Hercules (comics)
* Hercules in popular culture of the 20th and 21st centuries
* Sword-and-sandal
* 
* Strength (Tarot card)
* Samson
* Gilgamesh
* Demigod

==References==
;Notes

;Sources
* Charlotte Coffin. "Hercules" in Peyr, Yves (ed.) A Dictionary of Shakespeare's Classical Mythology (2009)

==External links==

* Hercules discovery in Israel
* Etruscan mirror illustrated Uni and Hercle
* Hercle and Menerva on an Etruscan mirror from Citt di Castello, c 300 B.C.: Badisches
* The Apples of the Hesperides
* Images of Hercules
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 2,500 images of Hercules)
* 



[[History of Poland]]

The History of Poland is rooted in the arrival of the Slavs, who gave rise to permanent settlement and historic development on Polish lands. During the Piast dynasty Christianity was adopted in 966 AD and a medieval monarchy established. The Jagiellonian dynasty period brought close ties with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, cultural development and territorial expansion, culminating in the establishment of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in 1569.

The Commonwealth in its early phase constituted a continuation of the Jagiellonian prosperity, with its remarkable development of a sophisticated noble democracy. From the mid-17th century, the huge state entered a period of decline caused by devastating wars and deterioration of the country's system of government. Significant internal reforms were introduced during the later part of the 18th century, but the reform process was not allowed to run its course, as the Russian Empire, the Kingdom of Prussia and the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy through a series of invasions and subsequent partitions terminated the Commonwealth's independent existence in 1795.

From then until 1918 there was no independent Polish state. The Poles engaged intermittently in armed resistance until 1864. After the failure of the last uprising, the nation preserved its identity through educational initiatives and the program of "organic work", intended to modernize the economy and society. The opportunity to regain freedom appeared only after World War I, when the partitioning imperial powers were defeated by war and revolution.

The Second Polish Republic was established and existed from 1918 to 1939. It was destroyed by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union by their Invasion of Poland at the beginning of World War II. Millions of Polish citizens perished in the course of the Nazi occupation as Nazi Germany classified both Poles and Jews as subhuman, targeting the latter for extermination. The Polish government in exile kept functioning and through the many Polish military formations on the western and eastern fronts the Poles contributed to the Allied victory. Nazi Germany's forces were compelled to retreat from Poland as the Soviet Red Army advanced, which led to the creation of the communist People's Republic of Poland, a Soviet satellite state.

The country's geographic location was shifted to the west and it largely lost its traditional multi-ethnic character. By the late 1980s Solidarity, a Polish reform movement, became crucial in bringing about a peaceful transition from a communist state to the capitalist economic system and liberal parliamentary democracy. This process resulted in the creation of the modern Polish state.

==Prehistory and protohistory==

Reconstructed Biskupin fortified settlement of the Lusatian culture, 8th century BC

Members of the Homo genus have lived in the glaciation disrupted environment of north Central Europe for a long time. In prehistoric and protohistoric times, over the period of at least 500,000 years, the area of present-day Poland went through the Stone Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age stages of development, along with the nearby regions. . 
 
The Neolithic period ushered in the first settled agricultural communities, whose founders migrated in from the Danube River area, beginning about 5,500 BC. Later the native post-Mesolithic populations would also adopt and further develop the agricultural way of life (between 4,400 and about 2,000 BC). . 
 
Poland's Early Bronze Age cultures began around 2,3002,400 BC. The Iron Age commenced ca. 700750 BC. One of the many cultures present, the Lusatian culture, spanning the Bronze and Iron Ages, left prominent settlement sites. . 

Around 400 BC Poland was being settled by the La Tne culture Celtic arrivals. They were soon followed by emerging cultures with a strong Germanic component, influenced first by the Celts and then by the Roman Empire. The Germanic people migrated out of the area by about 500 AD. Wooded regions to the north and east were settled by the Balts. . 

The Slavic people have been in this territory for over 1500 years. They organized into tribal units, of which the larger ones were later known as the Polish tribes; the names of many tribes are found on the list compiled by the anonymous Bavarian Geographer in the 9th century. . In the 9th and 10th centuries the tribes gave rise to developed regions along the upper Vistula (the Vistulans within the Great Moravian Empire sphere), the Baltic Sea coast and in Greater Poland. The last tribal undertaking resulted in the 10th century in a lasting political structure and state, Poland, one of the West Slavic nations. . 

==Piast period (10th century1385)==

===Mieszko I===

Poland expanded under its first two rulers. Dark pink area represents Poland at end of rule of Mieszko I (992); light pink area added (northwest lost) during reign of Bolesaw I (died 1025).

During the Piast dynasty rule (10th14th century), Poland was formed and established as a state and a nation. The historically recorded Polish state begins with Mieszko I in the second half of the 10th century. Mieszko, who ruled from before 963 to his death in 992, chose to be baptized in the Western Latin Rite in 966, following his marriage to Princess Dobrawa of Bohemia. Mieszko completed the unification of the West Slavic tribal lands fundamental to the new country's existence. Dagome iudex, a 991 document, placed Mieszko's country under the protection of the Pope. Following its emergence, the Polish nation was led by a series of rulers who converted the population to Christianity, created a strong kingdom and integrated Poland into the European culture. . 

===Bolesaw I Chrobry===

Mieszko's son Bolesaw I Chrobry (ruled 9921025) established a Polish Church province, pursued territorial conquests and was officially crowned at the end of his life in 1025, becoming the first King of Poland. In 997 his missionary Adalbert of Prague was killed in Prussia. As a result, during the Congress of Gniezno in the year 1000, Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor authorized the founding of the Archbishopric of Gniezno, an institution crucial for the continuing existence of the sovereign Polish state. During the reign of Otto's successor, Henry II, Bolesaw fought prolonged wars with Germany (100218). . 

===Early Piast monarchy restored===

Bolesaw's expansive rule overstretched early Poland's abilities and was followed by a collapse of the monarchy. Restoration took place under Casimir I (103958). Casimir's son Bolesaw II the Bold (105879) became fatally involved in a conflict with Bishop Stanislaus of Szczepanw, had him executed in 1079 and was expelled from the country. Around 1116 the so-called Gallus Anonymous wrote his chronicle, intended as a glorification of his patron Bolesaw III Wrymouth (110738), a successful duke, but important as a principal source for the early history of Poland. . 

===Fragmentation===

Wadysaw I the Elbow-high

After Bolesaw III divided Poland among his sons in 1138, internal fragmentation eroded the initial Piast monarchy structure in the 12th and 13th centuries. In 1180 Casimir II the Just, seeking papal confirmation of his senior duke status, granted at the Congress of czyca immunities and additional privileges to the Church. By about 1220, Wincenty Kadubek wrote his chronicle. One of the regional Piast dukes, Konrad I of Masovia, invited in 1226 the Teutonic Knights to help him fight the Baltic Prussian pagans, which caused centuries of Poland's warfare with the Knights and later with the German Prussian state. The Mongol invasion culminated in the Christian defeat and the death of a Silesian Piast, Duke Henry II the Pious at the Battle of Legnica in 1241. In 1242, Wrocaw became the first Polish municipality to be incorporated, as the period of fragmentation brought economic development and growth of towns. In 1264 Bolesaw the Pious granted Jewish liberties in the Statute of Kalisz. . 

===Late Piast monarchy under Wadysaw I and Casimir III===

Attempts to reunite the Polish lands gained momentum in the 13th century and in 1295 Przemys II of Greater Poland managed to become the first, since Bolesaw II, crowned king of Poland; he ruled over a limited territory and was soon killed. In 130005 the Czech ruler Vclav II was also the king of Poland. The Piast Kingdom was effectively restored under Wadysaw I the Elbow-high (130633), crowned in 1320. In 1308 the Teutonic Knights seized Gdask and its region. King Casimir III the Great (133370), Wadysaw's son and the last of the Piast rulers, significantly strengthened and expanded the country. The western provinces of Silesia (formally ceded by Casimir in 1339) and Pomerania were lost after the fragmentation. Progress was made in the recovery of the central province of Mazovia and in 1340 the conquest of Red Ruthenia began, marking Poland's expansion to the east. The Congress of Krakw took place in 1364, the same year that the future Jagiellonian University was founded. . 

===Angevin transition===

The Kingdom continued under Louis I of Hungary (ruled Poland 137082) of the Angevin dynasty. In 1374 Louis granted the Polish nobility the Privilege of Koszyce, to assure the succession of one of his daughters in Poland. His youngest daughter Jadwiga (138499) assumed the Polish throne in 1384. . 

==Jagiellonian dynasty (13851572)==

===Dynastic union with Lithuania, Wadysaw II Jagieo===

An iconic representation of the Battle of Grunwald, one of the great military contests of the Late Middle Ages

Beginning with the Lithuanian Grand Duke Jogaila (King Wadysaw II Jagieo 13861434), the Jagiellonian dynasty (13861572) formed the PolishLithuanian union. The turning point was the Union of Krewo of 1385, whereby arrangements were made for the marriage of Jogaila and Jadwiga. The Polish-Lithuanian partnership brought vast Lithuania-controlled Rus' areas into Poland's sphere of influence and proved beneficial for the Poles and Lithuanians, who coexisted and cooperated in one of the largest political entities in Europe for the next four centuries. Jadwiga died in 1399, leaving the Kingdom to her husband's long reign; her gifts helped to renew the activities of the University in 1400. . 
 
In the Baltic Sea region, Poland's struggle with the Teutonic Knights continued and culminated in the Battle of Grunwald (1410), a great victory that the Poles and Lithuanians were unable to follow up with a decisive strike against the main seat of the Order at Malbork Castle. The Union of Horodo of 1413 defined further the evolving relationship between the Crown of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and their elites. . 

===Rise of nobility, Casimir IV Jagiellon===

King Casimir IV Jagiellon was the central figure of the Jagiellonian period

The privileges of the szlachta (nobility) kept growing and in 1425 the Neminem captivabimus rule, protecting the noblemen from arbitrary royal arrests, was formulated. 

The reign of the young Wadysaw III (143444), a king of Poland and Hungary, was cut short by his death at the Battle of Varna, fought against the forces of the Ottoman Empire. . 

Central to the Jagiellonian period was the long reign of Casimir IV Jagiellon (144792). In 1454 Royal Prussia was incorporated by Poland and the Thirteen Years' War with the Teutonic state ensued. In 1466 the milestone Peace of Thorn took place; the treaty divided the Prussia region and East Prussia, the future Duchy of Prussia, became a separate entity (a Teutonic Order fief of Poland). Poland, a powerful state led by an influential dynasty, confronted the Ottoman Empire and the Crimean Tatars in the south, and in the east helped Lithuania fight the Grand Duchy of Moscow. The country was developing as a feudal state, with a predominantly agricultural economy and an increasingly dominant landed nobility. Krakw, the royal capital, was turning into a major academic and cultural center, and in 1473 the first printing press began operating there. With the growing importance of the szlachta, the king's council evolved to become by 1493 a bicameral general sejm (parliament), no longer representing only the top dignitaries of the realm. . 

The Nihil novi act, adopted in 1505 by the Sejm, transferred most of the legislative power from the monarch to the Sejm. This event marked the beginning of the period known as "Golden Liberty", when the state was ruled in principle by the "free and equal" Polish nobility. The massive development of szlachtas folwark agribusinesses in the 16th century led to the increasingly abusive conditions of peasant serfdom. The political monopoly of the nobles also slowly stifled the development of cities, some of which were thriving during the late Jagiellonian era, and limited the rights of townspeople, effectively holding back the emergence of a middle class. . 

===Early modern Poland under Sigismund I and Sigismund II===

Wawel Castle, Renaissance courtyard

Protestant Reformation movements made deep inroads into Polish Christianity, which resulted in policies of religious tolerance unique in Europe at that time. Many who fled the regions of Europe torn by religious strife found refuge in Poland. The European Renaissance currents evoked in late Jagiellonian Poland (kings Sigismund I the Old and Sigismund II Augustus) led to an immense cultural and scientific flowering (the Golden Age), of which the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (died 1543) is the best known representative. During Sigismud I's reign (150648) the Teutonic Order was secularized in 1525 and Duke Albrecht von Hohenzollern performed the act of homage before the Polish King for his fief, the Duchy of Prussia. Mazovia was finally fully incorporated into the Polish Crown in 1529. . 

The reign of Sigismund II (154872) ended the Jagiellonian period, but gave rise to the ultimate fulfillment of the Union with Lithuania. Livonia in the far north east was incorporated by Poland in 1561 and Poland entered the Livonian War. The szlachta reform Executionist movement (attempts to prevent domination by magnate families) peaked at the sejm in Piotrkw in 156263. On the religious front, the Polish Brethren split from the Calvinists and the Protestant Brest Bible was published in 1563. The Jesuits, who arrived in 1564, were destined to make a major impact on Poland's history. The Union of Lublin of 1569 transferred Ukraine from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to Poland and transformed the Polish-Lithuanian polity into a real union, preserving it beyond the death of the childless Sigismund II, whose active involvement made the completion of this process possible. . 

==PolishLithuanian Commonwealth==

===Establishment (15691648)===

====Union of Lublin====

The PolishLithuanian Commonwealth at its greatest extent, after the Truce of Deulino (Dywilino) of 1619

The Union of Lublin of 1569 established the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, a more closely unified federal state. The Union was largely run by the nobility through the system of central parliament and local assemblies, but was led by elected kings. The formal rule of the nobility, who were proportionally more numerous than in other European countries, constituted an early democratic system ("a sophisticated noble democracy"), . in contrast to the absolute monarchies prevalent at that time in the rest of Europe. . The beginning of the Commonwealth coincided with the period of Poland's great power, advancements in civilization and prosperity. The PolishLithuanian Union had become an influential player in Europe and a vital cultural entity, spreading Western culture eastward. In the second half of the 16th and the first half of the 17th century, the Commonwealth was a large state in central and eastern Europe, with an area approaching one million square kilometres. Nationwide religious toleration was guaranteed at the Warsaw Confederation in 1573. 

====First elective kings====

After the rule of the Jagiellonian dynasty had ended, Henry Valois of France was the winner of the first "free election" by the Polish nobility in 1573. He had to agree to the restrictive pacta conventa obligations, but soon fled Poland, having received the news of the vacancy of the French throne. The royal elections increased foreign influence in the Commonwealth, as foreign powers progressively manipulated the Polish szlachta to place candidates amicable to their interests. . 

Sigismund III at Smolensk. The king enjoyed a long reign, but was excessively involved in dynastic affairs of his native Sweden.

The reign of Stephen Bthory (157686) followed; the Hungarian was militarily and domestically assertive. The establishment of the legal Crown Tribunal in 1578 meant a transfer of many appellate cases from the royal to szlachta jurisdiction. Jan Kochanowski, a poet and the premier artistic personality of the Polish Renaissance, died in 1584. . 

====Vasa dynasty kings====

The Commonwealth suffered from dynastic distractions during the reigns of the Swedish House of Vasa kings Sigismund III (15871632) and Wadysaw IV (163248). The Catholic Church embarked on an ideological counter-offensive and the Counter-Reformation claimed many converts from Protestant circles. The Union of Brest split the Eastern Christians of the Commonwealth, creating the Uniate Church in 1596, of the Eastern Rite but under the pope. The Zebrzydowski Rebellion against Sigismund III unfolded in 1606-8. . 

The Commonwealth fought wars with Russia for supremacy in Eastern Europe (attempts were made to subjugate Poland's eastern neighbor around 1605, during the Russian Time of Troubles), with Sweden seeking supremacy in the Baltic (161729), and with the Ottoman Empire pressing from the south (battles at Cecora in 1620 and Khotyn in 1621). The agricultural expansion and serfdom policies in Polish Ukraine resulted in a series of Cossack uprisings. Allied with the Habsburg Monarchy, the Commonwealth did not directly participate in the Thirty Years' War. During Wadysaw's reign, the Treaty of Polyanovka with Russia was accomplished in 1634 and the Treaty of Stuhmsdorf with Sweden in 1635. The Orthodox Church hierarchy, banned in Poland after the Union of Brest, was reestablished in 1635. . 

===Decline (16481764)===

====Deluge of wars====

John II Casimir Vasa reigned during the Commonwealth's most difficult period. The monarch correctly predicted the partitions of the country. Frustrated with his inability to reform the state, John Casimir abdicated in 1668. . 

Beginning in the middle of the 17th century, the nobles' democracy, subjected to devastating wars, falling into internal disorder and then anarchy, gradually declined, marking the end of the Polish Golden Age and making the once powerful Commonwealth increasingly vulnerable to foreign intervention. The rapid deterioration caused by the onset of domestic wars and foreign invasions took place during the reign of John II Casimir Vasa (164868). . 

The Cossack Khmelnytsky Uprising (164857), a nationwide attempt to liberate Ukraine, engulfed the south-eastern Polish Crown regions; its long-term effects were disastrous for the Commonwealth. The first liberum veto was executed by a parliamentary deputy in 1652; a practice that would eventually critically weaken Poland's central government. In the Treaty of Pereyaslav (1654) the Ukrainian rebels declared themselves subjects of the Tsar of Russia. The Second Northern War raged through core Polish lands in 165560. The main invasion of Poland is known as the Swedish Deluge; it ended in 1660 with the Treaty of Oliva, but some of Poland's northern possessions were lost. In 1657 the Treaty of Wehlau-Bromberg established the independence of the Duchy of Prussia. The Commonwealth forces did well in the Russo-Polish War (165467), but the end result was the permanent division of Ukraine between Poland and Russia, agreed in the Truce of Andrusovo (1667). Towards the end of the war the Rokosz of Lubomirski, a major magnate rebellion against the King, destabilized and weakened the country. The large-scale slave raids of the Crimean Tatars also had highly deleterious effects on the Polish economy. . Merkuriusz Polski, the first Polish newspaper, was published in 1661. . 

====John III Sobieski and last victories====

King John III Sobieski with son Jakub, whom he tried to position to be his successor. Sobieski led the Commonwealth to its last victories.

The Second PolishOttoman War (167276) broke out during the reign of Micha Korybut Winiowiecki (166973) and continued under his successor, John III Sobieski (167496). Sobieski intended to pursue active Baltic area policies and to this end he signed the secret Treaty of Jaworw with France in 1675. Having instead to fight protracted wars with the Ottoman Empire, the Hetman and then King briefly revived the Commonwealth's military might. He defeated the expanding Muslims at the Battle of Khotyn in 1673 and decisively helped in 1683 to deliver Vienna from a Turkish onslaught. His reign marked the last high point in the history of the Commonwealth: in the first half of the 18th century Poland ceased being an active player in international politics. The Eternal Peace Treaty with Russia (1686) was the final border settlement between the two countries; its provisions remained in effect until the First Partition. . 

The Commonwealth, subjected to almost constant warfare until 1720, suffered enormous population losses and massive damage to its economy and social structure. The government became ineffective because of large-scale internal conflicts (e.g. Lubomirski's Rokosz and rebellious confederations), corrupted legislative processes and manipulation by foreign interests. The nobility fell under the control of a handful of feuding powerful families with established territorial domains. The urban population and infrastructure fell into ruin, together with most peasant farms, whose inhabitants were subjected to increasingly extreme forms of serfdom. The development of science, culture and education came to a halt or regressed. 

====Saxon kings====

The reigns of two kings of the Saxon Wettin dynasty (16971763), Augustus II the Strong (until 1733) and Augustus III (until 1763), caused further disintegration of the Commonwealth. The Great Northern War (170021), a period seen by the contemporaries as a temporary eclipse, may have been the fatal blow that brought down the Nobles' Republic. Stanisaw Leszczyski was installed as king in 1704 under Swedish protection, but lasted only a few years. The Silent Sejm of 1717 marked the beginning of the Commonwealth's existence as a Russian protectorate: the Tsardom would guarantee the Golden Liberty of the szlachta from that time on. Protestants were executed during the Tumult of Thorn in 1724. In 1732 Russia, Austria and Prussia, Poland's three increasingly powerful and scheming neighbors, entered into the secret Treaty of the Three Black Eagles with the intention of controlling the future royal succession in the Commonwealth. The so-called War of the Polish Succession was fought in 173335 and Leszczyski made his second unsuccessful attempt to rule Poland. The Kingdom of Prussia became a strong regional power and took Silesia from the Habsburg Monarchy. The Commonwealth-Saxony personal union gave rise to the emergence of the reform movement in the Commonwealth and the beginnings of the Polish Enlightenment culture. The Zauski Library in Warsaw was opened to the public in 1747. . 

===Reforms and loss of statehood (176495)===

====Czartoryski reforms and Stanisaw August Poniatowski====

In 1791 the Great or Four-Year Sejm adopted the May 3 Constitution at the Royal Castle in Warsaw

During the later part of the 18th century, fundamental internal reforms were attempted. The reform activity, initially actively pursued by the Czartoryski family faction, provoked a hostile reaction and eventually a military response on the part of the neighboring powers. That time witnessed economic improvement and significant population growth. The most populous capital city of Warsaw replaced Danzig (Gdask) as the leading trade center, and the role of the more prosperous urban strata increased. The last decades of the independent Commonwealth's existence were characterized by intense reform movements and far-reaching progress in the areas of education, intellectual life, art, and, especially toward the end of the period, in the evolution of the social and political system. . 

The royal election of 1764 resulted in the elevation of Stanisaw August Poniatowski (ruled until 1795, for the remaining period of the existence of statehood), a refined and worldly aristocrat connected to the major magnate family of Czartoryski, but hand-picked and imposed by Empress Catherine II of Russia, who expected Poniatowski to be her obedient follower. The King accordingly spent his reign torn between his desire to implement reforms necessary to save the failing state, and his perceived necessity of remaining in a subordinate relationship to his Russian sponsors. . 

The Bar Confederation (176872) was a szlachta rebellion directed against Russia and the Polish king, fought to preserve Poland's independence and in support of the szlachtas traditional causes. It was brought under control by the forces of the Russian Empire. 

====Partition====

Stanisaw August Poniatowski, the "enlightened" monarch

At the initiative of Frederick the Great of Prussia, Poland was partitioned four ways in 1772 between Prussia, Austria and Russia, with a rump state remaining. The remainder was in turn partitioned in 1793 and 1795, and Poles came under foreign rule until 1918. Lucjan R. Lewitter, "The Partitions of Poland" in A. Goodwyn, ed. The New Cambridge Modern History: vol 8 1763-93 (1965) pp 333-59 In 1772 in the First Partition of the Commonwealth, the outer provinces were seized by agreement among the three neighbors. The "Partition Sejm" under duress "ratified" the partition as a fait accompli. In 1773 it also established the Commission of National Education, a pioneering education authority in Europe. In 1780 Adam Naruszewicz began publishing the volumes of his History of the Polish Nation. . 

====Great Sejm and May 3 Constitution====

The long-lasting sejm convened by Stanisaw August in 1788 is known as the Great, or Four-Year Sejm. The Sejm's landmark achievement was the passing of the May 3 Constitution (1791), the first singular pronouncement of a supreme law of the state in modern Europe. The reformist but moderate document, accused by detractors of French revolutionary sympathies, soon generated strong opposition from the conservative circles of the Commonwealth's upper nobility and the Russian Empress Catherine the Great, determined to prevent a rebirth of a strong Commonwealth. The nobility's Targowica Confederation appealed to Catherine for help and in May 1792 the Russian army entered the Commonwealth's territory. The defensive war fought by the forces of the Commonwealth ended when the Polish king, convinced of the futility of resistance, capitulated by joining the Targowica Confederation. The Confederation took over the government, but Russia and Prussia in 1793 arranged for and executed the Second Partition of the Commonwealth, which left the country with a critically reduced territory practically incapable of an independent existence. The Commonwealth's last sejm at Grodno (1793) was compelled to deliberate and in the end announced a confirmation of the new partition. . 

====Kociuszko Uprising and loss of independence====

The Kociuszko Uprising began with Tadeusz Kociuszko taking an oath, Krakw 1794

Radicalized by recent events, the reformers in the still nominally Commonwealth area and in exile were soon working on preparations for a national insurrection. Tadeusz Kociuszko was chosen as its leader. The popular general returned from abroad and on March 24, 1794 in Krakw declared a national uprising under his supreme command. Kociuszko emancipated and enrolled in his army many peasants, but the hard-fought insurrection, strongly supported also by the poorer urban masses, proved incapable of generating the foreign collaboration and aid necessary for its success. It ended suppressed by the forces of Russia and Prussia, with Warsaw captured in November. The third and final partition of the Commonwealth was undertaken again by all three partitioning powers, and in 1795 the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth effectively ceased to exist. The King was moved to Grodno, abdicated and left for Saint Petersburg. . 

The response of the Polish leadership to the last partition is a matter of historical debate. Literary scholars found that the dominant emotion of the first decade was despair, producing a moral desert, ruled by violence and treason. On the other hand, historians have looked for signs of resistance to foreign rule. Apart from those who went into exile the nobility took oaths of loyalty to their new rulers and served as officers in their armies. . 

== Partitioned Poland ==

=== Armed resistance (17951864) ===

====Napoleonic wars====

The three Partitions of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth (1772, 1793, and 1795)

While there was no separate Polish state at all, the idea of Polish independence was kept alive throughout the 19th century and led to more Polish uprisings and conflict with the partitioning powers. Military efforts after the Partitions were first based on the alliances of Polish migrs with post-revolutionary France. Henryk Dbrowski's Polish Legions fought in French campaigns outside of Poland (17971802), hoping that their involvement and contribution would be rewarded by the liberation of their Polish homeland. The Polish national anthem  Dbrowski's Mazurka  was written in praise of his actions by Jzef Wybicki in 1797. . 

The Duchy of Warsaw, a small, semi-independent Polish state, was created in 1807 by Napoleon Bonaparte, following his defeat of Prussia and the Peace of Tilsit signed with Emperor Alexander I of Russia. The Duchy's military forces, led by Jzef Poniatowski, participated in numerous campaigns, including the successful PolishAustrian War of 1809, which, combined with the outcomes of other theaters of the War of the Fifth Coalition, resulted in an enlargement of the Duchy's territory. The French invasion of Russia in 1812 and the German campaign of 1813 were the Duchy's last military engagements. The Constitution of the Duchy of Warsaw abolished serfdom but promoted no land reform. . 

====Congress of Vienna====

Jzef Poniatowski's leap into the Elster at the Battle of Leipzig to some epitomized Poland's fate

After Napoleon's defeat, a new European order was established at the Congress of Vienna. Adam Czartoryski, a former close associate of Alexander I, became the leading advocate for the Polish national cause. The Congress implemented a new partition scheme, which took into account some of the gains realized by the Poles during the Napoleonic period. The Duchy of Warsaw was replaced in 1815 with the Kingdom of Poland, a residual Polish state united with the Russian Empire in a personal union under the Russian tsar. Early capitalist industry began to develop. East of the Kingdom, large areas of the former Commonwealth remained directly incorporated into the Empire; together with the Kingdom they were part of the Russian Partition. There was a Prussian Partition, with a portion of it separated as the Grand Duchy of Posen. Peasants under the Prussian administration were gradually enfranchised under the reforms of 1811 and 1823. The Austrian Partition's limited legal reforms were overshadowed by its rural poverty. The newly created Republic of Krakw was a tiny state under the joint supervision of the three partitioning powers. "Partitions" were the lands of the former Commonwealth, not actual administrative units. . 

====Uprising of November 1830====

1830 Uprising begins: taking of the Warsaw arsenal

The increasingly repressive policies of the partitioning powers led to Polish conspiracies, and in 1830 to the November Uprising. This developed into a full-scale war with Russia, but the leadership was taken over by Polish conservative circles reluctant to challenge the Empire and hostile to broadening the independence movement's social base through measures such as land reform. Despite the significant resources mobilized and self-sacrifice of the participants, a series of mistakes by several successive unwilling or incompetent chief commanders appointed by the Polish government ultimately led to the defeat of the insurgents by the Russian army in 1831. The Kingdom of Poland lost its constitution and military, but formally remained as a separate administrative unit. . 

Chopin, Romantic composer of piano works inspired by Polish folk music

After the defeat of the November Uprising, thousands of former Polish combatants and other activists emigrated to Western Europe, where they were initially enthusiastically received. This element, known as the Great Emigration, soon dominated Polish political and intellectual life. Together with the leaders of the independence movement, the Polish community abroad included the greatest Polish literary and artistic minds, including the Romantic poets Adam Mickiewicz (traditionally considered Poland's greatest poet, who died as an migr in 1855), Juliusz Sowacki, Cyprian Norwid, and composer Frdric Chopin. In occupied and repressed Poland, some sought progress through self-improvement activities known as organic work; others, in cooperation with emigrant circles, organized conspiracies and prepared for the next armed insurrection. . 

====Spring of Nations era revolts====

After the authorities in the partitions had found out about secret preparations, the planned national uprising ended in a fiasco in early 1846. In its most significant manifestation, the Krakw Uprising of February 1846, patriotic action was combined with revolutionary demands, but the result was the incorporation of the Republic of Krakw into the Austrian partition. The Austrian officials took advantage of peasant discontent and incited villagers against the noble-dominated insurgent units. This resulted in the Galician slaughter (1846), a large scale rebellion of serfs seeking relief from their post-feudal folwark condition of slavery. The uprising freed many from bondage and hastened decisions that led to peasant enfranchisement in the Austrian Empire (1848). A new wave of Polish military and other involvement, in the partitions and in other parts of Europe (e.g. Jzef Bem in Austria and Hungary), soon took place in the context of the 1848 Spring of Nations revolutions. In particular, the events in Berlin precipitated the Greater Poland Uprising, where peasants in the Prussian partition, who were by then largely enfranchised, played a prominent role. . 

====Uprising of January 1863====

Romuald Traugutt, last "dictator" of the 1863 Uprising

Despite the limited liberalization measures allowed in the Congress Kingdom under the rule of Alexander II, a renewal of popular liberation activities took place in 186061. During the large-scale demonstrations in Warsaw Russian forces inflicted numerous casualties on the civilian participants. The "Red", or left-wing faction, which promoted peasant enfranchisement and cooperated with the Russian revolutionaries, became involved in immediate preparations for a national uprising. The "White", or right-wing faction, inclined to cooperate with the Russian authorities, countered with partial reform proposals. Aleksander Wielopolski, the conservative leader of the Kingdom's government, in order to cripple the manpower potential of the Reds, arranged for a partial selective conscription of young Poles for the Russian army (186263), which hastened the outbreak of hostilities. The January Uprising, joined and led after the initial period by the Whites, was fought by partisan units against an overwhelmingly advantaged enemy. The war lasted from January 1863 to the spring of 1864, when Romuald Traugutt, the last supreme commander of the insurgency, was captured by the tsarist police. . 

On March 2, 1864, the Russian authority  compelled by the uprising to compete for the loyalty of Polish peasants  officially published an enfranchisement decree in the Kingdom, along the lines of an earlier land reform proclamation of the insurgents. The act created the conditions necessary for the development of the capitalist system on central Polish lands. At the time when the futility of armed resistance without external support was realized by most Poles, the various sections of Polish society were undergoing deep and far-reaching social, economic and cultural changes. . 

===Formation of modern Polish society under foreign rule (18641914)===

====Repression and organic work====

Bolesaw Prus (18471912), a leading novelist, journalist and philosopher of Poland's post-1863 Uprising period

The failure of the January Uprising caused a major psychological trauma and became a historic watershed; it sparked the development of modern Polish nationalism. The Poles, subjected within the territories under the Russian and Prussian administrations to still stricter controls and increased persecution, preserved their identity in non-violent ways. After the Uprising Congress Poland, downgraded in official usage from the "Kingdom of Poland" to the "Vistula Land", was more fully integrated into Russia proper, but not entirely obliterated. The Russian and German languages were imposed in all public communication and the Catholic Church was not spared from severe repression; public education was increasingly subjected to Russification and Germanization measures. Illiteracy was reduced, most effectively in the Prussian partition, but education in Polish was preserved mostly through Polish self-organization. The Prussian government pursued German colonization including the purchasing of Polish-owned land. On the other hand, the Galicia region in western Ukraine and southern Poland, economically and socially backward, but under the milder rule of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy increasingly allowed limited autonomy (from 1867), experienced a gradual relaxation of authoritarian policies and even a Polish cultural revival. Staczycy, a conservative Polish pro-Austrian faction led by great land owners, dominated the Galician government. The Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences was founded in Krakw in 1872. Positivism replaced Romanticism as the leading intellectual, social and literary trend. . . 

Social activities termed "organic work" consisted of self-help organizations that promoted economic advancement and worked on improving the competitiveness of Polish-owned businesses: industrial, agricultural or other. New commercial methods and ways of generating higher productivity were discussed and implemented through trade associations and special interest groups, while Polish banking and cooperative financial institutions made the necessary business loans available. The other major area of effort in organic work was the educational and intellectual development of the common people. Many libraries and reading rooms were established in small towns and villages, and numerous printed periodicals reflected the growing interest in popular education. Scientific and educational societies were active in a number of cities. Such activities were most pronounced in the Prussian Partition. . 

====Economic development and social change====

Marie Skodowska-Curie, discoverer of radioactive elements

Under the partitioning powers large-scale industrialization, economic diversification and progress were introduced in the traditionally agrarian Polish lands. The development turned out to be very uneven. In the Prussian Partition advanced agriculture was practised, except for Upper Silesia, where the coalmining industry created a large labor force. The densest network of railroads was built in German-ruled western Poland. In Russian Congress Poland, a striking growth of industry, railways and towns was taking place, all against the background of an extensive, but less productive agriculture. Warsaw (a metallurgical center) and d (textiles center) grew rapidly, as did the total proportion of urban population, making the region the most advanced in the Russian Empire (industrial production exceeded agricultural production by 1909). The coming of the railways spurred some industrial growth even in the vast Russian Partition territories outside the so-called Kingdom. The Austrian Partition was rural and poor, except for the industrialized Teschen Silesia area. Galician economic expansion after 1890 included oil extraction and resulted in the growth of Lemberg (Lww, Lviv) and Krakw. . 

Many Jews emigrated, but most remained and constituted a large minority on Polish-Lithuanian lands

Economic and social changes, involving factors such as land reform and industrialization, combined with the effects of foreign domination, altered the centuries-old social structure of Polish society. Among the newly emergent strata were wealthy industrialists and financiers, distinct from the traditional, but still critically important landed aristocracy. The intelligentsia, an educated, professional or business middle class, often originated from lower gentry, landless or alienated from their rural possessions (many smaller serfdom-based agricultural enterprises had not survived the land reforms) . and from urban people. The industrial proletariat, the new underprivileged class, usually comprised poor peasants or townspeople forced by deteriorating conditions to migrate and search for work in urban centers in their countries of origin or abroad. Millions of residents of the former Commonwealth of various ethnic backgrounds worked or settled in Europe and in North and South America. 

The changes were partial and gradual, and the degree of fast-paced industrialization in some areas and capitalist development on Polish lands lagged behind the advanced regions of western Europe. The three partitions developed different economies, and were more economically integrated with their mother states than with each other (for example the Prussian Partition's agricultural production depended heavily on the German, the Kingdom's industrial sector on the Russian market). 

====Nationalism, socialism and other movements====

275px

In the 1870s-1890s, large scale socialist, nationalist and agrarian movements of great ideological fervor and corresponding political parties became established in partitioned Poland and Lithuania. Of the major parties, the socialist First Proletariat was founded in 1882, the Polish League (precursor of National Democracy) in 1887, the Polish Socialist Party in 1892, the Marxist SDKPiL in 1893, the agrarian People's Party (Galicia) in 1895 and the Jewish socialist Bund in 1897. Catholic Church-allied Christian democracy regional associations were also active; they united into the Polish Christian Democratic Party in 1919. The main minority ethnic groups of the former Commonwealth, including Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Belarusians and Jews, were getting involved in their own national movements and plans, which met with disapproval on the part of those Polish independence activists who counted on an eventual rebirth of the Commonwealth or the rise of a Commonwealth-inspired federal structure. . 

Around the start of the 20th century, the Young Poland cultural movement, centered on Galicia and taking advantage of the milieu conducive to liberal expression there, was the source of Poland's finest artistic and literary productions. . Marie Skodowska-Curie was a pioneer radiation scientist who did her groundbreaking research in Paris. . 

====Revolution of 1905====

Roman Dmowski's National Democracy ideology proved highly influential; he wanted a Polish speaking Catholic nation with little concern for minorities and the expulsion of Jews

The Revolution of 190507 arose in Russian Poland new waves of Polish unrest, political manoeuvering, strikes and rebellion, with Roman Dmowski and Jzef Pisudski active as leaders of the nationalist and socialist factions respectively. As the authorities reestablished control within the Empire, the revolt in the Kingdom, placed under martial law, had withered as well, leaving tsarist concessions in the areas of national and workers' rights, including Polish representation in the newly created Russian Duma (participation of National Democrats and the new conservative Party of Real Politics). Some of the acquired gains were however rolled back, . which, coupled with intensified Germanization in the Prussian partition, left the Austrian Galicia as the territory most amenable to patriotic action. . 

In the Austrian Partition the Polish culture was openly cultivated, in the Prussian Partition higher standards of developed civilization were achieved, but the Russian Partition remained of primary importance for the Polish nation and its aspirations. About 15.5 million Polish-speakers lived in core central and western Poland, over a relatively small and compact territory. Much fewer were spread in the east: 1.3 million in Austrian Eastern Galicia and about 2 million along Russia's western districts, with the heaviest concentration in the region of Vilnius (Wilno). . 
 
Polish paramilitary independence-oriented organizations were being formed, mainly in Galicia, in 190814. The Poles were divided and their political parties fragmented on the eve of World War I, with Dmowski's National Democracy (pro-Entente) and Pisudski's faction assuming opposing positions. 

===World War I and Poland's independence issue===

"The Commandant": Jzef Pisudski with his legionaries in 1915

World War I and the political turbulence that was sweeping Europe in 1914 offered the Polish nation hopes for regaining independence. On the outbreak of war the Poles found themselves conscripted into the armies of Germany, Austria and Russia, and forced to fight each other in a war that was not theirs. Pisudski's paramilitary units stationed in Galicia were turned into the Polish Legions in 1914, and as a part of the Austro-Hungarian Army fought on the Russian front until 1917, when the formation was disbanded. Pisudski, who refused the demands that his men fight under German command was arrested and imprisoned by the Germans and became a heroic symbol of Polish nationalism. . 

During the course of the war, because of the German victory on the Eastern Front, the area of Congress Poland became occupied by the Central Powers, with Warsaw captured by the Germans on 5 August 1915. In the Act of 5th November 1916, the Kingdom of Poland (Krlestwo Regencyjne) was recreated by Germany and Austria on the formerly Russian-controlled territory. This puppet, but increasingly autonomous state existed until November 1918, when it was replaced by the newly established Republic of Poland. The existence of the "Kingdom", conceived within the German Mitteleuropa scheme, and its planned Polish army had a positive effect on the Polish national efforts on the Allied side. But the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (March 1918) between Germany and defeated Russia ignored Polish interests. 

Dmowski presented his exile Polish National Committee as the legitimate Polish representation, but the liberating events in Poland took place according to their own dynamics

The independence of Poland had been campaigned for in Russia and in the West by Dmowski and by Ignacy Paderewski in the West. The Russian Tsar and then the leaders of the February Revolution and the October Revolution installed governments declared in turn their support for Polish independence. In 1917 France formed the Blue Army (placed under Jzef Haller) comprising by the end of the war about 70,000 Poles, including men captured from German and Austrian units as well as 20,000 volunteers from the U.S. There was also a 30,000 men strong Polish anti-German army in Russia. Dmowski, operating from Paris as head of the Polish National Committee (KNP), became the spokesman for Polish nationalism in the Allied camp. On the initiative of Woodrow Wilson, Polish independence was officially endorsed by the Allies in June 1918. 

The Regency Council of the Kingdom of Poland, both about to be terminated (fall 1918). The "Kingdom" was established to entice the Poles to cooperate with the Central Powers.

In all, about two million Poles served in the war, counting both sides, and about 400450 thousand died. Much of the fighting on the Eastern Front took place in Poland, and civilian casualties and devastation were high. . Total deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within the 191939 borders, were estimated at 1,128,000. . 

On the ground in Poland in OctoberNovember 1918 the final upsurge of the push for independence took place and, with the end of the war, Austro-Hungarian and German units were being disarmed. The Austrian army's collapse freed Cieszyn and Krakw at the end of October, which was followed by the Poles and Ukrainians contesting Lviv. Ignacy Daszyski headed the first short-lived independent Polish government in Lublin (the leftist Provisional People's Government of the Republic of Poland, proclaimed as a democracy) from November 7. Germany, now defeated, was forced by the Allies to stand down its large military forces in Poland. Overtaken by a revolution at home, it released Pisudski from prison. He arrived in Warsaw on November 10 and was granted by the Kingdom's Regency Council extensive authority, also recognized by the Lublin government. On November 22 Pisudski became the Temporary Head of State. He was held by many in high regard, but was resented by the National Democrats. The emerging Polish state was internally divided, heavily war-damaged and economically dysfunctional. 

==Second Polish Republic (191839)==

===Securing national borders, war with Soviet Russia===

Greater Poland Uprising, a war with Germany, erupted in December 1918

After more than a century of foreign rule Poland regained its independence at the end of World War I. The rebirth of Poland was one of the outcomes of the negotiations that took place at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. . In 1919 the Treaty of Versailles set up an independent nation with an outlet to the sea, but left some of its boundaries to be decided by plebiscites. The largely German Free City of Danzig was granted a separate status that guaranteed its use as a port by Poland. In actuality, settling the German-Polish border turned out to be a prolonged and convoluted process. It involved the Greater Poland Uprising, the Treaty of Versailles itself, the three Silesian Uprisings, the East Prussia plebiscite, the Upper Silesia plebiscite and the 1922 Silesian Convention in Geneva. . . . 

Other boundaries were settled by war and subsequent treaties. A total of six border wars were fought in 191821, including a conflict with Czechoslovakia over Cieszyn Silesia in January 1919. 

PolishSoviet War, defenses near Warsaw, August 1920

The PolishSoviet War of 191921 was the most important conflict of the time. Pisudski had entertained far-reaching anti-Russian cooperative designs for Eastern Europe, and in 1919 the Polish forces pushed eastward into Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine, taking advantage of the Russian preoccupation with the civil war, but soon meeting the Russian forces pushing westwards. Western Ukraine or Galicia was already a theater of the PolishUkrainian War, which eliminated the proclaimed West Ukrainian People's Republic in July 1919. By June 1920, the Polish armies were past Vilnius, Minsk and, allied with the Directorate of Ukraine of the Ukrainian People's Republic, reached Kiev. In the autumn, Pisudski rejected urgent pleas from the Entente powers to support Anton Denikin's Whites in their advance on Moscow. From March 1920, a massive Soviet counter-offensive pushed the Poles out of most of Ukraine and on the northern front arrived in early August at the outskirts of Warsaw. A Soviet triumph and the quick end of Poland seemed inevitable. However, the Poles scored a stunning victory at the Battle of Warsaw. Afterwards more Polish military successes followed, the Soviets had to pull back and left to Polish rule swathes of territory occupied largely by Belarusians or Ukrainians. The new eastern boundary was finalized by the Treaty of Riga in 1921. . 

Wincenty Witos (right) and Ignacy Daszyski headed a wartime cabinet in 1920. Witos was an agrarian party leader and a centrist politician, later persecuted under the Sanation regime.

The defeat of the Russian armies forced Vladimir Lenin and the Soviet leadership to abandon for the time being their strategic objective of linking up with the German and other European revolutionary-minded comrades and spread revolution (Lenin's hope of generating support for the Red Army in Poland had already failed to materialize). Pisudski's seizure of Vilnius (Wilno) in October 1920 was a nail in the coffin of the already poor PolishLithuanian relations, strained by the PolishLithuanian War; both states would remain hostile to one another for the remainder of the interwar period. . Pisudski's planned East European federation of states (inspired by the tradition of the multiethnic PolishLithuanian Commonwealth and including a hypothetical multinational successor state to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania) . was incompatible, at a time of rising national movements, with his assumption of Polish domination and encroachment on neighboring peoples' lands and aspirations. It soon ceased to be a feature of Poland's politics. . . . A larger federated structure was also opposed by Dmowski's National Democrats. Their representative at the Peace of Riga talks, Stanisaw Grabski, opted for leaving Minsk, Berdychiv, Kamianets-Podilskyi and the surrounding areas on the Soviet side of the border, not wanting to allow population shifts which National Democrats considered politically undesirable, including what would be a reduced proportion of citizens who were ethnically Polish. . . 

Funeral of President Gabriel Narutowicz

The Peace of Riga settled the eastern border, preserving for Poland, at the cost of partitioning the lands of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania (Lithuania and Belarus) and Ukraine, . . a good portion of the old Commonwealth's eastern lands. Ukrainians ended up with no state of their own and felt betrayed by the Riga arrangements; their resentment gave rise to extreme nationalism and anti-Polish hostility. . The territories in the east won by 1921 would form the basis for a swap arranged and carried out by the Soviets in 194345, who at that time compensated the re-emerging Polish state for its eastern lands lost to the Soviet Union with conquered areas of eastern Germany. . 

The successful outcome of the PolishSoviet War gave Poland a false sense of being a major and self-sufficient military power, and the government a justification for trying to resolve international problems through imposed unilateral solutions. . The interwar period's Polish territorial and ethnic policies contributed to bad relations with most of Poland's neighbors and to uneasy cooperation with the more distant centers of power, including France, Britain and the League of Nations. 

===Democratic politics===

Wojciech Korfanty fought for a Polish Silesia and was the leader of the Polish Christian Democratic Party

The lack of an integrated infrastructure among the formerly separate partitions, involving industry, transportation, trade and other areas, was among the chief difficulties faced by the new Polish government. 

The first Polish legislative election for the reestablished national Sejm took place in January 1919. A temporary "Small Constitution" was passed by the body the following month. . 

The rapidly growing population of Poland within the new boundaries was  agricultural and  urban, with Polish being the primary language of  of the inhabitants. The minorities had very little voice in the government. The permanent "March Constitution" was adopted in March 1921. Due to the insistence of the National Democrats, worried about the potential power of Pisudski if elected, it introduced limited prerogatives for the presidency. 

What followed was the Second Republic's short (192126) and turbulent period of constitutional order and parliamentary democracy. The legislature remained fragmented and lacking stable majorities, governments changed frequently. Corruption was commonplace. The open-minded Gabriel Narutowicz was constitutionally elected president by the National Assembly in 1922, but was deemed by the nationalist right wing a traitor pushed through by the votes of alien minorities. Narutowicz and his supporters were subjected to an intense harassment campaign and the President was quickly assassinated. . 

Prime Minister Wadysaw Grabski reformed the currency

However, the investigations conducted by the new regime after the 1926 May Coup tried but failed to uncover any major affair or corruption scheme within the state apparatus of its predecessors. . 

Land reform was passed in 1919 and 1925 under pressure from an impoverished peasantry and partially implemented, but resulted in the parcellation of only 20% of the great agricultural estates. . Poland had suffered under a plethora of economic calamities and experienced waves of strikes and a workers' revolt in 1923, but there were also signs of progress and stabilization. Wadysaw Grabski's economically competent government accomplished a critical reform of finances and lasted for almost two years. The GermanPolish customs war, initiated by Germany in 1925, was one of the external factors straining Poland's economy. . . The achievements of the democratic period, such as the establishment, strengthening and expansion of the various governmental and civil society structures and integrative processes necessary for normal functioning of the reunited state and nation, were too easily overlooked. Lurking on the sidelines was the disgusted army upper corps, not willing to subject itself to civilian control, but ready to follow its equally dissatisfied, at that time retired but highly popular Jzef Pisudski. 

===Pisudski's coup and the Sanation Era===

Pisudski's May Coup of 1926 defined Poland's political reality in the years leading to World War II

On May 12, 1926, Pisudski staged a military overthrow of the Polish government, confronting President Stanisaw Wojciechowski and overpowering the troops loyal to the legitimate government. Hundreds died in fratricidal fighting. . Pisudski was supported by several leftist factions, who ensured the success of his coup by blocking the railway transportation of government forces. . He also had the support of the conservative great landowners, which left the right-wing National Democrats as the only major social force opposed to the takeover. . 

Following the coup, the new regime initially conformed to many parliamentary formalities, but gradually tightened its control and abandoned pretenses. Centrolew, a coalition of center-left parties was formed and in 1930 called for the "abolition of dictatorship". In 1930 the Sejm was dissolved and a number of opposition deputies were imprisoned at the Brest Fortress. Rigged elections followed and gave a majority of seats to the pro-regime BBWR formation. . 

Last leaders of the Republic: Marshal Edward Rydz-migy and President Ignacy Mocicki in 1936

The authoritarian "Sanation" regime that Pisudski was to lead for the rest of his life and that stayed in power until 1939 reflected the dictator's evolution from his center-left past to conservative alliances. Political institutions and parties were allowed to function, which was combined with electoral manipulation and strong-arming of those not willing to cooperate submissively. From 1930, persistent opponents of the regime, many of the leftist persuasion, were imprisoned and subjected to long Brest trials and other staged legal processes with harsh sentences, or detained in Bereza Kartuska and similar camps for political prisoners. About three thousand were abused without trial at different times at the Bereza concentration camp in 193439; in 1936 for example, 369 activists were taken there, including 342 communists. . Rebellious peasants, striking industrial workers, nationalist Ukrainians and the activists of the incipient Belarusian movement became targets of ruthless military pacification. . 

Pisudski signed non-aggression pacts with the Soviet Union in 1932 and with Nazi Germany in 1934, but in 1933 insisted that there was no threat from the East or West and said that Poland's politics were focused on finally becoming fully independent and not serving foreign interests. . He initiated the policy of equal distance and an adjustable middle course regarding the two great neighbors, later continued by Jzef Beck. . Pisudski kept personal control of the army, but it was poorly equipped, poorly trained and had poor planning. . His only war plan was a defensive war against a Soviet invasion. . The slow modernization after Pisudski's death fell far behind the progress made by Poland's neighbors and measures to protect the western border, discontinued by Pisudski from 1926, were not undertaken until March 1939. . 

Sanation deputies in the Sejm used a parliamentary maneouver to abolish the democratic March Constitution and push through a more authoritarian April Constitution in 1935; it reduced the powers of the Sejm (national parliament) which Pisudski despised. The process and the resulting document were seen as illegitimate by the anti-Sanation opposition, but during World War II the Polish government in exile, in order to uphold the legal continuity of the Polish state, recognized the April Constitution. . 

Marshall Pisudski died in 1935, retaining support of the main sections of Polish society and never subjecting his popularity to trial by honest election, but at that time in Poland's neighborhood only Czechoslovakia remained democratic. Historians have taken widely divergent views of the meaning and consequences of the coup he perpetrated and his personal rule that followed. 

===Social and economic trends===

Independence stimulated the development of a thriving culture and intellectual achievement was high. Warsaw, whose population had almost doubled during the interbellum, was a restless, burgeoning metropolis. It outpaced Krakw, Lww and Wilno, the other major centers. 

Mainstream Polish society was not affected by the repressions of the Sanation authorities; . many enjoyed relative stability and the economy improved between 1926 and 1929, after which it became caught up in the global Great Depression. . After 1929, the country's industrial production and gross national income slumped by about 50%. . 

The Great Depression brought low prices for farmers and unemployment for workers. Social tensions increased, such as rising antisemitism. The reconstituted Polish state had had only 20 years of relative stability and uneasy peace between the two wars. A major economic transformation and multi-year state plan to achieve national industrial development, including the Central Industrial Region initiative launched in 1936, was led by Minister Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski. Motivated primarily by the need for a native arms industry, it was in progress at the time of the outbreak of the war. Kwiatkowski was also the main architect of the earlier Gdynia seaport project. . 

A year after Pisudski's death, his former personal assistant General Felicjan Sawoj Skadkowski became the Second Republic's last prime minister

The prevalent nationalism in political circles was fueled by the large size of Poland's minority populations and their separate agendas. According to the language criterium of the 1931 census, the Poles constituted 69% of the population, Ukrainians 15%, Jews (defined as speakers of Yiddish) 8.5%, Belarusians 4.7%, Germans 2.2%, Lithuanians 0.25%, Russians 0.25% and Czechs 0.09%, with some geographical areas dominated by a particular minority. In time the ethnic conflicts intensified and the Polish state grew less tolerant in respect of its treatment of the interests of national minorities. In interwar Poland compulsory free general education substantially reduced illiteracy rates, but discrimination was practised, which resulted in a dramatic decrease in the number of Ukrainian language schools and official restrictions on Jewish attendance at selected schools in the late 1930s. 

The population grew steadily, reaching 35 million in 1939. However, the overall economic situation in the interwar period was one of stagnation. There was little money for investment inside Poland, and few foreigners were interested in investing there. Total industrial production had barely increased between 1913 and 1939 (within the area delimited by the 1939 borders), but because of population growth (from 26.3 millions in 1919 to 34.8 millions in 1939), the per capita output actually decreased by 18%. . 

Conditions in the predominant agricultural sector kept deteriorating during 192939, which resulted in rural unrest and a progressive radicalization of the Polish peasant movement, which was increasingly inclined toward militant anti-state activities and was repressed by the authorities . According to Norman Davies, the failures of the Sanation regime (combined with the objective economic realities) caused a well advanced radicalization of the Polish masses by the end of the 1930s, but he warns against drawing parallels with the incomparably more destructive histories of Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union under Stalin. 

===Final years===

Jzef Beck and Adolf Hitler in 1937. The influential Polish foreign minister was even-handed: he did not want an "alliance" with Nazi Germany or with the Soviet Union. 

The regime of Pisudski's "colonels", left in power after the Marshal's death in 1935, had neither the vision nor the resources to cope with the deteriorating situation in Europe. The colonels had gradually assumed more power during Pisudski's life, manipulating the ailing marshal behind the scenes of his personal cult, . eventually allowing an overt politicization of the army. 

Foreign policy was the responsibility of Jzef Beck, under whom Polish diplomacy attempted balanced approaches toward Germany and the Soviet Union but made many wrong judgements. Beck had numerous schemes and harbored great power illusions; he alienated most of Poland's neighbors but is not blamed for the ultimate failure of relations with Germany. In 1938, the Polish government opportunistically undertook hostile actions against Lithuania and post-Munich Czechoslovakia. . In the case of Poland's ultimatum to Lithuania, the Polish action nearly resulted in a German takeover of southwest Lithuania. . In the case of Czechoslovakia, Polish annexation policies and Beck's understanding of their consequences turned out to be completely mistaken, . . because the political elimination of Poland's southern neighbor markedly weakened Poland's own position. . Beck thought that Nazi-Soviet ideological contradictions would preclude their cooperation. . 

Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski's Central Industrial Region was meant to help Poland's defenses and employment

At home the increasingly alienated minorities threatened unrest and violence and were suppressed. Extreme nationalist circles grew more outspoken. One of the groups, the Camp of National Unity, combined many Dmowski-inspired nationalists with Sanation supporters and was connected to the new strongman, Marshal Edward Rydz-migy. . . 

In the late 1930s Front Morges exile bloc united several major Polish anti-Sanation figures, including Ignacy Paderewski, Wadysaw Sikorski, Wincenty Witos, Wojciech Korfanty and Jzef Haller. It gained little influence inside Poland, but its spirit soon reappeared during World War II, within the Polish government-in-exile. 

In October 1938, Joachim von Ribbentrop first proposed German-Polish territorial adjustments and Poland's participation in the Anti-Comintern Pact. . The status of the Free City of Danzig was one the key bones of contention. Approached by Ribbentrop again in March 1939, the Polish government expressed willingness to address issues causing German concern but effectively rejected Germany's stated demands and thus refused to allow Poland to be turned by Adolf Hitler into a German puppet state. . Hitler, incensed also by the British and French declarations of support for Poland, abrogated the GermanPolish Pact in late April 1939. . 

Krakowskie Przedmiecie Street in prewar Warsaw (1939)

To protect itself from an increasingly aggressive Nazi Germany, already responsible for the annexations of Austria, Czechoslovakia and a part of Lithuania, Poland entered into a military alliance with Britain and France (the 1939 Anglo-Polish military alliance and the earlier Franco-Polish military alliance, updated in 1939). . However, the two western powers were defense oriented and not in a strong position (geographically and in terms of resources) to assist Poland. Attempts were therefore made to engage the Soviet Union, as a power in the east, and induce Soviet-Polish cooperation, seen as the only militarily viable possibility. . . Diplomatic manoeuvers continued in spring and summer, but their final act, the Franco-British talks with the Soviets in Moscow on forming an anti-Nazi defensive military alliance, failed. Warsaw's refusal to allow the Red Army to operate on Polish territory doomed the Western efforts. . The final contentious exchanges took place on August 21 and 23. . . Stalin's regime was the target of an intense German counter-initiative and was concurrently involved in increasingly effective negotiations with Hitler's agents. Later, also on August 23, an outcome contrary to the exertions of the allies, became a reality: in Moscow Germany and the Soviet Union hurriedly signed the MolotovRibbentrop non-aggression pact, which secretly provided for the dismemberment of Poland into Nazi and Soviet-controlled zones. . 

==World War II and its violence==

===Invasions and resistance===

German battleship shells Westerplatte, 1 September 1939

On September 1, 1939 Hitler ordered the invasion of Poland and World War II began. Poland had signed a pact with Britain (as recently as August 25) and France, and the two western powers soon declared war on Germany, but remained largely inactive and extended no aid to the attacked country. The numerically and technically superior Wehrmacht formations rapidly advanced eastwards and engaged massively in the murder of Polish civilians over the entire occupied territory. . Poland's top government officials and military high command fled the war zone and arrived at the Romanian border in mid-September. On September 17, Soviet troops invaded under the terms of the German-Soviet agreement and occupied most of the areas of eastern Poland with heavy Ukrainian and Belarusian populations. The Sanation leaders crossed into Romania soon after the start of the Soviet invasion. . . . 

Among the military operations where Poles held out the longest (until late September or early October) were the Defense of Warsaw, the Defense of Hel and the resistance of the Polesie Group. Warsaw fell on 27 September after a heavy German bombardment which killed about 40,000 civilians. Poland was partitioned between Germany and the Soviet Union according to the treaty of alliance and friendship signed by the two powers in Moscow on September 29. . 

Polish cavalry at Battle of the Bzura, September 1939

Gerhard Weinberg has argued that the most significant Polish contribution to the Allied war effort was sharing its code-breaking results. . This allowed the British to break "Enigma", the main German military code, giving it a major advantage in the conflict. . In regard to actual military campaigns, some Polish historians have argued that fighting the initial "September Campaign" was the greatest Polish contribution in the war, despite the country's defeat. The Polish Army of nearly one million mobilized men significantly delayed Hitler's attack on Western Europe, planned for 1939. When the Nazi offensive in the West did happen, the delay caused it to be less effective, a possibly crucial factor in the case of the defense of Britain. . 

After Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the whole of Poland was overrun and occupied by German troops. . 

Polish 303 Fighter Squadron pilots won fame in the Battle of Britain

German-occupied Poland was divided from 1939 into the General Government area and the territories annexed by the German Reich. . The Poles formed an underground resistance movement and a Polish government in exile, first in Paris and from July 1940 in London, which was recognized by the Soviet Union. Polish-Soviet diplomatic relations, broken since September 1939, were resumed in July 1941, which facilitated the formation of a Polish army in the Soviet Union. . . . In November 1941, Prime Minister Sikorski flew to the Soviet Union to negotiate with Stalin on its role on the Soviet-German front, but the British wanted the Polish soldiers in the Middle East. Stalin agreed and the army was evacuated there. . . 

The members of the Polish Underground State which functioned in Poland throughout the war were loyal to and formally under the Polish government in exile, acting through its Delegation. . During World War II, about 400,000 Poles joined the underground Polish Home Army, . a part of the Polish Armed Forces of the government in exile. About 200,000 fought in campaigns in the west in units loyal to the government in exile, and about 300,000 Armed Forces in the East#Berling Army: 1943-1945|fought under the Soviet command] in the last stages of the war. . The pro-Soviet resistance movement, led by the Polish Workers' Party, was active from 1941. It was opposed by the gradually forming extreme nationalistic National Armed Forces. . 

Warsaw Ghetto Uprising

Beginning in late 1939, hundreds of thousands of Poles from the Soviet-occupied areas were deported and taken east. Of the upper-rank military and others, deemed uncooperative or potentially harmful by the Soviets, about 22,000 were secretly executed. . 
In April 1943, the Soviet Union broke off deteriorating relations with the Polish government in exile after the German military announced the discovery of mass graves containing murdered Polish army officers in woods at Katyn in the Soviet Union. The Soviets claimed that the Poles committed a hostile act by requesting that the Red Cross investigate these reports. . 

The implementation of the Final Solution began and the Holocaust proceeded in Poland from 1941. . As the Jewish ghetto in occupied Warsaw was being liquidated by the Nazi SS units, in AprilMay 1943 the city was the scene of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. The elimination of Jewish ghettos took place in Polish cities and uprisings took place against impossible odds by desperate Jewish insurgents, whose people were being removed and exterminated. . 

===Soviet advance 194445, Warsaw Uprising===

Surrender of the Warsaw Uprising

At a time of increasing cooperation between the western Allies and the Soviet Union, the standing and influence of the Polish government in exile were seriously diminished by the death of its most prominent leader  Prime Minister Wadysaw Sikorski  on July 4, 1943. . 

In July 1944, the Soviet Red Army and Soviet-controlled People's Army of Poland entered Poland and through protracted fighting in 1944 and 1945 destroyed the German army, losing 600,000 soldiers in the campaign. . 

The greatest single instance of armed struggle in occupied Poland and a major political event of World War II was the Warsaw Uprising which began on August 1, 1944. The uprising, in which most of the city's population participated, was instigated by the underground Armia Krajowa (Home Army) and approved by the Polish government in exile in an attempt to establish a non-communist Polish administration ahead of the arrival of the Red Army. The uprising was planned as a short-lived armed demonstration, . in the expectation that the Soviet forces approaching Warsaw and present on the right bank of the Vistula, would help in any battle to take the city. However, the Soviets had never agreed to this and halted their advance at the Vistula. The Germans used the opportunity to carry out the brutal suppression of the forces of the pro-Western Polish underground. . . 

The bitterly fought uprising lasted for two months and resulted in hundreds of thousands of civilians killed and expelled from the city. After the Poles, realising the hopelessness of the situation, surrendered on 2 October, the Germans carried out Hitler's order to destroy the remaining infrastructure of the city. The Polish First Army, fighting alongside the Soviet Red Army, entered Warsaw on 17 January 1945. . 

===Allied conferences, Polish governments===

Gen. Wadysaw Sikorski, Prime Minister of the Polish Government in Exile and Commander-in-Chief of Polish Armed Forces, shortly before his death

As a consequence of the war and the decision of the Soviet leadership, agreed to by the United States and Britain from the Tehran Conference (late 1943) onwards, Poland's geographic location was fundamentally altered. . . Stalin's proposal that Poland should be moved far to the west was readily accepted by the Polish communists, who were at that time in the early stages of forming the post-war government. . In July 1944, a communist-controlled "Polish Committee of National Liberation" was established in Lublin to govern nominally the areas liberated from German control, which caused protests by Prime Minister Stanisaw Mikoajczyk and the Polish government in exile. 

By the time of the Yalta Conference (February 1945), seen by many Poles as the pivotal point when the nation's fate was sealed by the Great Powers, the communists had established a provisional government in Poland. The Soviet position at the Conference was strong, corresponding to their territorial gains in Central Europe. The three Great Powers gave assurances for the conversion of the communist provisional government, by including in it democratic forces from within the country and currently active abroad (the Provisional Government of National Unity and subsequent democratic elections were the agreed stated goals), but the London-based government in exile was not mentioned. . . 

===War losses, extermination of Jews and resettlement of Poles===

250px

The paucity of available data makes it difficult to provide a scientific and numerically correct estimation of the human losses suffered by Polish citizens during World War II. It can, however, be conjectured that assertions made in the past have been incorrect and motivated by political considerations. To begin with, the total population of 1939 Poland and of the several nationalities/ethnicities present there are not accurately known, since the last population census took place in 1931. . . 

Modern research indicates that during the war about 5 million Polish citizens were killed, including 3 million Polish Jews. . According to the Holocaust Memorial Museum, at least 1.9 to 2 million ethnic Poles and 3 million Polish Jews were killed. . Millions were deported to Germany for forced labor or to German death camps such as Treblinka, Auschwitz and Sobibor. According to another estimate, between 2.35 and 2.9 million Polish Jews and about 2 million ethnic Poles were killed. . Nazi Germany intended to exterminate the Jews completely, . in actions that have come to be described collectively as the Holocaust. The Poles were to be expelled from areas annexed by the Reich by a process of resettlement, starting in 1939 and expected to be completed within 15 years. . 

Warsaw destroyed, photo taken January 1945

In an attempt to decapitate Polish society, the Nazis and the Soviets executed tens of thousands of members of the Polish intelligentsia and community leaders during the AB-Aktion, Operation Tannenberg and the Katyn massacre. ; . Over 95% of the Polish Jewish losses (less directly also many of the rest) and 90% of the ethnic Polish losses were caused by Nazi Germany; 5% of the ethnic Polish losses were caused by the Soviets and 5% by Ukrainian nationalists. This Jewish loss of life, together with the numerically much less significant waves of displacement during the war and emigration after the war, after the Polish October 1956 thaw and following the 1968 Polish political crisis, put an end to several centuries of a large scale and well-established Jewish settlement and presence in Poland. . The magnitude of the losses of Polish citizens of German, Ukrainian, Belarusian and other nationalities, which were also great, are not known. . 

In 194041, some 325,000 Polish citizens were deported by the Soviet regime. . The number of Polish citizens who died at the hands of the Soviets is estimated at less than 100,000. In 194344, Ukrainian nationalists (OUN and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army) massacred tens of thousands of Poles in Volhynia and Galicia. 

Approximately 90% of Poland's war losses were the victims of prisons, death camps, raids, executions, the annihilation of ghettos, epidemics, starvation, excessive work and ill treatment. There were one million war orphans and 590,000 war disabled. The country lost 38% of its national assets (Britain lost 0.8%, France 1.5%). . Nearly half of prewar Poland was expropriated by the Soviet Union, including the two great cultural centers of Lww and Wilno. . 

===Changing boundaries and population transfers===

Polish generals on the Eastern Front

After (for all practical purposes) the final settlement at Potsdam, the Soviet Union retained most of the territories captured as a result of the 1939 German-Soviet pact and gained others (western Ukraine, western Belarus, Lithuania and the Knigsberg area of East Prussia were officially incorporated). Poland was compensated with major parts of Silesia including Breslau (Wrocaw) and Grnberg (Zielona Gra), of Pomerania including Stettin (Szczecin), and of East Prussia, along with Danzig (Gdask). Collectively referred to as the "Recovered Territories", they were included in the reconstituted Polish state. Most of the German population there fled or was expelled to Germany. . 1.52 million Poles moved or were expelled from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union. The vast majority were resettled in the former German territories. . The Poles lost 70% of their prewar oil capacity to the Soviets, but gained from the Germans the highly developed industrial and infrastructural base that made a rounded industrial economy possible for the first time in Polish history. . 

Many Poles could not return to the country for which they had fought because they belonged to the "wrong" political group, or came from prewar eastern Poland now incorporated into the Soviet Union (see Polish population transfers (194446)), or, having fought in the West were warned not to return because of the high risk of persecution. Others were pursued, arrested, tortured and imprisoned by the Soviet authorities for belonging to the Home Army or other formations (see Anti-communist resistance in Poland (194446)), . or were persecuted because they had fought on the western front. . 

At end of World War II, the gray territories were transferred from Poland to the Soviet Union, and the pink territories  from Germany to Poland. Post-war Poland comprises the white and pink areas.

With Germany's defeat, the reestablished Polish state was shifted west to the area between the OderNeisse and Curzon lines and Germans who had not fled were expelled. Of those who remained, many chose to emigrate to post-war Germany. According to an estimate by Polish researchers, of the 200250 thousand Jews who escaped the Nazis, 4060 thousand had survived in Poland. . More had been repatriated from the Soviet Union and elsewhere, and the February 1946 population census showed about 300,000 Jews within the new borders. . Of the surviving Jews, many chose or felt compelled to emigrate. . 

Territories on both sides of the new Polish-Ukrainian border were "ethnically cleansed". Of the Ukrainians and Lemkos living in Poland within the new borders (about 700,000), close to 95% were forcibly moved to the Soviet Ukraine, and in 1947 to the new territories in northern and western Poland under Operation Vistula. In Volhynia, 98% of the Polish pre-war population was either killed or expelled, in Eastern Galicia the Polish population was reduced by 92%. ; . In all the mutual violence in the 1940s (during and after the war), about 70,000 Poles and about 20,000 Ukrainians were killed. . 

Because of the changing borders and the mass movements of people of various nationalities, both sponsored by governments and spontaneous, the emerging communist Poland ended up with a mainly homogeneous, ethnically Polish population (97.6% according to the December 1950 census). . The remaining members of minorities were not encouraged by the authorities or their neighbors to emphasize their ethnic identities.

==People's Republic of Poland (194589)==

===Post-war struggle for power===

Stanisaw Mikoajczyk's Polish People's Party tried to outvote the communists in 1947, but the election process was rigged. Mikoajczyk had to flee to the West.

In June 1945, as an implementation of the Soviet interpretation of the February Yalta Conference directives a Polish Provisional Government of National Unity was formed; and soon recognized by the United States and many other countries. . Communist rule and Soviet domination were apparent from the beginning: sixteen prominent leaders of the Polish anti-Nazi underground were brought to trial in Moscow in June 1945. . In the immediate post-war years, the emerging communist rule was challenged by unreconciled people and groups, and many thousands perished in the fight or were pursued by the security forces and executed. . Such insurgents often pinned their hopes and expectations on an imminent outbreak of a World War III and the defeat of the Soviet Union. . The right-wing insurgency faded after the amnesty of February 1947. 

A June 1946 national referendum arranged by the communist Polish Workers' Party was used to legitimize its dominance in Polish politics and claim widespread support for the party's policies. . . Although the Yalta agreement called for free elections, those held in January 1947 were controlled by the communists. Some democratic and pro-Western elements, led by Stanisaw Mikoajczyk, the former Prime Minister in Exile, participated in the Provisional Government and the 1947 elections, but were ultimately eliminated through electoral fraud, intimidation and violence. In times of radical political and economic change, members of Mikoajczyk's agrarian movement attempted to preserve some degree of market economy (protect limited property ownership). . Afterwards the communist-dominated ruling bloc was officially the only source of governmental authority. The Polish government in exile remained in continuous existence until 1990, although its influence was degraded. 

===Under Stalinism===

Wadysaw Gomuka declared in 1947 a "Polish road to socialism" (curbing, rather than eradicating, capitalist elements), but was soon overruled, . removed and imprisoned by the Stalinist authorities. . 

After the brief period of a coalition "National Unity" government a Polish People's Republic (Polska Rzeczpospolita Ludowa) was created (so named only in the communist constitution of 1952), effectively under the communist Polish United Workers' Party rule. . 

The ruling party itself was a result of the forced amalgamation in December 1948 of the communist Polish Workers' Party and the historically non-communist, more popular Polish Socialist Party (the party, re-established in 1944 by its left wing, . had been from that time allied with the communists). . . . The ruling communists, who in post-war Poland preferred to use the term "socialism", . needed to include the socialist junior partner to broaden their appeal, claim greater legitimacy and eliminate competition on the political Left. The socialists, who were losing their organization, had to be subjected to political pressure, ideological cleansing and purges in order to become suitable for unification on the "Workers' Party"'s terms. The socialist pro-communist leaders were the prime ministers Edward Osbka-Morawski and Jzef Cyrankiewicz. . 

During the most oppressive Stalinist period (194853), terror, justified as necessary to eliminate reactionary subversion, was widespread. Many thousands of perceived opponents of the regime were arbitrarily tried and large numbers executed. The People's Republic was led by discredited Moscow operatives such as Bolesaw Bierut, Jakub Berman and Konstantin Rokossovsky. . The independent Catholic Church in Poland was subjected to property confiscations and other curtailments from 1949, and in 1950 was pressured into signing an accord with the government. . . In 1953 and later, despite a partial thaw after Stalin's death, . the persecution of the Church intensified and its head, Cardinal Stefan Wyszyski, was detained. . . . 

In the Warsaw Pact, formed in 1955, the army of the People's Republic of Poland was the second largest, after the Soviet Army. . 

===Economic and social developments===

Primate Stefan Wyszyski's leadership led to the exceptional strength of the Polish Catholic Church

Larger rural estates and agricultural holdings as well as former German property were redistributed through land reform and industry was nationalized beginning in 1944. Communist restructuring and the imposition of work-space rules encountered active worker opposition already in the years 194547. . The Three-Year Plan (194749) continued with the rebuilding, socialization and restructuring of the economy. It was followed by the Six-Year Plan (195055) for heavy industry. The rejection of the Marshall Plan (1947), . however, made aspirations of catching-up with the West European standard of living unrealistic. . 

The government's highest economic priority was the development of militarily useful heavy industry. State-run institutions, collectivization and cooperatives were imposed (the last category dismantled in the late 1940s as not socialist enough, though later reestablished), while even small-scale private enterprises were eradicated. . Stalinism introduced heavy political and ideological propaganda and indoctrination in social life, culture and education. . 

Great strides were made, however, in the areas of eliminating unemployment, universal public education (including eliminating adult illiteracy), . health care and recreational amenities for working people. . Many historic sites, including the central districts of war-destroyed Warsaw and Gdask (Danzig), were rebuilt at a great cost. . . 

Communist aspirations were symbolized by the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw

The communist industrialization program led to increased urbanization and educational and career opportunities and advancement for the intended beneficiaries of the social transformation, along the lines of the peasants-workers-working intelligentsia paradigm. The most significant improvement was accomplished in the lives of the traditional Polish underclass, the peasants, who moved en masse to the cities, leaving behind their impoverished and overcrowded village communities. Those who stayed behind took advantage of the implementation of the 1944 PKWN land reform decree, which terminated the antiquated, but widespread parafeudal socioeconomic relations in Poland (under Stalinism it was followed by the generally failed attempts at establishing collective farms), but the national percentage of the rural population decreased in communist Poland by about 50%. A majority of Poland's residents of cities and towns still live in apartment blocks built during the communist era. . . 

===Thaw===

In March 1956, after the 20th Soviet Party Congress in Moscow ushered in de-Stalinization, Edward Ochab was chosen to replace the deceased Bierut as First Secretary of the Polish Communist Party. . Poland was rapidly overtaken by social restlessness and reformist undertakings; thousands of political prisoners were released and many people previously persecuted were officially rehabilitated. . Riots by economically distressed workers in Pozna ensued in June and were violently suppressed, but gave rise to the formation of a reformist current within the communist party. . . 

Apartment blocks built in communist Poland (Nowa Huta)

Amidst continuing social and national upheaval, in October a further shakeup took place in the party leadership. . While retaining most traditional communist economic and social aims, the regime led by the new Polish Party's First Secretary Wadysaw Gomuka liberalized internal life in Poland. The dependence on the Soviet Union was somewhat mollified and the state's relationships with the Church and Catholic lay activists were put on a new footing. . A repatriation agreement allowed the transfer to Poland of hundreds of thousands of Poles who were still in the Soviet Union, including many former political prisoners. . Collectivization efforts were abandoned - agricultural land, unlike in other Comecon countries, had mostly remained in the private ownership of farming families. . State-mandated provisions of agricultural products at fixed, artificially low prices were reduced and, from 1972, eliminated. . 

Sophisticated cultural life, to varying degrees linked to the intelligentsia's opposition to the totalitarian system, developed under Gomuka and his successors. The creative process had often been compromised by state censorship. Nevertheless, significant productions were achieved in fields such as literature, theater, cinema and music, among others. Journalism of veiled understanding and native varieties of popular trends and styles of western mass culture were well represented. Uncensored information and works generated by migr circles (the Paris-based Kultura magazine developed a conceptual framework for dealing with the issues of borders and the neighbors of a future free Poland) . were conveyed through a variety of channels, Radio Free Europe being of foremost importance. . . 

===Stagnation and crackdown===

One of the fatalities of the 1970 protests on the Baltic Coast

The legislative election of 1957 was followed by several years of relative stabilization, accompanied by economic stagnation and curtailment of reforms and reformists. A nuclear weapons-free zone in Central Europe was proposed in 1957 by Adam Rapacki, Poland's foreign minister. Several prominent "revisionists" were expelled from the party in the 1960s. . 

In 1965, the Conference of Polish Bishops issued the Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops. . In 1966, the celebrations of the 1,000th anniversary of the Baptism of Poland led by Cardinal Stefan Wyszyski and other bishops turned into a huge demonstration of the power and popularity of the Catholic Church in Poland. 

The post-1956 liberalizing trend, in decline for a number of years, was reversed in March 1968, when student demonstrations were suppressed. Motivated in part by the Prague Spring, by then in progress, the Polish opposition leaders, intellectuals, academics and students used a historical-patriotic classic theater spectacle series in Warsaw, and its forced termination, as a springboard for protests, which soon spread to centers of higher education and turned nationwide. The authorities responded with a major crackdown on opposition activity, which included especially reorganization, the firing of faculty members and the dismissal of students at universities and other institutions of learning. At the center of the controversy were also the few Znak Catholic deputies in the Sejm, who attempted to defend the students. . 

First Secretary Edward Gierek (second from left) was unable to reverse Poland's economic decline

In an official speech, Gomuka raised an artificial issue of the role of Jewish activists in the events taking place, giving ammunition to a nationalistic party faction opposed to his rule. Using the context of the military victory of Israel in the Six-Day War of 1967, some in the Polish communist leadership waged an antisemitic campaign against the remnants of the Polish Jewish community. The assimilated and secular, often well-placed targets of this campaign, were accused of actively sympathizing with Israeli aggression (most Poles welcomed a defeat for their Soviet ally) and being disloyal. Branded "Zionists", they were scapegoated and blamed for the unrest in March, which eventually led to the emigration of much of Poland's remaining Jewish population (about 15,000 Polish citizens left the country). 

With the active support of the Gomuka regime, after the informal announcement of the Brezhnev Doctrine, the Polish People's Army took part in the infamous Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. . 

August 1980 in Szczecin: signing of an agreement between leaders of striking workers and government representatives

In December 1970, the governments of Poland and West Germany signed a treaty which normalized their relations and made possible meaningful cooperation in a number of areas of bilateral interest. The Federal Republic recognized the post-war de facto border between Poland and East Germany. . . 

===Worker revolts and Solidarity===

In December 1970, disturbances and strikes in the port cities of Gdask (Danzig), Gdynia, and Szczecin (Stettin), triggered by a government-announced price increase for essential consumer goods, reflected deep dissatisfaction with living and working conditions in the country. The activity was centered on the industrial shipyard areas of the three coastal cities. Dozens of protesting workers and bystanders were killed in police and military actions, generally directed by Gomuka and under the command of Minister of Defense Wojciech Jaruzelski. In the aftermath, Edward Gierek replaced Gomuka as First Secretary of the Communist Party. The new regime was seen as more modern, friendly and pragmatic and enjoyed initially a degree of popular (and foreign) support. . 

Lech Wasa in 1980

Gierek's years (197080) brought, on the one hand, wide-ranging, if ultimately unsuccessful government attempts to revitalize the economy, and, on the other, the increased presence of opposition circles, emboldened by the Helsinki Conference processes. . Another attempt to raise food prices resulted in the June 1976 protests. Jacek Kuro was among the activists defending the accused rioters from Radom and other towns. . The Workers' Defense Committee (KOR), established in response to the crackdown, consisted of dissident intellectuals willing to support openly industrial workers, farmers and students who were organizing, struggling with and persecuted by the authorities throughout the late 1970s. . . 

In October 1978, the Archbishop of Krakw, Cardinal Karol Jzef Wojtya, became Pope John Paul II, head of the Roman Catholic Church. Catholics and others rejoiced at the elevation of a Pole to the papacy and greeted his June 1979 visit to Poland with an outpouring of emotion. . 

Fueled by large infusions of Western credit, Poland's economic growth rate was one of the world's highest during the first half of the 1970s; but much of the borrowed capital was misspent, and the centrally planned economy was unable to use the new resources effectively. The growing debt burden became insupportable in the late 1970s, and negative economic growth had set in by 1979. 

General Wojciech Jaruzelski meeting Soviet security chief Yuri Andropov during the 1980 crisis. Jaruzelski was about to become the (last) leader of communist Poland.

Around July 1, 1980, with the Polish foreign debt standing at more than $20 billion, the government made another attempt to increase meat prices. Workers responded with escalating work stoppages; culminating initially in a general strike in Lublin. . In mid-August labor protests at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdask gave rise to a chain reaction of strikes which virtually paralyzed the Baltic coast by the end of the month and, for the first time, closed most coal mines in Silesia. The Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee coordinated the strike action across hundreds of workplaces and formulated the 21 demands as the basis for negotiations with the authorities. The Strike Committee was sovereign in its decision-making, but was aided by a team of "expert" advisers that included Bronisaw Geremek and Tadeusz Mazowiecki, well-known intellectuals and oppositionists. . 

On August 31, 1980 representatives of workers at the Gdask Shipyard, led by an electrician and activist Lech Wasa, signed the Gdask Agreement with the government that ended their strike. Similar agreements were signed at Szczecin and in Silesia. The key provision of these agreements was the guarantee of the workers' right to form independent trade unions and the right to strike. Following the successful resolution of the largest labor confrontation in communist Poland's history, nationwide union organizing movements swept the country. 

Czesaw Miosz ranks among the great Polish poets

Edward Gierek was blamed by the Soviets for not following their "fraternal" advice, not shoring up the party and the official trade unions and allowing "anti-socialist" forces to emerge. On September 5 Gierek was replaced by Stanisaw Kania as First Secretary. . 

Delegates of the emergent worker committees from all over Poland gathered in Gdask on September 17 and decided to form a single national union organization named "Solidarity", following a suggestion by Karol Modzelewski. . 

While partycontrolled courts took up the contentious issues of Solidarity's legal registration as a trade union (finalized by November 10), planning had already begun for the imposition of martial law. A parallel farmers' union was organized and strongly opposed by the regime, but Rural Solidarity was finally registered on May 12, 1981. . In the meantime, a rapid deterioration of the party's authority, the disintegration of state power and an escalation of demands and threats by the various Solidarityaffiliated groups were occurring, . as, according to Kuro, a "tremendous social democratization movement in all spheres" was taking place and could not be contained. Wasa had meetings with Kania, which brought no resolution to the impasse. Following the Warsaw Pact summit in Moscow, the Soviet Union proceeded with a massive military build-up along Poland's border in December; but during the summit Kania forcefully argued with Leonid Brezhnev and other allied communists leaders against the feasibility of an external military intervention, and no action was taken. . The United States, under presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, repeatedly warned the Soviets about the consequences of a direct intervention, while discouraging an open insurrection in Poland and signaling to the Polish opposition that there would be no rescue by the NATO forces. . 

Martial law in December 1981: the communist power reasserted itself once more

In February 1981, Defense Minister General Wojciech Jaruzelski assumed the position of Prime Minister. A World War II veteran with a generally positive image, Jaruzelski engaged in preparations for calming the Polish unrest by the use of force, utilizing ZOMO troops and other security forces backed up by the Polish and Soviet bloc military. The 198081 Solidarity social revolt had thus far been free of any major use of force, but in March 1981 in Bydgoszcz three activists were beaten up by the secret police. A nationwide "warning strike" took place, in which the 9.5 million strong Solidarity union was supported by the population at large. A general strike was called off by Wasa after the March 30 settlement with the government. Both Solidarity and the party were badly split and the Soviets were losing patience. Kania was re-elected at the Party Congress in July, but the collapse of the economy continued and so did the general disorder. . 

At the first Solidarity national congress in SeptemberOctober 1981 in Gdask, Lech Wasa was elected national chairman of the union with 55% of the vote. An appeal was issued to the workers of the other East European countries, urging them to follow in the footsteps of Solidarity. . To the Soviets the gathering was an "anti-socialist and anti-Soviet orgy" and the Polish communist leaders, increasingly led by Jaruzelski and General Czesaw Kiszczak, were ready to apply force. 

In October Jaruzelski was named the party's First Secretary, an unusual advancement for a military man in the communist world. The Plenum's vote was 180 to 4 and he kept his government posts too. Jaruzelski asked parliament to ban strikes and grant him extraordinary powers, but when neither was accomplished he decided to proceed with his plans anyway. 

===Martial law and end of communism===

Pope John Paul II in Poland in 1987

On December 1213, the regime declared martial law, under which the army and ZOMO riot police were used to crush the Solidarity. The Soviet leaders insisted that Jaruzelski pacify the opposition with the forces at his disposal, without direct Soviet involvement or backup. Virtually all Solidarity leaders and many affiliated intellectuals were arrested or detained. Nine workers were killed at the Wujek Mine. The United States and other Western countries responded by imposing economic sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union. Unrest in the country was subdued but continued. . 

During martial law Poland was ruled by the "Crow" (Military Council of National Salvation). The recently open or semi-open opposition communications were replaced by underground publishing, as Solidarity was reduced to a few thousand underground activists. . 

Having achieved some semblance of stability, the Polish regime relaxed and then rescinded martial law over several stages. By December 1982, martial law was suspended, and a small number of political prisoners, including Wasa, were released. Although martial law formally ended in July 1983 and a partial amnesty was enacted, several hundred political prisoners remained in jail. Jerzy Popieuszko, a popular pro-Solidarity priest, was abducted and murdered by security functionaries in October 1984. 

Further developments in Poland occurred concurrently with and were influenced by the reformist leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev in the Soviet Union. In September 1986, a general amnesty was declared and the government released nearly all political prisoners, but the authorities continued to harass dissidents and Solidarity activists. The regime's efforts to organize society from the top down had failed, while the opposition's attempts at creating an "alternate society" were also unsuccessful. . With the economic crisis unresolved and societal institutions dysfunctional, both the ruling establishment and the Solidarity-led opposition began looking for ways out of the stalemate. Facilitated by the indispensable mediation of the Catholic Church, exploratory contacts were established. 

Student protests resumed from February 1988. The government's inability to forestall Poland's economic decline led to waves of strikes across the country in April, May and August 1988. The Soviet Union was becoming increasingly destabilized and unwilling to apply military and other pressure to prop up allied regimes in trouble. . The Polish government felt compelled to negotiate with the opposition and in September 1988 preliminary talks with Solidarity ensued in Magdalenka. Numerous meetings took place involving Wasa and Kiszczak among others and the regime made a major public relations mistake by allowing a televised debate in November between Wasa and Alfred Miodowicz, chief of the official trade unions. . The fitful bargaining and intra-party squabbling led to the official Round Table Negotiations in the following year, followed by the Polish legislative election of 1989, a watershed event marking the fall of communism in Poland. 

==Third Polish Republic (1989today)==

===Transition from communism===

Tadeusz Mazowiecki, one of the leaders of the Solidarity opposition, in 1989 became prime minister

The round-table talks began in February 1989. They produced the Round Table Agreement in April. The agreement called for local self-government, policies of full employment, legalization of independent trade unions and specified many wide-ranging reforms. . The current Sejm promptly implemented the political, association and other aspects of the deal and the agreed partly open National Assembly elections were set for June 4 and June 18. . Only 35% of the seats in the Sejm (national legislature's lower house) and all the Senate seats were freely contested; the remaining Sejm seats (65%) were guaranteed for the communists and their allies. . 

The failure of the communists at the polls (almost all of the contested seats were won by the opposition) resulted in a political crisis. The new constitutional agreement called for the re-establishment of the Polish presidency and on July 19 the National Assembly elected the communist leader General Wojciech Jaruzelski to that office. His election, seen at the time as politically necessary, was barely accomplished with tacit support from some Solidarity deputies and the new president's position was not strong. Moreover, the unexpected definitiveness of the parliamentary election results created new dynamics and attempts by the communists to form a government failed. . 

President Aleksander Kwaniewski with Lech Wasa in 2005. Kwaniewski defeated Wasa in the presidential election of 1995; he was one of the several "post-communist" politicians elected to highest offices.

On August 19, President Jaruzelski asked journalist and Solidarity activist Tadeusz Mazowiecki to form a government; on September 12, the Sejm voted approval of Prime Minister Mazowiecki and his cabinet. Mazowiecki decided to leave the economic reform entirely in the hands of economic liberals, led by the new Deputy Prime Minister Leszek Balcerowicz, who proceeded with the design and implementation of his "shock therapy" policy. For the first time in post-war history, Poland had a government led by non-communists, setting a precedent to be soon followed by many other communist-ruled nations. Mazowiecki's acceptance of the "gruba kreska" formula meant no "witch-hunt", an absence of revenge seeking or exclusion from politics in regard to former communist officials. 

In part because of the attempted indexation of wages, inflation reached 900% by the end of 1989 but was soon dealt with by the shock therapy. In December 1989, the Sejm approved the government's reform program to transform the Polish economy rapidly from a centrally planned one to a free market. . The constitution was amended to eliminate references to the "leading role" of the communist party and the country was renamed the "Republic of Poland." The communist Polish United Workers' Party dissolved itself in January 1990, creating in its place a new party, Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland. "Territorial self-government", abolished in 1950, was legislated back in March 1990, to be led by locally elected officials; its fundamental unit was the administratively independent gmina. . 

In October 1990, the constitution was amended to curtail the term of President Jaruzelski. In November 1990, the GermanPolish Border Treaty was signed. . 

In November 1990, Lech Wasa was elected president for a five-year term; in December he became the first popularly elected President of Poland. Poland's first free parliamentary election was held in October 1991. 18 parties entered the new Sejm, but the largest representation received only 12% of the total vote. . 

===Democratic constitution, NATO and European Union memberships===

Several post-Solidarity governments were in existence between the 1989 election and the 1993 election, after which the "post-communist" parties took over. . In 1993 the formerly Soviet Northern Group of Forces, a vestige of past domination, left Poland. 

In 1995 Aleksander Kwaniewski of the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland was elected president and remained in that capacity for the next ten years (two terms). 

In 1997, the new Constitution of Poland was finalized and approved in a referendum, replacing the previously used amended communist statute. . 

Poland joined NATO in 1999. . Elements of the Polish Armed Forces have since participated in the Iraq War and the Afghanistan War. Poland joined the European Union in May 2004. The two memberships were indicative of the Third Polish Republic's integration with the West.

European labor markets were gradually opened to Polish workers, which helped to reduce Poland's sometimes 20% unemployment by up to 50% (over two million emigrated). The influx of European Union funds allowed long-term structural economic improvements. Poland was able to withstand the damage of the 2008 economic crisis better than many other European countries.

==See also==

*History of Austria
*History of Belarus
*History of the Czech Republic
*History of Europe
*History of the European Union
*History of Germany
*History of Lithuania
*History of Russia
*History of Slovakia
*History of Sweden
*History of Ukraine
*List of Kings of Poland
*List of Presidents of Poland
*List of Prime Ministers of Poland
*Military history of Poland
*Old Polish units of measurement
*Polish American
*Polish British
*Polish United Workers' Party
*Politics of Poland
*Slavery in Poland

*Sources to History of Poland 
*Atlas of Poland (many maps for History of Poland)

==Maps==
*Poland and West-Slavs 800950
*Poland 9901040
*Poland 10401090
*Poland 10901140
*Poland 11401250
*Poland 12501290
*Poland 12901333
*Poland 13331350
*Poland 13501370
*Poland 1550
*Poland 1773
*Poland 2004
*Poland (flash version)

== Notes ==

a.Pisudski's family roots in the Polonized gentry of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the resulting perspective of seeing himself and people like him as legitimate Lithuanians put him in conflict with modern Lithuanian nationalists (who in Pisudski's lifetime redefined the scope of the meaning of "Lithuanian"), and by extension with other nationalists and also with the Polish modern nationalist movement. . 

b.In 1938 Poland and Romania refused to agree to a Franco-British proposal that in the event of war with Germany Soviet forces would be allowed to cross their territories to aid Czechoslovakia. The Polish ruling elites considered the Soviets in some ways more threatening than the Nazis. . . 

The Soviet Union repeatedly declared its intention to fulfill its obligations under the 1935 treaty with Czechoslovakia and defend Czechoslovakia militarily. A transfer of land and air forces through Poland and/or Romania was required and the Soviets approached the French about it, who also had a treaty with Czechoslovakia (and with Poland). Edward Rydz-migy rebuked the French suggestion on that matter in 1936, and in 1938 Jzef Beck pressured Romania not to allow even Soviet warplanes to fly over its territory. Like Hungary, Poland was looking into using the German-Czechoslovak conflict to settle its own territorial grievances, namely disputes over parts of Zaolzie, Spi and Orava. . 

Poland and the Baltic areas after the treaties of Versailles and Brest-Litovsk and before the Peace of Riga

c.An establishment of Poland restricted to "minimal size", according to ethnographic boundaries (such as those shown on this 1920 map, or the lands common to both prewar Poland and postwar Poland), . was planned by the Soviet People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs in 194344, and recommended by Ivan Maisky to Vyacheslav Molotov in early 1944 because of what Maisky saw as Poland's historically unfriendly disposition toward Russia and the Soviet Union. Joseph Stalin opted for a larger version, allowing a "swap" (territorial compensation for Poland), which involved the eastern lands gained by Poland at the Peace of Riga of 1921 and now lost, and eastern Germany conquered from the Nazis in 194445. . . In regard to the several disputed areas, including Stettin, "Zakerzonia" and Biaystok (Biaystok was claimed by the communists of the Byelorussian SSR), the Soviet leader made decisions that favored Poland.

Other territorial and ethnic scenarios were also possible, generally with outcomes less advantageous to Poland than its present form. . 

d.Timothy Snyder spoke of about 100,000 Jews killed by Poles during the Nazi occupation, the majority probably by members of the collaborationist Blue Police. . This number would have likely been many times higher had Poland entered into an alliance with Germany in 1939, as advocated by some Polish historians and others.

e.Some may have falsely claimed Jewish identity hoping for permission to emigrate. The communist authorities, pursuing the concept of a Poland of single ethnicity (in accordance with the recent border changes and expulsions), . were allowing the Jews to leave the country. . For a discussion of early communist Poland's ethnic politics, see Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, chapters on modern "Ukrainian Borderland".

f.A Communist Party of Poland had existed in the past, but was eliminated in Stalin's purges in 1938. . 

g.The Soviet leadership, which had previously ordered the crushing of the Uprising in East Germany, the Hungarian Revolution and the Prague Spring, now became worried about the demoralization of the Polish army, a crucial Warsaw Pact component, because of its deployment against Polish workers. The Soviets withdrew their support for Gomuka, who insisted on the use of force; he and his close associates were subsequently ousted from the Polish Politburo by the Polish Central Committee. . 

h.East of the Molotov-Ribbentrop line, the population was 43% Polish, 33% Ukrainian, 8% Belarusian and 8% Jewish. The Soviet Union did not want to appear as an aggressor, and moved its troops to Eastern Poland under the pretext of offering protection to "the kindred Ukrainian and Belorussian people". 

i.Joseph Stalin at the 1943 Tehran Conference discussed with Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt new post-war borders in central-eastern Europe, including the shape of a future Poland. He endorsed the Piast Concept, which justified a massive shift of Poland's frontiers to the west. . Stalin resolved to secure and stabilize the western reaches of the Soviet Union and disable the future military potential of Germany by constructing a compact and ethnically-defined Poland (along with the Soviet ethnic Ukraine, Belarus and Lithuania) and by radically altering the region's system of national borders. . After 1945 the Polish communist regime wholeheartedly adopted and promoted the Piast Concept, making it the centerpiece of their claim to be the true inheritors of Polish nationalism. After all the killings and population transfers during and after the war the country was 99% "Polish." . 

j."All the currently available documents of Nazi administration show that, together with the Jews, the stratum of the Polish intelligentsia was marked for total extermination. In fact, Nazi Germany achieved this goal almost by half, since Poland lost 50 percent of her citizens with university diplomas and 35 percent of those with a gimnazium diploma." . 

k.Decisive political events took place in Poland shortly before the Soviet intervention in Hungary. Wadysaw Gomuka, a reformist leader at that time, was reinstated to the Polish Politburo and the Eighth Plenum of the party's Central Committee was announced to convene on October 19, 1956, all without seeking Soviet approval. The Soviet Union responded with military moves and intimidation and its "military-political delegation", led by Nikita Khrushchev, quickly arrived in Warsaw. Gomuka tried to convince them of his loyalty but insisted on the reforms which he considered essential, including a replacement of Poland's Soviet-trusted minister of defense, Konstantin Rokossovsky. The disconcerted Soviets returned to Moscow, the Polish Plenum elected Gomuka First Secretary and removed Rokossovsky from the Politburo. On October 21, the Soviet Presidium followed Khrushchev's lead and decided unanimously to "refrain from military intervention" in Poland, a decision likely influenced also by the ongoing preparations for the invasion of Hungary. The Soviet gamble paid off because Gomuka in the coming years turned out to be a very dependable Soviet ally and an orthodox communist. 

Unlike the other Warsaw Pact countries, Poland did not endorse the Soviet armed intervention in Hungary. The Hungarian Uprising was intensely supported by the Polish public. . 

l.The delayed reinforcements were coming and the government military commanders General Tadeusz Rozwadowski and Wadysaw Anders wanted to keep on fighting the coup perpetrators, but President Stanisaw Wojciechowski and the government decided to surrender to prevent the imminent spread of civil war. The coup brought to power the "Sanation" regime under Jzef Pisudski and Edward Rydz-migy after Pisudski's death. The Sanation regime persecuted the opposition within the military and in general. Rozwadowski died after abusive imprisonment, according to some accounts murdered. According to Aleksandra Pisudska, the Marshal's wife, following the coup and for the rest of his life Pisudski lost his composure and appeared over-burdened. . 

At the time of Rydz-migy's command, the Sanation camp embraced the ideology of Roman Dmowski, Pisudski's nemesis. Rydz-migy did not allow General Wadysaw Sikorski, an anti-Sanation enemy, to participate as a soldier in the defense of the country in September 1939. During World War II in France and Britain the Polish government in exile became dominated by anti-Sanation politicians. The perceived Sanation followers were in turn persecuted (in exile) under prime ministers Sikorski and Stanisaw Mikoajczyk. . 

m.General Zygmunt Berling of the Soviet-allied First Polish Army attempted in mid-September a crossing of the Vistula and landing at Czerniakw to aid the insurgents, but the operation was defeated by the Germans and the Poles suffered heavy losses. . 

n.The decision to launch the Warsaw Uprising resulted in the destruction of the city, its population and its elites and has been a source of lasting controversy. . . According to the historians Czesaw Brzoza and Andrzej Leon Sowa, orders of further military offensives, issued at the end of August 1944 as a part of Operation Tempest, show the loss of the sense of responsibility for the country's fate on the part of the Polish leadership. 

o.One of the party leaders Mieczysaw Rakowski, who abandoned his mentor Gomuka following the 1970 crisis, saw the demands of the demonstrating workers as "exclusively socialist" in character, because of the way they were phrased. . Most people in communist Poland, including opposition activists, did not question the supremacy of "socialism" or the socialist idea; misconduct by party officials, such as not following the provisions of the constitution, was blamed. This assumed standard of political correctness was increasingly challenged in the years that followed, when pluralism became a frequently used concept. . 

p.The Polish Sanation authorities were provoked by the independence-seeking Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN). OUN engaged in political assassinations, terror and sabotage, to which the Polish state responded with a repressive campaign in the 1930s, as Jzef Pisudski and his successors imposed collective responsibility on the villagers in the affected areas. After the disturbances of 1933 and 1934, a prison camp in Bereza Kartuska was established, which became notorious for its brutal regime. The government brought Polish settlers and administrators to Volhynian areas with a centuries-old tradition of Ukrainian peasant rising against Polish land owners (and to Eastern Galicia). In the late 1930s, after Pisudski's death, military persecution intensified and a policy of "national assimilation" was aggressively pursued. Military raids, public beatings, property confiscations and the closing and destruction of Orthodox churches aroused lasting enmity in Galicia and antagonized Ukrainian society in Volhynia at, according to Timothy Snyder, the worst possible moment. However, he also notes that "Ukrainian terrorism and Polish reprisals touched only part of the population, leaving vast regions unaffected" and "the OUN's nationalist prescription, a Ukrainian state for ethnic Ukrainians alone was far from popular." Halik Kochanski wrote of the legacy of bitterness between the Ukrainians and Poles that soon exploded in the context of the World War II. . . See also: History of the Ukrainian minority in Poland.

r.Foreign policy was one of the few governmental areas in which Pisudski took an active interest. He saw Poland's role and opportunity as lying in Eastern Europe and advocated passive relations with the West. He felt that a German attack should not be feared because, even if this unlikely event were to take place, the Western powers would be bound to restrain Germany and come to Poland's rescue. . 

s.According to the researcher Jan Sowa, the Commonwealth failed as a state because it was not able to conform to the emerging new European order established at the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. Poland's elective kings, restricted by the self-serving but short-sighted nobility, could not impose a strong and efficient central government, with its characteristic post-Westphalian internal and external sovereignty. The inability of Polish kings to levy and collect taxes (and therefore sustain a standing army) and conduct independent foreign policy were among the chief obstacles to Poland competing effectively on the changed European scene, where absolutist power was a prerequisite for survival and became the foundation for the abolition of serfdom and gradual formation of parliamentarism. 

t.Besides the Home Army (Armia Krajowa) there were other major underground fighting formations: Bataliony Chopskie, Narodowe Siy Zbrojne and Gwardia Ludowa (later Armia Ludowa). In 1943 the leaders of the nationalistic Narodowe Siy Zbrojne collaborated with Nazi Germany in a case unique in occupied Poland. The NSZ conducted an anti-communist civil war. . According to the historians Czesaw Brzoza and Andrzej Leon Sowa, participation figures given for this are often inflated. In the spring of 1944, at the time of the most extensive involvement of the underground organizations, there were most likely considerably fewer than a total 500,000 military and civilian personnel participating, over the entire spectrum, from the right wing to the communists. 

u.About 1.1 million people may have been imprisoned or detained in 194456 and about 50,000 may have died because of the struggle and persecution, including about 7,000 soldiers of the right-wing underground killed in the 1940s. 

v.According to Andrzej Stelmachowski, one of the key participants of the Polish systemic transformation, Minister Leszek Balcerowicz pursued extremely liberal economic policies, often unusually painful for society. The December 1989 Sejm statute of credit relations reform introduced an "incredible" system of privileges for banks. Banks were allowed unilaterally to alter interest rates on already existing contracts. The extremely high rates they instantly introduced ruined many previously profitable enterprises and caused a complete breakdown of the apartment block construction industry, which had long-term deleterious effects on the state budget as well. Balcerowicz's policies also caused permanent damage to Polish agriculture, which Balcerowicz "did not understand", and to the often successful and useful Polish cooperative movement. . 

w.Led by Wadysaw Anders, the Polish II Corps fought at the famous Battle of Monte Cassino in 1944, as part of the Allied Italian Campaign. . 

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

==Further reading==
More recent general history of Poland books in English

*Biskupski, M. B. The History of Poland. Greenwood, 2000. 264 pp. online edition
*The Cambridge History of Poland, 2 vols., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1941 (16971935), 1950 (to 1696). New York: Octagon Books, 1971 online edition vol 1 to 1696, old fashioned but highly detailed
*Frucht, Richard. Encyclopedia of Eastern Europe: From the Congress of Vienna to the Fall of Communism Garland Pub., 2000 online edition
*Oskar Halecki. History of Poland, New York: Roy Publishers, 1942. New York: Barnes and Noble, 1993, ISBN 0-679-51087-7
*Kenney, Padraic. After the Blank Spots Are Filled: Recent Perspectives on Modern Poland, Journal of Modern History Volume 79, Number 1, March 2007 pp 13461, historiography
*Stefan Kieniewicz, History of Poland, Hippocrene Books, 1982, ISBN 0-88254-695-3
*Kloczowski, Jerzy. A History of Polish Christianity. Cambridge U. Pr., 2000. 385 pp.
*Lerski, George J. Historical Dictionary of Poland, 966-1945. Greenwood, 1996. 750 pp. online edition
*Leslie, R. F. et al. The History of Poland since 1863. Cambridge U. Press, 1980. 494 pp.
*Lewinski-Corwin, Edward Henry. The Political History of Poland (1917), well-illustrated; 650pp online at books.google.com
*Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski. Poland: An Illustrated History, New York: Hippocrene Books, 2000, ISBN 0-7818-0757-3
*Pogonowski, Iwo Cyprian. Poland: A Historical Atlas. Hippocrene, 1987. 321 pp.
*Radzilowski, John. A Traveller's History of Poland, Northampton, Massachusetts: Interlink Books, 2007, ISBN 1-56656-655-X
*Roos, Hans. A History of Modern Poland (1966)
*Sanford, George. Historical Dictionary of Poland. Scarecrow Press, 2003. 291 pp.
*Wrbel, Piotr. Historical Dictionary of Poland, 1945-1996. Greenwood, 1998. 397 pp.

Published in Poland

*History of Poland, Aleksander Gieysztor et al. Warsaw: PWN, 1968
*History of Poland, Stefan Kieniewicz et al. Warsaw: PWN, 1979
*An Outline History of Poland, by Jerzy Topolski. Warsaw: Interpress Publishers, 1986, ISBN 83-223-2118-X
*An Illustrated History of Poland, by Dariusz Banaszak, Tomasz Biber, Maciej Leszczyski. Pozna: Publicat, 2008, ISBN 978-83-245-1587-5
*Poland: History of Poland, by Stanisaw Koodziejski, Roman Marcinek, Jakub Polit. Krakw: Wydawnictwo Ryszard Kluszczyski, 2005, 2009, ISBN 83-7447-018-6

==External links==
* Publications and academic lectures on History of Poland, full text
; Movie (on-line):
* Animated history of Poland, (PARP, Expo 2010 Shanghai China)
* Borders of Poland, A.D. 990 - 2008
; Other:
*
*History of Poland, in paintings
*History of Poland on Historycy.org forum
*Commonwealth of Diverse Cultures: Poland's Heritage
* "Poland, Christianity in" The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (1910) vol 9 pp 104-8

 



[[Hradany]]

Hradany from the Petn Tower

Hradany (common ; ), the Castle District, is the district of the city of Prague, Czech Republic, surrounding the Prague Castle.

The castle is said to be the biggest castle in the world at about 570 meters in length and an average of about 130 meters wide. Its history stretches back to the 9th century. St Vitus Cathedral is located in the castle area.

Most of the district consists of noble historical palaces. There are many other attractions for visitors: romantic nooks, peaceful places and beautiful lookouts.

Hradany was an independent borough until 1784, when the four independent boroughs that had formerly constituted Prague were proclaimed a single city. The other three were: Mal Strana (, ), Star Msto (, ), and Nov Msto (, ).

==References==

 

==External links==

* Official Website of the City of Prague
* Hradany - Prague-wiki
*Fullscreen QTVR virtual tour of Hradany and Prague Castle

==Photo gallery==

Image:NearPrazhskyHrad.jpg|The architecture of Hradany Neighborhood
Image:Hradcany11.jpg|In a quiet corner of Hradany neighborhood.
Image:Hradcany1927.JPG|The promenade at Hradany
Image:HardcanyLittlePark.JPG|A little park a few steps away from Prague Castle



[[Houston]]

Houston ( ) is the largest city in Texas and the fourth-largest city in the United States. According to the 2012 U.S. Census estimates, the city had a population of 2.16 million people within a land area of 599.6 sqmi. Houston is the seat of Harris County, and Greater Houston is the fifth-largest in the U.S., with over 6 million people. 

Houston was founded in 1836 on land near the banks of Bayou (now known as Allen's Landing) and incorporated as a city on June 5, 1837. The city was named after former General Sam Houston, who was president of the Republic of Texas and had commanded and won at the Battle of San Jacinto 25 mi east of where the city was established. The burgeoning port and railroad industry, combined with oil discovery in 1901, has induced continual surges in the city's population. In the mid-twentieth century, Houston became the home of the Texas Medical Center&mdash;the world's largest concentration of healthcare and research institutions&mdash;and NASA's Johnson Space Center, where the Mission Control Center is located. Texas Medical Center. (2006). In 'A Vision for Strategic Growth'. September 14, 2010 

Houston's economy has a broad industrial base in energy, manufacturing, aeronautics, and transportation. It is also leading in health care sectors and building oilfield equipment; only New York City is home to more Fortune 500 headquarters. [http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500/2011/cities/ Fortune 500 2010: Cities Accessed May 25, 2011 The Port of Houston ranks first in the United States in international waterborne tonnage handled and second in total cargo tonnage handled. The city has a population from various ethnic and religious backgrounds and a large and growing international community. It is home to many cultural institutions and exhibits, which attract more than 7 million visitors a year to the Museum District. Houston has an active visual and performing arts scene in the Theater District and offers year-round resident companies in all major performing arts. "", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. 

== History ==

Sam Houston
In August 1836, two real estate entrepreneursAugustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allenfrom New York, purchased 6642 acre of land along Buffalo Bayou with the intent of founding a city. The Allen brothers decided to name the city after Sam Houston, the popular general at the Battle of San Jacinto, who was elected President of Texas in September 1836.

Houston was granted incorporation on June 5, 1837, with James S. Holman becoming its first mayor. Houston, Texas. Handbook of Texas Online. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. In the same year, Houston became the county seat of Harrisburg County (now Harris County) and the temporary capital of the Republic of Texas. In 1840, the community established a chamber of commerce in part to promote shipping and waterborne business at the newly created port on Buffalo Bayou. Born on the Bayou: city's murky start. John Perry, City Savvy Online Edition. Published Summer 2006. Retrieved on 2007-02-06. 

Houston, circa 1873

By 1860, Houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton. Railroad spurs from the Texas inland converged in Houston, where they met rail lines to the ports of Galveston and Beaumont. During the American Civil War, Houston served as a headquarters for General John Bankhead Magruder, who used the city as an organization point for the Battle of Galveston. After the Civil War, Houston businessmen initiated efforts to widen the city's extensive system of bayous so the city could accept more commerce between downtown and the nearby port of Galveston. By 1890, Houston was the railroad center of Texas.

Union Station, Houston, Texas (postcard, circa 1911)

In 1900, after Galveston was struck by a devastating hurricane, efforts to make Houston into a viable deep-water port were accelerated. J.H.W. Stele to Sayers, September 1112, 1900. Texas State Library & Archives Commission, Retrieved on August 31, 2007 The following year, oil discovered at the Spindletop oil field near Beaumont prompted the development of the Texas petroleum industry. In 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt approved a $1 million improvement project for the Houston Ship Channel. By 1910 the city's population had reached 78,800, almost doubling from a decade before. African-Americans formed a large part of the city's population, numbering 23,929 people, or nearly one-third of the residents. 

President Woodrow Wilson opened the deep-water Port of Houston in 1914, seven years after digging began. By 1930, Houston had become Texas' most populous city and Harris the most populous county. In 1940, the Census Bureau reported Houston's population as 77.5% white and 22.4% black. 

Downtown Houston, circa 1927

When World War II started, tonnage levels at the port decreased and shipping activities were suspended; however, the war did provide economic benefits for the city. Petrochemical refineries and manufacturing plants were constructed along the ship channel because of the demand for petroleum and synthetic rubber products during the war. Ellington Field, initially built during World War I, was revitalized as an advanced training center for bombardiers and navigators. The Brown Shipbuilding Company was founded in 1942 to build ships for the U.S. Navy during World War II. The M.D. Anderson Foundation formed the Texas Medical Center in 1945. After the war, Houston's economy reverted to being primarily port-driven. In 1948, several unincorporated areas were annexed into the city limits, which more than doubled the city's size, and Houston proper began to spread across the region. 

In 1950, the availability of air conditioning provided impetus for many companies to relocate to Houston resulting in an economic boom and producing a key shift in the city's economy toward the energy sector. How Air Conditioning Changed America. The Old House Web, Retrieved on April 4, 2007 A Short History. Houston Geological Auxiliary, Retrieved on April 4, 2007 Ashburn's Houston City Map (circa 1956)

The space shuttle Challenger atop its Boeing 747 SCA, flying over Johnson Space Center, 1983.
The increased production of the local shipbuilding industry during World War II spurred Houston's growth, as did the establishment in 1961 of NASA's "Manned Spacecraft Center" (renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973), which created the city's aerospace industry. The Astrodome, nicknamed the "Eighth Wonder of the World", opened in 1965 as the world's first indoor domed sports stadium.

During the late 1970s, Houston experienced a population boom as people from the Rust Belt states moved to Texas in large numbers. The new residents came for numerous employment opportunities in the petroleum industry, created as a result of the Arab Oil Embargo.

The population boom ended abruptly in the mid-1980s, as oil prices fell precipitously. The space industry also suffered in 1986 after the Space Shuttle Challenger disintegrated shortly after launch. The late 1980s saw a recession adversely affecting the city's economy.

After the early 1990s recession, Houston made efforts to diversify its economy by focusing on aerospace and health care/biotechnology and reduced its dependence on the petroleum industry, but as oil prices increased again in the 2000's, the petroleum industry has again increased it's share of the local economy.

In 1997, Houstonians elected Lee P. Brown as the city's first African American mayor. 

In June 2001, Tropical Storm Allison dumped up to 40 in of rain on parts of Houston, causing the worst flooding in the city's history. The storm cost billions of dollars in damage and killed 20 people in Texas. By December of that same year, Houston-based energy company Enron collapsed into the third-largest ever U.S. bankruptcy during an investigation surrounding fabricated partnerships that were allegedly used to hide debt and inflate profits.

In August 2005, Houston became a shelter to more than 150,000 people from New Orleans who evacuated from Hurricane Katrina. One month later, approximately 2.5 million Houston area residents evacuated when Hurricane Rita approached the Gulf Coast, leaving little damage to the Houston area. This was the largest urban evacuation in the history of the United States. 8th Congressional District of Texas 2007 Appropriations Project Requests. Congressman Kevin Brady, 8th District of Texas. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. 

== Geography ==

A simulated-color image of Houston

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 656.3 sqmi; this comprises 634.0 sqmi of land and 22.3 sqmi of water. Houston (city) QuickFacts from the US Census Bureau. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on 2009-02-28. 
Most of Houston is located on the gulf coastal plain, and its vegetation is classified as temperate grassland and forest. Much of the city was built on forested land, marshes, swamp, or prairie which resembles the Deep South, and are all still visible in surrounding areas. Flatness of the local terrain, when combined with urban sprawl, has made flooding a recurring problem for the city. Flood Forecasting for the Buffalo Bayou Using CRWR-PrePro and HEC-HMS. Center for Research in Water Resources, The University of Texas at Austin Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Downtown stands about 50 ft above sea level, Downtown Houston, Texas. TopoQuest.com Retrieved on 2008-07-05. and the highest point in far northwest Houston is about 125 ft in elevation. USGS Satsuma (TX) Topo Map. TopoQuest.com. 2008. Retrieved on 2008-07-05. Note: The boundaries of the City of Houston are shown as "HOUSTON CORP BDY" along the dotted line. Super Neighborhood# 1-Willowbrook. City of Houston. Retrieved on 2012-05-15. The city once relied on groundwater for its needs, but land subsidence forced the city to turn to ground-level water sources such as Lake Houston, Lake Conroe and Lake Livingston. . United States Geological Survey. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. The city owns surface water rights for 1.20 billion gallons of water a day in addition to 150 million gallons a day worth of groundwater. 

Houston has four major bayous passing through the city. Buffalo Bayou runs through downtown and the Houston Ship Channel, and has three tributaries: White Oak Bayou, which runs through the Houston Heights community northwest of Downtown and then towards Downtown; Braes Bayou, which runs along the Texas Medical Center; and Sims Bayou, which runs through the south of Houston and downtown Houston. The ship channel continues past Galveston and then into the Gulf of Mexico.

=== Geology ===
Underpinning Houston's land surface are unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands up to several miles deep. The region's geology developed from river deposits formed from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains. These sediments consist of a series of sands and clays deposited on decaying organic marine matter, that over time, transformed into oil and natural gas. Beneath the layers of sediment is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt. The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward. As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into salt dome formations, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands. The thick, rich, sometimes black, surface soil is suitable for rice farming in suburban outskirts where the city continues to grow. Harris County. Handbook of Texas Online. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. RICE CULTURE. Handbook of Texas Online. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. 

The Houston area has over 150 active faults (estimated to be 300 active faults) with an aggregate length of up to 310 mi, Earl R. Verbeek, Karl W. Ratzlaff, Uel S. Clanton. "Faults in Parts of North-Central and Western Houston Metropolitan Area, Texas", United States Geological Survey, 2005-09-16. Retrieved on 2006-12-14. Sachin D. Shah and Jennifer Lanning-Rush. Principal Faults in the Houston, Texas, Metropolitan Area, U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved on 2012-02-23. including the Long PointEureka Heights fault system which runs through the center of the city. There have been no significant historically recorded earthquakes in Houston, but researchers do not discount the possibility of such quakes having occurred in the deeper past, nor occurring in the future. Land in some areas southeast of Houston is sinking because water has been pumped out of the ground for many years. It may be associated with slip along the faults; however, the slippage is slow and not considered an earthquake, where stationary faults must slip suddenly enough to create seismic waves. Texas Earthquakes, University of Texas Institute for Geophysics, July 2001. Retrieved on 2007-08-29. These faults also tend to move at a smooth rate in what is termed "fault creep", which further reduces the risk of an earthquake.

=== Climate ===

Allen's Landing after Tropical Storm Allison, June 2001

Houston's climate is classified as humid subtropical (Cfa in Kppen climate classification system), typical of the lower South. While not located in "Tornado Alley", like much of the rest of Texas, spring supercell thunderstorms sometimes bring tornadoes to the area. Prevailing winds are from the south and southeast during most of the year, which bring heat and moisture from the nearby Gulf of Mexico. 

During the summer months, it is common for temperatures to reach over 90 F, with an average of 106.5 days per year, including a majority from June to September, with a high of 90 F or above and 4.6 days at or over 100 F. However, humidity usually yields a higher heat index. Summer mornings average over 90 percent relative humidity. "Average Relative Humidity (%)", National Climatic Data Center. Retrieved on 2012-02-23. Winds are often light in the summer and offer little relief, except in the far southeastern outskirts near the Gulf coast and Galveston. Afternoon thunderstorms are common.Wind - Average Speed (mph). Department of Meteorology, University of Utah. 1993. Retrieved on 2007-01-10 To cope with the heat, people use air conditioning in nearly every vehicle and building. In 1980, Houston was described as the "most air-conditioned place on earth". http://www.nbm.org/blueprints/90s/summer92/contents/contents.htm A MOMENT IN BUILDING. BLUEPRINTS, Volume X, Number 3, Summer 1992. National Building Museum. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. Officially, the hottest temperature ever recorded in Houston is 109 F, which was reached both on September 4, 2000 and August 28, 2011. 

Houston has mild winters in contrast to most areas of the United States. In January, the normal mean temperature at Intercontinental Airport is 53.1 F, while that station has an average of 13 days with a low at or below freezing. Snowfall is rare. Recent snow events in Houston include a storm on December 24, 2004 when one inch (2.5 cm) of snow accumulated in parts of the metro area. National Weather Service Forecast Office, Houston/Galveston, Texas. Retrieved on Dec. 1, 2006. Falls of at least one inch on both December 10, 2008 and December 4, 2009 marked the first time measurable snowfall had occurred in two consecutive years in the city's recorded history. The coldest temperature officially recorded in Houston was 5 F on January 23, 1940. Houston Extremes Data and Annual Summaries. National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Published 2007-01-05. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. Houston has historically received an ample amount of rainfall, averaging about 49.8 in annually per 19812010 normals. Localized flooding often occurs, owing to the extremely flat topography and widespread typical clay-silt prairie soils, which do not drain quickly.

Houston has excessive ozone levels and is routinely ranked among the most ozone-polluted cities in the United States. "State of the Air 2005, National and Regional Analysis", American Lung Association, page 26, 2005-03-25. Retrieved on 2006-02-17. Ground-level ozone, or smog, is Houston's predominant air pollution problem, with the American Lung Association rating the metropolitan area's ozone level as the 8th worst in the United States in 2011. "25 Most Ozone-Polluted Cities", American Lung Association. Retrieved on 2011-06-06. The industries located along the ship channel are a major cause of the city's air pollution. "Summary of the Issues", Citizens League for Environmental Action Now , 2004-08-01. Retrieved on 2006-02-17. In 2006, Houston's air quality was comparable to that of Los Angeles. 

=== Cityscape ===

Houston was incorporated in 1837 under the ward system of representation. The ward designation is the progenitor of the eleven current-day geographically oriented Houston City Council districts. Locations in Houston are generally classified as either being inside or outside the Interstate 610 Loop. The inside encompasses the central business district and many residential neighborhoods that predate World War II. More recently, high-density residential areas have been developed within the loop. The city's outlying areas, suburbs and enclaves are located outside of the loop. Beltway 8 encircles the city another 5 mi farther out.

Though Houston is the largest city in the United States without formal zoning regulations, it has developed similarly to other Sun Belt cities because the city's land use regulations and legal covenants have played a similar role. Regulations include mandatory lot size for single-family houses and requirements that parking be available to tenants and customers. Such restrictions have had mixed results. Though some have blamed the city's low density, urban sprawl, and lack of pedestrian-friendliness on these policies, the city's land use has also been credited with having significant affordable housing, sparing Houston the worst effects of the 2008 real estate crisis. The city issued 42,697 building permits in 2008 and was ranked first in the list of healthiest housing markets for 2009. 

Voters rejected efforts to have separate residential and commercial land-use districts in 1948, 1962, and 1993. Consequently, rather than a single central business district as the center of the city's employment, multiple districts have grown throughout the city in addition to downtown which include Uptown, Texas Medical Center, Midtown, Greenway Plaza, Memorial City, Energy Corridor, Westchase, and Greenspoint.

=== Architecture ===
Three eras of buildings: JPMorgan Chase Building (1920s), Pennzoil Place (1970s), and Bank of America Center (1980s)
Northern Downtown Houston has buildings of various styles and eras.

Houston has the third tallest skyline in North America and twelfth tallest in the world, as of 2011. "Calculated Average Height of the Ten Tallest (CAHTT)", UltrapolisProject.com. Retrieved on 2007-07-01. A seven-mile (11 km) system of tunnels and skywalks link downtown buildings containing shops and restaurants, enabling pedestrians to avoid summer heat and rain while walking between buildings.

In the 1960s, Downtown Houston consisted of a collection of mid-rise office structures. Downtown was on the threshold of an energy industry led boom in 1970. A succession of skyscrapers were built throughout the 1970smany by real estate developer Gerald D. Hinesculminating with Houston's tallest skyscraper, the 75-floor, 1002 ft-tall JPMorgan Chase Tower (formerly the Texas Commerce Tower), completed in 1982. It is the tallest structure in Texas, 13th tallest building in the United States and the 30th tallest skyscraper in the world, based on height to roof. In 1983, the 71-floor, 992 ft-tall Wells Fargo Plaza (formerly Allied Bank Plaza) was completed, becoming the second-tallest building in Houston and Texas. Based on height to roof, it is the 13th tallest in the United States and the 36th tallest in the world. In 2007, downtown Houston had over 43 million square feet (4,000,000 m) of office space. Fast Facts, Downtown Houston. Houstondowntown.com 2006. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. 

Centered on Post Oak Boulevard and Westheimer Road, the Uptown District boomed during the 1970s and early 1980s when a collection of mid-rise office buildings, hotels, and retail developments appeared along Interstate 610 west. Uptown became one of the most prominent instances of an edge city. The tallest building in Uptown is the 64-floor, 901 ft-tall, Philip Johnson and John Burgee designed landmark Williams Tower (known as the Transco Tower until 1999). At the time of construction, it was believed to the be the world's tallest skyscraper outside of a central business district. The new 20-story Skanska building and BBVA Compass Plaza - Houston Chronicle are the newest office buildings built in the Galleria area after thirty years. The Uptown District is also home to buildings designed by noted architects I. M. Pei, Csar Pelli, and Philip Johnson. In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade, there was a mini-boom of mid-rise and high-rise residential tower construction, with several over 30 stories tall. Residential Real Estate. Uptown-houston.com Retrieved on 2007-01-11. In 2002, Uptown had more than 23 million square feet (2,100,000 m) of office space with 16 million square feet (1,500,000 m) of Class A office space. Commercial Real Estate. Uptown-houston.com Retrieved on 2007-01-10. 

File:Niels Esperson Building.jpg|The Niels Esperson Building stood as the tallest building in Houston from 1927 to 1929.
File:Chase Tower, a block away.jpg|The JPMorgan Chase Tower is the tallest building in Texas and the tallest 5-sided building in the world.
File:Williamstower.jpg|The Williams Tower is the tallest building in the U.S. outside of a central business district.
File:Bank of America Center Houston 1.jpg|The Bank of America Center by Philip Johnson is an example of postmodern architecture.
File:JPMorgan Chase Tower, Houston, Texas.jpg|JPMorgan Chase Tower in Houston, Texas is the tallest composite building in the world

== Demographics ==

Map of racial/ethnic distribution in the city of Houston, 2010 census. Each dot represents 25 people. Red dots represent White people, orange dots represent Hispanic people, blue dots represent Black people, green dots represent Asian people, and gray dots represent other people
Houston is multicultural, in part because of its many academic institutions and strong industries as well as being a major port city. Over 90 languages are spoken in the city. "Houston Facts and Figures", City of Houston. Retrieved on 2006-12-15. It has among the youngest populations in the nation, . East-West Gateway Council of Governments. 2006. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. Page 25 in PDF File, labeled as page 21. Houston city, Texas. 2005 American Community Survey Data Profile Highlights, United States Census Bureau. 2005. Retrieved on 2007-01-12. United States and States R0101. Median Age of the Total Population: 2005. 2005 American Community Survey, United States Census Bureau. 2005. Retrieved on 2007-01-12. partly due to an influx of immigrants into Texas. The Face of Texas Jobs, People, Business, Change. D'Ann Petersen and Laila Assanie, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. October 2005. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. An estimated 400,000 undocumented people reside in the Houston area. 

According to the 2010 Census, whites made up 51% of Houston's population; 26% of the total population were non-Hispanic whites. Blacks or African Americans made up 24% of Houston's population. American Indians made up 0.7% of the population. Asians made up 6% (1.7% Vietnamese, 1.3% Chinese, 1.3% Indian, 0.9% Pakistani, 0.4% Filipino, 0.3% Korean, 0.1% Japanese), while Pacific Islanders made up 0.1%. Individuals from some other race made up 15.2% of the city's population, of which 0.2% were non-Hispanic. Individuals from two or more races made up 3.3% of the city. People of Hispanic origin, regardless of race, made up 44% of Houston's population. 

At the 2000 Census, there were 1,953,631 people and the population density was 3,371.7 people per square mile (1,301.8/km). The racial makeup of the city was 49.3% White, 25.3% African American, 5.3% Asian, 0.4% American Indian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 16.5% from some other race, and 3.1% from two or more races. In addition, Hispanics made up 37.4% of Houston's population while non-Hispanic whites made up 30.8%, down from 62.4% in 1970. 

The median income for a household in the city was $37,000, and the median income for a family was $40,000. Males had a median income of $32,000 versus $27,000 for females. The per capita income was $20,000. Nineteen percent of the population and 16% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 26% of those under the age of 18 and 14% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

 Racial composition 2010 1990 1970 
 White 50.5% 52.7% 73.4% 
 Non-Hispanic 25.6% 40.6% 62.4% From 15% sample 
 Black or African American 23.7% 28.1% 25.7% 
 Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 43.8% 27.6% 11.3% 
 Asian 6.0% 4.1% 0.4% 

== Economy ==

 Top publicly traded companies in Houston for 2013with Texas and U.S. ranks 
 Texas Corporation US 
 2 Phillips 66 4 
 5 ConocoPhillips 45 
 7 Enterprise Products Partners 64 
 8 Sysco 65 
 9 Plains All American Pipeline 77 
 11 Halliburton 106 
 14 Baker Hughes 135 
 18 National Oilwell Varco 144 
 21 Apache Corporation 167 
 22 Marathon Oil 174 
 23 Waste Management 200 
 29 EOG Resources 233 
 30 Kinder Morgan 265 
 34 Cameron International 310 
 35 KBR 334 
 37 Group 1 Automotive 343 
 38 CenterPoint Energy 344 
 39 Enbridge Energy Partners 38` 
 42 Quanta Services 413 
 44 FMC Technologies 417 
 46 Targa Resources 435 
 48 MRC Global 451 
 49 Calpine 459 
 51 Spectra Energy 451 
 Notes 
 Rankings for fiscal year ended January 31, 2013. 
 Energy and oil (22 companies) 
 Source: Fortune Fortune 500 web site as retrieved on December 12, 2013 

Port of Houston along the Houston Ship Channel
Houston is recognized worldwide for its energy industryparticularly for oil and natural gasas well as for biomedical research and aeronautics. Renewable energy sourceswind and solarare also growing economic bases in Houston. The ship channel is also a large part of Houston's economic base. Because of these strengths, Houston is designated as a global city by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network and by global management consulting firm A.T. Kearney. The Houston area is the top U.S. market for exports, surpassing New York City in 2013, according to data released by the U.S. Department of Commerces International Trade Administration. In 2012, the HoustonThe WoodlandsSugar Land area recorded $110.3 billion in merchandise exports. Houston surpasses New York as top U.S. export market - Houston Business Journal. Bizjournals.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-21. Petroleum products, chemicals, and oil and gas extraction equipment accounted for approximately two-thirds of the metropolitan area's exports last year. The top three destinations for exports were Mexico, Canada, and Brazil. Houston Passes New York to Become Nation's Top Exporting Metro Area. App1.kuhf.org (2013-07-12). Retrieved on 2013-07-21. 

The Houston area is a leading center for building oilfield equipment. "", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. Much of Houston's success as a petrochemical complex is due to its busy ship channel, the Port of Houston. "", The Port of Houston Authority, 2007-05-15. Retrieved on 2007-05-27. The port ranks first in the United States in international commerce, and is the tenth-largest port in the world. "General Information", The Port of Houston Authority, 2007-05-15. Retrieved on 2007-05-27. Unlike most places, high oil and gasoline prices are beneficial for Houston's economy as many of its residents are employed in the energy industry. 

The HoustonThe WoodlandsSugar Land MSA's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012 was $449 billion, the fourth-largest of any metropolitan area in the United States and larger than Austria's, Venezuela's or South Africa's GDP. Only 26 countries other than the United States have a gross domestic product exceeding Houston's regional gross area product. In 2010, mining, which in Houston consists almost entirely of exploration and production of oil and gas, accounted for 26.3% of Houston's GAP, up sharply in response to high energy prices and a decreased worldwide surplus of oil production capacity; followed by engineering services, health services, and manufacturing. "", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. 

A graph showing the major sectors of the Houston economy. 

The University of Houston System's annual impact on the Houston-area's economy equates to that of a major corporation: $1.1 billion in new funds attracted annually to the Houston area, $3.13 billion in total economic benefit, and 24,000 local jobs generated. This is in addition to the 12,500 new graduates the UH System produces every year who enter the workforce in Houston and throughout Texas. These degree-holders tend to stay in Houston. After five years, 80.5 percent of graduates are still living and working in the region. 

In 2006, the Houston metropolitan area ranked first in Texas and third in the U.S. within the Category of "Best Places for Business and Careers" by Forbes magazine. Badenhausen, Kurt. "2006 Best Places for Business and Careers", Forbes, 2006-05-04. Retrieved on 2006-12-15. Foreign governments have established 92 consular offices in metropolitan Houston, the third highest in the nation. Forty foreign governments maintain trade and commercial offices here and 23 active foreign chambers of commerce and trade associations. "", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. Twenty-five foreign banks representing 13 nations operate in Houston, providing financial assistance to the international community. 

In 2008, Houston received top ranking on Kiplinger's Personal Finance Best Cities of 2008 list which ranks cities on their local economy, employment opportunities, reasonable living costs and quality of life. The city ranked fourth for highest increase in the local technological innovation over the preceding 15 years, according to Forbes magazine. In the same year, the city ranked second on the annual Fortune 500 list of company headquarters, ranked first for Forbes Best Cities for College Graduates, and ranked first on Forbes list of Best Cities to Buy a Home. In 2010, the city was rated the best city for shopping, according to Forbes. 

In 2012, the city was ranked #1 for paycheck worth by Forbes; and in late May 2013, Houston was identified as America's top city for employment creation. 

In 2013, Houston was identified as the #1 U.S. city for job creation by the U.S. Bureau of Statistics after it was not only the first major city to regain all the jobs lost in the preceding economic downturn, but after the crash, more than two jobs were added for every one lost. Economist and vice president of research at the Greater Houston Partnership Patrick Jankowski attributed Houston's success to the ability of the region's real estate and energy industries to learn from historical mistakes. Furthermore, Jankowski stated that "more than 100 foreign-owned companies relocated, expanded or started new businesses in Houston" between 2008 and 2010, and this openness to external business boosted job creation during a period when domestic demand was problematically low. Also in 2013, Houston again appeared on Forbes list of Best Places for Business and Careers. 

== Culture ==

Houston Art Car Parade
Located in the American South, Houston is a diverse city with a large and growing international community. The metropolitan area is home to an estimated 1.1 million (21.4 percent) residents who were born outside the United States, with nearly two-thirds of the area's foreign-born population from south of the United StatesMexico border. Additionally, more than one in five foreign-born residents are from Asia. The city is home to the nation's third-largest concentration of consular offices, representing 86 countries. 

Many annual events celebrate the diverse cultures of Houston. The largest and longest running is the annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, held over 20 days from late February to early March, is the largest annual livestock show and rodeo in the world. Another large celebration is the annual night-time Houston Pride Parade, held at the end of June. Other annual events include the Houston Greek Festival, The Original Greek Festival, Houston, Texas. 2006. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Warning: Automatic sound file. Art Car Parade, the Houston Auto Show, the Houston International Festival, The Houston International Festival. 2007. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. and the Bayou City Art Festival, which is considered to be one of the top five art festivals in the United States. 

Houston received the official nickname of "Space City" in 1967 because it is the location of NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. Other nicknames often used by locals include "Bayou City", "Clutch City", "Magnolia City", "New Houston" (a tribute to the cultural contributions of New Orleans natives who left their city during the 2005 Hurricane Katrina catastrophe), and "H-Town".

=== Arts and theater ===
Hobby Center for the Performing Arts
Museum of Fine Arts, Houston
Houston Museum of Natural Science
The Houston Theater District, located downtown, is home to nine major performing arts organizations and six performance halls. It is the second-largest concentration of theater seats in a downtown area in the United States. Ramsey, Cody. "In a state of big, Houston is at the top", Texas Monthly, September 2002. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "About Houston Theater District", Houston Theater District. Retrieved on 2006-12-16. Archived at the Internet Archive Wayback Machine. Houston is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Houston Grand Opera), ballet (Houston Ballet), music (Houston Symphony Orchestra), and theater (The Alley Theatre). "Performing Arts Venues", Houston Theater District. Retrieved on 2006-12-16. Archived at the Internet Archive Wayback Machine. Houston is also home to folk artists, art groups and various small progressive arts organizations. "A Brief History of the Art Car Museum", ArtCar Museum of Houston. Retrieved on 2006-12-16. Houston attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions for a variety of interests. 2006 fall edition of International Quilt Festival attracts 53,546 to Houston. Quilts., Inc. Press release published 2006-11-30. Retrieved on 2007-01-12. Facilities in the Theater District include the Jones Hallhome of the Houston Symphony Orchestra and Society for the Performing Artsand the Hobby Center for the Performing Arts.

The Museum District's cultural institutions and exhibits attract more than 7 million visitors a year. Houston Museum District. Greater Houston Convention and Visitors Bureau. Retrieved on 2007-02-18. Notable facilities include The Museum of Fine Arts, Houston Museum of Natural Science, the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, the Station Museum of Contemporary Art, Holocaust Museum Houston, and the Houston Zoo. Houston Museum District Day. Texas Monthly. 2006. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Home Page. Contemporary Arts Museum Houston. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. 
Houston Museum District. Greater Houston Convention and Visitors Bureau. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Located near the Museum District are The Menil Collection, Rothko Chapel, and the Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum.

Bayou Bend is a 14 acre facility of the Museum of Fine Arts that houses one of America's best collections of decorative art, paintings and furniture. Bayou Bend is the former home of Houston philanthropist Ima Hogg. 

The National Museum of Funeral History is located in Houston near the George Bush Intercontinental Airport. The museum houses the original Popemobile used by Pope John Paul II in the 1980s along with numerous hearses, embalming displays and information on famous funerals.

Venues across Houston regularly host local and touring rock, blues, country, dubstep, and Tejano musical acts. While Houston has never been widely known for its music scene, Houston hip-hop has become a significant, independent music scene that is influential nationwide. 

=== Tourism and recreation ===
Mission Control Center inside the Johnson Space Center.
Discovery Green park in downtown.
Shopping centers in Houston's Bellaire Chinatown.
The Theater District is a 17-block area in the center of downtown Houston that is home to the Bayou Place entertainment complex, restaurants, movies, plazas, and parks. Bayou Place is a large multilevel building containing full-service restaurants, bars, live music, billiards, and Sundance Cinema. The Bayou Music Center stages live concerts, stage plays, and stand-up comedy.
Space Center Houston is the official visitors' center of NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. The Space Center has many interactive exhibits including moon rocks, a shuttle simulator, and presentations about the history of NASA's manned space flight program. Other tourist attractions include the Galleria (Texas's largest shopping mall located in the Uptown District), Old Market Square, the Downtown Aquarium, and Sam Houston Race Park.

Of worthy mention are Houston's current Chinatown and the Mahatma Gandhi District. Both areas offer a picturesque view of Houston's multicultural makeup. Restaurants, bakeries, traditional-clothing boutiques and specialty shops can be found in both areas.
The Galleria in the Uptown District is the largest mall in Texas.
Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Park in Uptown
Houston is home to 337 parks including Hermann Park, Terry Hershey Park, Lake Houston Park, Memorial Park, Tranquility Park, Sesquicentennial Park, Discovery Green, and Sam Houston Park. Within Hermann Park are the Houston Zoo and the Houston Museum of Natural Science. Sam Houston Park contains restored and reconstructed homes which were originally built between 1823 and 1905. The Heritage Society: Walk into Houston's Past. The Heritage Society. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. There is a proposal to open the city's first botanic garden at Herman Brown Park. Huber, Kathy. "Houston botanic garden slowly becoming reality." Houston Chronicle. Monday October 30, 2006. Retrieved on November 14, 2011. 

Of the 10 most populous U.S. cities, Houston has the most total area of parks and green space, 56405 acre. Continental Magazine, March 2008. p.67. The city also has over 200 additional green spacestotaling over 19600 acre that are managed by the cityincluding the Houston Arboretum and Nature Center. The Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark is a public skatepark owned and operated by the city of Houston, and is one of the largest skateparks in Texas consisting of 30,000 (2,800 m2) square foot in-ground facility. The Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Parklocated in the Uptown District of the cityserves as a popular tourist attraction, weddings, and various celebrations. A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Houston the 23rd most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the United States. Wet'n'Wild SplashTown is a water park located north of Houston. A 640-acre theme park, called the Grand Texas Theme Park, will open in 2015 and is located near Houston in New Caney, Texas. 

Houston is not known for being the most walkable city because of the way it was originally designed. In fact, in spite of having the 4th largest population in the US, Houston is only the 22nd most walkable city. However, there are some neighborhoods that are easy to navigate on foot. Better yet, many of these spots pack plenty of entertaining activities into a short amount of space. The number one rated place Ten Most Walkable Neighborhoods in Houston Top Houston Spots to Go for a Stroll (Part 1) - ULR | Real Estate Blog to walk in Houston is 19th Street & Rutland Drive in Greater Heights which was recently ranked 4th in CNN Money's Top 10 Big City Neighborhoods. 

The Bayport Cruise Terminal on the Houston Ship Channel will become port of call for both Princess Cruises and Norwegian Cruise Line in 2013-2014. 

== Sports ==

Reliant Stadium is the home of the Houston Texans.
Minute Maid Park is the home of the Houston Astros.
BBVA Compass Stadium is the home of the Houston Dynamo and Houston Dash.

Houston has sports teams for every major professional league, except the National Hockey League. The Houston Astros is an MLB expansion team formed in 1962 (as the "Colt .45s" until 1965) that made one World Series appearance in 2005. The Houston Rockets, which was formed in 1967 in San Diego, relocated in 1971, and have won two NBA Championships. The Houston Texans play in the NFL. The Houston Dynamo play in Major League Soccer. The Houston Dash play in the National Women's Soccer League. 

Minute Maid Park (home of the Astros) and Toyota Center (home of the Rockets), are located in Downtown Houston. Houston has the NFL's first retractable-roof stadium with natural grass, Reliant Stadium (home of the Texans). Minute Maid Park is also a retractable-roof stadium. Toyota Center also has the largest screen for an indoor arena in the United States built to coincide with the arena's hosting of the 2013 NBA All-Star Game. BBVA Compass Stadium is a soccer-specific stadium for the Dynamo and Dash, located in East Downtown. In addition, Reliant Astrodome was the first indoor stadium in the world, built in 1965. Other sports facilities include Hofheinz Pavilion (Houston Cougars basketball), Rice Stadium (Rice Owls football), and Reliant Arena. Houston Football Stadium is currently under construction for the University of Houston Houston Cougars football team, and is scheduled to open by August 2014. 

Houston has hosted several major sports events: The 1968, 1986 and 2004 MLB All-Star Game, the 1989, 2006 and 2013 NBA All-Star Game, Super Bowl VIII and Super Bowl XXXVIII, as well as hosting the 2005 World Series and 1981, 1986, 1994 and 1995 NBA Finals, winning the latter two. Super Bowl LI is currently slated to be hosted in Houston's Reliant Stadium in 2017. 

The city has hosted several major professional and college sporting events, including the annual Houston Open golf tournament. Houston hosts the annual NCAA College Baseball Classic every February and NCAA football's Texas Bowl in December. 

The Grand Prix of Houston, an annual auto race on the IndyCar Series circuit is held on a 1.7-mile temporary street circuit in Reliant Park. The October, 2013 event was held using a tweaked version of the 2006-2007 course. The event has a 5-year race contract through 2017 with IndyCar. 

== Government and politics ==

Houston City Hall
The city of Houston has a strong mayoral form of municipal government. Houston is a home rule city and all municipal elections in the state of Texas are nonpartisan. The City's elected officials are the mayor, city controller and 16 members of the Houston City Council. The current mayor of Houston is Annise Parker, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot whose third (and final) term in office will expire at the end of 2015. Houston's mayor serves as the city's chief administrator, executive officer, and official representative, and is responsible for the general management of the city and for seeing that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 

The original city council line-up of 14 members (nine district-based and five at-large positions) was based on a U.S. Justice Department mandate which took effect in 1979. At-large council members represent the entire city. Under the city charter, once the population in the city limits exceeded 2.1 million residents, two additional districts were to be added. The city of Houston's official 2010 census count was 600 shy of the required number; however, as the city was expected to grow beyond 2.1 million shortly thereafter, the two additional districts were added for, and the positions filled during, the August 2011 elections. The single-member districts are labeled A through K while the at-large positions are numbered 1 through 5.

The city controller is elected independently of the mayor and council. The controller's duties are to certify available funds prior to committing such funds and processing disbursements. The city's fiscal year begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. Ronald Green is the city controller, serving his first term as of January 2010.

As the result of a 1991 referendum in Houston, a mayor is elected for a two-year term, and can be elected to as many as three consecutive terms. The term limits were spearheaded by conservative political activist Clymer Wright. The city controller and city council members are also subject to the same two-year, three-term limitations.

Houston is considered to be a politically divided city whose balance of power often sways between Republicans and Democrats. Much of the city's wealthier areas vote Republican while the city's working class and minority areas vote Democratic. According to the 2005 Houston Area Survey, 68 percent of non-Hispanic whites in Harris County are declared or favor Republicans while 89 percent of non-Hispanic blacks in the area are declared or favor Democrats. About 62 percent Hispanics (of any race) in the area are declared or favor Democrats. Klineberg, Stephen. Houston Area Survey 19822005, Page 40. The city has often been known to be the most politically diverse city in Texas, a state known for being generally conservative. As a result the city is often a contested area in statewide elections. In 2009, Houston became the first US city with a population over 1 million citizens to elect a gay mayor, by electing Annise Parker.

=== Crime ===
Houston Police Department Memorial
Houston's murder rate ranked 46th of U.S. cities with a population over 250,000 in 2005 (per capita rate of 16.3 murders per 100,000 population). "," Morgan Quitno. Retrieved on November 29, 2006. In 2010, the city's murder rate (per capita rate of 11.8 murders per 100,000 population) was ranked fifth among U.S. cities with a population of over 750,000 (behind New York City, Chicago, Detroit, Dallas, and Philadelphia) FBI Uniform 2010 (prov.) Crime Report Table 4 ". Retrieved on July 6, 2011. according to the FBI.

Murders fell by 37 percent from January to June 2011, compared with the same period in 2010. Houston's total crime rate including violent and nonviolent crimes decreased by 11 percent. Lee, Renee C.. "Murder, other crimes drop in Hoston", Houston Chronicle, July 26, 2011, p. B2. Retrieved 2006-07-26. 

Houston is a significant hub for trafficking of cocaine, marijuana, heroin, MDMA, and methamphetamine due to its size and proximity to major illegal drug exporting nations. "Distribution - Houston High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Drug Market Analysis 2009." U.S. Department of Justice. Retrieved on August 11, 2009. Houston is one of the country's largest hubs for human trafficking Sex Trafficking: Groups Expose Houston's Dark Secret - US - CBN News - Christian News 24-7 - CBN.com 

In the early 1970s, Houston, Pasadena and several coastal towns were the site of the Houston Mass Murders, which at the time were the deadliest case of serial killing in American history. 

== Education ==

The Hattie Mae White Educational Support Center (HMWESC), which houses the Houston Independent School District administrative offices
Seventeen school districts exist within the city of Houston. The Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh-largest school district in the United States. "Houston ISD automates lunch", eSchool News online, 2006-02-21. Retrieved on 2006-12-16. HISD has 112 campuses that serve as magnet or vanguard schoolsspecializing in such disciplines as health professions, visual and performing arts, and the sciences. There are also many charter schools that are run separately from school districts. In addition, some public school districts also have their own charter schools.

The Houston area encompasses more than 300 private schools, Private Schools. Houston-Texas-Online. 2004. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Houston Private Schools. HoustonAreaWeb.com. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. School Art Participation. Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. Archived at the Internet Archive Wayback Machine. many of which are accredited by Texas Private School Accreditation Commission recognized agencies. The Houston Area Independent Schools offer education from a variety of different religious as well as secular viewpoints. About HAIS. Houston Area Independent Schools. 2007. Retrieved on 2007-03-27. The Houston area Catholic schools are operated by the Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston.

=== Colleges and universities ===

University of Houston
Four separate and distinct state universities are located in Houston. The University of Houston is a nationally recognized Tier One research university, and is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System. The third-largest university in Texas, the University of Houston has nearly 40,000 students on its 667 acre campus in southeast Houston. The University of HoustonClear Lake and the University of HoustonDowntown are stand-alone universities; they are not branch campuses of the University of Houston. Located in the historic community of Third Ward is Texas Southern University, one of the largest historically black colleges and universities in the United States.

Several private institutions of higher learningranging from liberal arts colleges, such as The University of St. Thomas, Houston's only Catholic University to Rice University, the nationally recognized research universityare located within the city. Rice, with a total enrollment of slightly more than 6,000 students, is widely recognized as one of the top twenty universities in the nation, and it has a number of distinguished graduate programs and research institutes such as the James A. Baker Institute for Public Policy. The university's undergraduates are among the most select in the nation. 

Three community college districts exist with campuses in and around Houston. The Houston Community College System serves most of Houston. The northwestern through northeastern parts of the city are served by various campuses of the Lone Star College System, while the southeastern portion of Houston is served by San Jacinto College, and a northeastern portion is served by Lee College. "About Lee College." Lee College. Retrieved on May 6, 2013. The Houston Community College and Lone Star College systems are within the 10 largest institutions of higher learning in the United States.

== Media ==

The primary network-affiliated television stations are KPRC-TV (NBC), KHOU-TV (CBS), KTRK-TV (ABC), and KRIV-TV (Fox).

The HoustonThe WoodlandsSugar Land metropolitan area is served by one public television station and two public radio stations. KUHT (HoustonPBS) is a PBS member station and is the first public television station in the United States. Houston Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises two NPR member stations: KUHF (KUHF News) and KUHA (Classical 91.7). KUHF is news/talk radio and KUHA is a classical music station. The University of Houston System owns and holds broadcasting licenses to KUHT, KUHF, and KUHA. The stations broadcast from the Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting, located on the campus of the University of Houston.

Houston is served by the Houston Chronicle, its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. The Hearst Corporation, which owns and operates the Houston Chronicle, bought the assets of the Houston Postits long-time rival and main competitionwhen Houston Post ceased operations in 1995. The Houston Post was owned by the family of former Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby of Houston. The only other major publication to serve the city is the Houston Pressa free alternative weekly with a weekly readership of more than 300,000. 

==Infrastructure==

=== Healthcare ===

Texas Medical Center
MD Anderson Cancer Center
Memorial Hermann-Texas Medical Center Hospital
Houston is the seat of the internationally renowned Texas Medical Center, which contains the world's largest concentration of research and healthcare institutions. All 49 member institutions of the Texas Medical Center are non-profit organizations. They provide patient and preventive care, research, education, and local, national, and international community well-being.
Employing more than 73,600 people, institutions at the medical center include 13 hospitals and two specialty institutions, two medical schools, four nursing schools, and schools of dentistry, public health, pharmacy, and virtually all health-related careers. It is where one of the firstand still the largestair emergency service, Life Flight, was created, and a very successful inter-institutional transplant program was developed. More heart surgeries are performed at the Texas Medical Center than anywhere else in the world. 

Some of the academic and research health institutions at the center include MD Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, UT Health Science Center, Memorial Hermann Hospital, The Methodist Hospital, Texas Children's Hospital, and University of Houston College of Pharmacy.

The Baylor College of Medicine has annually been considered within the top ten medical schools in the nation; likewise, the MD Anderson Cancer Center has consistently ranked as one of the top two U.S. hospitals specializing in cancer care by U.S. News & World Report since 1990. The Menninger Clinic, a renowned psychiatric treatment center, is affiliated with Baylor College of Medicine and The Methodist Hospital System. With hospital locations nationwide and headquarters in Houston, the Triumph Healthcare hospital system is the third largest long term acute care provider nationally. 

=== Transportation ===

==== Highways ====
I-10 and I-45 interchange
The predominant form of transportation in Houston is the automobile with 71.7 percent of residents driving alone to work This is facilitated through Houston's freeway system, comprising 739.3 mi of freeways and expressways in a ten-county metropolitan area. "", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. However, the Texas Transportation Institute's annual Urban Mobility Report found that Houston had the fourth-worst congestion in the country with commuters spending an average of 58 hours in traffic in 2009. 

Houston's highway system has a hub-and-spoke freeway structure serviced by multiple loops. The innermost loop is Interstate 610, which encircles downtown, the medical center, and many core neighborhoods with around a 8 mi diameter. Beltway 8 and its freeway core, the Sam Houston Tollway, form the middle loop at a diameter of roughly 23 mi. A proposed highway project, State Highway 99 (Grand Parkway), will form a third loop outside of Houston, totaling 180 miles in length and making an almost-complete circumference, with the exception of crossing the ship channel. As of June 2014, two of eleven segments of State Highway 99 have been completed to the west of Houston, and three northern segments, totaling 38 miles, are actively under construction and scheduled to open to traffic late in 2015. In addition to the Sam Houston Tollway loop mentioned above, the Harris County Toll Road Authority currently operates four spoke tollways: The Katy Managed Lanes of Interstate 10, the Hardy Toll Road, the Westpark Tollway, and the Fort Bend Parkway Extension. Other spoke roads either planned or under construction include Crosby Freeway, and the future Alvin Freeway.

Houston's freeway system is monitored by Houston TranStara partnership of four government agencies that are responsible for providing transportation and emergency management services to the region. About Houston TranStar. Houston TranStar. 2008. Retrieved on 2008-02-17. 

METRORail light rail

==== Transit systems ====
The Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County (METRO) provides public transportation in the form of buses, light rail, and lift vans.

METRO began light rail service on January 1, 2004, with the inaugural track ("Red Line") running about 8 mi from the University of HoustonDowntown (UHD), which traverses through the Texas Medical Center and terminates at Reliant Park. METRO is currently in the design phase of a 10-year expansion plan that will add five more lines. and expand the current Red Line. Amtrak, the national rail passenger system, provides service to Houston via the (Los AngelesNew Orleans), which stops at a train station on the north side of the downtown area. The station saw 14,891 boardings and alightings in fiscal year 2008. In 2012, there was a 25 percent increase in ridership to 20,327 passengers embarking from the Houston Amtrak station. 

==== Cycling ====
Houston has the largest number of bike commuters in Texas with over 160 miles of dedicated bikeways. The city is currently in the process of expanding its on and off street bikeway network. A new Bicycle sharing system known as Houston B-Cycle currently operates 11 different stations in the downtown area and 7 in other parts of Houston. 

==== Airports ====
George Bush Intercontinental Airport
Houston is served by three airports, two of which are commercial that served 52 million passengers in 2007 and managed by the Houston Airport System. The Federal Aviation Administration and the state of Texas selected the "Houston Airport System as Airport of the Year" for 2005, largely because of its multi-year, $3.1 billion airport improvement program for both major airports in Houston.

The primary city airport is George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), the sixth-busiest in the United States for total passengers, and fourteenth-busiest worldwide. Bush Intercontinental currently ranks fourth in the United States for non-stop domestic and international service with 182 destinations. About George Bush Intercontinental Airport. Houston Airport System. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. In 2006, the United States Department of Transportation named IAH the fastest-growing of the top ten airports in the United States. The Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center stands on the George Bush Intercontinental Airport grounds.

Houston was the headquarters of Continental Airlines until its 2010 merger with United Airlines with headquarters in Chicago; regulatory approval for the merger was granted in October of that year. Bush Intercontinental became United Airline's largest airline hub. The airline retained a significant operational presence in Houston while offering more than 700 daily departures from the city. Facts and Figures. Houston Airport System. 2007. Retrieved on 2007-02-28. In early 2007, Bush Intercontinental Airport was named a model "port of entry" for international travelers by U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 

The second-largest commercial airport is William P. Hobby Airport (named Houston International Airport until 1967) which operates primarily small to medium-haul domestic flights. Houston's aviation history is showcased in the 1940 Air Terminal Museum located in the old terminal building on the west side of the airport. Hobby Airport has been recognized with two awards for being one of the top five performing airports in the world and for customer service by Airports Council International. 

Houston's third municipal airport is Ellington Airport (a former U.S. Air Force base) used by military, government, NASA, and general aviation sectors. 

==== Pipelines ====
Houston is the beginning or end point of numerous oil gas and products pipelines: 

Oil Pipelines:
Houston - Wichita falls
Midland - Houston
San Juan - Houston
Santa Barbara - Houston

Natural Gas Pipelines:
Houston - Denver
Los Angeles - Houston
Panhandle, TX - Houston (2 lines)

Products Pipelines:
Denver - Houston
Houston - Port Isabel
Houston - Philadelphia
Midland - Houston

==Sister Cities==
The Houston Office of Protocol and International Affairs is the city's liaison to Houston's sister city associations and to the national governing organization, Sister Cities International. Through their official city-to-city relationships, these volunteer associations promote people-to-people diplomacy and encourage citizens to develop mutual trust and understanding through commercial, cultural, educational, and humanitarian exchanges. 

* Abu Dhabi (United Arab Emirates) - 2001
*Baku (Azerbaijan) - 1976
* Chiba (Japan) - 1973
* Grampian Region, Aberdeen (Scotland) - 1979
* Guayaquil (Ecuador) - 1987
* Huelva (Spain) - 1969
* Istanbul (Turkey) - 1986
* Karachi (Pakistan) - 2009
* Leipzig (Germany) - 1993
* Luanda (Angola) - 2003
* Nice (France) - 1973
* Perth (Australia) - 1983
* Shenzhen (China) - 1986
* Stavanger (Norway) - 1980
* Taipei (Taiwan) - 1963
* Tampico (Mexico) - 2003
* Tyumen (Russia) - 1995

== See also ==

==Notes==

== References ==

== Further reading ==

*
* Houston, New York Has a Problem, City Journal, Summer 2008
* 174 Years of Historic Houston Houstonhistory.com. 2007. Retrieved on 2007-01-13.
* A thumb-nail history of the city of Houston, Texas, from its founding in 1836 to the year 1912, published 1912, hosted by the Portal to Texas History, republished 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
* True stories of old Houston and Houstonians: historical and personal sketches / by S. O. Young., published 1913, hosted by the Portal to Texas History, republished 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
*.
*
*
*
*

== External links ==

* City of Houston official website
* Greater Houston Convention & Visitors Bureau
* Greater Houston Partnership (GHP) Houston Chamber
* Greater Houston Transportation and Emergency Management Center
* Houston Public Library official website
*

* Premium Supplements Houston official website
*

 



[[Head (disambiguation)]]

The head is the part of an animal that usually comprises the brain, eyes, ears, nose and mouth.

Head may also refer to:

== Science ==
* Head (linguistics), the word that determines the syntactic type of the phrase of which it is a member
* Head (geography) or headland, a type of peninsula
* Head (botany), a structure composed of numerous individual flowers
* Head (geology), a recent near-surface deposits
* Hydraulic head, an elevation difference between two fluid surfaces that drives flow
* High Energy Astrophysics Division, a division of the American Astronomical Society

== Technology ==
* Head (vessel), an end caps on a pressure vessel
* Cylinder head, a part of an internal combustion engine
* Hydraulic head, a specific measurement of water pressure
** Pressure head, a term used in fluid mechanics to represent the internal energy of a fluid due to the pressure exerted on its container
** Static head
** Total dynamic head, the total equivalent height that a fluid is to be pumped, taking into account friction losses in the pipe
** Velocity head
* Recording head, the physical interface between a recording apparatus and a moving recording medium
** Disk read-and-write head, part of a disk drive
* Sprinkler head, a component of a fire sprinkler system

== Computer programming ==
* of HTML tags|], a HTML document structure element
* HEAD, a HTTP request method
* head (Unix), a UNIX command

== Maritime ==
* Head (watercraft), a toilet on a watercraft
* Headsail, any sail set forward of the foremost mast
* Head (sail), the uppermost corner part of a sail

== People ==
* Head of state, the most senior public representative of a state
* Head of government, the most senior executive of a cabinet and government
* Head teacher, the most senior teacher and leader of a school

== Other common meanings ==
* Heads, the obverse of a coin
* Head (beer), a frothy emulsion of liquid and carbon dioxide at the top of beer
* Head, slang for oral sex

== Companies and brands ==
* Head (company), a manufacturer and marketer of tennis, ski and other sports equipment
* Head Entertainment, a chain of retail stores
* Head Shampoo, one of the first mass-market products which came about during the organic products movement beginning in the early 1970s

== Entertainment ==
* The Head, an animated television series
* Head (film), a 1968 film starring The Monkees
* "Head" (Blackadder), a 1986 episode of Blackadder
* Head (DC Comics), a minor character in the fictional DC universe

== Music ==
* Head (music), a main theme in jazz
* Head (band), an English rock band
* Brian Welch (born 1970), American musician better known as Head

* Head (The Jesus Lizard album), 1990
* Head (The Monkees album), the soundtrack to the Monkees' only theatrical release, Head
* Heads (Bob James album), 1977
* Heads (Osibisa album), 1972

* "Head" (Prince song)
* Head (The Cooper Temple Clause song), a track from The Cooper Temple Clause's third album Make This Your Own
* "Head" (Julian Cope song), 1991
* "Head", a song by Mark Lanegan from Bubblegum
* "Head", a song by Static-X from Beneath, Between, Beyond
* "Head", a song by Todd Sheaffer from The Black Bear Sessions and Elko
* "Head", a song by Lotion
* "Heads", a song by Hawkwind from The Xenon Codex

== Other uses ==
* Head (surname), a surname (and list of people with that name)
* Sydney Heads or simply The Heads, headlands that form the entrance to Sydney Harbour
* Viscount Head, a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom
* Head baronets, two titles, one extinct in the Baronetage of England, the other extant in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom

== See also ==
* Drumhead, a membrane on a drum
* Headstock, a part of an instrument
* Header (disambiguation)
* Heading (disambiguation)
* Headed (disambiguation)
* Head (wrestling)
* Heads in heraldry



[[Hard disk drive]]

A disassembled and labeled 1997 HDD laying atop a mirror.
Overview of how an HDD functions

A hard disk drive (HDD) is a data storage device used for storing and retrieving digital information using rapidly rotating disks (platters) coated with magnetic material. An HDD retains its data even when powered off. Data is read in a random-access manner, meaning individual blocks of data can be stored or retrieved in any order rather than sequentially. An HDD consists of one or more rigid ("hard") rapidly rotating disks (platters) with magnetic heads arranged on a moving actuator arm to read and write data to the surfaces.

Introduced by IBM in 1956, HDDs became the dominant secondary storage device for general purpose computers by the early 1960s. Continuously improved, HDDs have maintained this position into the modern era of servers and personal computers. More than 200 companies have produced HDD units, though most current units are manufactured by Seagate, Toshiba and Western Digital. Worldwide revenues for HDD shipments are expected to reach US $33 billion in 2013, a decrease of approximately 12% from US $37.8 billion in 2012.

The primary characteristics of an HDD are its capacity and performance. Capacity is specified in unit prefixes corresponding to powers of : a 1-terabyte (TB) drive has a capacity of gigabytes (GB; where 1 gigabyte = bytes). Typically, some of an HDD's capacity is unavailable to the user because it is used by the file system and the computer operating system, and possibly inbuilt redundancy for error correction and recovery. Performance is specified by the time to move the heads to a file (Average Access Time) plus the time it takes for the file to move under its head (average latency, a function of the physical rotational speed in revolutions per minute) and the speed at which the file is transmitted (data rate).

The two most common form factors for modern HDDs are 3.5-inch in desktop computers and 2.5-inch in laptops. HDDs are connected to systems by standard interface cables such as SATA (Serial ATA), USB or SAS (Serial attached SCSI) cables.

, the primary competing technology for secondary storage is flash memory in the form of solid-state drives (SSDs). HDDs are expected to remain the dominant medium for secondary storage due to predicted continuing advantages in recording capacity, price per unit of storage, write latency and product lifetime. However, SSDs are replacing HDDs where speed, power consumption and durability are more important considerations. Hutchinson, Lee. (2012-06-25) How SSDs conquered mobile devices and modern OSes. Ars Technica. Retrieved on 2013-01-07. 

== History ==
Video of modern HDD operation (cover removed)

HDDs were introduced in 1956 as data storage for an IBM real-time transaction processing computer and were developed for use with general purpose mainframe and minicomputers. The first IBM drive, the 350 RAMAC, was approximately the size of two refrigerators and stored 5 million 6-bit characters (3.75 megabytes) on a stack of 50 disks.

In 1961 IBM introduced the model 1311 disk drive, which was about the size of a washing machine and stored two million characters on a removable disk pack. Users could buy additional packs and interchange them as needed, much like reels of magnetic tape. Later models of removable pack drives, from IBM and others, became the norm in most computer installations and reached capacities of 300 megabytes by the early 1980s. Non-removable HDDs were called "fixed disk" drives.

Some high performance HDDs were manufactured with one head per track, e.g., IBM 2305 so that no time was lost physically moving the heads to a track. Microsoft Windows NT Workstation 4.0 Resource Guide  1995, Chapter 17  Disk and File System Basics Known as Fixed-Head or Head-Per-Track disk drives they were very expensive and are no longer in production. Computer Organization and Design, 2nd Ed., P. Pal Chaudhuri,  2006,p. 635 

In 1973, IBM introduced a new type of HDD codenamed "Winchester". Its primary distinguishing feature was that the disk heads were not withdrawn completely from the stack of disk platters when the drive was powered down. Instead, the heads were allowed to "land" on a special area of the disk surface upon spin-down, "taking off" again when the disk was later powered on. This greatly reduced the cost of the head actuator mechanism, but precluded removing just the disks from the drive as was done with the disk packs of the day. Instead, the first models of "Winchester technology" drives featured a removable disk module, which included both the disk pack and the head assembly, leaving the actuator motor in the drive upon removal. Later "Winchester" drives abandoned the removable media concept and returned to non-removable platters.

Like the first removable pack drive, the first "Winchester" drives used platters 14 in in diameter. A few years later, designers were exploring the possibility that physically smaller platters might offer advantages. Drives with non-removable eight-inch platters appeared, and then drives that used a 5+1/4 in form factor (a mounting width equivalent to that used by contemporary floppy disk drives). The latter were primarily intended for the then-fledgling personal computer (PC) market.

As the 1980s began, HDDs were a rare and very expensive additional feature on PCs; however by the late 1980s, their cost had been reduced to the point where they were standard on all but the cheapest PC.

Most HDDs in the early 1980s were sold to PC end users as an external, add-on subsystem. The subsystem was not sold under the drive manufacturer's name but under the subsystem manufacturer's name such as Corvus Systems and Tallgrass Technologies, or under the PC system manufacturer's name such as the Apple ProFile. The IBM PC/XT in 1983 included an internal 10 MB HDD, and soon thereafter internal HDDs proliferated on personal computers.

External HDDs remained popular for much longer on the Apple Macintosh. Every Mac made between 1986 and 1998 has a SCSI port on the back, making external expansion easy; also, "toaster" Compact Macs did not have easily accessible HDD bays (or, in the case of the Mac Plus, any hard drive bay at all), so on those models, external SCSI disks were the only reasonable option.

The 2011 Thailand floods damaged manufacturing plants, and impacted hard disk drive cost adversely in 2011-2013. 

Driven by areal density doubling every two to four years since their invention (an observation known as Kryder's law, similar to Moore's Law), HDDs have continuously improved their characteristics; a few highlights include:
* Capacity per HDD increasing from 3.75 megabytes to 4 terabytes or more, more than a million times larger.
* Physical volume of HDD decreasing from 68 cuft (comparable to a large side-by-side refrigerator), to less than 20 cc, a 100,000-to-1 decrease.
* Weight decreasing from 2,000 lb to 48 g, a 20,000-to-1 decrease.
* Price decreasing from about per megabyte to less than $0.00006 per megabyte ($90/1.5 terabyte), a greater than 250-million-to-1 decrease. 
* Average Access Time decreasing from over 100 milliseconds to a few milliseconds, a greater than 40-to-1 improvement.
* Market application expanding from mainframe computers of the late 1950s to most mass storage applications including computers and consumer applications such as storage of entertainment content.

== Technology ==
Magnetic cross section & frequency modulation encoded binary data

=== Magnetic recording ===

An HDD records data by magnetizing a thin film of ferromagnetic material on a disk. Sequential changes in the direction of magnetization represent binary data bits. The data is read from the disk by detecting the transitions in magnetization. User data is encoded using an encoding scheme, such as run-length limited encoding, which determines how the data is represented by the magnetic transitions.

A typical HDD design consists of a that holds flat circular disks, also called platters, which hold the recorded data. The platters are made from a non-magnetic material, usually aluminium alloy, glass, or ceramic, and are coated with a shallow layer of magnetic material typically 1020 nm in depth, with an outer layer of carbon for protection. For reference, a standard piece of copy paper is 0.07 -. 

Diagram labeling the major components of a computer HDD
Recording of single magnetisations of bits on a 200 MB HDD-platter (recording made visible using CMOS-MagView). 
Longitudinal recording (standard) & perpendicular recording diagram

The platters in contemporary HDDs are spun at speeds varying from 4,200 rpm in energy-efficient portable devices, to 15,000 rpm for high-performance servers. The first HDDs spun at 1,200 rpm and, for many years, 3,600 rpm was the norm. As of December 2013, the platters in most consumer-grade HDDs spin at either 5,400 rpm or 7,200 rpm.

Information is written to and read from a platter as it rotates past devices called read-and-write heads that operate very close (often tens of nanometers) over the magnetic surface. The read-and-write head is used to detect and modify the magnetization of the material immediately under it.

In modern drives there is one head for each magnetic platter surface on the spindle, mounted on a common arm. An actuator arm (or access arm) moves the heads on an arc (roughly radially) across the platters as they spin, allowing each head to access almost the entire surface of the platter as it spins. The arm is moved using a voice coil actuator or in some older designs a stepper motor. Early hard disk drives wrote data at some constant bits per second, resulting in all tracks having the same amount of data per track but modern drives (since the 1990s) use zone bit recordingincreasing the write speed from inner to outer zone and thereby storing more data per track in the outer zones.

In modern drives, the small size of the magnetic regions creates the danger that their magnetic state might be lost because of thermal effects, thermally induced magnetic instability which is commonly known as the "superparamagnetic limit." To counter this, the platters are coated with two parallel magnetic layers, separated by a 3-atom layer of the non-magnetic element ruthenium, and the two layers are magnetized in opposite orientation, thus reinforcing each other. Another technology used to overcome thermal effects to allow greater recording densities is perpendicular recording, first shipped in 2005, and as of 2007 the technology was used in many HDDs. 

=== Components ===
HDD with disks and motor hub removed exposing copper colored stator coils surrounding a bearing in the center of the spindle motor. Orange stripe along the side of the arm is thin printed-circuit cable, spindle bearing is in the center and the actuator is in the upper left

A typical HDD has two electric motors; a spindle motor that spins the disks and an actuator (motor) that positions the read/write head assembly across the spinning disks. The disk motor has an external rotor attached to the disks; the stator windings are fixed in place. Opposite the actuator at the end of the head support arm is the read-write head; thin printed-circuit cables connect the read-write heads to amplifier electronics mounted at the pivot of the actuator. The head support arm is very light, but also stiff; in modern drives, acceleration at the head reaches 550 g.

Head stack with an actuator coil on the left and read/write heads on the right

The is a permanent magnet and moving coil motor that swings the heads to the desired position. A metal plate supports a squat neodymium-iron-boron (NIB) high-flux magnet. Beneath this plate is the moving coil, often referred to as the voice coil by analogy to the coil in loudspeakers, which is attached to the actuator hub, and beneath that is a second NIB magnet, mounted on the bottom plate of the motor (some drives only have one magnet).

The voice coil itself is shaped rather like an arrowhead, and made of doubly coated copper magnet wire. The inner layer is insulation, and the outer is thermoplastic, which bonds the coil together after it is wound on a form, making it self-supporting. The portions of the coil along the two sides of the arrowhead (which point to the actuator bearing center) interact with the magnetic field, developing a tangential force that rotates the actuator. Current flowing radially outward along one side of the arrowhead and radially inward on the other produces the tangential force. If the magnetic field were uniform, each side would generate opposing forces that would cancel each other out. Therefore the surface of the magnet is half N pole, half S pole, with the radial dividing line in the middle, causing the two sides of the coil to see opposite magnetic fields and produce forces that add instead of canceling. Currents along the top and bottom of the coil produce radial forces that do not rotate the head.

The HDD's electronics control the movement of the actuator and the rotation of the disk, and perform reads and writes on demand from the disk controller. Feedback of the drive electronics is accomplished by means of special segments of the disk dedicated to servo feedback. These are either complete concentric circles (in the case of dedicated servo technology), or segments interspersed with real data (in the case of embedded servo technology). The servo feedback optimizes the signal to noise ratio of the GMR sensors by adjusting the voice-coil of the actuated arm. The spinning of the disk also uses a servo motor. Modern disk firmware is capable of scheduling reads and writes efficiently on the platter surfaces and remapping sectors of the media which have failed.

=== Error rates and handling ===
Modern drives make extensive use of error correction codes (ECCs), particularly ReedSolomon error correction. These techniques store extra bits, determined by mathematical formulas, for each block of data; the extra bits allow many errors to be corrected invisibly. The extra bits themselves take up space on the HDD, but allow higher recording densities to be employed without causing uncorrectable errors, resulting in much larger storage capacity. For example, a typical 1 TB hard disk with 512-byte sectors provides additional capacity of about 93 GB for the ECC data. 

In the newest drives, as of 2009, low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) were supplanting Reed-Solomon; LDPC codes enable performance close to the Shannon Limit and thus provide the highest storage density available. 

Typical hard disk drives attempt to "remap" the data in a physical sector that is failing to a spare physical sector provided by the drive's "spare sector pool" (also called "reserve pool"), while relying on the ECC to recover stored data while the amount of errors in a bad sector is still low enough. The S.M.A.R.T (Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology) feature counts the total number of errors in the entire HDD fixed by ECC (although not on all hard drives as the related S.M.A.R.T attributes "Hardware ECC Recovered" and "Soft ECC Correction" are not consistently supported), and the total number of performed sector remappings, as the occurrence of many such errors may predict an HDD failure.

The "No-ID Format", developed by IBM in the mid-1990s, contains information about which sectors are bad and where remapped sectors have been located. 
Charles M. Kozierok.
"The PC Guide: Hard Disk: Sector Format and Structure".
19972004.
 

Only a tiny fraction of the detected errors ends up as not correctable. For example, specification for an enterprise SAS disk (a model from 2013) estimates this fraction to be one uncorrected error in every 1016 bits, and another SAS enterprise disk from 2013 specifies similar error rates. Another modern (as of 2013) enterprise SATA disk specifies an error rate of less than 10 non-recoverable read errors in every 1016 bits. An enterprise disk with a Fibre Channel interface, which uses 520 byte sectors to support the Data Integrity Field standard to combat data corruption, specifies similar error rates in 2005. 

The worst type of errors are those that go unnoticed, and are not even detected by the disk firmware or the host operating system. These errors are known as silent data corruption, some of which may be caused by hard disk drive malfunctions. 

=== Future development ===
HDD areal density has shown a long term compound annual growth rate (1956 - 2010) somewhat higher than the 41% per year Moore's Law growth; A brief History of Areal Density most recently growth has been in the range of 812% annually However beginning around 2010, the superparamagnetic limit constrained the rate of progress. According to industry observers and analysts for 2011 to 2016 and beyond, the areal density compound annual growth is forecasted to be 19, 25% or 20-40% per year.

New magnetic storage technologies are being developed to support higher areal density growth, address the superparamagnetic limit, and maintain the competitiveness of HDDs with respect to products such as flash memory-based solid-state drives (SSDs). One of several such technologies, Shingled magnetic recording, was introduced in 2013 as the first step to reaching a 20 TB HDD by 2020. Seagate Delivers On Technology Milestone: First To Ship Hard Drives Using Next-Generation Shingled Magnetic Recording Other new HDD technologies still in the laboratory include heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR), bit-patterned recording (BPR) and "current perpendicular to plane" giant magnetoresistance (CPP/GMR) heads. All-Heusler giant-magnetoresistance junctions with matched energy bands and Fermi surfaces 

== Capacity ==
The capacity of an HDD reported to an end user by the operating system is less than the amount stated by a drive or system manufacturer due to amongst other things, different units of measuring capacity, capacity consumed system and/or redundancy.

=== Calculation ===
Because modern disk drives appear to their interface as a contiguous set of logical blocks their gross capacity can be calculated by multiplying the number of blocks by the size of the block. This information is available from the manufacturer's specification and from the drive itself through use of special utilities invoking low level commands. 

The gross capacity of older HDDs can be calculated by multiplying for each zone of the drive the number of cylinders by the number of heads by the number of sectors/zone by the number of bytes/sector (most commonly 512) and then summing the totals for all zones. Some modern SATA drives will also report cylinder-head-sector (C/H/S) values to the CPU but they are no longer actual physical parameters since the reported numbers are constrained by historic operating-system interfaces.

The old C/H/S scheme has been replaced by logical block addressing. In some cases, to try to "force-fit" the C/H/S scheme to large-capacity drives, the number of heads was given as 64, although no modern drive has anywhere near 32 platters: the typical 2 TB hard disk as of 2013 has two 1 TB platters (and 4 TB drives use four platters).

=== Redundancy ===
In modern HDDs, spare capacity for defect management is not included in the published capacity; however in many early HDDs a certain number of sectors were reserved for spares, thereby reducing capacity available to end users.

In some systems, there may be hidden partitions used for system recovery that reduce the capacity available to the end user.

For RAID subsystems, data integrity and fault-tolerance requirements also reduce the realized capacity. For example, a RAID1 subsystem will be about half the total capacity as a result of data mirroring. RAID5 subsystems with x drives, would lose 1/x of capacity to parity. RAID subsystems are multiple drives that appear to be one drive or more drives to the user, but provides a great deal of fault-tolerance. Most RAID vendors use some form of checksums to improve data integrity at the block level. For many vendors, this involves using HDDs with sectors of 520 bytes per sector to contain 512 bytes of user data and eight checksum bytes or using separate 512-byte sectors for the checksum data. 

=== File system use ===

The presentation of an HDD to its host is determined by its controller. This may differ substantially from the drive's native interface particularly in mainframes or servers.

Modern HDDs, such as SAS and SATA drives, appear at their interfaces as a contiguous set of logical blocks; typically 512 bytes long but the industry is in the process of changing to 4,096-byte logical blocks; see Advanced Format. 

The process of initializing these logical blocks on the physical disk platters is called low level formatting which is usually performed at the factory and is not normally changed in the field.

High level formatting then writes the file system structures into selected logical blocks to make the remaining logical blocks available to the host OS and its applications. The operating system file system uses some of the disk space to organize files on the disk, recording their file names and the sequence of disk areas that represent the file. Examples of data structures stored on disk to retrieve files include the File Allocation Table (FAT) in the DOS file system and inodes in many UNIX file systems, as well as other operating system data structures. As a consequence not all the space on an HDD is available for user files. This file system overhead is usually less than 1% on drives larger than 100 MB.

=== Units ===

 Unit prefixes Advertised capacity by manufacturer (using decimal multiples) Expected capacity by consumers in class action (using binary multiples) Reported capacity 
 Windows (using binary multiples) Mac OS X 10.6+ (using decimal multiples) 
 With prefix Bytes Bytes Diff. 
 100 MB 100,000,000 104,857,600 4.86% 95.4 MB 100 MB 
 100 GB 100,000,000,000 107,374,182,400 7.37% 93.1 GB, 95,367 MB 100 GB 
 1 TB 1,000,000,000,000 1,099,511,627,776 9.95% 931 GB, 953,674 MB 1,000 GB, 1,000,000 MB 

The total capacity of HDDs is given by manufacturers in megabytes (1 MB = 1,000,000 bytes), gigabytes (1 GB = 1,000,000,000 bytes) or terabytes (1 TB = 1,000,000,000,000 bytes). This numbering convention, where prefixes like mega- and giga- denote powers of 1,000, is also used for data transmission rates and DVD capacities. However, the convention is different from that used by manufacturers of memory (RAM, ROM) and CDs, where prefixes like kilo- and mega- mean powers of 1,024.

The practice of using prefixes assigned to powers of 1,000 within the HDD and computer industries dates back to the early days of computing. By the 1970s million, mega and M were consistently being used in the powers of 1,000 sense to describe HDD capacity. 

Computers do not internally represent HDD or memory capacity in powers of 1,024; reporting it in this manner is just a convention. Microsoft Windows uses the powers of 1,024 convention when reporting HDD capacity, thus an HDD offered by its manufacturer as a 1 TB drive is reported by these OSes as a 931 GB HDD. Mac OS X 10.6 ("Snow Leopard"), uses powers of 1,000 when reporting HDD capacity.

In the case of "mega-", there is a nearly 5% difference between the powers of 1,000 definition and the powers of 1,024 definition. Furthermore, the difference is compounded by 2.4% with each incrementally larger prefix (gigabyte, terabyte, etc.). The discrepancy between the two conventions for measuring capacity was the subject of several class action suits against HDD manufacturers. The plaintiffs argued that the use of decimal measurements effectively misled consumers while the defendants denied any wrongdoing or liability, asserting that their marketing and advertising complied in all respects with the law and that no class member sustained any damages or injuries. 

In December 1998, standards organizations addressed these dual definitions of the conventional prefixes by standardizing on unique binary prefixes and prefix symbols to denote multiples of 1,024, such as "mebibyte (MiB)", which exclusively denotes 220 or 1,048,576 bytes. This standard has seen little adoption by the computer industry, and the conventionally prefixed forms of "byte" continue to denote slightly different values depending on context. 

== Form factors ==

 Past and present HDD form factors 
 Form factor Status Length Width Height Largest capacity Platters (max) CapacityPer platter 
 3.5\" Current 146 101.6 19 or 25.4 6 TB HGST Ships 6TB Ultrastar He6 Helium-filled Drives for High-density, Massive Scale-out Data Center Environments. First helium-filled 6TB hard drive launched, just not for you. 750 GB for IDE-based barebone. (2013) 5 or 7 1200 (Seagate) was able increase areal density from 831 Gbits per square inch to 1,000 (20% increase of previous limit of 1TB/platter) 
 2.5\" Current 100 69.85 5, 7, 9.5, 12.5, 15, or 19 2 TB (2012) 4 500 
 1.8\" Current 71 54 5 or 8 320 GB (2009) 2 220 
 8\" Obsolete 362 241.3 117.5 
 5.25\" FH Obsolete 203 146 82.6 47 GB Seagate Elite 47, shipped 12/97 per 1998 Disk/Trend Report  Rigid Disk Drives (1998) 14 3.36 
 5.25\" HH Obsolete 203 146 41.4 19.3 GB Quantum Bigfoot TS, shipped 10/98 per 1999 Disk/Trend Report  Rigid Disk Drives (1998) 4 4.83 
 1.3\" Obsolete 43 40 GB (2007) 1 40 
 1\" (CFII/ZIF/IDE-Flex) Obsolete 42 20 GB (2006) 1 20 
 0.85\" Obsolete 32 24 5 8 GB (2004) 1 8 

Six HDDs with 8", 5.25", 3.5", 2.5", 1.8", and 1" hard disks with a ruler to show the length of platters and read-write heads

Mainframe and minicomputer hard disks were of widely varying dimensions, typically in free standing cabinets the size of washing machines or designed to fit a 19" rack. In 1962, IBM introduced its model 1311 disk, which used 14 inch (nominal size) platters. This became a standard size for mainframe and minicomputer drives for many years. Such large platters were never used with microprocessor-based systems.

With increasing sales of microcomputers having built in floppy-disk drives (FDDs), HDDs that would fit to the FDD mountings became desirable. Thus HDD Form factors, initially followed those of 8-inch, 5.25-inch, and 3.5-inch floppy disk drives. Because there were no smaller floppy disk drives, smaller HDD form factors developed from product offerings or industry standards.

; 8 inch:   (   ). In 1979, Shugart Associates' SA1000 was the first form factor compatible HDD, having the same dimensions and a compatible interface to the 8" FDD.
; 5.25 inch: 5.75 in  3.25 in  8 in (146.1 mm  82.55 mm  203 mm). This smaller form factor, first used in an HDD by Seagate in 1980, was the same size as full-height 5+1/4 in FDD, 3.25-inches high. This is twice as high as "half height"; i.e., 1.63 in (41.4 mm). Most desktop models of drives for optical 120 mm disks (DVD, CD) use the half height 5" dimension, but it fell out of fashion for HDDs. The format was standardized as EIA-741 and co-published as SFF-8501 for disk drives, with other SFF-85xx series standards covering related 5.25 inch devices (optical drives, etc.) The Quantum Bigfoot HDD was the last to use it in the late 1990s, with "low-profile" (25 mm) and "ultra-low-profile" (20 mm) high versions.
; 3.5 inch: 4 in  1 in  5.75 in (101.6 mm  25.4 mm  146 mm) = 376.77344 cm. This smaller form factor is similar to that used in an HDD by Rodime in 1983, which was the same size as the "half height" 3" FDD, i.e., 1.63 inches high. Today, the 1-inch high ("slimline" or "low-profile") version of this form factor is the most popular form used in most desktops. The format was standardized in terms of dimensions and positions of mounting holes as EIA/ECA-740, co-published as SFF-8301. 
; 2.5 inch:  0.275  (  7  ) = 48.895. This smaller form factor was introduced by PrairieTek in 1988; there is no corresponding FDD. The 2.5 drive format is standardized in the EIA/ECA-720 co-published as SFF-8201; when used with specific connectors, more detailed specifications are SFF-8212 for the 50-pin (ATA laptop) connector, SFF-8223 with the SATA, or SAS connector and SFF-8222 with the SCA-2 connector. It came to be widely used for HDDs in mobile devices (laptops, music players, etc.) and for solid-state drives (SSDs), by 2008 replacing some 3.5 inch enterprise-class drives. It is also used in the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game consoles. Drives 9.5 mm high became an unofficial standard for all except the largest-capacity laptop drives (usually having two platters inside); 12.5 mm-high drives, typically with three platters, are used for maximum capacity, but will not fit most laptop computers. Enterprise-class drives can have a height up to 15 mm. Seagate released a 7 mm drive aimed at entry level laptops and high end netbooks in December 2009. Western Digital released on April 23, 2013 a hard drive 5 mm in height specifically aimed at UltraBooks. Western Digital rolls out ultra-slim 5 mm Ultrabook drives. 
; 1.8 inch: 54 mm  8 mm  71 mm = 30.672 cm. This form factor, originally introduced by Integral Peripherals in 1993, evolved into the ATA-7 LIF with dimensions as stated. For a time it was increasingly used in digital audio players and subnotebooks, but its popularity decreased to the point where this form factor is increasingly rare and only a small percentage of the overall market. There was an attempt to standardize this format as SFF-8123, but it was cancelled in 2005. 
; 1 inch: 42.8 mm  5 mm  36.4 mm. This form factor was introduced in 1999 as IBM's Microdrive to fit inside a CF Type II slot. Samsung calls the same form factor "1.3 inch" drive in its product literature. 
; 0.85 inch: 24 mm  5 mm  32 mm. Toshiba announced this form factor in January 2004 for use in mobile phones and similar applications, including SD/MMC slot compatible HDDs optimized for video storage on 4G handsets. Toshiba manufactured a 4 GB (MK4001MTD) and an 8 GB (MK8003MTD) version and holds the Guinness World Record for the smallest HDD. 
5" full height 110 MB HDD; 2" (63.5 mm) 6,495 MB HDD
, 2.5-inch and 3.5-inch hard disks were the most popular sizes.

By 2009 all manufacturers had discontinued the development of new products for the 1.3-inch, 1-inch and 0.85-inch form factors due to falling prices of flash memory, which has no moving parts.

While these sizes are customarily described by an approximately correct figure in inches, actual sizes have long been specified in millimeters.

== Performance characteristics ==

=== Time to access data ===
The factors that limit the time to access the data on an HDD are mostly related to the mechanical nature of the rotating disks and moving heads. Seek time is a measure of how long it takes the head assembly to travel to the track of the disk that contains data. Rotational latency is incurred because the desired disk sector may not be directly under the head when data transfer is requested. These two delays are on the order of milliseconds each. The bit rate or data transfer rate (once the head is in the right position) creates delay which is a function of the number of blocks transferred; typically relatively small, but can be quite long with the transfer of large contiguous files. Delay may also occur if the drive disks are stopped to save energy.

An HDD's Average Access Time is its average Seek time which technically is the time to do all possible seeks divided by the number of all possible seeks, but in practice is determined by statistical methods or simply approximated as the time of a seek over one-third of the number of tracks. 

Defragmentation is a procedure used to minimize delay in retrieving data by moving related items to physically proximate areas on the disk. Some computer operating systems perform defragmentation automatically. Although automatic defragmentation is intended to reduce access delays, performance will be temporarily reduced while the procedure is in progress. 

Time to access data can be improved by increasing rotational speed (thus reducing latency) and/or by reducing the time spent seeking. Increasing areal density increases throughput by increasing data rate and by increasing the amount of data under a set of heads, thereby potentially reducing seek activity for a given amount of data. The time to access data has not kept up with throughput increases, which themselves have not kept up with growth in bit density and storage capacity.

=== Seek time ===

Average seek time ranges from under 4 ms for high-end server drives to 15 ms for mobile drives, with the most common mobile drives at about 12 ms and the most common desktop type typically being around 9 ms. The first HDD had an average seek time of about 600 ms; by the middle of 1970s HDDs were available with seek times of about 25 ms. Some early PC drives used a stepper motor to move the heads, and as a result had seek times as slow as 80120 ms, but this was quickly improved by voice coil type actuation in the 1980s, reducing seek times to around 20 ms. Seek time has continued to improve slowly over time.

Some desktop and laptop computer systems allow the user to make a tradeoff between seek performance and drive noise. Faster seek rates typically require more energy usage to quickly move the heads across the platter, causing louder noises from the pivot bearing and greater device vibrations as the heads are rapidly accelerated during the start of the seek motion and decelerated at the end of the seek motion. Quiet operation reduces movement speed and acceleration rates, but at a cost of reduced seek performance.

=== Latency ===

 Rotational speed Average latency 
 15,000 2 
 10,000 3 
 7,200 4.16 
 5,400 5.55 
 4,800 6.25 

Latency is the delay for the rotation of the disk to bring the required disk sector under the read-write mechanism. It depends on rotational speed of a disk, measured in revolutions per minute (rpm). Average rotational latency is shown in the table below, based on the statistical relation that the average latency in milliseconds for such a drive is one-half the rotational period.

=== Data transfer rate ===
, a typical 7,200-rpm desktop HDD has a sustained "disk-to-buffer" data transfer rate up to 1,030 Mbits/sec. This rate depends on the track location; the rate is higher for data on the outer tracks (where there are more data sectors per rotation) and lower toward the inner tracks (where there are fewer data sectors per rotation); and is generally somewhat higher for 10,000-rpm drives. A current widely used standard for the "buffer-to-computer" interface is 3.0 Gbit/s SATA, which can send about 300 megabyte/s (10-bit encoding) from the buffer to the computer, and thus is still comfortably ahead of today's disk-to-buffer transfer rates. Data transfer rate (read/write) can be measured by writing a large file to disk using special file generator tools, then reading back the file. Transfer rate can be influenced by file system fragmentation and the layout of the files. 

HDD data transfer rate depends upon the rotational speed of the platters and the data recording density. Because heat and vibration limit rotational speed, advancing density becomes the main method to improve sequential transfer rates. Higher speeds require a more powerful spindle motor, which creates more heat. While areal density advances by increasing both the number of tracks across the disk and the number of sectors per track, only the latter increases the data transfer rate for a given rpm. Since data transfer rate performance only tracks one of the two components of areal density, its performance improves at a lower rate.

=== Other considerations ===
Other performance considerations include power consumption, audible noise, and shock resistance.

== Access and interfaces ==
Inner view of a 1998 Seagate HDD which used Parallel ATA interface

HDDs are accessed over one of a number of bus types, including parallel ATA (PATA, also called IDE or EIDE; described before the introduction of SATA as ATA), Serial ATA (SATA), SCSI, Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), and Fibre Channel. Bridge circuitry is sometimes used to connect HDDs to buses with which they cannot communicate natively, such as IEEE 1394, USB and SCSI.

Modern HDDs present a consistent interface to the rest of the computer, no matter what data encoding scheme is used internally. Typically a DSP in the electronics inside the HDD takes the raw analog voltages from the read head and uses PRML and ReedSolomon error correction to decode the sector boundaries and sector data, then sends that data out the standard interface. That DSP also watches the error rate detected by error detection and correction, and performs bad sector remapping, data collection for Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting Technology, and other internal tasks.

Modern interfaces connect an HDD to a host bus interface adapter (today typically integrated into the "south bridge") with one data/control cable. Each drive also has an additional power cable, usually direct to the power supply unit.
* Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), originally named SASI for Shugart Associates System Interface, was standard on servers, workstations, Commodore Amiga, Atari ST and Apple Macintosh computers through the mid-1990s, by which time most models had been transitioned to IDE (and later, SATA) family disks. The range limitations of the data cable allows for external SCSI devices.
* Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE), later standardized under the name AT Attachment (ATA, with the alias P-ATA or PATA (Parallel ATA) retroactively added upon introduction of SATA) moved the HDD controller from the interface card to the disk drive. This helped to standardize the host/contoller interface, reduce the programming complexity in the host device driver, and reduced system cost and complexity. The 40-pin IDE/ATA connection transfers 16 bits of data at a time on the data cable. The data cable was originally 40-conductor, but later higher speed requirements for data transfer to and from the HDD led to an "ultra DMA" mode, known as UDMA. Progressively swifter versions of this standard ultimately added the requirement for an 80-conductor variant of the same cable, where half of the conductors provides grounding necessary for enhanced high-speed signal quality by reducing cross talk.
* EIDE was an unofficial update (by Western Digital) to the original IDE standard, with the key improvement being the use of direct memory access (DMA) to transfer data between the disk and the computer without the involvement of the CPU, an improvement later adopted by the official ATA standards. By directly transferring data between memory and disk, DMA eliminates the need for the CPU to copy byte per byte, therefore allowing it to process other tasks while the data transfer occurs.
* Fibre Channel (FC) is a successor to parallel SCSI interface on enterprise market. It is a serial protocol. In disk drives usually the Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL) connection topology is used. FC has much broader usage than mere disk interfaces, and it is the cornerstone of storage area networks (SANs). Recently other protocols for this field, like iSCSI and ATA over Ethernet have been developed as well. Confusingly, drives usually use copper twisted-pair cables for Fibre Channel, not fibre optics. The latter are traditionally reserved for larger devices, such as servers or disk array controllers.
* Serial Attached SCSI (SAS). The SAS is a new generation serial communication protocol for devices designed to allow for much higher speed data transfers and is compatible with SATA. SAS uses a mechanically identical data and power connector to standard 3.5-inch SATA1/SATA2 HDDs, and many server-oriented SAS RAID controllers are also capable of addressing SATA HDDs. SAS uses serial communication instead of the parallel method found in traditional SCSI devices but still uses SCSI commands.
* Serial ATA (SATA). The SATA data cable has one data pair for differential transmission of data to the device, and one pair for differential receiving from the device, just like EIA-422. That requires that data be transmitted serially. A similar differential signaling system is used in RS485, LocalTalk, USB, FireWire, and differential SCSI.

== Integrity and failure ==
Close-up of an HDD head resting on a disk platter; its mirror reflection is visible on the platter surface.

Due to the extremely close spacing between the heads and the disk surface, HDDs are vulnerable to being damaged by a head crasha failure of the disk in which the head scrapes across the platter surface, often grinding away the thin magnetic film and causing data loss. Head crashes can be caused by electronic failure, a sudden power failure, physical shock, contamination of the drive's internal enclosure, wear and tear, corrosion, or poorly manufactured platters and heads.

The HDD's spindle system relies on air density inside the disk enclosure to support the heads at their proper flying height while the disk rotates. HDDs require a certain range of air densities in order to operate properly. The connection to the external environment and density occurs through a small hole in the enclosure (about 0.5 mm in breadth), usually with a filter on the inside (the breather filter). If the air density is too low, then there is not enough lift for the flying head, so the head gets too close to the disk, and there is a risk of head crashes and data loss. Specially manufactured sealed and pressurized disks are needed for reliable high-altitude operation, above about 3000 m. Modern disks include temperature sensors and adjust their operation to the operating environment. Breather holes can be seen on all disk drivesthey usually have a sticker next to them, warning the user not to cover the holes. The air inside the operating drive is constantly moving too, being swept in motion by friction with the spinning platters. This air passes through an internal recirculation (or "recirc") filter to remove any leftover contaminants from manufacture, any particles or chemicals that may have somehow entered the enclosure, and any particles or outgassing generated internally in normal operation. Very high humidity present for extended periods of time can corrode the heads and platters.

For giant magnetoresistive (GMR) heads in particular, a minor head crash from contamination (that does not remove the magnetic surface of the disk) still results in the head temporarily overheating, due to friction with the disk surface, and can render the data unreadable for a short period until the head temperature stabilizes (so called "thermal asperity", a problem which can partially be dealt with by proper electronic filtering of the read signal).

When the logic board of a hard disk fails, the drive can often be restored to functioning order and the data recovered by replacing the circuit board of one of an identical hard disk. In the case of read-write head faults, they can be replaced using specialized tools in a dust-free environment. If the disk platters are undamaged, they can be transferred into an identical enclosure and the data can be copied or cloned onto a new drive. In the event of disk-platter failures, disassembly and imaging of the disk platters may be required. For logical damage to file systems, a variety of tools, including fsck on UNIX-like systems and CHKDSK on Windows, can be used for data recovery. Recovery from logical damage can require file carving.

A common expectation is that hard disk drives designed for server use will fail less frequently than consumer-grade drives usually used in desktop computers. A study by Carnegie Mellon University and an independent one by Google both found that the "grade" of a drive does not relate to the drive's failure rate.

A 2011 summary of research into SSD and magnetic disk failure patterns by Tom's Hardware summarized research findings as follows: Investigation: Is Your SSD More Reliable Than A Hard Drive?  Tom's Hardware long term SSD reliability review, 2011, "final words" 
* MTBF does not indicate reliability; the annualized failure rate is higher and usually more relevant.
* Magnetic disks do not have a specific tendency to fail during early use, and temperature only has a minor effect; instead, failure rates steadily increase with age.
* S.M.A.R.T. warns of mechanical issues but not other issues affecting reliability, and is therefore not a reliable indicator of condition.
* Failure rates of drives sold as "enterprise" and "consumer" are "very much similar", although customized for their different environments.
* In drive arrays, one drive's failure significantly increases the short-term chance of a second drive failing.

== Market segments ==
; Desktop HDDs
: They typically store between 60 GB and 4 TB and rotate at 5,400 to 10,000 rpm, and have a media transfer rate of 0.5 Gbit/s or higher (1 GB = 109 bytes; 1 Gbit/s = 109 bit/s). , the highest capacity consumer HDDs store 6 TB. 
; Mobile (laptop) HDDs
: They are smaller than their desktop and enterprise counterparts, tend to be slower and have lower capacity. Mobile HDDs spin at 4,200 rpm, 5,200 rpm, 5,400 rpm, or 7,200 rpm, with 5,400 rpm being typical. 7,200 rpm drives tend to be more expensive and have smaller capacities, while 4,200 rpm models usually have very high storage capacities. Because of smaller platter(s), mobile HDDs generally have lower capacity than their greater desktop counterparts. As a note, there are also 2.5-inch drives spinning at 10,000 rpm which are belonging to the enterprise segment, thus not intended to be used in laptops.
; Enterprise HDDs
: Typically used with multiple-user computers running enterprise software. Examples are: transaction processing databases, internet infrastructure (email, webserver, e-commerce), scientific computing software, and nearline storage management software. Enterprise drives commonly operate continuously ("24/7") in demanding environments while delivering the highest possible performance without sacrificing reliability. Maximum capacity is not the primary goal, and as a result the drives are often offered in capacities that are relatively low in relation to their cost. The fastest enterprise HDDs spin at 10,000 or 15,000 rpm, and can achieve sequential media transfer speeds above 1.6 Gbit/s and a sustained transfer rate up to 1 Gbit/s. Drives running at 10,000 or 15,000 rpm use smaller platters to mitigate increased power requirements (as they have less air drag) and therefore generally have lower capacity than the highest capacity desktop drives. Enterprise HDDs are commonly connected through Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) or Fibre Channel (FC). Some support multiple ports, so they can be connected to a redundant host bus adapter. They can be reformatted with sector sizes larger than 512 bytes (often 520, 524, 528 or 536 bytes). The additional storage can be used by hardware RAID cards or to store a Data Integrity Field.
; Consumer electronics HDDs
: They include drives embedded into digital video recorders and automotive vehicles. The former are configured to provide a guaranteed streaming capacity, even in the face of read and write errors, while the latter are built to resist larger amounts of shock.

== Manufacturers and sales ==
Diagram of HDD manufacturer consolidation

More than 200 companies have manufactured HDDs over time. But consolidations have concentrated production into just three manufacturers today: Western Digital, Seagate, and Toshiba.

Worldwide revenues for HDDs shipments are expected to reach $33 billion in 2013, down about 12% from $37.8 billion in 2012. This corresponds to a 2013 unit shipment forecast of 552 million compared to 577 million units in 2012 and 624 million units in 2011. The estimated 2013 market shares are about 4045% each for Seagate and Western Digital and 1316% for Toshiba 

== External hard disk drives ==

External HDDs typically connect via USB; variants using USB 2.0 interface generally have slower data transfer rates when compared to internally mounted hard drives connected through SATA. Plug and play drive functionality offers system compatibility and features large storage options and portable design.

External HDDs are usually available as pre-assembled integrated products, but may be also assembled by combining an external enclosure (with USB or other interface) with a separately purchased HDD. They are available in 2.5-inch and 3.5-inch sizes; 2.5-inch variants are typically called portable external drives, while 3.5-inch variants are referred to as desktop external drives. "Portable" drives are packaged in smaller and lighter enclosures than the "desktop" drives; additionally, "portable" drives use power provided by the USB connection, while "desktop" drives require external power bricks.

, capacities of external HDDs generally range from 160 GB to 6 TB; common sizes are 160 GB, 250 GB, 320 GB, 500 GB, 640 GB, 750 GB, 1 TB, 2 TB, 3 TB, 4 TB, 5 TB and 6 TB. Features such as biometric security or multiple interfaces (for example, Firewire) are available at a higher cost. 

There are pre-assembled external hard disk drives that, when taken out from their enclosures, cannot be used internally in a laptop or desktop computer due to embedded USB interface on their printed circuit boards, and lack of SATA (or Parallel ATA) interfaces. 

== Icons ==
HDDs are traditionally symbolized as a stylized stack of platters or as a cylinder and are found in diagrams, or on lights to indicate HDD access. In most modern operating systems, HDDs are represented by an illustration or photograph of the drive enclosure.

File:Hdd icon.svg|HDDs are commonly symbolized with a drive icon
File:RAID 0.svg|RAID diagram icon symbolizing the array of disks

== See also ==

* Automatic acoustic management
* Cleanroom
* Click of death
* Data erasure
* Drive mapping
* Hybrid drive
* Microdrive
* RAID
* S.M.A.R.T.
* Solid-state drive
* Write precompensation

== Notes ==

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Computer History Museum's HDD Working Group Website
* Hard Disk Drives Encyclopedia
* Video showing an opened HD working
* Average seek time of a computer disk
* Timeline: 50 Years of Hard Drives

 



[[Hebrew calendar]]

Jewish calendar, showing Adar II between 1927 and 1948
The Hebrew or Jewish calendar (, ha'luach ha'ivri) is a lunisolar calendar used today predominantly for Jewish religious observances. It determines the dates for Jewish holidays and the appropriate public reading of Torah portions, yahrzeits (dates to commemorate the death of a relative), and daily Psalm readings, among many ceremonial uses. In Israel, it is used for religious purposes, provides a time frame for agriculture and is an official calendar for civil purposes, although the latter usage has been steadily declining in favor of the Gregorian calendar.

The present Hebrew calendar is the product of evolution, including a Babylonian influence. Until the Tannaitic period (approximately 10&ndash;220 CE) the calendar employed a new crescent moon, with an additional month normally added every two or three years to correct for the difference between twelve lunar months and the solar year. When to add it was based on observation of natural agriculture-related events. Specifically, the ripening of the barley crop; the age of the kids, lambs, and doves; the ripeness of the fruit trees; and the relation of the date to the tekufah (seasons). See the Talmud, Sanhedrin 11b Through the Amoraic period (200&ndash;500 CE) and into the Geonic period, this system was gradually displaced by the mathematical rules used today. The principles and rules were fully codified by Maimonides in the Mishneh Torah in the 12th century. Maimonides' work also replaced counting "years since the destruction of the Temple" with the modern creation-era Anno Mundi.

The Hebrew lunar year is about eleven days shorter than the solar cycle and uses the 19-year Metonic cycle to bring it into line with the solar cycle, with the addition of an intercalary month every two or three years, for a total of seven times per 19 years. Even with this intercalation, the average Hebrew calendar year is longer by about 6 minutes and 25+25/57 seconds than the current mean solar year, so that every 224 years, the Hebrew calendar will fall a day behind the current mean solar year; and about every 231 years it will fall a day behind the Gregorian calendar year.

The era used since the middle ages is the Anno Mundi epoch (Latin for "in the year of the world"; Hebrew: , "from the creation of the world"). As with Anno Domini (A.D. or AD), the words or abbreviation for Anno Mundi (A.M. or AM) for the era should properly precede the date rather than follow it, although this is no longer always followed. AM 5773 began at sunset on 16 September 2012 and ended on 4 September 2013. AM 5774 began at sunset on 4 September 2013 and will end on 24 September 2014. AM 5775 will begin at sunset on 24 September 2014 and end on 13 September 2015. "Tishrei, 5774". Chabad.org. Retrieved September 3, 2013. 

==Components==

===Day and hours===

The Jewish day is of no fixed length. The Jewish day is modeled on the reference to "...there was evening and there was morning..." , , , , , and . in the Creation account in the first chapter of Genesis. Based on the classic Rabbinic interpretation of this text, a day in the Rabbinic Hebrew calendar runs from sunset (start of "the evening") to the next sunset. One complicating factor is that there is no clear cut sunrise or sunset time at the extreme latitudes during certain seasons. At higher latitudes in summer, when the sun does not sink below the horizon, a day is counted from midday to midday, and in the winter, when the sun does not rise above the horizon, from midnight to midnight.

There is no clock in the Jewish scheme, so that a civil clock is used. Though the civil clock, including the one in use in Israel, incorporates local adoptions of various conventions such as time zones, standard times and daylight saving, these have no place in the Jewish scheme. The civil clock is used only as a reference point - in expressions such as: "Shabbat starts at ...". The steady progression of sunset around the world and seasonal changes results in gradual civil time changes from one day to the next based on observable astronomical phenomena (the sunset) and not on man-made laws and conventions.

Instead of the international date line convention, there are varying opinions as to where the day changes. One opinion uses the antimeridian of Jerusalem. (Jerusalem is 3513 east of the prime meridian, so the antimeridian is at 14447' W, passing through eastern Alaska.) Other opinions exist as well. See Willie Roth's essay The International Date Line and Halacha. "Appendix II: Baal HaMaor's Interpretation of 20b and its Relevance to the Dateline" in Talmud Bavli, Schottenstein Edition, Tractate Rosh HaShanah, Mesorah Publications Ltd. ("ArtScroll") 1999, where "20b" refers to the 20th page 2nd folio of the tractate. 

Every hour is divided into 1080 halakim (singular: helek) or parts. A part is 3 seconds or 1/18 minute. The ultimate ancestor of the helek was a small Babylonian time period called a barleycorn, itself equal to 1/72 of a Babylonian time degree (1 of celestial rotation). Otto Neugebauer, "The astronomy of Maimonides and its sources", Hebrew Union College Annual 23 (1949) 322363. Actually, the barleycorn or she was the name applied to the smallest units of all Babylonian measurements, whether of length, area, volume, weight, angle, or time.

The weekdays start with Sunday (day 1, or Yom Rishon) and proceed to Saturday (day 7), Shabbat. Since some calculations use division, a remainder of 0 signifies Saturday.

While calculations of days, months and years are based on fixed hours equal to 1/24 of a day, the beginning of each halachic day is based on the local time of sunset. The end of the Shabbat and other Jewish holidays is based on nightfall (Tzeth haKochabim) which occurs some amount of time, typically 42 to 72 minutes, after sunset. According to Maimonides, nightfall occurs when three medium-sized stars become visible after sunset. By the 17th century this had become three second-magnitude stars. The modern definition is when the center of the sun is 7 below the geometric (airless) horizon, somewhat later than civil twilight at 6. The beginning of the daytime portion of each day is determined both by dawn and sunrise. Most halachic times are based on some combination of these four times and vary from day to day throughout the year and also vary significantly depending on location. The daytime hours are often divided into Sha`oth Zemaniyoth or "Halachic hours" by taking the time between sunrise and sunset or between dawn and nightfall and dividing it into 12 equal hours. The nighttime hours are similarly divided into 12 equal portions, albeit a different amount of time than the "hours" of the daytime. The earliest and latest times for Jewish services, the latest time to eat Chametz on the day before Passover and many other rules are based on Sha`oth Zemaniyoth. For convenience, the modern day using Sha`oth Zemaniyoth is often discussed as if sunset were at 6:00pm, sunrise at 6:00am and each hour were equal to a fixed hour. For example, halachic noon may be after 1:00pm in some areas during daylight saving time. Within the Mishnah, however, the numbering of the hours starts with the "first" hour after the start of the day. See, for example, Berachot chapter 1, Mishnah 2. 

===Weeks===
There is a weekly cycle of seven days, mirroring the seven-day period of the Book of Genesis in which the world is created. The names for the days of the week, like those in the Creation account, are simply the day number within the week, with Shabbat being the seventh day. Each day of the week runs from sunset to the following sunset and is figured locally.

====Names of weekdays====
A bronze Shabbat candlestick holder made in British Mandate Palestine in the 1940s.
The Hebrew calendar follows a seven-day weekly cycle, which runs concurrently but independently of the monthly and annual cycles. The names for the days of the week are simply the day number within the week. In Hebrew, these names may be abbreviated using the numerical value of the Hebrew letters, for example (Day 1, or Yom Rishon ()):

#Yom Rishon - (abbreviated ), meaning "first day" to Sunday (starting at preceding sunset of Saturday)
#Yom Sheni - (abbr. ) meaning "second day" to Monday
#Yom Shlishi - (abbr. ) meaning "third day" to Tuesday
#Yom Revii - (abbr. ) meaning "fourth day" to Wednesday
#Yom Chamishi - (abbr. ) = "fifth day" to Thursday
#Yom Shishi - (abbr. ) meaning "sixth day" to Friday
#Yom Shabbat - (abbr. ), or more usually Shabbat - = "Sabbath-rest day" to Saturday.

The names of the days of the week are modeled on the seven days mentioned in the Creation story. For example, "... And there was evening and there was morning, one day". One day () in Genesis 1:15 is translated in JPS as first day, and in some other contexts (including KJV) as day one. In subsequent verses the Hebrew refers to the days using ordinal numbers, e.g., 'second day', 'third day', and so forth, but with the sixth and seventh days the Hebrew includes the definite article ("the"). See , , , , and . 

The Jewish Shabbat has a special role in the Jewish weekly cycle. There are many special rules which relate to the Shabbat, discussed more fully in the Talmudic tractate Shabbat.

In Hebrew, the word Shabbat () can also mean "(Talmudic) week", For example, according to Morfix  , Morfix Dictionary, which is based upon Prof. Yaakov Choeka's Rav Milim dictionary. But the word meaning a non-Talmudic week is  (shavua), according to the same " ". so that in ritual liturgy a phrase like "Yom Revii bShabbat" means "the fourth day in the week". For example, when referring to the daily psalm recited in the morning prayer (services#Shacharit: morning prayers|Shacharit]). 

====Days of week of holidays====

The period from 1 Adar (or Adar II, in leap years) to 29 Heshvan contains all of the festivals specified in the Bible - Purim (14 Adar), Pesach (15 Nisan), Shavuot (6 Sivan), Rosh Hashanah (1 Tishrei), Yom Kippur (10 Tishrei), Sukkot (15 Tishrei), and Shemini Atzeret (22 Tishrei). This period is fixed, during which no adjustments are made.

 
 Purim Passover(first day) Shavuot(first day) 17 Tammuz/Tisha B'Av Rosh Hashanah/Sukkot/Shmini Atzeret/(first day) Yom Kippur Chanukah(first day) 10 Tevet Tu Bishvat 
 Thu Sat Sun Sun* Mon Wed Sun or Mon Sun or Tue Sat or Mon 
 Fri Sun Mon Sun Tue Thu Mon Tue Mon 
 Sun Tue Wed Tue Thu Sat Wed or Thu Wed, Thu, or Fri Tue, Wed, or Thu 
 Tue Thu Fri Thu Sat Mon Fri or Sat Fri or Sun Thu or Sat 
 *Postponed from Shabbat 

There are additional rules in the Hebrew calendar to prevent certain holidays from falling on certain days of the week. (See Rosh Hashanah postponement, below.) These rules are implemented by adding an extra day to Marcheshvan (making it 30 days long) or by removing one day from Kislev (making it 29 days long). Accordingly, a common Hebrew calendar year can have a length of 353, 354 or 355 days, while a leap Hebrew calendar year can have a length of 383, 384 or 385 days.

===Months===
The Hebrew calendar is a lunisolar calendar, meaning that months are based on lunar months, but years are based on solar years. In contrast, the Gregorian calendar is a pure solar calendar, while the Islamic calendar is a pure lunar calendar. The calendar year features twelve lunar months of twenty-nine or thirty days, with an intercalary lunar month added periodically to synchronize the twelve lunar cycles with the longer solar year. (These extra months are added seven times every nineteen years. See Leap months, below.) The beginning of each Jewish lunar month is based on the appearance of the new moon. Under the fixed, calculated calendar, this is only loosely true. Because the calculations are based on mean lunar months, not observed onesand because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rulesa given month may not begin on the same day as its astronomical conjunction. See Although originally the new lunar crescent had to be observed and certified by witnesses, This practice continues to be used in Karaite Judaism as well as in the Islamic calendar. the moment of the new moon is now approximated arithmetically.

The mean period of the lunar month (precisely, the synodic month) is very close to 29.5 days. Accordingly, the basic Hebrew calendar year is one of twelve lunar months alternating between 29 and 30 days:

 No. Hebrew calendar Length 
 1 Nisan 30 
 2 Iyar 29 
 3 Sivan 30 
 4 Tammuz 29 
 5 Av 30 
 6 Elul 29 
 7 Tishrei 30 
 8 Cheshvan 29 
 9 Kislev 30 
 10 Tevet 29 
 11 Shevat 30 
 12 Adar 29/(30) 
 Total 354/(355) 

In leap years (such as 5771) an additional month, Adar I (30 days) is added after Shevat, while the regular Adar is referred to as "Adar II."

The insertion of the leap month mentioned above is based on the requirement that Passoverthe festival celebrating the Exodus from Egypt, which took place in the springalways occur in the hemisphere's spring season. Since the adoption of a fixed calendar, intercalations in the Hebrew calendar have been assigned to fixed points in a 19-year cycle. Prior to this, the intercalation was determined empirically:

The year may be intercalated on three grounds: 'aviv ripeness of barley, fruits of trees, and the equinox. On two of these grounds it should be intercalated, but not on one of them alone. Tosefta Sanhedrin 2.2, Herbert Danby, Trans., Tractate Sanhedrin Mishnah and Tosefta, Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, London and New York, 1919, p. 31. Also quoted in Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community: A History of the Jewish Calendar Second Century BCE-Tenth Century CE, Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 70. 

====Importance of lunar months====
From very early times, the Mesopotamian lunisolar calendar was in wide use by the countries of the western Asia region. The structure, which was also used by the Israelites, was based on lunar months with the intercalation of an additional month to bring the cycle closer to the solar cycle. Ancient Israel: Its Life and Institutions (1961) by Roland De Vaux, John McHugh, Publisher: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 978-0-8028-4278-7, p.179 

 stresses the importance in Israelite religious observance of the new month (Hebrew: , Rosh Chodesh, "beginning of the month"): "... in your new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings..." Similarly in . "The beginning of the month" meant the appearance of a new moon.

According to the Mishnah and Tosefta, in the Maccabean, Herodian, and Mishnaic periods, new months were determined by the sighting of a new crescent, with two eyewitnesses required to testify to the Sanhedrin to having seen the new lunar crescent at sunset. M. Rosh Hashanah 1.7 The practice in the time of Gamaliel II (c. 100 CE) was for witnesses to select the appearance of the moon from a collection of drawings that depicted the crescent in a variety of orientations, only a few of which could be valid in any given month. M. Rosh Hashanah 2.6-8 These observations were compared against calculations. b. Rosh Hashanah 20b: "This is what Abba the father of R. Simlai meant: 'We calculate the new moon's birth. If it is born before midday, then certainly it will have been seen shortly before sunset. If it was not born before midday, certainly it will not have been seen shortly before sunset.' What is the practical value of this remark? R. Ashi said: Confuting the witnesses." I. Epstein, Ed., The Babylonian Talmud Seder Mo'ed, Soncino Press, London, 1938, p. 85. 

At first the beginning of each Jewish month was signaled to the communities of Israel and beyond by fires lit on mountaintops, but after the Samaritans began to light false fires, messengers were sent. M. Rosh Hashanah 2.2 The inability of the messengers to reach communities outside Israel before mid-month High Holy Days (Succot and Passover) led outlying communities to celebrate scriptural festivals for two days rather than one, observing the second feast-day of the Jewish diaspora because of uncertainty of whether the previous month ended after 29 or 30 days. b. Betzah 4b 

In his work Mishneh Torah (1178), Maimonides included a chapter "Sanctification of the New Moon", in which he discusses the calendrical rules and their scriptural basis. He notes, "By how much does the solar year exceed the lunar year? By approximately 11 days. Therefore, whenever this excess accumulates to about 30 days, or a little more or less, one month is added and the particular year is made to consist of 13 months, and this is the so-called embolismic (intercalated) year. For the year could not consist of twelve months plus so-and-so many days, since it is said: throughout the months of the year (), which implies that we should count the year by months and not by days." Sanctification of the New Moon. Translated from the Hebrew by Solomon Gandz; supplemented, introduced, and edited by Julian Obermann; with an astronomical commentary by Otto Neugebauer. Yale Judaica Series, Volume 11, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1956 

====Names of months====
Biblical references to the pre-Jewish calendar include ten months identified by number rather than by name. In parts of the Torah portion Noach ("Noah") (specifically, , , ) it is implied that the months are thirty days long. says "... on the seventeenth day of the second monthon that day all the springs of the great deep burst forth..." and says "...At the end of the hundred and fifty days the water had gone down, (4) and on the seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat..." There is an interval of 5 months and 150 days, making each month 30 days long. There is also an indication that there were twelve months in the annual cycle (, ).

Many countries in the western Asian region used the Mesopotamian calendar from very early times, though the names of months varied. Prior to the Babylonian exile, the names of only four months are referred to in the Tanakh:
*Aviv - first month - literally "spring" (, , , , );
*Ziv - second month - literally "light" (, );
*Ethanim - seventh month - literally "strong" in plural, perhaps referring to strong rains (); and
*Bul - eighth month ().
All of these are believed to be Canaanite names. These names are only mentioned in connection with the building of the First Temple. Hkan Ulfgard suggests that the use of what are rarely used Canaanite (or in the case of Ethanim perhaps Northwest-semitic) names indicates that "the author is consciously utilizing an archaizing terminology, thus giving the impression of an ancient story...". 

At some point during the Babylonian exile or diaspora, which started in 597 BCE, Babylonian Jews commenced to use Babylonian month names, which names continue to be used today. The Syrian calendar used in the Levant region shares many of the names for months as the Hebrew calendar, such as Nisan, Iyyar, Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri, and Adar, indicating a common Babylonian origin.

Hebrew names and romanized transliteration may somewhat differ, as they do for Marcheshvan () or Kislev (): the Hebrew words shown here are those commonly indicated e.g. in newspapers.

In a regular (kesidran) year, Marcheshvan has 29 days and Kislev has 30 days. However, because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules (see below) Kislev may lose a day to have 29 days, and the year is called a short (chaser) year, or Marcheshvan may acquire an additional day to have 30 days, and the year is called a full (maleh) year. The calendar rules have been designed to ensure that Rosh Hashanah does not fall on a Sunday, Wednesday or Friday. This is to ensure that Yom Kippur does not directly precede or follow Shabbat, which would create practical difficulties, and that Hoshana Rabbah is not on a Shabbat, in which case certain ceremonies would be lost for a year.

====Leap months====
The solar year is about eleven days longer than twelve lunar months. The Bible does not directly mention the addition of "embolismic" or intercalary months. However, without the insertion of embolismic months, Jewish festivals would gradually shift outside of the seasons required by the Torah. This has been ruled as implying a requirement for the insertion of embolismic months to reconcile the lunar cycles to the seasons, which are integral to solar yearly cycles.

When the observational form of the calendar was in use, whether or not an embolismic month was announced after the "last month" (Adar) depended on 'aviv ripeness of barley, fruits of trees, and the equinox. On two of these grounds it should be intercalated, but not on one of them alone. It may be noted that in the Bible the name of the first month, Aviv, literally means "spring". Thus, if Adar was over and Spring had not yet arrived, an additional month was observed.

Traditionally, for the Babylonian and Hebrew lunisolar calendars, the years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are the long (13-month) years of the Metonic cycle. This cycle, which can be used to predict eclipses, forms the basis of the Greek and Hebrew calendars, and is used for the computation of the date of Easter each year

During leap years Adar I (or Adar Aleph &mdash; "first Adar") is added before the regular Adar. Adar I is actually considered to be the extra month, and has 30 days. Adar II (or Adar Bet &mdash; "second Adar") is the "real" Adar, and has the usual 29 days. For this reason, holidays such as Purim are observed in Adar II, not Adar I.

===Years===
The Hebrew calendar year conventionally begins on Rosh Hashanah. However, other dates serve as the beginning of the year for different religious purposes.

There are three qualities that distinguish one year from another: whether it is a leap year or a common year, on which of four permissible days of the week the year begins, and whether it is a deficient, regular, or complete year. Mathematically, there are 24 (243) possible combinations, but only 14 of them are valid. Each of these patterns is called a keviyah (Hebrew  for "a setting" or "an established thing"), and is encoded as a series of three Hebrew letters.

In Hebrew there are two common ways of writing the year number: with the thousands, called ("major era"), and without the thousands, called ("minor era").

====Anno Mundi====

The Jewish calendar's reference point is traditionally held to be about one year before the Creation of the world.
In 1178 CE, Maimonides wrote in the Misheh Torah, Sanctification of the Moon (11.16), that he had chosen the epoch from which calculations of all dates should be as "the third day of Nisan in this present year ... which is the year 4938 of the creation of the world" (March 22, 1178 CE). Solomon, Gandz (19471948). "Date of the Composition of Maimonides' Code". Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research, Vol. 17, pp. 1 - 7. Archived at JSTOR. Retrieved March 14, 2013. He included all the rules for the calculated calendar and their scriptural basis, including the modern epochal year in his work, and beginning formal usage of the anno mundi era. From the 11th century, anno mundi dating became dominant throughout most of the world's Jewish communities The Easter Computus and the Origins of the Christian Era, Alden A. Mosshammer Today, the rules detailed in Maimonides' calendrical code are those generally used by Jewish communities throughout the world.

Since the codification by Maimonides in 1178 CE, the Jewish calendar has used the Anno Mundi epoch (Latin for in the year of the world, abbreviated AM or A.M.; Hebrew ), sometimes referred to as the Hebrew era, to distinguish it from other systems based on some computation of creation, such as the Byzantine calendar.

There is also reference in the Talmud to years since the creation based on the calculation in the Seder Olam Rabbah of Rabbi Jose ben Halafta in about 160 CE. p.107, Kantor By his calculation, based on the Masoretic Text, Adam was created in 3760 BCE, later confirmed by the Muslim chronologist al-Biruni as 3448 years before the Seleucid era. See The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries. An example is the c. 8th century Baraita of Samuel.

According to Rabbinic reckoning, the beginning of "year 1" is not Creation, but about one year before Creation, with the new moon of its first month (Tishrei) to be called molad tohu (the mean new moon of chaos or nothing). The Jewish calendar's epoch (reference date), 1 Tishrei AM 1, is equivalent to Monday, 7 October 3761 BC/BCE in the proleptic Julian calendar, the equivalent tabular date (same daylight period) and is about one year before the traditional Jewish date of Creation on 25 Elul AM 1, based upon the Seder Olam Rabbah. A minority opinion places Creation on 25 Adar AM 1, six months earlier, or six months after the modern epoch. Thus, adding 3760 before Rosh Hashanah or 3761 after to a Julian (or proleptic Gregorian) year number starting from 1 CE (AD 1) will yield the Hebrew year. For earlier years there may be a discrepancy (see: Missing years (Jewish calendar)).

The Seder Olam Rabbah also recognized the importance of the Jubilee and Sabbatical cycles as a long-term calendrical system, and attempted at various places to fit the Sabbatical and Jubilee years into its chronological scheme.

====Previous systems====
Before the adoption of the current AM year numbering system, other systems were in use. In early times, the years were counted from some significant historic event. (e.g. ) During the period of the monarchy, it was the widespread practice in western Asia to use era year numbers according to the accession year of the monarch of the country involved. This practice was also followed by the united kingdom of Israel (e.g. ), kingdom of Judah (e.g. ), kingdom of Israel (e.g. ), Persia (e.g. ) and others. Besides, the author of Kings coordinated dates in the two kingdoms by giving the accession year of a monarch in terms of the year of the monarch of the other kingdom, (e.g. ) though some commentators note that these dates do not always synchronise. Other era dating systems have been used at other times. For example, Jewish communities in the Babylonian diaspora counted the years from the first deportation from Israel, that of Jehoiachin in 597 BCE, (e.g. ). The era year was then called "year of the captivity of Jehoiachin". (e.g. )

During the Hellenistic Maccabean period, Seleucid era counting was used, at least in the Greek-influenced area of Israel. The Books of the Maccabees used Seleucid era dating exclusively (e.g. , , , , ). Josephus writing in the Roman period also used Seleucid era dating exclusively. During the Talmudic era, from the 1st to the 10th century, the center of world Judaism was in the Middle East, primarily in the Talmudic Academies of Iraq and Palestine. Jews in these regions used Seleucid era dating (also known as the "Era of Contracts"). Chronology of the Old Testament, Dr. Floyd Nolen Jones "When the center of Jewish life moved from Babylonia to Europe during the 8th and 9th centuries CE, calculations from the Seleucid era became meaningless. Over those centuries, it was replaced by that of the anno mundi era of the Seder Olam. From the 11th century, anno mundi dating became dominant throughout most of the world's Jewish communities." The Avodah Zarah states:

Rav Aha b. Jacob then put this question: How do we know that our Era Documents is connected with the Kingdom of Greece at all? Why not say that it is reckoned from the Exodus from Egypt, omitting the first thousand years and giving the years of the next thousand? In that case, the document is really post-dated! Said Rav Nahman: In the Diaspora the Greek Era alone is used. He questioner thought that Rav Nahman wanted to dispose of him anyhow, but when he went and studied it thoroughly he found that it is indeed taught a Baraita: In the Diaspora the Greek Era alone is used. Avodah Zarah, tractate 10 

The use of the era of documents (i.e., Seleucid era) continued till the 16th century in the East, and was employed even in the 19th century among the Jews of Yemen. 

Occasionally in Talmudic writings, reference was made to other starting points for eras, such as destruction era dating, Avodah Zarah, tractate 9 Footnote: "The Eras in use among Jews in Talmudic Times are: (a) ERA OF CONTRACTS dating from the year 380 before the Destruction of the Second Temple (312&ndash;1 BCE) when, at the Battle of Gaza, Seleucus Nicator, one of the followers of Alexander the Great, gained dominion over Palestine. It is also termed Seleucid or Greek Era . Its designation as Alexandrian Era connecting it with Alexander the Great (Maim. Yad, Gerushin 1, 27) is an anachronism, since Alexander died in 323 BCEeleven years before this Era began (v. E. Mahler, Handbuch der judischen Chronologie, p. 145). This Era, which is first mentioned in Mac. I, 10, and was used by notaries or scribes for dating all civil contracts, was generally in vogue in eastern countries till the 16th cent, and was employed even in the 19th cent, among the Jews of Yemen, in South Arabia (Eben Saphir, Lyck, 1866, p. 62b). (b) THE ERA OF THE DESTRUCTION (of the Second Temple) the year 1 of which corresponds to 381 of the Seleucid Era, and 69-70 of the Christian Era. This Era was mainly employed by the Rabbis and was in use in Palestine for several centuries, and even in the later Middle Ages documents were dated by it. One of the recently discovered Genizah documents bears the date 13 Tammuz 987 after the Destruction of the Templei.e. 917 C.E. (Op. cit. p. 152, also Marmorstein ZDMG, Vol. VI, p. 640). The difference between the two Eras as far as the tens and units are concerned is thus 20. If therefore a Tanna, say in the year 156 Era of Dest. (225 CE), while remembering, naturally, the century, is uncertain about the tens and units, he should ask the notary what year it is according to hisSeleucidera. He will get the answer 536 (156 + 380), on adding 20 to which he would get 556, the last two figures giving him the year 56 of the Era of Destruction." being the number of years since the 70 CE destruction of the Second Temple. In the 8th and 9th centuries, as the center of Jewish life moved from Babylonia to Europe, counting using the Seleucid era "became meaningless". There is indication that Jews of the Rhineland in the early Middle Ages used the "years after the destruction of the Temple" (e.g., Mainz Anonymous).

====New year====
A shofar made from a ram's horn is traditionally blown in observance of Rosh Hashanah, the beginning of the Jewish civic year.

 and set Aviv (now Nisan) as "the first of months":

:this month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you.

Nisan 1 is referred to as the ecclesiastical new year.

In ancient Israel, the start of the ecclesiastical new year for the counting of months and festivals (i.e. Nisan) was determined by reference to Passover. Passover is on 15 Nisan, () which corresponds to the full moon of Nisan. As Passover is a spring festival, it should fall on a full moon day around, and normally just after, the vernal (northward) equinox. If the twelfth full moon after the previous Passover is too early compared to the equinox, a leap month is inserted near the end of the previous year before the new year is set to begin. According to normative Judaism, the verses in require that the months be determined by a proper court with the necessary authority to sanctify the months. Hence the court, not the astronomy, has the final decision. 

According to some Christian and Karaite sources, the tradition in ancient Israel was that 1 Nisan would not start until the barley is ripe, being the test for the onset of spring. The barley had to be "eared out" (ripe) in order to have a wave-sheaf offering of the first fruits according to the Law. If the barley was not ripe an intercalary month would be added before Nisan.

The day most commonly referred to as the "New Year" is 1 Tishrei, which actually begins in the seventh month of the ecclesiastical year. On that day the formal New Year for the counting of years (such as Shmita and Yovel), Rosh Hashanah ("head of the year") is observed. (see , which uses the phrase "beginning of the year".) This is the civil new year, and the date on which the year number advances. Certain agricultural practices are also marked from this date. See Maaser Rishon, Maaser Sheni, Maaser Ani. 

In the 1st century, Josephus stated that while -

Moses...appointed Nisan...as the first month for the festivals...the commencement of the year for everything relating to divine worship, but for selling and buying and other ordinary affairs he preserved the ancient order e. the year beginning with Tishrei." Josephus, Antiquities 1.81, Loeb Classical Library, 1930. 

Edwin Thiele has concluded that the ancient northern Kingdom of Israel counted years using the ecclesiastical new year starting on 1 Aviv (Nisan), while the southern Kingdom of Judah counted years using the civil new year starting on 1 Tishrei. Edwin Thiele, The Mysterious Numbers of the Hebrew Kings, (1st ed.; New York: Macmillan, 1951; 2d ed.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1965; 3rd ed.; Grand Rapids: Zondervan/Kregel, 1983). ISBN 0-8254-3825-X, 9780825438257 The practice of the Kingdom of Israel was also that of Babylon, The Chronology of the Old Testament, 16th ed., Floyd Nolan Jones, ISBN 978-0-89051-416-0, p. 118-123 as well as other countries of the region. The practice of Judah is still followed.

In fact the Jewish calendar has a multiplicity of new years for different purposes. The use of these dates has been in use for a long time. The use of multiple starting dates for a year is comparable to different starting dates for civil "calendar years", "tax or fiscal years", "academic years", "religious cycles", etc. By the time of the redaction of the Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 1:1 (c. 200 CE), jurists had identified four new-year dates:

The 1st of Nisan is the new year for kings and feasts; the 1st of Elul is the new year for the tithe of cattle... the 1st of Tishri is the new year for years, of the years of release and jubilee years, for the planting and for vegetables; and the 1st of Shevat is the new year for trees-so the school of Shammai; and the school of Hillel say: On the 15th thereof. M. Rosh Hashanah 1, in Herbert Danby, trans., The Mishnah, Oxford University Press, 1933, p. 188. 

The month of Elul is the new year for counting animal tithes (ma'aser behemah). Tu Bishvat ("the 15th of Shevat") marks the new year for trees (and agricultural tithes).

The table below shows the dates of the Jewish New Year.

 Year Date Days 
 5767 23 September 2006 355 
 5768 13 September 2007 383* 
 5769 30 September 2008 354 
 5770 19 September 2009 355 
 5771 9 September 2010 385* 
 5772 29 September 2011 354 
 5773 17 September 2012 353 
 5774 5 September 2013 385* 
 5775 25 September 2014 354 
 5776 14 September 2015 385* 
 5777 3 October 2016 353 
 5778 21 September 2017 354 
 5779 10 September 2018 385* 
 5780 30 September 2019 355 
 5781 19 September 2020 353 
 5782 7 September 2021 384* 
 5783 26 September 2022 355 
 5784 16 September 2023 383* 
 5785 3 October 2024 355 
 5786 23 September 2025 354 
 5787 12 September 2026 385* 
 5788 2 October 2027 355 
 5789 21 September 2028 354 
 5790 10 September 2029 383* 
 5791 28 September 2030 355 
 5792 18 September 2031 354 
 5793 6 September 2032 383* 
 5794 24 September 2033 355 
 5795 14 September 2034 385* 
 5796 4 October 2035 354 
 5797 22 September 2036 353 
 5798 10 September 2037 385* 
 5799 30 September 2038 354 
 5800 19 September 2039 355 
 5801 8 September 2040 383* 
 5802 26 September 2041 354 
 5803 15 September 2042 385* 
 5804 5 October 2043 353 
 5805 22 September 2044 355 
 5806 12 September 2045 384* 

* Leap years of 13 months.

====Leap years====
The Jewish calendar is based on the Metonic cycle of 19 years, of which 12 are common (non-leap) years of 12 months and 7 are leap years of 13 months. To determine whether a Jewish year is a leap year, one must find its position in the 19-year Metonic cycle. This position is calculated by dividing the Jewish year number by 19 and finding the remainder. For example, the present Jewish year divided by 19 results in a remainder of , indicating that it is year of the Metonic cycle. Since there is no year 0, a remainder of 0 indicates that the year is year 19 of the cycle. See also Golden number (time). 

Years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 the Metonic cycle are leap years. To assist in remembering this sequence, some people use the mnemonic Hebrew word GUCHADZaT , where the Hebrew letters gimel-vav-het aleph-dalet-zayin-tet are used as Hebrew numerals equivalent to 3, 6, 8, 1, 4, 7, 9. The keviyah records whether the year is leap or common:  for p'shutah, meaning simple and indicating a common year, and  indicating a leap year. 

Another memory aid notes that intervals of the major scale follow the same pattern as do Jewish leap years, with do corresponding to year 19 (or 0): a whole step in the scale corresponds to two common years between consecutive leap years, and a half step to one common year between two leap years. This connection with the major scale is more remarkable in the context of 19 equal temperament.

To determine whether year n of the calendar is a leap year, find the remainder on dividing  n) + 1 by 19. If the remainder is 6 or less it is a leap year; if it is 7 or more it is not. For example, the The 

====Rosh Hashanah postponement====

 Day of week Number of days 
 Monday 353 355 383 385 
 Tuesday 354 384 
 Thursday 354 355 383 385 
 Saturday 353 355 383 385 

To calculate the day on which Rosh Hashanah falls, it is necessary to first calculate the molad (lunar conjunction or new moon) of Tishrei, and then determine whether the start of the year must be postponed. The molad can be calculated by multiplying the mean length of a (synodic) lunar month (29 days, 12 hours, and 793 parts) by the elapsed time since another molad whose weekday is known. (There are 1080 "parts" in an hour, making one part equal to 31/3 seconds.) The molad tohu began 2 days, 5 hours, and 204 parts after the beginning of the week.

The rules are complicated by the fact that the months subject to adjustment, Marcheshvan and Kislev, are the eighth and ninth months of the ecclesiastical year while Tishrei is the seventh month. This means that adjustments must be made in one year in anticipation of the day of the week on which Rosh Hashanah will fall in the next year, which may itself be affected by the day on which it will fall in the third year, and so on. The process is further complicated by the need to insert leap months in accordance with their own cycle.

Nevertheless, only four possible adjustments are needed. These are called the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, or deiyyot: 

*If the molad occurs at or later than 18 hours, Rosh Hashanah is postponed a day. This is called deiyyah molad zaken, meaning an "old conjunction."
*If the molad occurs on a Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, Rosh Hashanah is postponed a day. If deiyyah molad zaken places Rosh Hashanah on one of these days, it is postponed a second day. This is called deiyyah lo ADU, an acronym meaning "not one, four, or six."

The first of these (deiyyah molad zaken) is thought to be a relic of when the calendar was established empirically (although there is some doubt); the second (deiyyah lo ADU) is applied for religious reasons. 

Another two rules are applied much less frequently and exist to prevent illegal year lengths. Their names are Hebrew acronyms for the way they are calculated:

*If the molad in a common year falls on a Tuesday after 9 hours and 204 parts, Rosh Hashanah is postponed to Thursday. This is deiyyah GaTaRaD, an acronym meaning "3 (Tuesday), 9, 204."
*If the molad following a leap year falls on a Monday after 15 hours and 589 parts, Rosh Hashanah is postponed to Tuesday. This is deiyyah BeTUTeKaPoT, and acronym for "2 (Monday), 15, 589."

At the innovation of the rabbis, the mathematical calendar has been arranged to ensure that Yom Kippur does not fall on a Friday or Sunday, and Hoshana Rabbah does not fall on Shabbat. This is the reason given by most halachic authorities, based on the Talmud, Rosh Hashanah 20b and Sukkah 43b. Maimonides (Mishneh Torah, Kiddush Hachodesh 7:7), however, writes that the arrangement was made (possible days alternating with impossible ones) in order to average out the difference between the mean and true lunar conjunctions. These rules have been instituted because Shabbat restrictions also apply to Yom Kippur, so that if Yom Kippur were to fall on Friday, it would not be possible to make necessary preparations for Shabbat (such as candle lighting). Similarly, if Yom Kippur fell on a Sunday, it would not be possible to make preparations for Yom Kippur because the preceding day is Shabbat. The Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 20b) puts it differently: over two consecutive days of full Shabbat restrictions, vegetables would wilt (since they can't be cooked), and unburied corpses would putrefy. Additionally, the laws of Shabbat override those of Hoshana Rabbah, so that if Hoshana Rabbah were to fall on Shabbat certain rituals that are a part of the Hoshana Rabbah service (such as carrying willows, which is a form of work) could not be performed. Yerushalmi, Sukkah 54b. 

To prevent Yom Kippur (10 Tishrei) from falling on a Friday or Sunday, Rosh Hashanah (1 Tishrei) cannot be a Wednesday or Friday. Likewise, to prevent Hoshana Rabbah (21 Tishrei) from falling on a Saturday, Rosh Hashanah cannot be a Sunday. This leaves only four days on which Rosh Hashanah can fall: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, which are referred as the "four gates." Each day is associated with a number (its order in the week, starting with Sunday as 1), and these numbers are associated with Hebrew letters. Therefore the keviyah uses the letters ,, and  (representing 2, 3, 5, and 7, for Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday) to denote the starting day of the year.

====Deficient, regular, and complete years====
The postponement of the year is compensated for by adding a day to the second month or removing one from the third month. A Jewish common year can only have 353, 354, or 355 days. A leap year is always 30 days longer, and so can have 383, 384, or 385 days.

*A chaserah year (Hebrew for "deficient" or "incomplete") is 353 or 383 days long. Both Marcheshvan and Kislev have 29 days. The Hebrew letter  "het" is used in the keviyah.
*A kesidrah year ("regular" or "in-order") is 354 or 384 days long. Marcheshvan has 29 days while Kislev has 30 days. The Hebrew letter  "kaf" is used in the keviyah.
*A shlemah year ("complete" or "perfect") is 355 or 385 days long. Both Marcheshvan and Kislev have 30 days. The Hebrew letter  "shin" is used in the keviyah.

Whether a year is deficient, regular, or complete is determined by the time between two adjacent Rosh Hashanah observances and the leap year. While the keviyah is sufficient to describe a year, a variant specifies the day of the week for the first day of Pesach (Passover) in lieu of the year length.

A Metonic cycle equates to 235 lunar months in each 19-year cycle. This gives an average of 6939 days, 16 hours, and 595 parts for each cycle. But due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules (preceding section) a cycle of 19 Jewish years can be either 6939, 6940, 6941, or 6942 days in duration. Since none of these values is evenly divisible by seven, the Jewish calendar repeats exactly only following 36,288 Metonic cycles, or 689,472 Jewish years. There is a near-repetition every 247 years, except for an excess of 50 minutes (905 parts).

==History==
A stone (2.431 m) with Hebrew inscription "To the Trumpeting Place" is believed to be a part of the Second Temple.

===Mishnaic period===
The Tanakh contains several commandments related to the keeping of the calendar and the lunar cycle, and records changes that have taken place to the Hebrew calendar.

It has been noted Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community, Oxford University Press, 2001, pp. 162ff. that the procedures described in the Mishnah and Tosefta are all plausible procedures for regulating an empirical lunar calendar. Fire-signals, for example, or smoke-signals, are known from the pre-exilic Lachish ostraca. James B. Pritchard, ed., The Ancient Near East: An Anthology of Texts and Pictures, Vol. 1, Princeton University Press, p. 213. Furthermore, the Mishnah contains laws that reflect the uncertainties of an empirical calendar. Mishnah Sanhedrin, for example, holds that when one witness holds that an event took place on a certain day of the month, and another that the same event took place on the following day, their testimony can be held to agree, since the length of the preceding month was uncertain. M. Sanhedrin 5.3: "If one testifies, 'on the second of the month, and the other, 'on the third of the month:' their evidence is valid, for one may have been aware of the intercalation of the month and the other may not have been aware of it. But if one says, 'on the third', and the other 'on the fifth', their evidence is invalid." Another Mishnah takes it for granted that it cannot be known in advance whether a year's lease is for twelve or thirteen months. M. Baba Metzia 8.8. Hence it is a reasonable conclusion that the Mishnaic calendar was actually used in the Mishnaic period.

The accuracy of the Mishnah's claim that the Mishnaic calendar was also used in the late Second Temple period is less certain. One scholar has noted Solomon Gandz, "The origin of the Two New Moon Days", Jewish Quarterly Review (New Series), v. 40, 1949-50. Reprinted in Shlomo Sternberg, ed., Studies in Hebrew Astronomy and Mathematics by Solomon Gandz, KTAV, New York, 1970, pp. 7273. that there are no laws from Second Temple period sources that indicate any doubts about the length of a month or of a year. This led him to propose that the priests must have had some form of computed calendar or calendrical rules that allowed them to know in advance whether a month would have 30 or 29 days, and whether a year would have 12 or 13 months.

===Modern calendar===
The Arch of Titus depicting the objects from the Temple being carried through Rome.
Between 70 and 1178 CE, the observation-based calendar was gradually replaced by a mathematically calculated one. Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community. Except for the epoch year number, the calendar rules reached their current form by the beginning of the 9th century, as described by the Persian Muslim astronomer al-Khwarizmi (c. 780850 CE) in 823. 

One notable difference between the calendar of that era and the modern form was the date of the epoch (the fixed reference point at the beginning of year 1), which at that time was one year later than the epoch of the modern calendar.

Most of the present rules of the calendar were in place by 823, according to a treatise by al-Khwarizmi. Al-Khwarizmi's study of the Jewish calendar, "Extraction of the Jewish Era" describes the 19-year intercalation cycle, the rules for determining on what day of the week the first day of the month Tishr shall fall, the interval between the Jewish era (creation of Adam) and the Seleucid era, and the rules for determining the mean longitude of the sun and the moon using the Jewish calendar. E.S. Kennedy, "Al-Khwarizmi on the Jewish calendar", Scripta Mathematica 27 (1964) 5559. "al-Khwarizmi", Dictionary of Scientific Biography, VII: 362, 365. 

In 921, Aaron ben Mer proposed changes to the calendar. Though the proposals were rejected, they indicate that all of the rules of the modern calendar (except for the epoch) were in place before that date. In 1000, the Muslim chronologist al-Biruni described all of the modern rules of the Hebrew calendar, except that he specified three different epochs used by various Jewish communities being one, two, or three years later than the modern epoch. 

There is a tradition, first mentioned by Hai Gaon (died 1038 CE), that Hillel b. R. Yehuda "in the year 670 of the Seleucid era" (i.e., 358359 CE) was responsible for the new calculated calendar with a fixed intercalation cycle. Later writers, such as Nachmanides, explained Hai Gaon's words to mean that the entire computed calendar was due to Hillel b. Yehuda in response to persecution of Jews. Maimonides, in the 12th century, stated that the Mishnaic calendar was used "until the days of Abaye and Rava", who flourished c. 320350 CE, and that the change came when "the land of Israel was destroyed, and no permanent court was left." Taken together, these two traditions suggest that Hillel b. Yehuda (whom they identify with the mid-4th-century Jewish patriarch Ioulos, attested in a letter of the Emperor Julian, Julian, Letter 25, in John Duncombe, Select Works of the Emperor Julian and some Pieces of the Sophist Libanius, Vol. 2, Cadell, London, 1784, pp. 5762. and the Jewish patriarch Ellel, mentioned by Epiphanius Epiphanius, Adversus Haereses 30.4.1, in Frank Williams, trans., The Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis Book I (Sects 1-46), Leiden, E. J.Brill, 1987, p. 122. ) instituted the computed Hebrew Calendar because of persecution. H. Graetz H. Graetz, Popular History of the Jews, (A. B. Rhine, trans.,) Hebrew Publishing Company, New York, 1919, Vol. II, pp. 410411. Quoted in Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community, p. 216. linked the introduction of the computed calendar to a sharp repression following a failed Jewish insurrection that occurred during the rule of the Christian emperor Constantius and Gallus. A later writer, S. Lieberman, argued S Lieberman, "Palestine in the 3rd and 4th Centuries", Jewish Quarterly Review, New Series 36, pp. 329370(1946). Quoted in Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community, pp. 216217. instead that the introduction of the fixed calendar was due to measures taken by Christian Roman authorities to prevent the Jewish patriarch from sending calendrical messengers.

Both the tradition that Hillel b. Yehuda instituted the complete computed calendar, and the theory that the computed calendar was introduced due to repression or persecution, have been questioned. Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community: A History of the Jewish Calendar Second Century BCE-Tenth Century CE, Oxford University Press, 2001. In particular section 5.1.1, discussion of the "Persecution theory." Samuel Poznanski, "Ben Meir and the Origin of the Jewish Calendar", Jewish Quarterly Review, Original Series, Vol. 10, pp. 152161(1898). "While it is not unreasonable to attribute to Hillel II the fixing of the regular order of intercalations, his full share in the present fixed calendar is doubtful." Entry "Calendar", Encyclopedia Judaica, Keter, Jerusalem, 1971. Furthermore, two Jewish dates during post-Talmudic times (specifically in 506 and 776) are impossible under the rules of the modern calendar, indicating that its arithmetic rules were developed in Babylonia during the times of the Geonim (7th to 8th centuries). Samuel Poznanski, "Calendar (Jewish)", Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vol. 3. The Babylonian rules required the delay of the first day of Tishrei when the new moon occurred after noon.

The Talmuds do, however, indicate at least the beginnings of a transition from a purely empirical to a computed calendar. According to a statement attributed to Yose, an Amora who lived during the second half of the 3rd century, the feast of Purim, 14 Adar, could not fall on a Sabbath nor a Monday, lest 10 Tishrei (Yom Kippur) fall on a Friday or a Sunday. Yerushalmi Megillah 70b. This indicates that, by the time of the redaction of the Jerusalem Talmud (c. 400 CE), there were a fixed number of days in all months from Adar to Elul, also implying that the extra month was already a second Adar added before the regular Adar. In another passage, a sage is reported to have counseled "those who make the computations" not to set the first day of Tishrei or the Day of the Willow on the sabbath. Yerushalmi Sukkah 54b. This indicates that there was a group who "made computations" and were in a position to control, to some extent, the day of the week on which Rosh Hashanah would fall.

===Usage in contemporary Israel===
Early Zionist pioneers were impressed by the fact that the calendar preserved by Jews over many centuries in far-flung diasporas, as a matter of religious ritual, was geared to the climate of their original country: the Jewish New Year marks the transition from the dry season to the rainy one, and major Jewish holidays such as Sukkot, Passover, and Shavuot correspond to major points of the country's agricultural year such as planting and harvest.

Accordingly, in the early 20th century the Hebrew calendar was re-interpreted as an agricultural rather than religious calendar. The Kibbutz movement was especially inventive in creating new rituals fitting this interpretation.

After the creation of the State of Israel, the Hebrew calendar became one of the official calendars of Israel, along with the Gregorian calendar. Holidays and commemorations not derived from previous Jewish tradition were to be fixed according to the Hebrew calendar date. For example, the Israeli Independence Day falls on 5 Iyar, Jerusalem Reunification Day on 28 Iyar, and the Holocaust Commemoration Day on 27 Nisan.

Nevertheless, since the 1950s usage of the Hebrew calendar has steadily declined, in favor of the Gregorian calendar. At present, Israelisexcept for a minority of the religiously observantconduct their private and public life according to the Gregorian calendar, although the Hebrew calendar is still widely acknowledged, appearing in public venues such as banks (where it is legal for use on cheques and other documents, though only rarely do people make use of this option) and on the mastheads of newspapers.

The Jewish New Year (Rosh Hashanah) is a two-day public holiday in Israel. However, since the 1980s an increasing number of secular Israelis celebrate the Gregorian New Year (usually known as "Silvester Night"" ") on the night between 31 December and 1 January. Prominent Rabbis have on several occasions sharply denounced this practice, but with no noticeable effect on the secularist celebrants. 

The disparity between the two calendars is especially noticeable with regard to commemoration of the assassinated Prime Minister Yitzchak Rabin. The official Day of Commemoration, instituted by a special Knesset law, is marked according to the Hebrew calendar - on 12 Marcheshvan. However, left-leaning Israelis, who revere Rabin as a martyr for the cause of peace and who are predominantly secular, hold their commemoration on 4 November. In some years the two competing Rabin Memorial Days are separated by as much as two weeks.

Wall calendars commonly used in Israel are hybrids. Most are organised according to Gregorian rather than Jewish months, but begin in September, when the Jewish New Year usually falls, and provide the Jewish date in small characters.

==Other practices==
Outside of Rabbinic Judaism, evidence shows a diversity of practice.

===Karaite calendar===
Karaites use the lunar month and the solar year, but the Karaite calendar differs from the current Rabbinic calendar in a number of ways. The Karaite calendar is identical to the Rabbinical calendar used before the Sanhedrin changed the Rabbinic calendar from the lunar, observation based calendar, to the current mathematically based calendar used in Rabbinic Judaism today.

In the lunar Karaite calendar, the beginning of each month, the Rosh Chodesh, can be calculated, but is confirmed by the observation in Israel of the first sightings of the new moon. The Karaite Korner: The New Moon in the Hebrew Bible This may result in an occasional variation of a maximum of one day, depending on the inability to observe the new moon. The day is usually "picked up" in the next month.

The addition of the leap month (Adar II) is determined by observing in Israel the ripening of barley at a specific stage (defined by Karaite tradition) (called aviv), The Karaite Korner: Aviv (Barley) rather than using the calculated and fixed calendar of Rabbinic Judaism. Occasionally this results in Karaites being one month ahead of other Jews using the calculated Rabbinic calendar. The "lost" month would be "picked up" in the next cycle when Karaites would observe a leap month while other Jews would not.

Furthermore, the seasonal drift of the Rabbinic calendar is avoided, resulting in the years affected by the drift starting one month earlier in the Karaite calendar.

Also, the four rules of postponement of the Rabbinic calendar are not applied, since they are not mentioned in the Tanakh. This can affect the dates observed for all the Jewish holidays in a particular year by one day.

In the Middle Ages many Karaite Jews outside Israel followed the calculated Rabbinic calendar, because it was not possible to retrieve accurate aviv barley data from the land of Israel. However, since the establishment of the State of Israel, and especially since the Six Day War, the Karaite Jews that have made aliyah can now again use the observational calendar.

===The Qumran calendar===

Many of the Dead Sea (Qumran) Scrolls have references to a unique calendar, used by the people there, who are often assumed to be Essenes.

The year of this calendar used the ideal Mesopotamian calendar of twelve 30-day months, to which were added 4 days at the equinoxes and solstices (cardinal points), making a total of 364 days.

There was some ambiguity as to whether the cardinal days were at the beginning of the months or at the end, but the clearest calendar attestations give a year of four seasons, each having three months of 30, 30, and 31 days with the cardinal day the extra day at the end, for a total of 91 days, or exactly 13 weeks. Each season started on the 4th day of the week (Wednesday), every year. (Ben-Dov, Head of All Years, p. 16-17)

With only 364 days, it is clear that the calendar would after a few years be very noticeably different from the actual seasons, but there is nothing to indicate what was done about this problem. Various suggestions have been made by scholars. One is that nothing was done and the calendar was allowed to change with respect to the seasons. Another suggestion is that changes were made irregularly, only when the seasonal anomaly was too great to be ignored any longer. (Ben-Dov, Head of All Years, p. 19-20)

The writings often discuss the moon, but the calendar was not based on the movement of the moon any more than indications of the phases of the moon on a modern western calendar indicate that that is a lunar calendar.

The calendrical documents 4Q320 and 4Q321 from the Dead Sea Scrolls outlining the 364-day solar calendar, six-year cycle of priestly courses, and 354-day lunar year cycles may be found here. Vermes, 1997, Mishmarot A - 4Q320, pp.336-348 In addition, an abbreviated Jubilee calendar from 4Q319 along with the priestly course serving on 1 Abib (the first day of the year) each year may be found here. Vermes, 1997, Calendric Signs (Otot) - 4Q319, pp.352-356 

===Persian civil calendar===
Calendrical evidence for the postexilic Persian period is found in papyri from the Jewish colony at Elephantine, in Egypt. These documents show that the Jewish community of Elephantine used the Egyptian and Babylonian calendars. Sacha Stern, "The Babylonian Calendar at Elephantine", Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik 130, 159171(2000). Lester L. Grabbe, A History of the Jews and Judaism in the Second Temple Period, Volume 1: Yehud: A History of the Persian Province of Judah, T&T Clark, London, 2004, p. 186. 

The Sardica paschal table shows that the Jewish community of some eastern city, possibly Antioch, used a calendrical scheme that kept Nisan 14 within the limits of the Julian month of March. Eduard Schwartz, Christliche und jdische Ostertafeln, (Abhandlungen der kniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gttingen. Philologisch-Historische Klasse. Neue Folge, Band viii, Berlin, 1905. Some of the dates in the document are clearly corrupt, but they can be emended to make the sixteen years in the table consistent with a regular intercalation scheme. Peter, the bishop of Alexandria (early 4th century CE), mentions that the Jews of his city "hold their Passover according to the course of the moon in the month of Phamenoth, or according to the intercalary month every third year in the month of Pharmuthi", Peter of Alexandria, quoted in the Chronicon Paschale. Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae, Chronicon Paschale Vol. 1, Weber, Bonn, 1832, p. 7 suggesting a fairly consistent intercalation scheme that kept Nisan 14 approximately between the Phamenoth 10 (March 6 in the 4th century CE) and Pharmuthi 10 (April 5). Jewish funerary inscriptions from Zoar, south of the Dead Sea, dated from the 3rd to the 5th century, indicate that when years were intercalated, the intercalary month was at least sometimes a repeated month of Adar. But the inscriptions reveal no clear pattern of regular intercalations, nor do they indicate any consistent rule for determining the start of the lunar month. Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community, pp. 8797, 146-153. 

In 1178, Maimonides included all the rules for the calculated calendar and their scriptural basis, including the modern epochal year in his work, Mishneh Torah. Today, the rules detailed in Maimonides' code are those generally used by Jewish communities throughout the world.

==Astronomic calculations==

===Synodic month - the molad interval===
A "new moon" (astronomically called a lunar conjunction and in Hebrew called a molad) is the moment at which the sun and moon are aligned horizontally with respect to a north-south line (technically, they have the same ecliptical longitude). The period between two new moons is a synodic month. The actual length of a synodic month varies from about 29 days 6 hours and 30 minutes (29.27 days) to about 29 days and 20 hours (29.83 days), a variation range of about 13 hours and 30 minutes. Accordingly, for convenience, a long-term average length called the mean synodic month (also called the molad interval) is used. The mean synodic month is days, or 29 days, 12 hours, and 793 parts (44+1/18 minutes) (i.e. 29.530594 days), and is the same value determined by the Babylonians in the System B in about 300 BCE Neugebauer, Astronomical cuneiform texts, Vol 1, pp 271273 and was adopted by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus in the 2nd century BCE and by the Alexandrian astronomer Ptolemy in Almagest four centuries later (who cited Hipparchus as his source). Its remarkable accuracy (less than one second from the true value) is thought to have been achieved using records of lunar eclipses from the 8th to 5th centuries BCE. G. J. Toomer, Hipparcus' Empirical Basis for his Lunar Mean Motions, Centaurus, Vol 24, 1980, pp. 97109 

This value is as close to the correct value of 29.530589 days as it is possible for a value to come that is rounded off to whole parts (1/18 minute). The discrepancy makes the molad interval about 0.6 seconds too long. Put another way, if the molad is taken as the time of mean conjunction at some reference meridian, then this reference meridian is drifting slowly eastward. If this drift of the reference meridian is traced back to the mid-4th century, the traditional date of the introduction of the fixed calendar, then it is found to correspond to a longitude midway between the Nile and the end of the Euphrates. The modern molad moments match the mean solar times of the lunar conjunction moments near the meridian of Kandahar, Afghanistan, more than 30 east of Jerusalem.

Furthermore, the discrepancy between the molad interval and the mean synodic month is accumulating at an accelerating rate, since the mean synodic month is progressively shortening due to gravitational tidal effects. Measured on a strictly uniform time scale, such as that provided by an atomic clock, the mean synodic month is becoming gradually longer, but since the tides slow Earth's rotation rate even more, the mean synodic month is becoming gradually shorter in terms of mean solar time.

===Seasonal drift===
The mean year of the current mathematically-based Hebrew calendar is more than 6 minutes and 25 seconds more than the northern hemisphere spring equinox year: the mean Hebrew year is 365 days 5 hours 55 minutes and 25+25/57 seconds (365.2468 days) - computed as the molad/monthly interval of 29.530594 days  235 months in a 19-year metonic cycle  19 years per cycle. The present-era mean northward equinoctal year is 365 days 5 hours 49 minutes 1 second long (365.2424 days), resulting in a "seasonal drift" of the Hebrew calendar in relation to the tropical year of about a day every 224 years. In relation to the Gregorian calendar, the mean Gregorian calendar year is 365 days 5 hours 49 minutes and 12 seconds (365.2425 days), and the drift of the Hebrew calendar in relation to it is about a day every 231 years.

===Implications for Jewish ritual===
This figure, in a detail of a medieval Hebrew calendar, reminded Jews of the palm branch (Lulav), the myrtle twigs, the willow branches, and the citron (Etrog) to be held in the hand and to be brought to the synagogue during the holiday of sukkot, near the end of the autumn holiday season.
Although the molad of Tishrei is the only molad moment that is not ritually announced, it is actually the only one that is relevant to the Hebrew calendar, for it determines the provisional date of Rosh Hashanah, subject to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules. The other monthly molad moments are announced for mystical reasons. With the moladot on average almost 100 minutes late, this means that the molad of Tishrei lands one day later than it ought to in (100 minutes)  (1440 minutes per day) = 5 of 72 years or nearly 7% of years!

Therefore, the seemingly small drift of the moladot is already significant enough to affect the date of Rosh Hashanah, which then cascades to many other dates in the calendar year and sometimes, due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, also interacts with the dates of the prior or next year. The molad drift could be corrected by using a progressively shorter molad interval that corresponds to the actual mean lunar conjunction interval at the original molad reference meridian. Furthermore, the molad interval determines the calendar mean year, so using a progressively shorter molad interval would help correct the excessive length of the Hebrew calendar mean year, as well as helping it to "hold onto" the northward equinox for the maximum duration.

When the 19-year intercalary cycle was finalised in the 4th century, the earliest Passover (in year 16 of the cycle) coincided with the northward equinox, which means that Passover fell near the first full moon after the northward equinox, or that the northward equinox landed within one lunation before 16 days after the molad of Nisan. This is still the case in about 80% of years, but in about 20% of years Passover is a month late by these criteria (as it was in AM 5765 and 5768, the 8th and 11th years of the 19-year cycle = Gregorian 2005 and 2008 CE). Presently this occurs after the "premature" insertion of a leap month in years 8, 11, and 19 of each 19-year cycle, which causes the northward equinox to land on exceptionally early Hebrew dates in such years. This problem will get worse over time, and so beginning in AM 5817 (2057 CE), year 3 of each 19-year cycle will also be a month late. Furthermore, the drift will accelerate in the future as perihelion approaches and then passes the northward equinox, and if the calendar is not amended then Passover will start to land on or after the summer solstice around AM 16652 (12892 CE). (The exact year when this will begin to occur depends on uncertainties in the future tidal slowing of the Earth rotation rate, and on the accuracy of predictions of precession and Earth axial tilt.)

The seriousness of the spring equinox drift is widely discounted on the grounds that Passover will remain in the spring season for many millennia, and the text of the Torah is generally not interpreted as having specified tight calendrical limits. On the other hand, the mean southward equinoctial year length is considerably shorter, so the Hebrew calendar has been drifting faster with respect to the autumn equinox, and at least part of the harvest festival of Sukkot is already more than a month after the equinox in years 1, 9, and 12 of each 19-year cycle; beginning in AM 5818 (2057 CE), this will also be the case in year 4. (These are the same year numbers as were mentioned for the spring season in the previous paragraph, except that they get incremented at Rosh Hashanah.) This progressively increases the probability that Sukkot will be cold and wet, making it uncomfortable or impractical to dwell in the traditional succah during Sukkot. The first winter seasonal prayer for rain is not recited until Shemini Atzeret, after the end of Sukkot, yet it is becoming increasingly likely that the rainy season in Israel will start before the end of Sukkot.

No equinox or solstice will ever be more than a day or so away from its mean date according to the solar calendar, while nineteen Jewish years average 6939d 16h 33m 03s compared to the 6939d 14h 26m 15s of nineteen mean tropical years. Weinberg, I., Astronomical Aspects of the Jewish Calendar, Monthly Notes of the Astronomical Society of South Africa, Vol. 15, p. 86; available at This discrepancy has mounted up to six days, which is why the earliest Passover currently falls on 26 March (as in AM 5773 / 2013 CE).

===Worked example===

Given the length of the year, the length of each month is fixed as described above, so the real problem in determining the calendar for a year is determining the number of days in the year. In the modern calendar this is determined in the following manner. The following description is based on the article "Calendar" in Encyclopaedia Judaica (Jerusalem: Ketter, 1972). It is an explanatory description, not a procedural one, in particular explaining what is going on with the third and fourth deiyyot 

The day of Rosh Hashanah and the length of the year are determined by the time and the day of the week of the Tishrei molad, that is, the moment of the average conjunction. Given the Tishrei molad of a certain year, the length of the year is determined as follows:

First, one must determine whether each year is an ordinary or leap year by its position in the 19-year Metonic cycle. Years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are leap years.

Secondly, one must determine the number of days between the starting Tishrei molad (TM1) and the Tishrei molad of the next year (TM2). For calendar descriptions in general the day begins at 6 p.m., but for the purpose of determining Rosh Hashanah, a molad occurring on or after noon is treated as belonging to the next day (the second deiyyah). So for example if the Tishrei molad is calculated as occurring from noon on Wednesday (the 18th hour of the fourth day) up until noon on Thursday, Rosh Hashanah falls on a Thursday, which of course starts Wednesday at sunset wherever one happens to be. All months are calculated as 29d, 12h, 44m, 3s long (MonLen). Therefore, in an ordinary year TM2 occurs 12  MonLen days after TM1. This is usually 354 calendar days after TM1, but if TM1 is on or after 3:11:20 a.m. and before noon, it will be 355 days. Similarly, in a leap year, TM2 occurs 13  MonLen days after TM1. This is usually 384 days after TM1, but if TM1 is on or after noon and before 2:27:16 p.m., TM2 will be only 383 days after TM1. In the same way, from TM2 one calculates TM3. Thus the four natural year lengths are 354, 355, 383, and 384 days.

However, because of the holiday rules, Rosh Hashanah cannot fall on a Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, so if TM2 is one of those days, Rosh Hashanah in year 2 is postponed by adding one day to year 1 (the first deiyyah). To compensate, one day is subtracted from year 2. It is to allow these adjustments that the system allows 385-day years (long leap) and 353-day years (short ordinary) besides the four natural year lengths.

But how can year 1 be lengthened if it is already a long ordinary year of 355 days or year 2 be shortened if it is a short leap year of 383 days? That is why the third and fourth deiyyahs are needed.

If year 1 is already a long ordinary year of 355 days, there will be a problem if TM1 is on a Tuesday, This will happen if TM1 is on or after 3:11:20 a.m. and before noon on a Tuesday. If TM1 is Monday, Thursday or Saturday, Rosh Hashanah in year 2 does not need to be postponed. If TM1 is Sunday, Wednesday or Friday, Rosh Hashanah in year 1 is postponed, so year 1 is not the maximum length. as that means TM2 falls on a Sunday and will have to be postponed, creating a 356-day year. In this case, Rosh Hashanah in year 1 is postponed from Tuesday (the third deiyyah). As it cannot be postponed to Wednesday, it is postponed to Thursday, and year 1 ends up with 354 days.

On the other hand, if year 2 is already a short year of 383 days there will be a problem if TM2 is on a Wednesday. TM2 will be between noon and 2:27:16 p.m. on Tuesday, and TM3 will be between 9:32:43 and noon on Monday. because Rosh Hashanah in year 2 will have to be postponed from Wednesday to Thursday and this will cause year 2 to be only 382 days long. In this case, year 2 is extended by one day by postponing Rosh Hashanah in year 3 from Monday to Tuesday (the fourth deiyyah ), and year 2 will have 383 days.

=="Rectifying" the Hebrew calendar==
It has been argued by some that, as the fixed arithmetic Hebrew calendar was established on the authority of Hillel II, President of the Sanhedrin in AM 4119 (358 CE), only an equal authority (the modern Sanhedrin) can either amend it or reinstate the observational Hebrew calendar. The attribution of the fixed arithmetic Hebrew calendar solely to Hillel II has, however, been questioned by a few authors, such as Sasha Stern, who claim that the calendar rules developed gradually over several centuries. 

Given the importance in Jewish ritual of establishing the accurate timing of monthly and annual times, some futurist writers and researchers have considered whether a "corrected" system of establishing the Hebrew date is required. The mean year of the current mathematically-based Hebrew calendar is more than 6 minutes and 25 seconds in excess of the northern hemisphere spring equinox year, and has "drifted" an average of 78 days late relative to the equinox relationship that it originally had. It is not possible, however, for any individual Hebrew date to be a week or more "late", because Hebrew months always begin within a day or two of the molad moment. What happens instead is that the traditional Hebrew calendar "prematurely" inserts a leap month one year before it "should have been" inserted, where "prematurely" means that the insertion causes the spring equinox to land more than 30 days before the latest acceptable moment, thus causing the calendar to run "one month late" until the time when the leap month "should have been" inserted prior to the following spring. This presently happens in 4 years out of every 19-year cycle (years 3, 8, 11, and 19), implying that the Hebrew calendar currently runs "one month late" more than 21% of the time. To a minor degree the tardiness of the calendar is also due to not correcting for the progressively shorter mean astronomical lunation intervalalthough presently this only accounts for a little over six seconds of the yearly equinox drift, it more importantly accounts for nearly two hours of molad drift relative to actual mean lunar conjunctions, which is enough to cause Rosh HaShanah to start on the "wrong" date in an appreciable number of years.

Dr. Irv Bromberg has proposed a 353-year cycle of 4366 months, which would include 130 leap months, along with use of a progressively shorter molad interval, which would keep an amended fixed arithmetic Hebrew calendar from drifting for more than seven millennia. Bromberg, Irv. It takes about 3 centuries for the spring equinox to drift an average of th of a molad interval earlier in the Hebrew calendar. That is a very important time unit, because it can be cancelled by simply truncating a 19-year cycle to 11 years, omitting 8 years including three leap years from the sequence. That is the essential feature of the 353-year leap cycle (1= (9  19) + 11 + (9  19) = 353 years).

Religious questions abound about how such a system might be implemented and administered throughout the diverse aspects of the world Jewish community. Committee concerning the fixing of the Calendar at TheSanhedrin.org 

==See also==

* Assyrian calendar
* Babylonian calendar
* Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement
* Chol HaMoed, the intermediate days during Passover and Sukkot.
* Chronology of the Bible
* Counting of the Omer
* Gematria, Jewish system of assigning numerical value to a word or phrase.
* Islamic calendar
* Hebrew numerals
* Jewish and Israeli holidays 20002050
* Lag BaOmer, 33rd day of counting the Omer.
* Notarikon, a method of deriving a word by using each of its initial letters.
* Sephirot, the 10 attributes/emanations found in Kabbalah.
* Significance of numbers in Judaism
* Weekly Torah portion, division of the Torah into 54 portions.

==References==

==Bibliography==
* al-Biruni. The Chronology of Ancient Nations, Chapter VII. tr. C. Edward Sachau. London, 1879.
* Ari Belenkiy. "A Unique Feature of the Jewish Calendar &mdash; Dehiyot". Culture and Cosmos 6 (2002) 3-22.
* Jonathan Ben-Dov. Head of All Years: Astronomy and Calendars at Qumran in their Ancient Context. Leiden: Brill, 2008.
* Bonnie Blackburn and Leofranc Holford-Strevens. The Oxford Companion to the Year: An Exploration of Calendar Customs and Time-reckoning. Oxford University Press; USA, 2000.
* Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby. Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan Calendars. George Bell and Sons, London, 1901.
* Nathan Bushwick. Understanding the Jewish Calendar. Moznaim, New York/Jerusalem, 1989. ISBN 0-940118-17-3
* William Moses Feldman. Rabbinical Mathematics and Astronomy, 3rd edition, Sepher-Hermon Press, New York, 1978.
* Eduard Mahler, Handbuch der jdischen Chronologie. Buchhandlung Gustav Fock, Leipzig, 1916.
* Otto Neugebauer. Ethiopic astronomy and computus. sterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 347. Vienna, 1979.
* The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Book Three, Treatise Eight: Sanctification of the New Moon. Translated by Solomon Gandz. Yale Judaica Series Volume XI, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 1956.
* Samuel Poznanski. "Calendar (Jewish)". Encyclopdia of Religion and Ethics. T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1910, vol. 3, pp. 117124.
* Edward M. Reingold and Nachum Dershowitz. Calendrical Calculations: The Millennium Edition. Cambridge University Press; 2 edition (2001). ISBN 0-521-77752-6
723-730.
* Louis A. Resnikoff. "Jewish Calendar Calculations", Scripta Mathematica 9 (1943) 191-195, 274-277.
* Eduard Schwartz, Christliche und jdische Ostertafeln (Abhandlungen der kniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gttingen. Philologisch-Historische Klasse. Neue Folge, Band viii), Berlin, 1905.
* Arthur Spier. The Comprehensive Hebrew Calendar: Twentieth to the Twenty-Second Century 56605860/19002100. Feldheim Publishers, Jerusalem/New York, 1986.
* Sacha Stern, Calendar and Community: A History of the Jewish Calendar 2nd Century BCE to 10th Century CE. Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN 9780198270348.
* Ernest Wiesenberg. "Appendix: Addenda and Corrigenda to Treatise VIII". The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Book Three: The Book of Seasons. Yale Judaica Series Volume XIV, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 1961. pp. 557602.
* Francis Henry Woods. "Calendar (Hebrew)", Encyclopdia of Religion and Ethics. T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1910, vol. 3, pp. 108109.

==External links==

*Perpetual Hebrew / Civil Calendar
*Jewish Calendar with Halachic times date converter and daf yomi yeshiva.co
*The Jewish Controversy about Calendar Postponements
*Jewish Calendar with Zmanim - Halachic times and date converter chabad.org
*Jewish calendar scientific explanation at the NASA web site
*Karaite Holidays Karaite website
*Hebrew Calendar Dates and Holydays (Diaspora or Israel) for both the Traditional and the Rectified calendars
*Hebrew - Gregorian Calendar with options
*Bet Ha Bracha Hebrew Calendar

===Date converters===
*Jewish Holidays Online - List of all Jewish holidays for the current year (or any given year).
*Molad - Jewish Calendar with Zmanim and holidays for Mobiles.
*Jewish Calendar for many platforms
*Kaluach - Hebrew/civil calendars
*Hebcal Hebrew Date Converter
*
*Jewish / Civil Date Converter
*Software program that converts Hebrew dates to the civil calendar and vice versa
*Gregorian-Mayan-Julian-Islamic-Persian-Hebrew Calendar Converter
*Kalendis Calendar Calculator
*Firefox Add-ons. Hebrew Calendar
*Lisp calendar calculator which accompanies Dershowitz & Reingold's Calendrical Calculations 3rd ed. Click "Ancillary materials" tab.
*Hebrew/Gregorian converter, including a full Hebrew calendar.
*Hebrew/Gregorian Calendar converter, including a full Jewish Calendar.
*JCAL for Windows, full Jewish/Gregorian Calendar for Windows with explanation.

 



[[The Holocaust Industry]]

The Holocaust Industry: Reflections on the Exploitation of Jewish Suffering is a 2000 book by Norman G. Finkelstein in which he argues that the American Jewish establishment exploits the memory of the Nazi Holocaust for political and financial gain, as well as to further the interests of Israel. See article on Norman Finklestein's webpage. According to Finkelstein, this "Holocaust industry" has corrupted Jewish culture and the authentic memory of the Holocaust.

==Finkelstein on the book==
Finkelstein states that his consciousness of "the Nazi holocaust" is rooted in his parents' experiences in the Warsaw ghetto; with the exception of his parents themselves, "every family member on both sides was exterminated by the Nazis". The Holocaust Industry, p. 5-8. Nonetheless, during his childhood, no one ever asked any questions about what his mother and father had suffered. He suggests, "This was not a respectful silence. It was indifference." It was only after the establishment of "the Holocaust industry", he suggests, that outpourings of anguish over the plight of the Jews in World War II began. This ideology in turn served to endow Israel with a status as "'victim' state" despite its "horrendous" human rights record. 

According to Finkelstein, his book is "an anatomy and an indictment of the Holocaust industry". He argues that "'The Holocaust' is an ideological representation of the Nazi holocaust". The Holocaust Industry, p. 3. 

In the foreword to the first paperback edition, Finkelstein notes that the first hardback edition had been a considerable hit in several European countries and many languages, but had been banned in the United States. He sees The New York Times as the main promotional vehicle of the "Holocaust industry", and notes that the 1999 Index listed 273 entries for the Holocaust and just 32 entries for the entire continent of Africa.

==Chapters==
*Chapter 1: Capitalizing The Holocaust - by the 1980s, Finkelstein states, the "War against the Jews" had become more important to American cultural life than the "War Between the States".(p. 11)
*Chapter 2: Hoaxers, Hucksters and History - in 1967, Finkelstein claims that two concepts appeared in public discourse: The uniqueness of the Holocaust, and the concept of the Holocaust as climax of a historical irrational anti-Semitic tendency in Europe. Finkelstein asserts that these concepts became central to the "Holocaust Industry", but that neither figures in scholarship of the Nazi Holocaust.(p. 13)
*Chapter 3: The Double Shakedown - in this chapter, Finkelstein claims that the number of Jewish survivors of the Holocaust recognized by relief groups increased from c. 100,000 in 1945 Henry Friedlander, "Darkness and Dawn in 1945: The Nazis, the Allies, and the Survivors," in US Holocaust Memorial Museum, 1945 - the Year of Liberation (Washington: 1995), 11-35. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.81. to nearly 1 million 1997 study commissioned by the Israeli Prime Minister's office.(p.67) owing to definitional changes in who was considered to be a survivor. Because of this, Finkelstein repeatedly asserts that "fraudulent" claims were made on Switzerland, while accounts and assets in the US and Israel were ignored. Payments were made to the wrong people and real survivors lost out.
The second (2003) edition contained 100 pages of new material, primarily in chapter 3 on the World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks. Finkelstein set out to provide a guide to the relevant sections of the case. He feels that the presiding judge elected not to docket crucial documents, and that the Claims Resolution Tribunal could no longer be trusted. Finkelstein claims the CRT was on course to vindicate the Swiss banks before it changed tack in order to "protect the blackmailers' reputation".

==Other topics==

===Fraudulent writings on the Holocaust===
Finkelstein describes two known frauds, that of The Painted Bird by Polish writer Jerzy Kosinski and Fragments by Binjamin Wilkomirski, and how they were defended by people even after they'd been exposed. He identifies some of these people as members of the "Holocaust Industry", and notes that they also support each other. Elie Wiesel supported Kosinski; Israel Gutman and Daniel Goldhagen (see below) supported Wilkomirski; Wiesel and Gutman support Goldhagen.

===Holocaust Industry defends itself===
Finkelstein has published heavy criticisms of several books in his career, as he did to Hitler's Willing Executioners by Daniel Johnah Goldhagen, which he calls "replete with gross misinterpretations of source material and internal contradictions", and says "the book is devoid of scholarly value". Independently, Ruth Bettina Birn (the world's leading authority on the archives that Goldhagen had consulted and chief historian for War Crimes with the Canadian Department of Justice) did the same - she and Finkelstein worked together on A Nation on Trial: The Goldhagen Thesis and Historical Truth. Goldhagen refused the journal's invitation for a full rebuttal, and instead enlisted a London law firm to sue Birn and the Cambridge University Press. Protests were made to Birn's employer, calling her "a member of the perpetrator race" (she is German-born), prompting an official investigation of her.(p. 66) 

===Other genocides===
Finkelstein scathingly compared the media treatment of the Holocaust and the media treatment of other genocides such as the Holodomor and the Armenian Genocide, particularly by members of what he calls "The Holocaust Industry". (1 to 1.5 million Armenians died in the years between 1915 and 1917/1923 - denial includes the claim that they were the result of a Civil War within World War I, or refusal to accept there were deaths). In 2001, Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres went so far as to dismiss it as "allegations". However, by this time historical consensus was changing, and he was "angrily compared ... to a holocaust denier" by Israel Charny, executive director of the Institute on the Holocaust and Genocide in Jerusalem. Peres stands accused over denial of `meaningless' Armenian Holocaust". Findarticle archive of Independent 18th April 2001. Verified 22nd Jun 2008. 

In August 2007, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity produced a letter signed by 53 Nobel Laureates re-affirming the Genocide Scholars' conclusion that the 1915 killings of Armenians constituted genocide. Nobel Laureates Call For Armenian-Turkish Reconciliation, Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, April 10, 2007. Verified 22nd Jun 2008. However, Wiesel's organization asserted there would be no legal "basis for reparations or territorial claims", anticipating Turkish anxieties that it could prompt financial or property claims. Abraham Foxmanof the Anti-Defamation League announced: "Upon reflection, the consequences of those actions were indeed tantamount to genocide". "Upon reflection, the consequences of those actions were indeed tantamount to genocide. Armenian Weekly, September 15, 2007. Verified 22nd Jun 2008. 

===Other forms of Holocaust denial===
According to Finkelstein, Elie Wiesel characterizes any suggestion that he has profited from the "Holocaust Industry", or even any criticism at all, as Holocaust denial. Wiesel, All Rivers, 333, 336. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70. Questioning a survivor's testimony, denouncing the role of Jewish collaborators, suggesting that Germans suffered during the bombing of Dresden or that any state except Germany committed crimes in World War II are all evidence of Holocaust denial  according to Deborah Lipstadt Lipstadt, Denying, 6, 12, 22, 89-90. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70.  and the most "insidious" forms of Holocaust denial are "immoral equivalencies", denying the uniqueness of The Holocaust. Lipstadt, Denying, chapter 11. Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70. Finkelstein examines the implications of applying this standard to another member of the "Holocaust Industry", Daniel Goldhagen, who argued that Serbian actions in Kosovo "are, in their essence, different from those of Nazi Germany only in scale". "A New Serbia" in New Republic (17 May 1999). Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.70. 

===Holocaust deniers in real life===

According to Finkelstein, Deborah Lipstadt claims there is widespread Holocaust denial - yet in "Denying the Holocaust" her prime example is Arthur Butz, author of The Hoax of the Twentieth Century. The chapter on him is entitled "Entering the Mainstream" - but Finkelstein considers that, were it not for the likes of Lipstadt, no one would ever have heard of Arthur Butz. Holocaust deniers have as much influence in the US as the Flat Earth Society (p. 69). Finkelstein believes there to be only one "truly mainstream" holocaust denier&mdash;Bernard Lewis, who was convicted in France of denying the Armenian genocide. "France Fines Historian Over Armenian Denial," in Boston Globe (22 June 1995), and "Bernard Lewis and the Armenians," in Counterpunch (1631 December 1997). Cited in the 2003 edition of HI on p.69. Since Lewis is pro-Israel, "this instance ... raises no hackles in the United States."

==Reviews and critiques==
The critical response has been varied. In addition to prominent supporters, such as Noam Chomsky and Alexander Cockburn, the Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg is on record as praising Finkelstein's book: 

Others have argued that The Holocaust Industry is an unscholarly work that promotes antisemitic stereotypes. For example, according to Israeli journalist Yair Sheleg, in August 2000, German historian Hans Mommsen called it "a most trivial book, which appeals to easily aroused anti-Semitic prejudices." http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/article.php?PG=3&AR=11 

Historian Omer Bartov Brown University German Studies criticized Finkelstein's notion of Holocaust profiteers as a "novel variation of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion '". In reviewing the first edition of the book, Bartov wrote:

::I find so striking about The Holocaust Industry is that it is almost an exact copy of the arguments it seeks to expose. It is filled with precisely the kind of shrill hyperbole that Finkelstein rightly deplores in much of the current media hype over the Holocaust; it is brimming with the same indifference to historical facts, inner contradictions, strident politics and dubious contextualizations; and it oozes with the same smug sense of moral and intellectual superiority.

::Here he combines an old-hat 1960s view of Israel as the outpost of American Imperialism with a novel variation on the anti-Semitic forgery, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, which warned of a Jewish conspiracy to take over the world. Now, however, the Jewish conspiracy is intended to "shake down" (his favorite phrase) such innocent entities as Swiss banks, German corporations and East European owners of looted Jewish property, all in order to consolidate Jewish power and influence without giving the real survivors of the genocide anything but empty rhetoric.

::This book is, in a word, an ideological fanatic's view of other people's opportunism, by a writer so reckless and ruthless in his attacks that he is prepared to defend his own enemies, the bastions of Western capitalism, and to warn that "The Holocaust" will stir up an anti-Semitism whose significance he otherwise discounts. Like any conspiracy theory, it contains several grains of truth; and like any such theory, it is both irrational and insidious. Finkelstein can now be said to have founded a Holocaust industry of his own." From The New York Times, Book Review Desk A Tale of Two Holocausts August 6, 2000 (archived). 

Finkelstein was to later blame Bartov's review for the poor US sales of the book. From interview with Ha'aretz March 30, 2001 The Finkelstein polemic "Finkelstein attributes the book's flop in the U.S. to a lethal book review by Israeli scholar Omer Bartov that appeared in the New York Times Book Review." 

University of Chicago Professor Peter Novick, whose work Finkelstein described as providing the "initial stimulus" for The Holocaust Industry, The Holocaust Industry, p. 4. asserted in the July 28, 2000 Jewish Chronicle (London) that the book is replete with "false accusations", "egregious misrepresentations", "absurd claims" and "repeated mis-statements" ("A charge into darkness that sheds no light"). Finkelstein replied to the "hysterical" allegations by Novick on his homepage. http://www.normanfinkelstein.com/article.php?pg=3&ar=165 

Hasia Diner has accused Peter Novick and Finkelstein of being "harsh critics of American Jewry from the left," and challenges the notion reflected in their books that American Jews did not begin to commemorate the Holocaust until post 1967. All Quiet; Were postwar American Jews really silent about the Holocaust? BY ADAM KIRSCH | 7:00 am June 23, 2009, Tablet Magazine 

Andrew Ross reviewing the book for Salon magazine wrote:

Finkelstein responded to his critics in the foreword to the second edition:

==Publishing history==
Publishing history of The Holocaust Industry:
*2000; First published, by Verso Books (London) 150 p. Hardcover, ISBN 1-85984-773-0 (Blue star of David on cover)
*2001; First paperback edition, Verso. ISBN 1-85984-323-9 (Yellow star of David on cover)
*2003; 2 edition, expanded; 286 p., paperback, Verso. ISBN 1-85984-488-X (Red star of David on cover)

==See also==
*Norman Finkelstein
*Nazi gold
*Claims Conference
*The Holocaust in American Life
*Jewish lobby
*Image and Reality of the IsraelPalestine Conflict

==References==

==External links==
*Author's web page for the book 
*
*http://www.crt-ii.org/index_en.phtm
*Final Report on the Work of the Claims Resolution Tribunal for Dormant Accounts in Switzerland (CRT-I) Zurich, 5 October 2001
*normanfinkelstein.com
*"The business of death" (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), The Guardian (Wednesday July 12, 2000).
*"Swiss toll II", (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), The Guardian (Thursday July 13, 2000).
*"It Takes an Enormous Amount of Courage to Speak the Truth When No One Else is Out There" -- World-Renowned Holocaust, Israel Scholars Defend DePaul Professor Norman Finkelstein as He Fights for Tenure (Raul Hilberg and Avi Shlaim speak in support of Norman Finkelstein's scholarship and "The Holocaust Industry" specifically.)

Industry



[[Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn]]

The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (or, more commonly, the Golden Dawn) was an organization devoted to the study and practice of the occult, metaphysics, and paranormal activities during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Known as a magical order, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was active in Great Britain and focused its practices on theurgy and spiritual development. Many present-day concepts of ritual and magic that are at the centre of contemporary traditions, such as Wicca Colquhoun, Ithell (1975) The Sword of Wisdom: MacGregor Mathers & the Golden Dawn. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. Phillips, Julia (1991) History of Wicca in England: 1939 - present day. Lecture at the Wiccan Conference in Canberra, 1991. and Thelema, were inspired by the Golden Dawn, which became one of the largest single influences on 20th-century Western occultism. Jenkins, Phillip (2000) Mystics and Messiahs: Cults and New Religions in American History, pg. 74. "Also in the 1880s, the tradition of ritual magic was revived in London by a group of Masonic adepts, who formed the Order of the Golden Dawn, which would prove an incalculable influence on the whole subsequent history of occultism." USA: Oxford University Press. Smoley, Richard (1999) Hidden Wisdom: A Guide to the Western Inner Traditions, ppg 102-103. "Founded in 1888, the Golden Dawn lasted a mere twelve years before it was shattered by personal conflicts. At its height it probably had no more than a hundred members. Yet its influence on magic and esoteric thought in the English-speaking world would be hard to overestimate." USA: Quest Books. 

The three founders, William Robert Woodman, William Wynn Westcott, and Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers were Freemasons and members of Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (S.R.I.A.). Regardie, 1993, page 10 Westcott appears to have been the initial driving force behind the establishment of the Golden Dawn.

The Golden Dawn system was based on hierarchy and initiation like the Masonic Lodges; however women were admitted on an equal basis with men. The "Golden Dawn" was the first of three Orders, although all three are often collectively referred to as the "Golden Dawn". The First Order taught esoteric philosophy based on the Hermetic Qabalah and personal development through study and awareness of the four Classical Elements as well as the basics of astrology, tarot divination, and geomancy. The Second or "Inner" Order, the Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis (the Ruby Rose and Cross of Gold), taught proper magic, including scrying, astral travel, and alchemy. The Third Order was that of the "Secret Chiefs", who were said to be highly skilled; they supposedly directed the activities of the lower two orders by spirit communication with the Chiefs of the Second Order.

==Influences==

Influences on Golden Dawn concepts and work include: Christian mysticism, Qabalah, Hermeticism, Ancient Egyptian religion, Theurgy, Freemasonry, Alchemy, Theosophy, Astrology, Eliphas Levi, Papus, John Dee & Edward Kelly, Enochian magic, and Renaissance grimoires, as well as Anna Kingsford & Frederick Hockley.

==History==

===Cipher Manuscripts===

Folio 13 of the Cipher Manuscripts

The foundational documents of the original Order of the Golden Dawn, known as the Cipher Manuscripts, are written in English using Trithemius cipher. The manuscripts give the specific outlines of the Grade Rituals of the Order and prescribe a curriculum of graduated teachings that encompass the Hermetic Qabalah, astrology, occult tarot, geomancy, and alchemy.

According to the records of the Order, the manuscripts passed from Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, a Masonic scholar, to the Rev. A. F. A. Woodford, whom British occult writer Francis King describes as the fourth founder 
King, 1989, page 42-43 (although Woodford died shortly after the Order was founded). King, 1989, page 47 The documents did not excite Woodford, and in February 1886 he passed them on to Freemason William Wynn Westcott, who managed to decode them in 1887. Westcott, pleased with his discovery, called on fellow Freemason Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers for a second opinion. Westcott asked for Mathers' help to turn the manuscripts into a coherent system for lodge work. Mathers in turn asked fellow Freemason William Robert Woodman to assist the two, and he accepted. Mathers and Westcott have been credited with developing the ritual outlines in the Cipher Manuscripts into a workable format. 
Golden Dawn researcher R. A. Gilbert has found evidence which suggests that Westcott was instrumental in developing the Order's rituals from the Cipher Manuscripts. See Gilbert's article, From Cipher to Enigma: The Role of William Wynn Westcott in the Creation of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, from Carroll Runyon's book Secrets of the Golden Dawn Cypher Manuscripts.
 Mathers, however, is generally credited with the design of the curriculum and rituals of the Second Order, which he called the Rosae Rubae et Aureae Crucis ("Ruby Rose and Golden Cross" or the RR et AC). Regardie, 1993, page 92 

===Founding of first temple===
In October 1887, Westcott claimed to have written to a German countess and prominent Rosicrucian named Anna Sprengel, whose address was said to have been found in the decoded Cipher Manuscripts. Apparently, Sprengel had the ability to contact certain supernatural entities, known as the Secret Chiefs, that were considered the authorities over any magical order or esoteric organization. Westcott purportedly received a reply from Sprengel granting permission to establish a Golden Dawn temple and conferring honorary grades of Adeptus Exemptus on Westcott, Mathers, and Woodman. The temple was to consist of the five grades outlined in the manuscripts. King, 1989, page 43 Regardie, 1993, page 11. 

In 1888, the Isis-Urania Temple was founded in London. In contrast to the S.R.I.A. and Masonry, women were allowed and welcome to participate in the Order in "perfect equality" with men. The Order was more of a philosophical and metaphysical teaching order in its early years. Other than certain rituals and meditations found in the Cipher manuscripts and developed further, King, 1997, page 35 "magical practices" were generally not taught at the first temple.

For the first four years, the Golden Dawn was one cohesive group later known as "the Outer Order" or "First Order." An "Inner Order" was established and became active in 1892. The Inner Order consisted of members known as "adepts," who had completed the entire course of study for the Outer Order. This group of adepts eventually became known as the Second Order.

Eventually, the Osiris temple in Weston-super-Mare, the Horus temple in Bradford, and the Amen-Ra temple in Edinburgh were founded. A few years after this, Mathers founded the Ahathoor temple in Paris. 

===Secret Chiefs===

In 1891, Westcott's alleged correspondence with Anna Sprengel suddenly ceased. He claimed to have received word from Germany that she was either dead or that her companions did not approve of the founding of the Order and no further contact was to be made. If the founders were to contact the Secret Chiefs, apparently, it had to be done on their own. In 1892, Mathers professed that a link to the Secret Chiefs had been established. Subsequently, he supplied rituals for the Second Order, calling them the Red Rose and Cross of Gold. The rituals were based on the tradition of the tomb of Christian Rosenkreuz, and a Vault of Adepts became the controlling force behind the Outer Order. King, 1989, page 44 Later in 1916, Westcott claimed that Mathers also constructed these rituals from materials he received from Frater Lux ex Tenebris, a purported Continental Adept. King, 1989, page 46 

Some followers of the Golden Dawn tradition believe that the Secret Chiefs were not human or supernatural beings but, rather, symbolic representations of actual or legendary sources of spiritual esotericism. The term came to stand for a great leader or teacher of a spiritual path or practice that found its way into the teachings of the Order. Penczak, Christopher. Spirit Allies, p. 27. Red Wheel/Weiser Books. ISBN 1-57863-214-5 

===Golden Age===
By the mid-1890s, the Golden Dawn was well established in Great Britain, with over one hundred members from every class of Victorian society. Many celebrities belonged to the Golden Dawn, such as actress Florence Farr, Irish revolutionary Maud Gonne, Irish writer William Butler Yeats, Welsh author Arthur Machen, and English authors Evelyn Underhill, and Aleister Crowley.

In 1896 or 1897, Westcott broke all ties to the Golden Dawn, leaving Mathers in control. It has been speculated that his departure was due to his having lost a number of occult-related papers in a hansom cab. Apparently, when the papers were found, Westcott's connection to the Golden Dawn was discovered and brought to the attention of his employers. He may have been told to either resign from the Order or to give up his occupation as coroner. King, 1989, page 48 After Westcott's departure, Mathers appointed Florence Farr to be Chief Adept in Anglia. Dr. Henry B. Pullen Burry succeeded Westcott as Cancellariusone of the three Chiefs of the Order.

Mathers was the only active founding member after Westcott's departure. Due to personality clashes with other members and frequent absences from the center of Lodge activity in Great Britain, however, challenges to Mathers's authority as leader developed among the members of the Second Order. 

===Revolt===
Toward the end of 1899, the Adepts of the Isis-Urania and Amen-Ra temples had become dissatisfied with Mathers' leadership, as well as his growing friendship with Aleister Crowley. They had also become anxious to make contact with the Secret Chiefs themselves, instead of relying on Mathers as an intermediary. King, 1989, page 66 Within the Isis-Urania temple, disputes were arising between Farr's The Sphere, a secret society within the Isis-Urania, and the rest of the Adepti Minores. 

Crowley was refused initiation into the Adeptus Minor grade by the London officials. Mathers overrode their decision and quickly initiated him at the Ahathoor temple in Paris on January 16, 1900. King, 1989, page 67 Upon his return to the London temple, Crowley requested from Miss Cracknell, the acting secretary, the papers acknowledging his grade, to which he was now entitled. To the London Adepts, this was the final straw. Farr, already of the opinion that the London temple should be closed, wrote to Mathers expressing her wish to resign as his representative, although she was willing to carry on until a successor was found. Mathers believed Westcott was behind this turn of events and replied on February 16. On March 3, a committee of seven Adepts was elected in London, and requested a full investigation of the matter. Mathers sent an immediate reply, declining to provide proof, refusing to acknowledge the London temple, and dismissing Farr as his representative on March 23. King, 1989, page 68-69 In response, a general meeting was called on March 29 in London to remove Mathers as chief and expel him from the Order. King, 1989, page 69 

====Splinters====
In 1901, W. B. Yeats privately published a pamphlet titled Is the Order of R. R. & A. C. to Remain a Magical Order? Melton, J. Gordon, editor, Encyclopedia of Occultism and Parapsychology, v. 2 p. 1327, Gale Group, 2001 ISBN 0-8103-9489-8 
After the Isis-Urania temple claimed its independence, there were even more disputes, leading to Yeats resigning. King, 1989, page 78 A committee of three was to temporarily govern, which included P.W. Bullock, M.W. Blackden and J. W. Brodie-Innes. After a short time, Bullock resigned, and Dr. Robert Felkin took his place. King, 1989, page 94 

In 1903, A.E. Waite and Blackden joined forces to retain the name Isis-Urania, while Felkin and other London members formed the Stella Matutina. Yeats remained in the Stella Matutina until 1921, while Brodie-Innes continued his Amen-Ra membership in Edinburgh. King, 1989, pages 95-96 

===Reconstruction===
Once Mathers realised that reconciliation was impossible, he made efforts to reestablish himself in London. The Bradford and Weston-super-Mare temples remained loyal to him, but their numbers were few. King, 1989, page 109 He then appointed Edward Berridge as his representative. King, 1989, page 110 According to Francis King, historical evidence shows that there were "twenty three members of a flourishing Second Order under Berridge-Mathers in 1913." 

J.W. Brodie-Innes continued leading the Amen-Ra temple, deciding that the revolt was unjustified. By 1908, Mathers and Brodie-Innes were in complete accord. Regardie, 1993, page 33 According to sources that differ regarding the actual date, sometime between 1901 and 1913 Mathers renamed the branch of the Golden Dawn remaining loyal to his leadership to Alpha et Omega. King, 1971, p. 110-111 King, 1989, page 111 "The Golden Dawn ceased to exist by that name after October, 1901, replaced by Mathers' Alpha et Omega and the London groups Order of the Morgan Rothe. No longer associated with the SRIA after 1902, Mathers continued to oversee a few temples until his death, when his wife, Moina, assumed supervision." Samuel Liddel MacGregor Mathers biography, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon, February 26, 2001 Golden Dawn Time Line, Chic Cicero and Sandra Tabatha Cicero, Llewellyn Encyclopedia Brodie-Innes assumed command of the English and Scottish temples, while Mathers concentrated on building up his Ahathoor temple and extending his American connections. According to occultist Israel Regardie, the Golden Dawn had spread to the United States of America before 1900 and a Thoth-Hermes temple had been founded in Chicago. By the beginning of the First World War in 1914, Mathers had established two to three American temples.

Most temples of the Alpha et Omega and Stella Matutina closed or went into abeyance by the end of the 1930s, with the exceptions of two Stella Matutina temples: Hermes Temple in Bristol, which operated sporadically until 1970, and the Smaragdum Thallasses Temple (commonly referred to as Whare Ra) in Havelock North, New Zealand, which operated regularly until its closure in 1978. Gilbert, R. A. Golden Dawn Companion. Aquarian Press, 1986. ISBN 0-85030-436-9 Llewellyn Encyclopedia: "Golden Dawn Time Line" 

==Structure and grades==
Rosy Cross of the Golden Dawn
Much of the hierarchical structure for the Golden dawn came from the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, which was itself derived from the Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross. The masonic career of A.E. Waite by Bro. R. A. Gilbert 

;First Order:
*IntroductionNeophyte 0=0
*Zelator 1=10
*Theoricus 2=9
*Practicus 3=8
*Philosophus 4=7
*IntermediatePortal Grade

;Second Order:
*Adeptus Minor 5=6
*Adeptus Major 6=5
*Adeptus Exemptus 7=4

;Third Order:
*Magister Templi 8=3
*Magus 9=2
*Ipsissimus 10=1

The paired numbers attached to the Grades relate to positions on the Tree of Life. The Neophyte Grade of "0=0" indicates no position on the Tree. In the other pairs, the first numeral is the number of steps up from the bottom (Malkuth), and the second numeral is the number of steps down from the top (Kether).

The First Order Grades were related to the four elements of Earth, Air, Water, and Fire, respectively. The Aspirant to a Grade received instruction on the metaphysical meaning of each of these Elements and had to pass a written examination and demonstrate certain skills to receive admission to that Grade.

The Portal Grade was an "Invisible" or in-between grade separating the First Order from the Second Order. Golden Dawn Research Center - What is the Golden Dawn? The Circle of existing Adepts from the Second Order had to consent to allow an Aspirant to be initiated as an Adept and join the Second Order.

The Second Order was not, properly, part of the "Golden Dawn", but a separate Order in its own right, known as the R.R. et A.C. The Second Order directed the teachings of the First Order and was the governing force behind the First Order.

After passing the Portal, the Aspirant was instructed in the techniques of practical magic. When another examination was passed, and the other Adepts consented, the Aspirant attained the Grade of Adeptus Minor (5=6). There were also four sub-Grades of instruction for the Adeptus Minor, again relating to the four Outer Order grades.

A member of the Second Order had the power and authority to initiate aspirants to the First Order, though usually not without the permission of the Chiefs of his or her Lodge.

==The Golden Dawn book==
The encyclopedic text The Golden Dawn, by Israel Regardie, has been the most intensively used source for modern western occult and magical practice. Weschcke, Carl L., Publisher, Publishers Preface (1982) The Golden Dawn 

==Known or alleged members==

===A  M===
*Sara Allgood (18791950), Irish stage actress and later film actress in America
*Charles Henry Allan Bennett (18721923), best known for introducing Buddhism to the West
*Arnold Bennett (18671931), British novelist Regardie, 1982, page 16 
*Edward W. Berridge (ca. 18431923), British homeopathic physician 
*Algernon Blackwood (18691951), English writer and radio broadcaster of supernatural stories Regardie, 1982, foreword - page ix 
*Anna de Brmont, American-born singer and writer. 
*Aleister Crowley (18751947), occultist, writer and mountaineer, founder of his own magical society. 

*Florence Farr (18601917), London stage actress and musician 
*Robert Felkin (18531925), medical missionary, explorer and anthropologist in Central Africa, author
*Dion Fortune was not an original member of the Golden Dawn, rather a member of the off shoot Golden Dawn order the Stella Matutina. Dion Fortune Founded the Society of Inner Light.
*Frederick Leigh Gardner (18571930), British stock broker and occultist; published three-volume bibliography Catalogue Raisonn of Works on the Occult Sciences (1912) "Frederick Leigh Gardner", Biographies: Fringe freemasons, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon (Freemasons) web site. Retrieved November 2008. 
*Maud Gonne (18661953), Irish revolutionary, actress.
*Annie Horniman (18601937), British repertory theatre producer and pioneer; member of the wealthy Horniman family of tea-traders 
*Arthur Machen (18631947), leading London writer of the 1890s, author of acclaimed works of imaginative and occult fiction, such as "The Great God Pan", "The White People" and "The Hill of Dreams". Welsh by birth and upbringing.
*Gustav Meyrink (18681932), Austrian author, storyteller, dramatist, translator, banker, and Buddhist

===N  Z===
*E. Nesbit (18581924), real name Edith Bland; English author and political activist
*Israel Regardie was not a member of the original Golden Dawn, but rather of the Stella Matutina, which he claimed was as close to the original order as could be found in the early 1930s (when he was initiated). Regardie wrote many respected and acclaimed books about magic and the Golden Dawn Order, including The Golden Dawn, The Tree Of Life, Middle Pillar, and A Garden of Pomegranates.
*Sax Rohmer, novelist, creator of the Fu Manchu character
*Charles Rosher (18851974), British cinematographer
*Pamela Colman Smith (18781951), British-American artist and co-creator of the Rider-Waite Tarot deck
*William Sharp (18551905), poet and author; alias Fiona MacLeod
*Bram Stoker (18471912), Irish writer best-known today for his 1897 horror novel Dracula
*John Todhunter (18391916), Aktis Heliou Irish poet and playwright who wrote seven volumes of poetry, and several plays
*Violet Tweedale (18621936), author.
*Evelyn Underhill (18751941), British Christian mystic, author of Mysticism: A Study in Nature and Development of Spiritual Consciousness
*Charles Williams (18861945), British poet, novelist, theologian, and literary critic
*A. E. Waite (18571942), British-American author, Freemason and co-creator of the Rider-Waite Tarot deck 
*W. B. Yeats (18651939), Irish poet, dramatist, and writer.

==Contemporary Golden Dawn orders==
While no temples in the original chartered lineage of the Golden Dawn survived past the 1970s, several organizations have since revived its teachings and rituals. Among these, the following are notable:
*The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Inc.
*The Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn

==See also==

*AA
*Hermeticism
*Tattva
*Tattva vision

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Fra. A.o.C. (2002). A Short Treatise on the History, Culture and Practices of The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
* Armstrong, Allan & R. A. Gilbert, eds. (1997). Golden Dawn: The Proceedings of the Golden Dawn Conference, London - 1997. Hermetic Research Trust.
* Cicero, Chic and Tabatha Cicero (1991). The New Golden Dawn Ritual Tarot. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications. ISBN 0-87542-139-3
* Colquhoun, Ithell (1975). Sword of Wisdom: Macgregor Mathers and the Golden Dawn. Neville Spearman. ISBN 0-85435-092-6.
* Greer, Mary K. (1994). Women of the Golden Dawn. Park Street. ISBN 0-89281-516-7.
*Greer, Mary K. & Darcy Kuntz (1999) The Chronology of the Golden Dawn. Holmes Publishing Group. ISBN 1-55818-354-X
* Gilbert, Robert A. (1983). The Golden Dawn: Twilight of the Magicians. The Aquarian Press. ISBN 0-85030-278-1
* Gilbert, Robert A. (1986). The Golden Dawn Companion. Weiser Books. ISBN 0-85030-436-9
* Gilbert, Robert A. Golden Dawn Scrapbook - The Rise and Fall of a Magical Order. Weiser Books (1998) ISBN 1-57863-037-1
* Howe, Ellic (1978). The Magicians of the Golden Dawn: A Documentary History of a Magical Order 1887-1923. Samuel Weiser. ISBN 0-87728-369-9.
* Jenkins, Phillip (2000) Mystics and Messiahs: Cults and New Religions in American History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512744-7
* King, Francis (1971). The Rites of Modern Occult Magic. New York: Macmillan Company. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 76-158-933
* King, Francis (1989). Modern Ritual Magic: The Rise of Western Occultism. ISBN 1-85327-032-6
* King, Francis, ed. (1997). Ritual Magic of the Golden Dawn: Works by S. L. MacGregor Mathers and Others. Destiny Books. ISBN 0-89281-617-1
* 
* Israel Regardie|Regardie, Israel, et al., eds. (1989). The Golden Dawn: A Complete Course in Practical Ceremonial Magic. Llewellyn. ISBN 0-87542-663-8
* Regardie, Israel (1993). What You Should Know About the Golden Dawn (6th ed.). ISBN 1-56184-064-5
* Runyon, Carroll (1997). Secrets of the Golden Dawn Cipher Manuscripts. C.H.S. ISBN 0-9654881-2-8
* Smoley, Richard (1999). Hidden Wisdom: A Guide to the Western Inner Traditions. Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0844-2
* Suster, Gerald (1990). Crowley's Apprentice: The Life and Ideas of Israel Regardie. Weiser Books. ISBN 0-87728-700-7
* Wasserman, James (2005). The Mystery Traditions: Secret Symbols and Sacred Art. Rochester, VT: Destiny Books. ISBN 1-59477-088-3

==External links==
*The Golden Dawn FAQ (original from 1990s Usenet groups)
*The Golden Dawn Library Project
*Golden Dawn entries in Llewellyn Encyclopedia
*Golden Dawn Tradition, by co-founder Dr. W. Wynn Westcott
*Photocopies and the translation of the original Cipher Manuscripts
*Lots of GD material on display in Yeats exhibition including Ritual Notebooks.
*The Golden Dawn Roll Call 
*

*


[[Hash function]]

A hash function that maps names to integers from 0 to 15. There is a collision between keys "John Smith" and "Sandra Dee".
A hash function is any function that can be used to map data of arbitrary size to data of fixed size, with slight differences in input data producing very big differences in output data. The values returned by a hash function are called hash values, hash codes, hash sums, or simply hashes. Hash values are commonly used to differentiate between data. For example, in implementing a set in software, one has to avoid including an element more than once. Recent developments in internet payment networks also uses a form of 'hashing' for producing checksums, bringing additional attention to the term.

== Description ==

Hash functions are primarily used to generate fixed-length output data that acts as a shortened reference to the original data. This is useful when the original data is too cumbersome to use in its entirety.

One practical use is a data structure called a hash table where the data is stored associatively. Searching linearly for a person's name in a list becomes cumbersome as the length of the list increases, but the hashed value can be used to store a reference to the original data and retrieve constant time (barring collisions). Another use is in cryptography, the science of encoding and safeguarding data. It is easy to generate hash values from input data and easy to verify that the data matches the hash, but for certain hash functions hard to 'fake' a hash value to hide malicious data. This is the principle behind the PGP algorithm for data validation.

Hash functions are also frequently used to accelerate table lookup or data comparison tasks such as finding items in a database, detecting duplicated or similar records in a large file and finding similar stretches in DNA sequences.

A hash function should be deterministic: when it is invoked twice on identical data (e.g. two strings containing exactly the same characters), the function should produce the same value. This is crucial to the correctness of virtually all algorithms based on hashing. In the case of a hash table, the lookup operation should look at the slot where the insertion algorithm actually stored the data that is being sought for, so it needs the same hash value.

Hash functions are typically not invertible, meaning that it is not possible to reconstruct the input datum from its hash value () alone. In many applications, it is common that several values hash to the same value, a condition called a hash collision. Since collisions cause "confusion" of objects, which can make exact hash-based algorithm slower and approximate algorithms less precise, hash functions are designed to minimize the probability of collisions. For cryptographic uses, hash functions are engineered in such a way that it is considered impossible to reconstruct any input from the hash alone without spending great amounts of computing time (see also One-way function).

Hash functions used to accelerate data searches typically produce small hash values, like a 32bit integer. On the other hand, cryptographic hash functions produce much larger hash values, in order to ensure the computational ifeasibility of brute-force inversion. For example SHA-1, one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions, produces a 160-bit value. In both cases, the hash function breaks the input data into chunks of specific size. Hash functions used for data searches use some arithmetic expression which iteratively processes those chunks (such as the characters in a string) to produce the hash value. In cryptographic hash functions, these chunks are processed by a one-way compression function, with the last chunk being padded if neccessary. In this case, their size, which is called block size, is much bigger than the size of the hash value. For example, in SHA-1, the hash value is 160 bits and the block size 512 bits.

Hash functions are related to (and often confused with) checksums, check digits, fingerprints, randomization functions, error-correcting codes, and ciphers. Although these concepts overlap to some extent, each has its own uses and requirements and is designed and optimized differently. The Hash Keeper database maintained by the American National Drug Intelligence Center, for instance, is more aptly described as a catalog of file fingerprints than of hash values.

== Uses ==

=== Hash tables ===
Hash functions are primarily used in hash tables, to quickly locate a data record (e.g., a dictionary definition) given its search key (the headword). Specifically, the hash function is used to map the search key to an index; the index gives the place in the hash table where the corresponding record should be stored. Hash tables, in turn, are used to implement associative arrays and dynamic sets.

Typically, the domain of a hash function (the set of possible keys) is larger than its range (the number of different table indexes), and so it will map several different keys to the same index. Therefore, each slot of a hash table is associated with (implicitly or explicitly) a set of records, rather than a single record. For this reason, each slot of a hash table is often called a bucket, and hash values are also called bucket indices.

Thus, the hash function only hints at the record's location  it tells where one should start looking for it. Still, in a half-full table, a good hash function will typically narrow the search down to only one or two entries.

=== Caches ===
Hash functions are also used to build caches for large data sets stored in slow media. A cache is generally simpler than a hashed search table, since any collision can be resolved by discarding or writing back the older of the two colliding items. This is also used in file comparison

=== Bloom filters ===

Hash functions are an essential ingredient of the Bloom filter, a space-efficient probabilistic data structure that is used to test whether an element is a member of a set.

=== Finding duplicate records ===

When storing records in a large unsorted file, one may use a hash function to map each record to an index into a table T, and collect in each bucket T a list of the numbers of all records with the same hash value i. Once the table is complete, any two duplicate records will end up in the same bucket. The duplicates can then be found by scanning every bucket T which contains two or more members, fetching those records, and comparing them. With a table of appropriate size, this method is likely to be much faster than any alternative approach (such as sorting the file and comparing all consecutive pairs).

=== Protecting data ===

A hash value can be used to uniquely identify secret information. This requires that the hash function is collision resistant, which means that it is very hard to find data that generate the same hash value. These functions are categorized into cryptographic hash functions and provably secure hash functions. Functions in the second category are the most secure but also too slow for most practical purposes. Collision resistance is accomplished in part by generating very large hash values. For example SHA-1, one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions, generates 160 bit values.

=== Finding similar records ===

Hash functions can also be used to locate table records whose key is similar, but not identical, to a given key; or pairs of records in a large file which have similar keys. For that purpose, one needs a hash function that maps similar keys to hash values that differ by at most m, where m is a small integer (say, 1 or 2). If one builds a table T of all record numbers, using such a hash function, then similar records will end up in the same bucket, or in nearby buckets. Then one need only check the records in each bucket T against those in buckets T where k ranges between m and m.

This class includes the so-called acoustic fingerprint algorithms, that are used to locate similar-sounding entries in large collection of audio files. For this application, the hash function must be as insensitive as possible to data capture or transmission errors, and to trivial changes such as timing and volume changes, compression, etc. "Robust Audio Hashing for Content Identification by Jaap Haitsma, Ton Kalker and Job Oostveen" 

=== Finding similar substrings ===
The same techniques can be used to find equal or similar stretches in a large collection of strings, such as a document repository or a genomic database. In this case, the input strings are broken into many small pieces, and a hash function is used to detect potentially equal pieces, as above.

The RabinKarp algorithm is a relatively fast string searching algorithm that works in O(n) time on average. It is based on the use of hashing to compare strings.

=== Geometric hashing ===
This principle is widely used in computer graphics, computational geometry and many other disciplines, to solve many proximity problems in the plane or in three-dimensional space, such as finding closest pairs in a set of points, similar shapes in a list of shapes, similar images in an image database, and so on. In these applications, the set of all inputs is some sort of metric space, and the hashing function can be interpreted as a partition of that space into a grid of cells. The table is often an array with two or more indices (called a grid file, grid index, bucket grid, and similar names), and the hash function returns an index tuple. This special case of hashing is known as geometric hashing or the grid method. Geometric hashing is also used in telecommunications (usually under the name vector quantization) to encode and compress multi-dimensional signals.

=== Standard Uses of Hashing in Cryptography ===

Some standard applications that employ hash functions include authentication,
message integrity (using an HMAC(Hashed MAC)), message fingerprinting, data corruption detection,
and digital signature efficiency.

== Properties ==
Good hash functions, in the original sense of the term, are usually required to satisfy certain properties listed below. Note that different requirements apply to the other related concepts (cryptographic hash functions, checksums, etc.).

=== Determinism ===
A hash procedure must be deterministicmeaning that for a given input value it must always generate the same hash value. In other words, it must be a function of the data to be hashed, in the mathematical sense of the term. This requirement excludes hash functions that depend on external variable parameters, such as pseudo-random number generators or the time of day. It also excludes functions that depend on the memory address of the object being hashed, because that address may change during execution (as may happen on systems that use certain methods of garbage collection), although sometimes rehashing of the item is possible.

=== Uniformity ===
A good hash function should map the expected inputs as evenly as possible over its output range. That is, every hash value in the output range should be generated with roughly the same probability. The reason for this last requirement is that the cost of hashing-based methods goes up sharply as the number of collisionspairs of inputs that are mapped to the same hash valueincreases. Basically, if some hash values are more likely to occur than others, a larger fraction of the lookup operations will have to search through a larger set of colliding table entries.

Note that this criterion only requires the value to be uniformly distributed, not random in any sense. A good randomizing function is (barring computational efficiency concerns) generally a good choice as a hash function, but the converse need not be true.

Hash tables often contain only a small subset of the valid inputs. For instance, a club membership list may contain only a hundred or so member names, out of the very large set of all possible names. In these cases, the uniformity criterion should hold for almost all typical subsets of entries that may be found in the table, not just for the global set of all possible entries.

In other words, if a typical set of m records is hashed to n table slots, the probability of a bucket receiving many more than m/n records should be vanishingly small. In particular, if m is less than n, very few buckets should have more than one or two records. (In an ideal "perfect hash function", no bucket should have more than one record; but a small number of collisions is virtually inevitable, even if n is much larger than m  see the birthday paradox).

When testing a hash function, the uniformity of the distribution of hash values can be evaluated by the chi-squared test.

=== Variable range ===
In many applications, the range of hash values may be different for each run of the program, or may change along the same run (for instance, when a hash table needs to be expanded). In those situations, one needs a hash function which takes two parametersthe input data z, and the number n of allowed hash values.

A common solution is to compute a fixed hash function with a very large range (say, 0 to 232  1), divide the result by n, and use the division's remainder. If n is itself a power of 2, this can be done by bit masking and bit shifting. When this approach is used, the hash function must be chosen so that the result has fairly uniform distribution between 0 and n  1, for any value of n that may occur in the application. Depending on the function, the remainder may be uniform only for certain values of n, e.g. odd or prime numbers.

We can allow the table size n to not be a power of 2 and still not have to perform any remainder or division operation, as these computations are sometimes costly. For example, let n be significantly less than 2b. Consider a pseudorandom number generator (PRNG) function P(key) that is uniform on the interval 2b  1. A hash function uniform on the interval n-1 is n P(key)/2b. We can replace the division by a (possibly faster) right bit shift: nP(key) >> b.

=== Variable range with minimal movement (dynamic hash function) ===
When the hash function is used to store values in a hash table that outlives the run of the program, and the hash table needs to be expanded or shrunk, the hash table is referred to as a dynamic hash table.

A hash function that will relocate the minimum number of records when the table is  where z is the key being hashed and n is the number of allowed hash values  such that H(z,n + 1) = H(z,n) with probability close to n/(n + 1).

Linear hashing and spiral storage are examples of dynamic hash functions that execute in constant time but relax the property of uniformity to achieve the minimal movement property.

Extendible hashing uses a dynamic hash function that requires space proportional to n to compute the hash function, and it becomes a function of the previous keys that have been inserted.

Several algorithms that preserve the uniformity property but require time proportional to n to compute the value of H(z,n) have been invented.

=== Data normalization ===
In some applications, the input data may contain features that are irrelevant for comparison purposes. For example, when looking up a personal name, it may be desirable to ignore the distinction between upper and lower case letters. For such data, one must use a hash function that is compatible with the data equivalence criterion being used: that is, any two inputs that are considered equivalent must yield the same hash value. This can be accomplished by normalizing the input before hashing it, as by upper-casing all letters.

=== Continuity ===
"A hash function that is used to search for similar (as opposed to equivalent) data must be as continuous as possible; two inputs that differ by a little should be mapped to equal or nearly equal hash values." "Fundamental Data Structures - Josiang p.132". Retrieved May 19, 2014. 

Note that continuity is usually considered a fatal flaw for checksums, cryptographic hash functions, and other related concepts. Continuity is desirable for hash functions only in some applications, such as hash tables used in Nearest neighbor search.

== Hash function algorithms ==
For most types of hashing functions the choice of the function depends strongly on the nature of the input data, and their probability distribution in the intended application.

=== Trivial hash function ===
If the datum to be hashed is small enough, one can use the datum itself (reinterpreted as an integer) as the hashed value. The cost of computing this "trivial" (identity) hash function is effectively zero. This hash function is perfect, as it maps each input to a distinct hash value.

The meaning of "small enough" depends on the size of the type that is used as the hashed value. For example, in Java, the hash code is a 32-bit integer. Thus the 32-bit integer Integer and 32-bit floating-point Float objects can simply use the value directly; whereas the 64-bit integer Long and 64-bit floating-point Double cannot use this method.

Other types of data can also use this perfect hashing scheme. For example, when mapping character strings between upper and lower case, one can use the binary encoding of each character, interpreted as an integer, to index a table that gives the alternative form of that character ("A" for "a", "8" for "8", etc.). If each character is stored in 8 bits (as in ASCII or ISO Latin 1), the table has only 28 = 256 entries; in the case of Unicode characters, the table would have 17216 = 1114112 entries.

The same technique can be used to map two-letter country codes like "us" or "za" to country names (262=676 table entries), 5-digit zip codes like 13083 to city names (100000 entries), etc. Invalid data values (such as the country code "xx" or the zip code 00000) may be left undefined in the table, or mapped to some appropriate "null" value.

=== Perfect hashing ===

A perfect hash function for the four names shown
A hash function that is injectivethat is, maps each valid input to a different hash valueis said to be perfect. With such a function one can directly locate the desired entry in a hash table, without any additional searching.

=== Minimal perfect hashing ===
A minimal perfect hash function for the four names shown
A perfect hash function for n keys is said to be minimal if its range consists of n consecutive integers, usually from 0 to n1. Besides providing single-step lookup, a minimal perfect hash function also yields a compact hash table, without any vacant slots. Minimal perfect hash functions are much harder to find than perfect ones with a wider range.

=== Hashing uniformly distributed data ===
If the inputs are bounded-length strings and each input may independently occur with uniform probability (such as telephone numbers, car license plates, invoice numbers, etc.), then a hash function needs to map roughly the same number of inputs to each hash value. For instance, suppose that each input is an integer z in the range 0 to N1, and the output must be an integer h in the range 0 to n1, where N is much larger than n. Then the hash function could be h = z mod n (the remainder of z divided by n), or h = (z  n)  N (the value z scaled down by n/N and truncated to an integer), or many other formulas.

h = z mod n was used in many of the original random number generators, but was found to have a number of issues. One of which is that as n approaches N, this function becomes less and less uniform.

=== Hashing data with other distributions ===
These simple formulas will not do if the input values are not equally likely, or are not independent. For instance, most patrons of a supermarket will live in the same geographic area, so their telephone numbers are likely to begin with the same 3 to 4 digits. In that case, if m is 10000 or so, the division formula (z  m)  M, which depends mainly on the leading digits, will generate a lot of collisions; whereas the remainder formula z mod m, which is quite sensitive to the trailing digits, may still yield a fairly even distribution.

=== Hashing variable-length data ===
When the data values are long (or variable-length) character stringssuch as personal names, web page addresses, or mail messagestheir distribution is usually very uneven, with complicated dependencies. For example, text in any natural language has highly non-uniform distributions of characters, and character pairs, very characteristic of the language. For such data, it is prudent to use a hash function that depends on all characters of the stringand depends on each character in a different way.

In cryptographic hash functions, a MerkleDamgrd construction is usually used. In general, the scheme for hashing such data is to break the input into a sequence of small units (bits, bytes, words, etc.) and combine all the units b, b, , b sequentially, as follows

 S  S0; // ''Initialize the state.''
 '''for''' k '''in''' 1, 2, ..., m '''do''' // ''Scan the input data units:''
 S  F(S, b[k]); // ''Combine data unit k into the state.''
 '''return''' G(S, n) // ''Extract the hash value from the state.''

This schema is also used in many text checksum and fingerprint algorithms. The state variable S may be a 32- or 64-bit unsigned integer; in that case, S0 can be 0, and G(S,n) can be just S mod n. The best choice of F is a complex issue and depends on the nature of the data. If the units b are single bits, then F(S,b) could be, for instance

 '''if''' highbit(S) = 0 '''then'''
 '''return''' 2 * S + b
 '''else'''
 '''return''' (2 * S + b) ^ P
Here highbit(S) denotes the most significant bit of S; the '*' operator denotes unsigned integer multiplication with lost overflow; '^' is the bitwise exclusive or operation applied to words; and P is a suitable fixed word. 

=== Special-purpose hash functions ===
In many cases, one can design a special-purpose (heuristic) hash function that yields many fewer collisions than a good general-purpose hash function. For example, suppose that the input data are file names such as FILE0000.CHK, FILE0001.CHK, FILE0002.CHK, etc., with mostly sequential numbers. For such data, a function that extracts the numeric part k of the file name and returns k mod n would be nearly optimal. Needless to say, a function that is exceptionally good for a specific kind of data may have dismal performance on data with different distribution.

=== Rolling hash ===

In some applications, such as substring search, one must compute a hash function h for every k-character substring of a given n-character string t; where k is a fixed integer, and n is k. The straightforward solution, which is to extract every such substring s of t and compute h(s) separately, requires a number of operations proportional to kn. However, with the proper choice of h, one can use the technique of rolling hash to compute all those hashes with an effort proportional to k + n.

=== Universal hashing ===
A universal hashing scheme is a randomized algorithm that selects a hashing function h among a family of such functions, in such a way that the probability of a collision of any two distinct keys is 1/n, where n is the number of distinct hash values desiredindependently of the two keys. Universal hashing ensures (in a probabilistic sense) that the hash function application will behave as well as if it were using a random function, for any distribution of the input data. It will however have more collisions than perfect hashing, and may require more operations than a special-purpose hash function. See also Unique Permutation Hashing. Shlomi Dolev, Limor Lahiani, Yinnon Haviv, "Unique permutation hashing," Theoretical Computer Science Volume 475, 4 March 2013, Pages 5965 

=== Hashing with checksum functions ===
One can adapt certain checksum or fingerprinting algorithms for use as hash functions. Some of those algorithms will map arbitrary long string data z, with any typical real-world distributionno matter how non-uniform and dependentto a 32-bit or 64-bit string, from which one can extract a hash value in 0 through n  1.

This method may produce a sufficiently uniform distribution of hash values, as long as the hash range size n is small compared to the range of the checksum or fingerprint function. However, some checksums fare poorly in the avalanche test, which may be a concern in some applications. In particular, the popular CRC32 checksum provides only 16 bits (the higher half of the result) that are usable for hashing. Moreover, each bit of the input has a deterministic effect on each bit of the CRC32, that is one can tell without looking at the rest of the input, which bits of the output will flip if the input bit is flipped; so care must be taken to use all 32 bits when computing the hash from the checksum. Bret Mulvey, Evaluation of CRC32 for Hash Tables, in Hash Functions. Accessed April 10, 2009. 

=== Hashing with cryptographic hash functions ===
Some cryptographic hash functions, such as SHA-1, have even stronger uniformity guarantees than checksums or fingerprints, and thus can provide very good general-purpose hashing functions.

In ordinary applications, this advantage may be too small to offset their much higher cost. Bret Mulvey, Evaluation of SHA-1 for Hash Tables, in Hash Functions. Accessed April 10, 2009. However, this method can provide uniformly distributed hashes even when the keys are chosen by a malicious agent. This feature may help to protect services against denial of service attacks.

=== Hashing By Nonlinear Table Lookup ===
Tables of random numbers (such as 256 random 32 bit integers) can provide high-quality nonlinear functions to be used
as hash functions or for other purposes such as cryptography. The key to be hashed would be split into 8-bit (one byte) parts
and each part will be used as an index for the nonlinear table. The table values will be added by arithmetic or XOR addition
to the hash output value. Because the table is just 1024 bytes in size, it will fit into the cache of modern microprocessors
and allow for very fast execution of the hashing algorithm. As the table value is on average much longer than 8 bits, one bit
of input will affect nearly all output bits. This is different from multiplicative hash functions where higher-value input bits
do not affect lower-value output bits.

This algorithm has proven to be very fast and of high quality for hashing purposes (especially hashing of integer number keys).

=== Efficient Hashing Of Strings ===
Modern microprocessors will allow for much faster processing, if 8-bit character Strings are not hashed by
processing one character at a time, but by interpreting the string as an array of 32 bit or 64 bit integers
and hashing/accumulating these "wide word" integer values by means of arithmetic operations (e.g. multiplication
by constant and bit-shifting). The remaining characters of the string which are smaller than the word length
of the CPU must be handled differently (e.g. being processed one character at a time).

This approach has proven to speed up hash code generation by a factor of five or more on modern microprocessors of
a word size of 64 bit.

Another approach http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.18.7520 Performance in Practice of String Hashing Functions is to convert strings to a 32 or 64 bit numeric value and then apply a hash function. One method that avoids the problem of strings having great similarity ("Aaaaaaaaaa" and "Aaaaaaaaab") is to use a Cyclic redundancy check (CRC) of the string to compute a 32- or 64-bit value. While it is possible that two different strings will have the same CRC, the likelihood is very small and only requires that one check the actual string found to determine whether one has an exact match. CRCs will be different for strings such as "Aaaaaaaaaa" and "Aaaaaaaaab". Although, CRC codes can be used as hash values they are not cryptographically secure since they are not collision resistant. 

== Locality-sensitive hashing ==
Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) is a method of performing probabilistic dimension reduction of high-dimensional data. The basic idea is to hash the input items so that similar items are mapped to the same buckets with high probability (the number of buckets being much smaller than the universe of possible input items). This is different from the conventional hash functions, such as those used in cryptography, as in this case the goal is to maximize the probability of "collision" of similar items rather than to avoid collisions. 

One example of LSH is MinHash algorithm used for finding similar documents (such as web-pages):

Let h be a hash function that maps the members of A and B to distinct integers, and for any set S define hmin(S) to be the member x of S with the minimum value of h(x). Then 1=hmin(A) = hmin(B) exactly when the minimum hash value of the union A  B lies in the intersection A  B.
Therefore,
:1=Pr= hmin(B) = J(A,B). where J is Jaccard index.
In other words, if r is a random variable that is one when 1=hmin(A) = hmin(B) and zero otherwise, then r is an unbiased estimator of J(A,B), although it has too high a variance to be useful on its own. The idea of the MinHash scheme is to reduce the variance by averaging together several variables constructed in the same way.

== Origins of the term ==
The term "hash" comes by way of analogy with its non-technical meaning, to "chop and mix". Indeed, typical hash functions, like the mod operation, "chop" the input domain into many sub-domains that get "mixed" into the output range to improve the uniformity of the key distribution.

Donald Knuth notes that Hans Peter Luhn of IBM appears to have been the first to use the concept, in a memo dated January 1953, and that Robert Morris used the term in a survey paper in CACM which elevated the term from technical jargon to formal terminology. 

== List of hash functions ==

*NIST hash function competition
*Bernstein hash 
*Fowler-Noll-Vo hash function (32, 64, 128, 256, 512, or 1024 bits)
*Jenkins hash function (32 bits)
*Pearson hashing (8 bits) (64 bit hash C code provided)
*Zobrist hashing

== See also ==

== References ==

== External links ==

*Hash Functions and Block Ciphers by Bob Jenkins
* The Goulburn Hashing Function (PDF) by Mayur Patel
* Hash Function Construction for Textual and Geometrical Data Retrieval Latest Trends on Computers, Vol.2, pp. 483489, CSCC conference, Corfu, 2010

 



[[High jump]]

The high jump is a track and field event in which competitors must jump over a horizontal bar placed at measured heights without the aid of certain devices. In its modern most practiced format, auxiliary weights and mounds have been used for assistance; rules have changed over the years. Over the centuries since, competitors have introduced increasingly more effective techniques to arrive at the current form.

Javier Sotomayor (Cuba) is the current men's record holder with a jump of set in 1993, the longest standing record in the history of the men's high jump. Stefka Kostadinova (Bulgaria) has held the women's world record at since 1987, also the longest-held record in the event.

==Rules==
Canadian high jumper Nicole Forrester demonstrating the Fosbury flop
Jumpers must take off on one foot.

A jump is considered a failure if the bar is dislodged by the action of the jumper whilst jumping or the jumper touches the ground or breaks the plane of the near edge of the bar before clearance . The technique one uses for the jump must be almost flawless in order to have a chance of clearing a high bar.

Competitors may begin jumping at any height announced by the chief judge, or may pass, at their own discretion. Three consecutive missed jumps, at any height or combination of heights, will eliminate the jumper from competition.

The victory goes to the jumper who clears the greatest height during the final. If two or more jumpers tie for first place, the tie-breakers are: 1) The fewest misses at the height at which the tie occurred; and 2) The fewest misses throughout the competition.

If the event remains tied, the jumpers have a jump-off, beginning at the next greater height. Each jumper has one attempt. The bar is then alternately lowered and raised until only one jumper succeeds at a given height. iaaf rules 

==History==
Konstantinos Tsiklitiras during the standing high jump competition at the 1912 Summer Olympics
The first recorded high jump event took place in Scotland in the 19th century. Early jumpers used either an elaborate straight-on approach or a scissors technique. In the latter, the bar was approached diagonally, and the jumper threw first the inside leg and then the other over the bar in a scissoring motion. Around the turn of the 20th century, techniques began to modernise, starting with the Irish-American Michael Sweeney's Eastern cut-off. By taking off like the scissors, but extending his back and flattening out over the bar, Sweeney achieved a more economic clearance and raised the world record to in 1895.

Another American, George Horine, developed an even more efficient technique, the Western roll. In this style, the bar again is approached on a diagonal, but the inner leg is used for the take-off, while the outer leg is thrust up to lead the body sideways over the bar. Horine increased the world standard to in 1912. His technique was predominant through the Berlin Olympics of 1936, in which the event was won by Cornelius Johnson at .

American and Soviet jumpers held the playing field for the next four decades, and they pioneered the evolution of the straddle technique. Straddle jumpers took off as in the Western roll, but rotated their (belly-down) torso around the bar, obtaining the most economical clearance up to that time. Straddle-jumper Charles Dumas was the first to clear 7 feet (2.13 m) in 1956, and American John Thomas pushed the world mark to in 1960. Valeriy Brumel took over the event for the next four years. The elegant Soviet jumper radically sped up his approach run, took the record up to , and won the Olympic gold medal in 1964, before a motorcycle accident ended his career.
Gold medal winner Ethel Catherwood of Canada scissors over the bar at the 1928 Summer Olympics. Her winning result was .
 
Platt Adams during the standing high jump competition at the 1912 Summer Olympics
American coaches, including two-time NCAA champion Frank Costello of the University of Maryland, flocked to Russia to learn from Brumel and his coaches. However, it would be a solitary innovator at Oregon State University, Dick Fosbury, who would bring the high jump into the next century. Taking advantage of the raised, softer landing areas by then in use, Fosbury added a new twist to the outmoded Eastern Cut-off. He directed himself over the bar head and shoulders first, sliding over on his back and landing in a fashion which would likely have broken his neck in the old, sawdust landing pits. After he used this Fosbury flop to win the 1968 Olympic gold medal, the technique began to spread around the world, and soon floppers were dominating international high jump competitions. The last straddler to set a world record was Vladimir Yashchenko, who cleared in 1977 and then indoors in 1978.

Among renowned high jumpers following Fosbury's lead were: Americans Dwight Stones and his rival, 5 ft tall Franklin Jacobs of Paterson, NJ, who cleared , an astounding 0.59 m over his head (a feat equaled 27 years later by Sweden's Stefan Holm); Chinese record-setters Ni-chi Chin and Zhu Jianhua; Germans Gerd Wessig and Dietmar Mgenburg; Swedish Olympic medalist and world record holder Patrik Sjberg; and female jumpers Iolanda Bala of Romania, Ulrike Meyfarth of Germany and Italy's Sara Simeoni.

==Technical aspects==

===High jump shoes===
High jump shoes are different from most other track shoes in that they have much thicker soles than ordinary "sprint spikes" - in order to provide stability and comfort at take-off, although in the 1960s and early 70s, when the straddle technique still predominated, a single shoe was often worn on the take-off foot where the built-up sole would allow the free leg to swing without spikes catching the ground. There are an additional four holes in the heel of the take-off shoe, where the user can insert spikes for increased traction. The total number of spikes allowed by the IAAF can not exceed 11 in the sole, and jump shoes are normally configured with six or seven in the front, and four in the heel: spikes may not exceed 12mm in length. The four heel spikes aid greatly in the last four to five steps of the J-approach, allowing the jumper to run on his or her curve at a fast speed without slipping. The limit for the length of spikes in the shoe may not exceed 9mm in length on a senthetic track. Some high jump shoes are even more technologically developed and in addition to the extra spikes on the heel, the shoes are modified to lean the direction of the approach to provide further support while running their curve. As well as the approach, high jump shoes also help and support the jumper's takeoff. The IAAF regulations specify a maximum sole thickness for both high jump and long jump shoes; competitors in all other events may wear shoes with soles of any thickness.

===The approach===
Spanish jumper Ruth Beitia approaching the bar from an angle
The approach of the high jump may actually be more important than the take off. If a high jumper runs with bad timing or without enough aggression, clearing a high bar becomes more of a challenge. The approach requires a certain shape or curve, the right amount of speed, and the correct number of strides. The approach angle is also critical for optimal height.

Most great straddle jumpers have a run at angles of about 30 to 40 degrees. The length of the run is determined by the speed of the person's approach. A slower run requires about 8 strides. However, a faster high jumper might need about 13 strides. A greater run speed allows a greater part of the body's forward momentum to be converted upward . Straddle Technique 

The J type approach, favored by Fosbury floppers, allows for horizontal speed, the ability to turn in the air (centripetal force), and good take-off position. The approach should be a hard controlled stride so that a person does not fall from creating an angle with speed. Athletes should run tall and lean from the ankles on the curve and not the hips. Unlike the "classic" straddle technique, where the take-off foot is "planted" in the same spot at every height, flop-style jumpers must adjust their take-off as the bar is raised. Their J approach run must be adjusted slightly so that their take-off spot is slightly further out from the bar in order to allow their hips to clear the bar while still maintaining enough momentum to carry their legs across the bar. Jumpers attempting to reach record heights commonly fail when most of their energy is directed into the vertical effort, and they brush the bar off the standards with the backs of their legs as they stall-out in mid-air.

Drills can be practiced to solidify the approach. One drill is to run in a straight line (the linear part of the approach) and then run two to three circles spiraling into one another. Another is to run or skip a circle of any size, two to three times in a row. It is important to train to leap upwards without first leaning into the bar, allowing the momentum of the J approach to carry the body across the bar.

== Declaring the winner ==
In competition the winner is the person who cleared the highest height. In case of a tie, fewer failed attempts at that height are better: i.e., the jumper who makes a height on his/her first attempt is placed ahead of someone who clears the same height on the second or third attempt. If there still is a tie here, all the failed attempts at lower heights are added up, the one with the fewest number of total misses is declared the winner. If still tied a playoff is held. Starting height is the next larger height after the overjumped one. If all the competitors clear the height, the bar is raised 2 cm, and if they fail, the bar is lowered 2 cm. That continues until only one competitor succeeds in overjumping that height, he is declared the winner.

* In the table below, dashes indicate that a height was not attempted, crosses indicate failed attempts, and circles indicate a cleared height. Jumpers A and D cleared 1.99 m but failed at 2.01 m. A wins this competition having cleared the winning height with two attempts, while jumper D required three attempts. Similarly, B is ranked ahead of C having cleared the decisive height (i.e., 1.97m) in the first attempt.

 Athlete 1.91 m 1.93 m 1.95 m 1.97 m 1.99 m 2.01 m Height Rank 
 A - - XO XO XO XXX 1.99 1st 
 B O - O O XXX 1.97 3rd 
 C O - XO XO X-- XX 1.97 4th 
 D - XO O XXO XXO XXX 1.99 2nd 
 E - - - XXX &mdash; 5th 
 

==All-time top ten athletes==

*. High Jump - men - senior - outdoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. High Jump - women - senior - outdoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. High Jump - men - senior - indoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. High Jump - women - senior - indoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. . IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-02-25. 

===Men (outdoor)===

 Rank Mark Athlete Venue Date 
 1 Salamanca 27 July 1993 
 2 Stockholm 30 June 1987 
 3 Kobe 4 September 1985 
 Lausanne 4 July 2013 
 Doha 9 May 2014 
 Rome 5 June 2014 http://www.iaaf.org/results/diamond-league-meetings/2014/golden-gala-pietro-mennea-5388/men/high-jump/final/result 
 7 Donetsk 11 August 1985 
 Bratislava 20 June 1990 
 Zrich 7 August 1991 
 London 5 August 2000 
 Note: Drouin jumped imperial 7'10 \" Des Moines 25 April 2014 

===Women (outdoor)===

 Rank Mark Athlete Venue Date 
 1 Rome 30 August 1987 
 2 Zagreb 31 August 2009 
 3 Berlin 20 July 1984 
 Cheboksary 22 July 2011 
 5 Eberstadt 26 July 2003 
 Paris 31 August 2003 
 Athens 28 August 2004 
 Berlin 14 June 2009 
 9 Kiev 22 June 1984 
 Tokyo 31 August 1991 
 Tokyo 15 September 1995 
 Beijing 23 August 2008 
 Des Moines 26 June 2010 

===Men (indoor)===

 Rank Mark Athlete Venue Date 
 1 Budapest 4 March 1989 
 2 Berlin 26 February 1988 
 Prague 25 February 2014 
 4 Piraeus 1 February 1987 
 5 Seville 10 March 1991 
 Madrid 6 March 2005 
 Arnstadt 8 February 2014 
 8 Cologne 24 February 1985 
 Berlin 1 March 1991 
 10 Indianapolis 7 March 1987 
 Indianapolis 7 March 1987 
 Wuppertal 4 February 1994 
 Weinheim 18 March 1994 
 Wuppertal 3 February 1995 
 Atlanta 4 March 2000 
 Stockholm 15 February 2005 
 Gothenburg 25 February 2007 
 Sopot 9 March 2014 

===Women (indoor)===

 Rank Mark Athlete Venue Date 
 1 Arnstadt 6 February 2006 
 2 Karlsruhe 8 February 1992 
 3 Athens 20 February 1988 
 Arnstadt 6 February 2010 
 Arnstadt 4 February 2012 
 6 Birmingham 3 March 2007 
 Karlsruhe 15 February 2009 
 8 Berlin 3 March 1995 
 Budapest 7 March 2004 
 Bansk Bystrica 9 February 2011 

==Olympic medalists==
===Men===

===Women===

==World Championships medalists==
===Men===

 1983 Helsinki 
 1987 Rome none awarded 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1993 Stuttgart 
 1995 Gothenburg 
 1997 Athens 
 1999 Seville 
 2001 Edmonton none awarded 
 2003 Saint-Denis 
 2005 Helsinki none awarded 
 2007 Osaka 
 2009 Berlin 
 2011 Daegu 
 2013 Moscow 

===Women===

 1983 Helsinki 
 1987 Rome 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1993 Stuttgart 
 1995 Gothenburg 
 1997 Athens none awarded 
 1999 Seville 
 2001 Edmonton 
 2003 Saint-Denis 
 2005 Helsinki 
 2007 Osaka none awarded 
 2009 Berlin 
 2011 Daegu 
 2013 Moscow 

==Athletes with most medals==
Athletes who have won multiple titles at the two most important competitions, the Olympic Games and the World Championships:

*3 wins: Javier Sotomayor (CUB) - Olympic Champion in 1992, World Champion in 1993 & 1997
*3 wins: Stefka Kostadinova (BUL) - Olympic Champion in 1996, World Champion in 1987 & 1995
*2 wins: Gennadiy Avdeyenko (URS) - Olympic Champion in 1988, World Champion in 1983
*2 wins: Charles Austin (USA) - Olympic Champion in 1996, World Champion in 1991
*2 wins: Iolanda Balas (ROM) - Olympic Champion in 1960 & 1964
*2 wins: Ulrike Meyfarth (FRG) - Olympic Champion in 1972 & 1984
*2 wins: Heike Henkel (GER) - Olympic Champion in 1992, World Champion in 1991
*2 wins: Hestrie Cloete (RSA) - World Champion in 2001 & 2003
*2 wins: Blanka Vlasic (CRO) - World Champion in 2007 & 2009
*2 wins: Anna Chicherova (RUS) - Olympic Champion in 2012, World Champion in 2011

Kostadinova and Sotomayor are the only high jumpers to have been Olympic Champion, World Champion and broken the world record.

===Men===

Athlete Olympic Games World Championships World Indoor Championships Continental Championships Continental Indoor Championships Universiade Regional GamesMediterraneanPan AmericanAsian Total 
 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 
 1 1 0 2 2 0 4 1 0 2 0 1 
 - - 1 0 0 3 0 0 13 4 1 
 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 5 2 1 0 0 0 
 - - 7 3 1 
 1 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 
 - - 7 2 1 
 0 2 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 
 - - 6 3 2 
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 0 
 - - 1 0 1 2 0 0 6 1 1 
 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 
 - - 4 1 0 
 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 
 - - 4 1 0 
 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 
 - - 0 0 0 2 0 0 4 0 2 
 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 
 - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 
 0 0 1 1 3 0 1 4 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 
 - - 3 8 2 
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 4 
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 
 - - 3 0 0 
 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 
 - - 2 2 1 
 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 
 - - 1 1 0 0 0 1 2 2 3 

===Women===

Athlete Olympic Games World Championships World Indoor Championships Continental Championships Continental Indoor Championships Universiade Regional GamesMediterraneanPan AmericanCommonwealth Total 
 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 20px 
 1 1 0 2 0 0 5 0 0 1 0 0 4 1 0 0 0 0 
 - - 13 2 0 
 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 4 0 0 2 1 2 2 0 0 10 2 4 
 0 1 0 2 0 0 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 2 1 
 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 2 0 
 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 2 1 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 
 - - 6 1 3 
 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 
 - - 6 1 0 
 0 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 
 - - 5 1 4 
 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 
 - - 5 1 0 
 1 0 1 1 2 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 
 - - 4 4 2 
 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 
 - - 4 2 2 
 Alina Astafei(Romania & Germany) 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 1 1 0 0 
 - - 4 3 2 
 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
 - - 4 0 0 
 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 
 - - 3 2 0 
 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
 - - 3 1 1 
 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 3 1 

==Season's bests==
===Men's outdoor===

 Year Height Athlete Venue 
 1971 Berkeley 
 1972 Moscow 
 1973 Munich 
 1974 Oslo 
 1975 New York 
 1976 Philadelphia 
 1977 Richmond 
 1978 Tbilisi 
 1979 Ottawa 
 1980 Moscow 
 1981 Leningrad 
 1982 Delhi 
 1983 Shanghai 
 1984 Eberstadt 
 1985 Kobe 
 1986 Rieti 
 1987 Stockholm 
 1988 Salamanca 
 1989 San Juan 
 1990 Bratislava 
 1991 Saint-DenisZrich 
 1992 Seoul 
 1993 Salamanca 
 1994 Seville 
 1995 Mar del Plata 
 1996 Atlanta 
 1997 Athens 
 1998 Maracaibo 
 1999 Seville 
 2000 London 
 2001 Eberstadt 
 2002 Durban 
 2003 Bydgoszcz 
 2004 Eberstadt 
 2005 OudtshoornRome 
 2006 Monaco 
 2007 SalamancaStockholmOsakaOsaka 
 2008 London 
 2009 AustinCheboksaryCheboksary 
 2010 Opole 
 2011 Eugene 
 2012 CheboksaryLausanne 
 2013 Lausanne 

===Women's outdoor===

 Year Height Athlete Venue 
 1970 Kiev 
 1971 Vienna 
 1972 Zagreb 
 1973 Warsaw 
 1974 Rome 
 1975 Nice 
 1976 Dresden 
 1977 Berlin 
 1978 Brescia 
 1979 Turin 
 1980 Turin 
 1981 Brussels 
 1982 Athens 
 1983 Pisa 
 1984 Berlin 
 1985 Moscow 
 1986 Sofia 
 1987 Rome 
 1988 Sofia 
 1989 Barcelona 
 1990 Seattle 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1992 San Marino 
 1993 Fukuoka 
 1994 HavanaMoscowHelsinki 
 1995 Tokyo 
 1996 Atlanta 
 1997 OsakaFukuoka 
 1998 Kalamata 
 1999 Monaco 
 2000 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
 2001 Kalamta 
 2002 Pozna 
 2003 EberstadtSaint-Denis 
 2004 Athens 
 2005 Sheffield 
 2006 London 
 2007 Stockholm 
 2008 IstanbulMadrid 
 2009 Zagreb 
 2010 Des MoinesSplit 
 2011 Cheboksary 
 2012 London 
 2013 Des Moines 

==Height differentials==
All time lists of athletes with the highest recorded jumps above their own height. High Jump Differentials 50 cm club - Alltime list in jump above own height 

===Men===

Rank Differential Athlete Height Mark 
 1 Stefan Holm 
 Franklin Jacobs 
 3 Linus Thrnblad 
 Anton Riepl 
 Rick Noji 
 6 Hollis Conway 
 7 Takahiro Kimino 
 Charles Austin 
 Sorin Matei 
 10 Robert Wolski 
 Hari Shankar Roy 
 Marcello Benvenuti 
 Milton Ottey 

===Women===

Rank Differential Athlete Height Mark 
 1 Antonietta Di Martino 
 2 Kajsa Bergqvist 
 Niki Bakoyianni 
 4 Yolanda Henry 
 Emilia Dragieva 
 6 Marie Collonvill 
 7 Jessica Ennis 
 Viktoriya Seryogina 
 Antonella Bevilacqua 
 Lyudmila Andonova 
 Cindy Holmes 

==Female two metres club==
, 65 different female athletes had ever been able to jump . The following table shows the only ten countries from which more than one athlete that has cleared that mark.

 # Nations Athletes 
 15 Anna Chicherova 2.07, Elena Slesarenko 2.06, Tamara Bykova 2.05, Irina Gordeeva 2.04, Marina Kuptsova 2.03,Svetlana Shkolina 2.03, Tatyana Babashkina 2.03, Yelena Yelesina 2.02, Yelena Gulyayeva 2.01, Svetlana Lapina 2.00,Ekaterina Savchenko 2.00, Larisa Kositsyna 2.00, Viktoriya Klyugina 2.00, Viktoriya Seryogina 2.00, Yuliya Lyakhova 2.00 
 8 Chaunt Lowe 2.05, Brigetta Barrett 2.04, Louise Ritter 2.03, Amy Acuff 2.01, Tisha Waller 2.01,Coleen Sommer 2.00, Jan Wohlschlag 2.00, Tisha Waller 2.00, Yolanda Henry 2.00 
 Heike Henkel 2.07, Ariane Friedrich 2.06, Alina Astafei 2.04, Ulrike Meyfarth 2.03, Gabriele Gnz 2.01, Heike Balck 2.01,Daniela Rath 2.00, Meike Krger 2.00 
 5 Stefka Kostadinova 2.09, Lyudmila Andonova 2.07, Venelina Veneva-Mateeva 2.04, Emilia Dragieva 2.00, Svetlana Isaeva-Leseva 2.00 
 Inha Babakova 2.05, Vita Styopina 2.02, Iryna Mykhalchenko 2.01, Vita Palamar 2.01, Lyudmila Avdeyenko 2.00 
 3 Antonietta Di Martino 2.04, Sara Simeoni 2.01, Alessia Trost 2.00 m 
 Hestrie Cloete 2.06, Desir Du Plessis 2.01, Charmaine Gale-Weavers 2.00 
 2 Kajsa Bergqvist 2.08, Emma Green Tregaro 2.01 
 Silvia Costa 2.04, Ioamnet Quintero 2.01 
 Susanne Beyer 2.02, Rosemarie Ackermann 2.00 

==National records==
Updated May 2014.

===Men===

 Nation Height Athlete Venue Date Ref 
 Javier Sotomayor Salamanca 1993-07-27 
 Patrik Sjberg Stockholm 30 June 1987 
 i Ivan Ukhov Prague 25 February 2014 
 i Carlo Thrnhardt Berlin 26 February 1988 
 Igor Paklin Kobe 1985-09-04 
 Bohdan Bondarenko Lausanne 4 July 2013 
 Mutaz Essa Barshim 5 June 2014 Rome 
 Sorin Matei Bratislava 20 June 1990 
 Charles Austin Zrich 7 August 1991 
 Derek Drouin Des Moines 25 April 2014 
 Zhu Jianhua Beijing 1983-06-11 
 Dragutin Topic Belgrad 1993-08-01 
 Troy Kemp Nice 1995-07-12 
 Artur Partyka Eberstadt 1996-08-18 
 Jacques Freitag Oudtshoorn 2005-03-05 
 Valeriy Sereda Rieti 1984-09-02 
 m Steve Smith Seoul 1992-09-20 
 Stuttgart 1993-08-22 
 Robbie Grabarz Lausanne 2012-08-23 
 Eddy Annys Ghent 1985-05-26 
 Jan Zvara Prague 1987-08-23 
 Jaroslav Baba Rome 2005-07-08 
 Clarence Saunders Auckland 1990-02-01 
 Georgi Dakov Brussels 1990-08-10 
 Lambros Papakostas Athens 1992-07-21 
 Tim Forsyth Melbourne 1997-03-02 
 Steinar Hoen Oslo 1997-07-01 
 Konstantin Matusevich Perth 2000-02-05 
 Jean-Charles Gicquel Paris 1994-03-13 
 Kyriakos Ioannou Osaka 2007-08-29 
 Rolandas Verkys Warsaw 1991-06-16 
 Arturo Ortz Barcelona 1991-06-22 
 Andrey Sankovich Gomel 1993-05-15 
 Lee Jin-Taek Seoul 1997-06-20 
 Abderrahmane Hammad Algiers 2000-07-14 
 Germaine Mason Santo Domingo 2003-08-09 
 Kabelo Kgosiemang Addis Ababa 2008-05-04 
 Marcello Benvenuti Verona 1989-09-12 
 Gilmar Mayo Pereira 1994-10-17 
 Naoyuki Daigo Kobe 2006-07-02 
 Gennadiy Belkov Tashkent 1982-05-29 
 Jess de Lima Lausanne 2008-09-02 
 Roland Dalhuser Eberstadt 1981-06-07 
 Oleg Palaschevskiy Bryansk 1990-08-12 
 Elvir Krehmic Zagreb 1998-07-07 
 Mika Polku Hmeenkyr 2000-07-22 
 Toni Huikuri Bratislava 2002-06-11 
 Wilbert Pennings Eberstadt 7 August 1999 
 Hugo Munoz Lima 1995-10-29 
 Marko Turban Rakvere 1996-06-05 
 Normunds Sieti Nurmijrvi 1992-07-20 
 Adrian O'Dwyer Algiers 2004-06-24 
 Einar Karl Hjartarson Reykjavk 2001-02-20 
 Lee Hup Wei Beijing 2008-05-25 
 Manjula Kumara Wijesekara Colombo 2004-07-23 
 Incheon 2005-09-04 
 Eure Yez So Paulo 4 May 2014 
 Mohamed Younes Idris Abidjan 26 April 2014 
 Luis Castro Garbsen 18 May 2014 
 Fernand Djoumessi Dijon 18 May 2014 
 Nawaf Ahmad Al-Yami Salzburg 15 June 2013 
 Eugenio Rossi Palmanova 1 May 2014 
 Abdoulaye Diarra Bamako 19 May 2013 
 Sayed Abbas Al-Alaoui Doha 10 April 2013 
 Daniel Kashef Nashville 20 April 2013 
 Miguel van Assen Nassau 31 March 2013 
 

===Women===

 Nation Height Athlete Venue Date Ref 
 Stefka Kostadinova Rome 1987-08-30 
 Kajsa Bergqvist Arnstadt 2006-02-04 
 Blanka Vlai Zagreb 2009-08-31 
 Heike Henkel Karlsruhe 1992-02-08 
 Anna Chicherova Cheboksary 2011-07-22 
 Hestrie Cloete Paris 2003-08-31 
 Inga Babakova Tokyo 1995-09-15 
 Tia Hellebaut Birmingham 2007-03-03 
 Chaunte Lowe Des Moines 2010-06-26 
 Silvia Costa Barcelona 1989-09-09 
 Antonietta Di Martino Bansk Bystrica 2011-02-09 
 Niki Bakogianni Atlanta 1996-08-03 
 Monica Iagar Bucharest 1999-01-23 
 Ruth Beitia San Sebastin 2007-08-04 
 Olga Turchak Moscow 1986-07-07 
 Hanne Haugland Zrich 1997-08-13 
 Biljana Petrovi Saint-Denis 1990-06-22 
 Tatyana Shevchik Gomel 1993-05-14 
 Zuzana Hlavoov Prague 2000-06-05 
 Britta Bila Helsinki 1994-08-14 
 Dra Gyrffy Nyiregyhaza 2001-07-26 
 i Kamila Liwinko Arnstadt 8 February 2014 
 Sopot 22 February 2014 
 8 March 2014 
 Lyudmila Butuzova Sochi 1984-06-10 
 Debbie Brill Rieti 1984-09-02 
 Alison Inverarity Ingolstadt 1989-02-12 
 Levern Spencer Athens, GA 2010-05-08 
 Jin Ling Hamamatsu 1989-05-07 
 Valentna Gotovska Vilnius 1992-30-03 
 Sigrid Kirchmann Stuttgart 1993-08-21 
 Olga Bolova Rieti 1993-09-05 
 Solange Witteveen Manaus 2001-05-19 
 Juana Rosario Arrendel San Salvador 2002-12-02 
 Tatyana Efimenko Rome 2003-07-11 
 Romary Rifka Xalapa 2004-04-04 
 Anna Iljutenko Viljandi 2011-08-09 
 Miki Imai Yokohama 2001-09-15 
 Nel ilinskien Atlanta 1996-08-03 
 Airin Palyt Shenzhen 2011-08-21 
 Diana Elliott (Davies) Oslo 1982-06-26 
 Susan Moncrieff Bremen 2001-06-24 
 Jessica Ennis Desenzano 5 May 2007 
 Deirdre Ryan Daegu 1 September 2011 
 Maryse Ewanje-Epee Gteborg 4 March 1984 
 i Danielle Frenkel Paris 5 March 2011 
 Bui Thi Nhung Bangkok 4 May 2005 
 Amra Temim Varadin 1987-08-15 
 Amra Temim Thessaloniki 1988-09-16 
 Website of Turkish Athleticism Federation Candeer Ouz Istanbul 2004-05-16 
 Orlane dos Santos Bogot 1989-08-11 
 Hanna Mikkonen Tampere 12 June 2005 
 Leontia Kallenou Lexington 17 May 2014 
 i Saniel Atkinson Grier Nashville 24 January 2014 
 Blacksburg 8 February 2014 
 Ghizlane Siba Warri 30 March 2013 
 Reims 5 May 2013 
 Villeneuve d'Ascq 19 May 2013 
 Yap Sean Yee Hanoi 27 June 2013 
 Shabana Khanum Jalal Din Bangkok 5 May 2005 
 Sharyaane Gijsbertha Nassau 1 April 2013 
 Ariat Dibo Ogba Warri 30 March 2013 
 Addis Ababa 26 May 2013 
 Deborah Galon Willemstad 10 March 2013 
 Nassau 1 April 2013 
 Fatoumata Balley Bruay-la-Buissire 19 May 2013 
 Buthayna Ayed Al-Yacoobi Debrecen 11 July 2013 

==See also==
* List of high jump national champions (women)
* List of high jump national champions (men)
* Standing high jump

==References==
* The Complete Book of Track and Field, by Tom McNab
* The World Almanac and Book of Facts, 2000

==External links==

*IAAF high jump homepage
*High Jump Resource Center
*Vertical Jump Resource

*



[[Heraclitus]]

Heraclitus of Ephesus (; , ; c. 535  c. 475 BCE) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher, a native of the Greek city Ephesus, Ionia, on the coast of Asia Minor. He was of distinguished parentage. Little is known about his early life and education, but he regarded himself as self-taught and a pioneer of wisdom. From the lonely life he led, and still more from the riddling nature of his philosophy and his contempt for humankind in general, he was called "The Obscure" and the "Weeping Philosopher".

Heraclitus is famous for his insistence on ever-present change in the universe, as stated in the famous saying, "No man ever steps in the same river twice" This is how Plato puts Heraclitus' doctrine. See Cratylus, 402a. (see panta rhei, below). He believed in the unity of opposites, stating that "the path up and down are one and the same", all existing entities being characterized by pairs of contrary properties. His cryptic utterance that "all entities come to be in accordance with this Logos" (literally, "word", "reason", or "account") has been the subject of numerous interpretations.

==Life==
The main source for the life of Heraclitus is Diogenes Lartius, although some have questioned the validity of his account as "a tissue of Hellenistic anecdotes, most of them obviously fabricated on the basis of statements in the preserved fragments." Diogenes said that Heraclitus flourished in the 69th Olympiad, Diogenes Lartius, ix. 1 504-501 BCE. All the rest of the evidence  the people Heraclitus is said to have known, or the people who were familiar with his work  confirms the floruit. His dates of birth and death are based on a life span of 60 years, the age at which Diogenes says he died, Diogenes Lartius, ix. 3 with the floruit in the middle.

Ephesus on the coast of Asia Minor, birthplace of Heraclitus
Heraclitus was born to an aristocratic family in Ephesus, Anatolia, in what is now called present-day Efes, Turkey. His father was named either Blosn or Herakn. Diogenes says that he abdicated the kingship (basileia) in favor of his brother Diogenes Lartius, ix. 6 and Strabo confirms that there was a ruling family in Ephesus descended from the Ionian founder, Androclus, which still kept the title and could sit in the chief seat at the games, as well as a few other privileges. Strabo, Chapter 1, section 3. How much power the king had is another question. Ephesus had been part of the Persian Empire since 547 and was ruled by a satrap, a more distant figure, as the Great King allowed the Ionians considerable autonomy. Diogenes says that Heraclitus used to play knucklebones with the youths in the temple of Artemis and when asked to start making laws he refused saying that the constitution (politeia) was ponra, Diogenes Lartius, ix. 2 which can mean either that it was fundamentally wrong or that he considered it toilsome. Two extant letters between Heraclitus and Darius I, quoted by Diogenes, are undoubtedly later forgeries. G. S. Kirk (2010), Heraclitus: The Cosmic Fragments, Cambridge University Press, p. 1. ISBN 0521136679 

With regard to education, Diogenes says that Heraclitus was "wondrous" (thaumasios, which, as Plato explains in the Theaetetus and elsewhere, is the beginning of philosophy) from childhood. Diogenes relates that Sotion said he was a "hearer" of Xenophanes, which contradicts Heraclitus' statement (so says Diogenes) that he had taught himself by questioning himself. Burnet states in any case that "... Xenophanes left Ionia before Herakleitos was born." Chapter 3 beginning. Diogenes relates that as a boy Heraclitus had said he "knew nothing" but later claimed to "know everything." Diogenes Lartius, ix. 5 His statement that he "heard no one" but "questioned himself," can be placed alongside his statement that "the things that can be seen, heard and learned are what I prize the most." DK B55. 

Diogenes relates that Heraclitus had a poor opinion of human affairs. He believed that Hesiod and Pythagoras lacked understanding though learned DK B40. and that Homer and Archilochus deserved to be beaten. DK B42. Laws needed to be defended as though they were city walls. DK B44. Timon is said to have called him a "mob-reviler." Heraclitus hated the Athenians and his fellow Ephesians, wishing the latter wealth in punishment for their wicked ways. DK B125a. Says Diogenes: "Finally, he became a hater of his kind (misanthrope) and wandered the mountains ... making his diet of grass and herbs."

Heraclitus' life as a philosopher was interrupted by dropsy. The physicians he consulted were unable to prescribe a cure. He treated himself with a liniment of cow manure and baking in the sun, believing that this method would remove the fluid. After a day of treatment he died and was interred in the marketplace. Diogenes Lartius, ix. 4 

==Works==

Heraclitus (figured by Michelangelo) sits apart from the other philosophers in Raphael's School of Athens
Diogenes states that Heraclitus' work was "a continuous treatise On Nature, but was divided into three discourses, one on the universe, another on politics, and a third on theology." Theophrastus says (in Diogenes) "...some parts of his work are half-finished, while other parts make a strange medley." 

Diogenes also tells us that Heraclitus deposited his book as a dedication in the great temple of Artemis, the Artemisium, one of the largest temples of the 6th century BCE and one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Ancient temples were regularly used for storing treasures, and were open to private individuals under exceptional circumstances; furthermore, many subsequent philosophers in this period refer to the work. Says Kahn: "Down to the time of Plutarch and Clement, if not later, the little book of Heraclitus was available in its original form to any reader who chose to seek it out." Diogenes says: "the book acquired such fame that it produced partisans of his philosophy who were called Heracliteans."

As with other pre-Socratics, his writings survive only in fragments quoted by other authors.

==Ancient characterizations==

==="The Obscure"===
At some time in antiquity he acquired this epithet denoting that his major sayings were difficult to understand. According to Diogenes Lartius, Timon of Phlius called him "the riddler" (ainikts), and explained that Heraclitus wrote his book "rather unclearly" (asaphesteron) so that only the "capable" should attempt it. By the time of Cicero he had become "the dark" (Ancient Greek &mdash; ) De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum, Chapter 2, Section 15. because he had spoken nimis obscur, "too obscurely", concerning nature and had done so deliberately in order to be misunderstood. The customary English translation of follows the Latin, "the Obscure."

===The "weeping philosopher"===
Bust of Heraclitus, 'The Weeping Philosopher' by Johann Christoph Ludwig Lcke ca. 1757.
Diogenes Lartius ascribes the theory that Heraclitus did not complete some of his works because of melancholia to Theophrastus. Later he was referred to as the "weeping philosopher," as opposed to Democritus, who is known as the "laughing philosopher." If Stobaeus III.20.53 writes correctly, Sotion in the early 1st century CE was already combining the two in the imaginative duo of weeping and laughing philosophers: "Among the wise, instead of anger, Heraclitus was overtaken by tears, Democritus by laughter." The view is expressed by the satirist Juvenal: Satire X. Translation from 

The motif was also adopted by Lucian of Samosata in his "Sale of Creeds," in which the duo is sold together as a complementary product in the satirical auction of philosophers. Subsequently they were considered an indispensable feature of philosophic landscapes. Montaigne proposed two archetypical views of human affairs based on them, selecting Democritus' for himself. The weeping philosopher may have been mentioned in William Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice. Act I Scene II Line 43. Donato Bramante painted a fresco, "Democritus and Heraclitus," in Casa Panigarola in Milan. 

==Philosophy==

===Logos===

"The idea that all things come to pass in accordance with this Logos" DK B1. and "the Logos is common," DK B2. is expressed in two famous but obscure fragments:
This Logos holds always but humans always prove unable to understand it, both before hearing it and when they have first heard it. For though all things come to be in accordance with this Logos, humans are like the inexperienced when they experience such words and deeds as I set out, distinguishing each in accordance with its nature and saying how it is. But other people fail to notice what they do when awake, just as they forget what they do while asleep. (DK 22B1)
For this reason it is necessary to follow what is common. But although the Logos is common, most people live as if they had their own private understanding. (DK 22B2)
The meaning of Logos also is subject to interpretation: "word", "account", "principle", "plan", "formula", "measure", "proportion", "reckoning." For the etymology see Though Heraclitus "quite deliberately plays on the various meanings of logos", K.F. Johansen, "Logos" in Donald Zeyl (ed.), Encyclopedia of Classical Philosophy, Greenwood Press 1997. there is no compelling reason to suppose that he used it in a special technical sense, significantly different from the way it was used in ordinary Greek of his time. pp. 419ff. , W. K. C. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, 1962. 

The later Stoics understood it as "the account which governs everything," DK B72, from Marcus Aurelius, Meditations iv. 46 and Hippolytus, in the 3rd century CE, identified it as meaning the Christian Word of God. DK B2, DK B50, from Hippolytus, Refutation of all Heresies, ix. 9 

===Panta rhei, "everything flows" ===
 (panta rhei) "everything flows" either was not spoken by Heraclitus or did not survive as a quotation of his. This famous aphorism used to characterize Heraclitus' thought comes from Simplicius, Barnes (1982), page 65, and also Commentary on Aristotle's Physics, 1313.11. a neoplatonist, and from Plato's Cratylus. The word rhei (cf. rheology) is the Greek word for "to stream", and to the etymology of Rhea according to Plato's Cratylus. For the etymology see In pronunciation the -ei- is a diphthong sounding like the -ei- in reindeer. The initial r is aspirated or made breathy, which indicates the dropping of the s in *sreu-. 

Heraclitus by Hendrick ter Brugghen
The philosophy of Heraclitus is summed up in his cryptic utterance: DK22B12, quoted in Arius Didymus apud Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica, 15.20.2 
Potamoisi toisin autoisin embainousin, hetera kai hetera hudata epirrei"Ever-newer waters flow on those who step into the same rivers." 
The quote from Heraclitus appears in Plato's Cratylus twice; in 401d as: Cratylus Paragraph Crat. 401 section d line 5. 
Ta onta ienai te panta kai menein ouden"All entities move and nothing remains still"and in 402a Cratylus Paragraph 402 section a line 8. 

Panta chrei kai ouden menei kai dis es ton auton potamon ouk an embaies
"Everything changes and nothing remains still ... and ... you cannot step twice into the same stream" This sentence has been translated by Seneca in Epistulae, VI, 58, 23. 
Instead of "flow" Plato uses chrei, to change chros.

The assertions of flow are coupled in many fragments with the enigmatic river image: DK B49a, Harris 110. Others like it are DK B12, Harris 20; DK B91, Harris 21. 

"We both step and do not step in the same rivers. We are and are not."

Compare with the Latin adages Omnia mutantur and Tempora mutantur (8 CE) and the Japanese tale Hjki, (1200 CE) which contains the same image of the changing river, and the central Buddhist doctrine of impermanence.

===Hodos ano kato, "the way up and the way down"===
In DK B60 the structure an kat is more accurately translated as a hyphenated word: "the upward-downward path." They go on simultaneously and instantaneously and result in "hidden harmony". DK B54. A way is a series of transformations: the , "turnings of fire," DK B31 first into sea, then half of sea to earth and half to rarefied air.

The transformation is a replacement of one element by another: "The death of fire is the birth of air, and the death of air is the birth of water." DK B76. 
This world, which is the same for all, no one of gods or men has made. But it always was and will be: an ever-living fire, with measures of it kindling, and measures going out. DK B30. This latter phraseology is further elucidated:All things are an interchange for fire, and fire for all things, just like goods for gold and gold for goods. DK B90 

Heraclitus considered fire as the most fundamental element. He believed fire gave rise to the other elements and thus to all things. He regarded the soul as being a mixture of fire and water, with fire being the noble part of the soul, and water the ignoble part. A soul should therefore aim toward becoming more full of fire and less full of water: a "dry" soul was best. According to Heraclitus, worldly pleasures made the soul "moist", and he considered mastering one's worldly desires to be a noble pursuit which purified the soul's fire. Russell, Bertrand, History of Western Philosophy Norman Melchert interpreted Heraclitus as using "fire" metaphorically, in lieu of Logos, as the origin of all things. 

===Dike eris, "strife is justice"===
If objects are new from moment to moment so that one can never touch the same object twice, then each object must dissolve and be generated continually momentarily and an object is a harmony between a building up and a tearing down. Heraclitus calls the oppositional processes  eris, "strife", and hypothesizes that the apparently stable state,  dik, or "justice," is a harmony of it: DK B80: "         ,    '   ". We must know that war ( polemos) is common to all and strife is justice, and that all things come into being through strife necessarily.
As Diogenes explains: Diogenes Lartius, ix. 8 All things come into being by conflict of opposites, and the sum of things (  ta hola, "the whole") flows like a stream.
In the bow metaphor Heraclitus compares the resultant to a strung bow held in shape by an equilibrium of the string tension and spring action of the bow: DK B51. There is a harmony in the bending back ( palintropos) as in the case of the bow and the lyre.

===Hepesthai to koino, "follow the common"===
People must "follow the common" ( hepesthai t koin) The initial part of DK B2, often omitted because broken by a note explaining that  ksunos (Ionic) is  koinos (Attic). and not live having "their own judgement (phronsis)". He distinguishes between human laws and divine law (  tou theiou "of God"). DK B114. By "God" Heraclitus does not mean the Judeo-Christian version of a single God as primum mobile of all things, God as Creator, but the divine as opposed the human, the immortal (which we tend to confuse with the "eternal") as opposed to the mortal, the cyclical as opposed to the transient. It is more accurate to speak of "the god" and not of "God".

He removes the human sense of justice from his concept of God; i.e., humanity is not the image of God: "To God all things are fair and good and just, but people hold some things wrong and some right." DK B102. God's custom has wisdom but human custom does not, DK B78. and yet both humans and God are childish (inexperienced): "human opinions are children's toys" DK B70. and "Eternity is a child moving counters in a game; the kingly power is a child's." DK B52. 

Wisdom is "to know the thought by which all things are steered through all things", DK B41. which must not imply that people are or can be wise. Only Zeus is wise. DK B32. To some degree then Heraclitus seems to be in the mystic's position of urging people to follow God's plan without much of an idea what that may be. In fact there is a note of despair: "The fairest universe ( kallistos kosmos) is but a heap of rubbish ( sarma, sweepings) piled up ( kechumenon, i.e. "poured out") at random ( eik, "aimlessly")." DK B124. 

===Ethos antropoi daimon, "character is fate"===
This influential quote by Heraclitus "  " (DK 22B119) has led to numerous interpretations. Whether in this context, "daimon" can indeed be translated to mean "fate" is disputed, however, it lends much sense to Heraclitus' observations and conclusions about human nature in general. While the translation with "fate" is generally accepted as in Kahn's "a man's character is his divinity", in some cases, it may also stand for the soul of the departed. Thomas L. Cooksey (2010). Plato's 'Symposium': A Reader's Guide. p. 69. Continuum International Publishing Group (London & New York). ISBN 978-0-8264-4067-9 

==Influence==

===Plato===
In Heraclitus a perceived object is a harmony between two fundamental units of change, a waxing and a waning. He typically uses the ordinary word "to become" (gignesthai or ginesthai, root sense of being born), which led to his being characterized as the philosopher of becoming rather than of being. He recognizes the changing of objects with the flow of time.

Plato argues against Heraclitus as follows: Cratylus Paragraph 440 sections c-d. How can that be a real thing which is never in the same state? ... for at the moment that the observer approaches, then they become other ... so that you cannot get any further in knowing their nature or state .... but if that which knows and that which is known exist ever ... then I do not think they can resemble a process or flux ....

In Plato one experienced unit is a state, or object existing, which can be observed. The time parameter is set at "ever"; that is, the state is to be presumed present between observations. Change is to be deduced by comparing observations, but no matter how many of those you are able to make, you cannot get through the mysterious gap between them to account for the change that must be occurring there.

===Stoics===
Stoicism was a philosophical school which flourished between the 3rd century BCE and about the 3rd century CE. It began among the Greeks and became the major philosophy of the Roman Empire before declining with the rise of Christianity in the 3rd century.

Throughout their long tenure the Stoics believed that the major tenets of their philosophy derived from the thought of Heraclitus. According to Long, "the importance of Heraclitus to later Stoics is evident most plainly in Marcus Aurelius." Long (2001), p. 56. Explicit connections of the earliest Stoics to Heraclitus showing how they arrived at their interpretation are missing but they can be inferred from the Stoic fragments. Long concludes to "modifications of Heraclitus." Long (2001), p. 51. 

The Stoics were interested in Heraclitus' treatment of fire. In addition to seeing it as the most fundamental of the four elements and the one that is quantified and determines the quantity (logos) of the other three, he presents fire as the cosmos, which was not made by any of the gods or men, but "was and is and ever shall be ever-living fire." DK B60. Fire is both a substance and a motivator of change, it is active in altering other things quantitatively and performing an activity Heraclitus describes as "the judging and convicting of all things." DK B66. It is "the thunderbolt that steers the course of all things." DK B64. There is no reason to interpret the judgement, which is actually "to separate" ( krinein), as outside of the context of "strife is justice" (see subsection above).

The earliest surviving Stoic work, the Hymn to Zeus of Cleanthes, Different translations of this critical piece of literature, transitional from pagan polytheism to the modern religions and philosophies, can be found at though not explicitly referencing Heraclitus, adopts what appears to be the Heraclitean logos modified. Zeus rules the universe with law (nomos) wielding on its behalf the "forked servant", the "fire" of the "ever-living lightning." So far nothing has been said that differs from the Zeus of Homer. But then, says Cleanthes, Zeus uses the fire to "straighten out the common logos" that travels about (phoitan, "to frequent") mixing with the greater and lesser lights (heavenly bodies). This is Heraclitus' logos, but now it is confused with the "common nomos", which Zeus uses to "make the wrong (perissa, left or odd) right (artia, right or even)" and "order (kosmein) the disordered (akosma)." The ancient Greek can be found in Downloadable Google Books at . 

The Stoic modification of Heraclitus' idea of the Logos was also influential on Jewish philosophers such as Philo of Alexandria, who connected it to "Wisdom personified" as God's creative principle. Philo uses the term Logos throughout his treatises on Hebrew Scripture in a manner clearly influenced by the Stoics.

===Church fathers===
Democriet (laughing) & Herakliet (crying) by Cornelis van Haarlem
The church fathers were the leaders of the early Christian Church during its first five centuries of existence, roughly contemporaneous to Stoicism under the Roman Empire. The works of dozens of writers in hundreds of pages have survived.

All of them had something to say about the Christian form of the Logos. The Catholic Church found it necessary to distinguish between the Christian logos and that of Heraclitus as part of its ideological distancing from paganism. The necessity to convert by defeating paganism was of paramount importance. Hippolytus of Rome therefore identifies Heraclitus along with the other Pre-Socratics (and Academics) as sources of heresy. Church use of the methods and conclusions of ancient philosophy as such was as yet far in the future, even though many were converted philosophers.

In Refutation of All Heresies Book IX leading sentence. Hippolytus says: "What the blasphemous folly is of Noetus, and that he devoted himself to the tenets of Heraclitus the Obscure, not to those of Christ." Hippolytus then goes on to present the inscrutable DK B67: "God (theos) is day and night, winter and summer, ... but he takes various shapes, just as fire, when it is mingled with spices, is named according to the savor of each." The fragment seems to support pantheism if taken literally. German physicist and philosopher Max Bernard Weinstein classed these views with pandeism. Max Bernhard Weinsten, Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ("World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Nature") (1910), p. 233: "Dieser Pandeismus, der von Chrysippos (aus Soloi 280-208 v. Chr.) herrhren soll, ist schon eine Verbindung mit dem Emanismus; Gott ist die Welt, insofern als diese aus seiner Substanz durch Verdichtung und Abkhlung entstanden ist und entsteht, und er sich strahlengleich mit seiner Substanz durch sie noch verbreitet. Da Gott als feurig gedacht wird (jedoch auch als Atem oder ther) ist dem Menschen entnommen, dessen Wrme sein Lebensprinzip bedeutet; eine Idee, die sich schon bei den ersten griechischen Philosophen und namentlich bei Heraklit findet." 

Hippolytus condemns the obscurity of it. He cannot accuse Heraclitus of being a heretic so he says instead: "Did not (Heraclitus) the Obscure anticipate Noetus in framing a system ...?" The apparent pantheist deity of Heraclitus (if that is what DK B67 means) must be equal to the union of opposites and therefore must be corporeal and incorporeal, divine and not-divine, dead and alive, etc., and the Trinity can only be reached by some sort of illusory shape-shifting. 

The Apologist Justin Martyr, however, took a much more positive view of him. In his First Apology, he said both Socrates and Heraclitus were Christians before Christ: "those who lived reasonably are Christians, even though they have been thought atheists; as, among the Greeks, Socrates and Heraclitus, and men like them." 

==See also==
The following articles on other topics contain non-trivial information that relates to Heraclitus in some way.

* Becoming (philosophy)
* Cratylus
* Dialectical monism
* Dialectics
* Dualism
* Ephesian School
* Quotes of Heraclitus (Apospsmata)
*Heraclitus' Influence on Hegel
* Introduction to Metaphysics
* Ionian School (philosophy)
* Logos

* Marcel Conche
* Metaphysics (Aristotle)
* Nondualism
* Pandeism
* Pantheism
* Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks
* Philosophy of space and time
* Process philosophy

==Notes==

==Further reading==

===Editions and translations===
* Botten, Mick. (2012). Herakleitos  Logos Made Manifest, Upfront Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78035-064-6 All fragments, in Greek and English, with commentary and appendices.
* Complete fragments of Heraclitus in English.
* . Parallel Greek & English.
*
*
* First edition: Heraclitus, editio maior. Mrida, Venezuela, 1967.
* 
* 
*
* 

===Selected bibliography===
* 
* 
* First published in 1892, this book has had dozens of editions and has been used as a textbook for decades. The first edition is downloadable from Google Books.
*
*
*
* 
*
* . Transcript of seminar in which two German philosophers analyze and discuss Heraclitus' texts.
*
* 
* 
* Creative re-creation of Heraclitus' lost book, from the fragments.
* 
*
* Pyle, C. M. (1997). 'Democritus and Heracleitus: An Excursus on the Cover of this Book,' Milan and Lombardy in the Renaissance. Essays in Cultural History. Rome, La Fenice. (Istituto di Filologia Moderna, Universit di Parma: Testi e Studi, Nuova Serie: Studi 1.) (Fortuna of the Laughing and Weeping Philosophers topos)
*
*
* Taylor, C. C. W (ed.), Routledge History of Philosophy: From the Beginning to Plato, Vol. I, pp. 80  117. ISBN 0-203-02721-3 Master e-book ISBN, ISBN 0-203-05752-X (Adobe eReader Format) and ISBN 0-415-06272-1 (Print Edition).
*
*
*

==External links==

* . .
* Heraclitus bilingual anthology from DK in Greek and English, side by side, the translations being provided by the organization, Elpenor.
* 
* 
* Greek and English with DK numbers and commentary.
* Text and selected aphorisms in Greek, English, Italian and French.
* Selected fragments translated by Hooker.
* The fragments also cited in DK in Greek (Unicode) with the English translations of John Burnet (see Bibliography).
* 
* Essay on the flux and fire philosophy of Heraclitus.
* Site with links to pdf's containing the fragments of DK in Greek (Unicode) with the English translations of John Burnet (see Bibliography) and translations into French, either in parallel columns or interlinear, with links on the lexical items to Perseus dictionaries. Includes also Heraclitus article from Encyclopdia Britannica Eleventh Edition.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Heraclitus' fragments rendered into the language of deductive logic on Triple Canopy (online magazine).

*



[[Harrison Schmitt]]

Harrison Hagan "Jack" Schmitt (born July 3, 1935) is an American geologist, retired NASA astronaut, university professor and former U.S. senator from New Mexico.

In December 1972, as one of the crew on board Apollo 17, Schmitt became the first member of NASA's first scientist-astronaut group to fly in space. As Apollo 17 was the last of the Apollo missions, he also became the twelfth and, , last person to set foot on the Moon. (At the end of the mission's last lunar EVA, Eugene Cernan, the mission commander and other Lunar Module occupant, re-entered the Lunar Module after Schmitt, making Cernan the last person (to date) to have walked on the Moon.) Schmitt also remains the first and only professional scientist to have flown beyond low Earth orbit and to have visited the Moon. He was influential within the community of geologists supporting the Apollo program and, before starting his own preparations for an Apollo mission, had been one of the scientists training those Apollo astronauts chosen to visit the lunar surface.

Schmitt resigned from NASA in August 1975 in order to run for election to the United States Senate as a member from New Mexico. As the Republican candidate in the 1976 election, he defeated the two-term Democrat incumbent Joseph Montoya, but, running for re-election in 1982, was himself defeated, by Democrat Jeff Bingaman.

==Biography==

=== Early life and education ===
Born in Santa Rita, New Mexico, Schmitt grew up in nearby Silver City, and he is a graduate of the Western High School (class of 1953). He received a B.S. degree in geology from the California Institute of Technology in 1957 and then spent a year studying geology at the University of Oslo in Norway. He received a Ph.D. in geology from Harvard University in 1964, based on his geological field studies in Norway. 

=== NASA career ===

Before joining NASA as a member of the first group of scientist-astronauts in June 1965, he worked at the U.S. Geological Survey's Astrogeology Center at Flagstaff, Arizona, developing geological field techniques that would be used by the Apollo crews. Following his selection, Schmitt spent his first year at Air Force UPT learning to become a jet pilot. Upon his return to the astronaut corps in Houston, he played a key role in training Apollo crews to be geologic observers when they were in lunar orbit and competent geologic field workers when they were on the lunar surface. After each of the landing missions, he participated in the examination and evaluation of the returned lunar samples and helped the crews with the scientific aspects of their mission reports.

Schmitt spent considerable time becoming proficient in the CSM and LM systems. In March 1970 he became the first of the scientist-astronauts to be assigned to space flight, joining Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (Commander) and Vance Brand (Command Module Pilot) on the Apollo 15 backup crew. The flight rotation put these three in line to fly as prime crew on the third following mission, Apollo 18. When Apollo flights 18 and 19 were cancelled in September 1970, the community of lunar geologists supporting Apollo felt so strongly about the need to land a professional geologist on the Moon, that they pressured NASA to reassign Schmitt to a remaining flight. As a result, Schmitt was assigned in August 1971 to fly on the last mission, Apollo 17, replacing Joe Engle as Lunar Module Pilot. Schmitt landed on the Moon with commander Gene Cernan in December 1972. 

Schmitt claims to have taken the photograph of the Earth known as The Blue Marble, one of the most widely distributed photographic images in existence. (NASA officially credits the image to the entire Apollo 17 crew.)

While on the Moon's surface, Schmitt  the only geologist in the astronaut corps  collected the rock sample designated Troctolite 76535, which has been called "without doubt the most interesting sample returned from the Moon". Lunar Sample Compendium at jsc.nasa.gov Among other distinctions, it is the central piece of evidence suggesting that the Moon once possessed an active magnetic field. "Rock Suggests Early Moon's Fiery Core Churned a Magnetic Field", The New York Times, January 19, 2009 

As he returned to the Lunar Module before Cernan, Schmitt is the next-to-last person to have walked on the Moon's surface.

After the completion of Apollo 17, Schmitt played an active role in documenting the Apollo geologic results and also took on the task of organizing NASA's Energy Program Office.

File:Astronaut Harrison 'Jack' Schmitt, American Flag, and Earth (Apollo 17 EVA-1).jpg|Schmitt poses by the American flag, with Earth in the background, during Apollo 17's first EVA.
File:Schmitt Covered with Lunar Dirt - GPN-2000-001124.jpg|Schmitt collects lunar specimens during the Apollo 17 mission.
File:Ap17 schmitt falls.ogg|Schmitt falls while on a Moonwalk.

===Post-NASA career===
Senator Schmitt with then-President Ronald Reagan in Roswell, New Mexico, October 1982
Schmitt in 2009

In August 1975, Schmitt resigned from NASA to seek election as a Republican to the United States Senate representing New Mexico in the 1976 election. Schmitt faced two-term Democratic incumbent, Joseph Montoya, whom he defeated 57% to 42%. He served one term and, notably, was the ranking Republican member of the Science, Technology, and Space Subcommittee. He sought a second term in the 1982, but due to a deep recession and concerns that he wasn't paying attention to local matters, he was defeated in a re-election bid by the state Attorney General Jeff Bingaman by a 54% to 46% margin. Bingaman's campaign slogan asked, "What on Earth has he done for you lately?" "40th Anniversary of Apollo 11: Moonstruck", Time Magazine, July 27, 2009 Following his Senate term, Schmitt has been a consultant in business, geology, space, and public policy.

During his term in the Senate, Schmitt sat at the chamber's candy desk.

Schmitt is an adjunct professor of engineering physics at the University of WisconsinMadison, Schmitt, Harrison J and has long been a proponent of lunar resource utilization. "The moon: an abundant source of clean and safe fusion fuel for the 21st century" http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988lhfp.rept...35K, in NASA, Lewis Research Center, Lunar Helium-3 and Fusion Power pp. 3564 (SEE N89-14842 06-75) Return to the Moon: exploration, enterprise, and energy in the human settlement of space, Springer, 2006 ISBN 0-387-24285-6 In 1997 he proposed the Interlune InterMars Initiative, listing among its goals the advancement of private sector acquisition and use of lunar resources, particularly lunar helium-3 as a fuel for notional nuclear fusion reactors. 

Schmitt was chair of the NASA Advisory Council, whose mandate is to provide technical advice to the NASA Administrator, from November 2005 until his abrupt resignation on October 16, 2008. "Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council Service; Ford Named Chairman", NASA Press Release In November 2008, he quit the Planetary Society over policy advocacy differences, citing the organization's statements on "focusing on Mars as the driving goal of human spaceflight" (Schmitt said that going back to the Moon would speed progress toward a manned Mars mission), on "accelerating research into global climate change through more comprehensive Earth observations" (Schmitt voiced objections to the notion of a present "scientific consensus" on climate change as any policy guide), and on international cooperation (which he felt would retard rather than accelerate progress), among other points of divergence. "Former NASA Advisory Council Chair Jack Schmitt Quits Planetary Society Over New Roadmap", SpaceRef.com, Nov 17, 2008. 

In January, 2011, he was appointed as Secretary of the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department in the cabinet of Governor Susana Martinez, http://www.governor.state.nm.us/Press/2011/January/010611_02.pdf but was forced to give up the appointment the following month after refusing to submit to a required background investigation. "Harrison Schmitt withdraws nomination for New Mexico energy secretary", El Paso Times, Feb 11, 2011 

Schmitt wrote a book entitled "Return to the Moon: Exploration, Enterprise, and Energy in the Human Settlement of Space" in 2006. 

He lives in Silver City, New Mexico, and spends some of his summer at his northern Minnesota lake cabin.

Senator Schmitt is also involved in several civic projects, including the improvement of the Senator Harrison H. Schmitt Big Sky Hang Glider Park in Albuquerque, NM. http://www.bernco.gov/Parks/ 

==Global warming==
Schmitt's view on climate change diverges from the prevailing scientific opinion on climate change as he emphasizes natural over human factors as driving climate. The prevailing scientific opinion links global warming to human activity and Schmitt is therefore considered by Mitchell Anderson from the DeSmogBlog to "deny climate". "Former Astronaut in Bed with Big Oil?", DeSmog Blog, 17 February 2009 (accessed 15 May 2013) In repeated comments, Schmitt has expressed his view that the risks posed by climate change are overrated, and suggest instead that climate change is a tool for people who are trying to increase the size of government. "Profile of Harrison Schmitt", DeSmog Blog (accessed 15 May 2013) He resigned his membership in the Planetary Society because of its stance on the subject, writing in his resignation letter that the "global warming scare is being used as a political tool to increase government control over American lives, incomes and decision-making." He spoke at the March 2009 International Conference on Climate Change sponsored by the Heartland Institute. "Ex-Astronaut: Global Warming Is Bunk", Fox News, Feb 16, 2009 He appeared in December that year on the Fox Business Network, saying "he CO2 scare is a red herring". "Is Global Warming Real? Climate debate heats up", Fox Business Network interview by Stuart Varney, 22 December 2009 (accessed 9 September 2010) 

In a 2009 interview with libertarian talk-radio host Alex Jones, Schmitt asserted a link between Soviet Communism and the American environmental movement: "I think the whole trend really began with the fall of the Soviet Union. Because the great champion of the opponents of liberty, namely communism, had to find some other place to go and they basically went into the environmental movement." Moonstruck: Climate science denier Harrison Schmitt, appointed to head NM environment agency, believes enviros and scientists like Holdren are communists Climate Progress At the Heartland Institute's sixth International Conference on Climate Change Schmitt said that climate change was a stalking horse for National Socialism. 

Schmitt co-authored a May 8, 2013 Wall Street Journal opinion column with William Happer, contending that increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are not significantly correlated with global warming, attributing the "single-minded demonization of this natural and essential atmospheric gas" to advocates of government control of energy production. Noting a positive relationship between crop resistance to drought and increasing carbon dioxide levels, the authors argued, "Contrary to what some would have us believe, increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will benefit the increasing population on the planet by increasing agricultural productivity.". "In Defense of Carbon Dioxide", Wall Street Journal opinion piece, 8 May 2013 (accessed 13 May 2013) The progressive organization Media Matters for America responded to the column with criticism based on information from a July 1, 2010 Skeptical Science blog. "Wall Street Journal's Idiocy: CO2 is What Plants Crave", Media Matters blog, 9 May 2013 (accessed 13 May 2013) 

== In popular culture ==
* Schmitt was portrayed by Tom Amandes in the 1998 miniseries From the Earth to the Moon.
* Schmitt appeared in the 2007 BBC Two documentary Moon for Sale.
* Schmitt was interviewed on Infowars, the Alex Jones radio show, on July 31, 2009, regarding his opposition to the mainstream scientific assessment of global warming. He admitted being a fan of the show, saying he "keeps up on things out here".
* He appeared in an episode of the television show Bill Nye the Science Guy.
* He was interviewed in the 2009 BBC television show James May on the Moon.
* He was interviewed by Maltese television talk show Xarabank, the episode airing December 11, 2009, 2045 CET.
* He was referred to in an episode ("Maid in Arlen") of the cartoon TV show King of the Hill.
* He was referred to in an episode ("Episode 7 - Dear Hibito") of the popular anime show Space Brothers.

== Awards and honors ==
* NASA Distinguished Service Medal (1973)
* He was made an honorary fellow of the Geological Society of America for his efforts in geoscience in 1984. Geological Society of America: Award & Medal Recipients 
* 1989 Recipient of the G. K. Gilbert Award
* One of the elementary schools in Schmitt's hometown of Silver City, New Mexico was named in his honor in the mid-1970s. An image of the astronaut riding a rocket through space is displayed on the front of Harrison Schmitt Elementary School. 
* AAPG's Special Award has been changed to the Harrison Schmitt Award in 2011. It recognizes individuals or organizations that, for a variety of reasons, do not qualify for other Association honors or awards. Schmitt received the award in 1973 for his contribution as the first geologist to land on the moon and study its geology. http://www.aapg.org/business/honors_awards/special.cfm 

== Media ==
Schmitt is one of the astronauts featured in the documentary In the Shadow of the Moon. He also contributed to the book NASA's Scientist-Astronauts by David Shayler and Colin Burgess.

== References ==

== External links ==

* UW prof recounts '72 trip to moon
* Harrison Schmitt visits University of Malta in 2009 and Handaq School
* NASA Biography
* Spacefacts biography of Harrison Schmitt



[[Hilaire Rouelle]]

Hilaire Marin Rouelle (February 1718, MathieuApril 7, 1779, Paris) was a French chemist. Commonly cited as the 1773 discoverer of urea, he was not the first to do so. Dutch scientist Herman Boerhaave had discovered this chemical as early as 1727. Rouelle is known as "le cadet" (the younger) to distinguish him from his older brother, Guillaume-Franois Rouelle, who was also a chemist.

==References==

Rouell, H.M.
Rouell, H.M.



[[Halon]]

Halon may refer to:

* Haloalkane, or halogenoalkane, a group of chemical compounds consisting of alkanes with linked halogens. In particular, bromine-containing haloalkanes.
* Halomethane fire extinguishing systems

* Various compounds that have been used in agriculture, dry cleaning, fire suppression, and other applications.
** Halon 10001 (iodomethane)
** Halon 1001 (bromomethane)
** Halon 1011 (bromochloromethane, CH2BrCl)
** Halon 104 (carbon tetrachloride)
** Halon 1103 (tribromofluoromethane)
** Halon 112 (dichlorofluoromethane)
** Halon 1201 (bromodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1202 (dibromodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1211 (bromochlorodifluoromethane, CF2ClBr)
** Halon 122 (dichlorodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1301 (bromotrifluoromethane, CBrF3)
** Halon 14 (tetrafluoromethane)
** Halon 242 (1,2-dichlorotetrafluoroethane)
** Halon 2402 (dibromotetrafluoroethane, C2Br2F4)used as a fire extinguisher
** Halon 2600 (hexafluoroethane)



[[Harrisonburg]]

Harrisonburg may refer to a place in the United States:

* Harrisonburg, Louisiana
* Harrisonburg, Virginia



[[Hammer]]

A hammer is a tool meant to deliver an impact to an object. The most common uses for hammers are to drive nails, fit parts, forge metal and break apart objects. Hammers are often designed for a specific purpose, and vary in their shape and structure. The term "hammer" is also used for some devices that are designed to deliver blows, e.g., the caplock mechanism of firearms.

The hammer is a basic tool of many professions. The usual features are a handle and a head, with most of the weight in the head. The basic design is hand-operated, but there are also many mechanically operated models, such as steam hammers, for heavier uses.

== History ==
The use of simple hammers dates to about 2,600,000 BCE Semaw, S., M. J. Rogers, J. Quade, P. R. Renne, R. F. Butler, M. Domnguez-Rodrigo, D. Stout, W. S. Hart, T. Pickering, and S. W. Simpson. 2003. 2.6-Million-year-old stone tools and associated bones from OGS-6 and OGS-7, Gona, Afar, Ethiopia. Journal of Human Evolution 45:169-177. 2.5-million-year-old stone tools from Gona, Ethiopia, S. Semaw, P. Renne, J. W. K. Harris, C. S. Feibel, R. L. Bernor, N. Fesseha, and K. Mowbray, Nature 385, 333-336 (23 January 1997) ; Accepted 25 November 1996 when various shaped stones were used to strike wood, bone, or other stones to break them apart and shape them. Stones attached to sticks with strips of leather or animal sinew were being used as hammers with handles by about 30,000 BCE during the middle of the Paleolithic Stone Age.

The hammer's archeological record shows that it may be the oldest tool for which definite evidence exists of its early existence. 

== Designs and variations ==
The claw of a hammer is frequently used to remove nails.
The essential part of a hammer is the head, a compact solid mass that is able to deliver the blow to the intended target without itself deforming. The opposite side may have a ball shape, as in the ball-peen hammer and the cow hammer (sometimes used for livestock slaughter, but now disparaged for animal cruelty). Some upholstery hammers have a magnetized face, to pick up tacks. In the hatchet, the hammer head is secondary to the cutting edge of the tool.

The impact between steel hammer heads and the objects being hit can create sparks, which may ignite flammable or explosive gases. These are a hazard in some industries such as underground coal mining (methane gas), or in other hazardous environments such as petroleum refineries and chemical plants. In these environments, a variety of non-sparking metal tools are used, primarily aluminium or beryllium copper hammers. 

In recent years, the handles have been made of durable plastic or rubber, though wood is still widely used.

Popular hand-powered variations include:
* Ball-peen hammer, British Standard BS 876:1995 Specification for Hand Hammers or mechanic's hammer
* Boiler scaling hammer 
* Brass hammer, also known as non-sparking hammer or spark-proof hammer and used mainly in flammable areas like oil fields
* Brickhammer 
* Carpenter's hammer (used for nailing), such as the framing hammer and the claw hammer, and pinhammers (ball-peen and cross-peen types) 
* Cross-peen hammer 
* Drilling hammer - a lightweight, short handled sledgehammer
* Gavel, used by judges and presiding authorities to draw attention 
* Geologist's hammer or rock pick
* Joiner's hammer, or Warrington hammer 
* Knife-edged hammer, its properties developed to aid a hammerer in the act of slicing whilst bludgeoning
* Lathe hammer (also known as a lath hammer, lathing hammer, or lathing hatchet), a tool used for cutting and nailing wood lath which has a small hatchet blade on one side (which features a small lateral nick used for pulling out nails) and a hammer head on the other 
* Lump hammer, or club hammer
* Mallets, including the rubber hammer and dead blow hammer
* Railway track keying hammer 
* Rock climbing hammer
* Sledge hammer
* Soft-faced hammer
* Splitting maul
* Stonemason's hammer
* Tinner's hammer
* Upholstery hammer
* Welder's chipping hammer 

===Mechanically-powered hammers===
Mechanically-powered hammer

Mechanically-powered hammers often look quite different from the hand tools, but nevertheless most of them work on the same principle. They include:
* Hammer drill, that combines a jackhammer-like mechanism with a drill
* High Frequency Impact Treatment hammer  for aftertreatment of weld transitions
* Jackhammer
* Steam hammer
* Trip hammer

In professional framing carpentry, the manual hammer has almost been completely replaced by the nail gun. In professional upholstery, its chief competitor is the staple gun.

==Tools used in conjunction with hammers==
* Anvil
* Chisel
* Star drill
* Punch
* Woodsplitting maul - can be hit with a sledgehammer for splitting wood.
* Woodsplitting wedge - hit with a sledgehammer for splitting wood.

==Physics of hammering==

===Hammer as a force amplifier===
A hammer is basically a force amplifier that works by converting mechanical work into kinetic energy and back.

In the swing that precedes each blow, a certain amount of kinetic energy gets stored in the hammer's head, equal to the length D of the swing times the force f produced by the muscles of the arm and by gravity. When the hammer strikes, the head gets stopped by an opposite force coming from the target; which is equal and opposite to the force applied by the head to the target. If the target is a hard and heavy object, or if it is resting on some sort of anvil, the head can travel only a very short distance d before stopping. Since the stopping force F times that distance must be equal to the head's kinetic energy, it follows that F will be much greater than the original driving force f  roughly, by a factor D/d. In this way, great strength is not needed to produce a force strong enough to bend steel, or crack the hardest stone.

===Effect of the head's mass===
The amount of energy delivered to the target by the hammer-blow is equivalent to one half the mass of the head times the square of the head's speed at the time of impact (). While the energy delivered to the target increases linearly with mass, it increases quadratically with the speed (see the effect of the handle, below). High tech titanium heads are lighter and allow for longer handles, thus increasing velocity and delivering more energy with less arm fatigue than that of a steel head hammer of the same weight. As hammers must be used in many circumstances, where the position of the person using them cannot be taken for granted, trade-offs are made for the sake of practicality. In areas where one has plenty of room, a long handle with a heavy head (like a sledge hammer) can deliver the maximum amount of energy to the target. It is not practical to use such a large hammer for all tasks, however, and thus the overall design has been modified repeatedly to achieve the optimum utility in a wide variety of situations.

===Effect of the handle===
The handle of the hammer helps in several ways. It keeps the user's hands away from the point of impact. It provides a broad area that is better-suited for gripping by the hand. Most importantly, it allows the user to maximize the speed of the head on each blow. The primary constraint on additional handle length is the lack of space in which to swing the hammer. This is why sledge hammers, largely used in open spaces, can have handles that are much longer than a standard carpenter's hammer. The second most important constraint is more subtle. Even without considering the effects of fatigue, the longer the handle, the harder it is to guide the head of the hammer to its target at full speed. Most designs are a compromise between practicality and energy efficiency. Too long a handle: the hammer is inefficient because it delivers force to the wrong place, off-target. Too short a handle: the hammer is inefficient because it doesn't deliver enough force, requiring more blows to complete a given task. Recently, modifications have also been made with respect to the effect of the hammer on the user. A titanium head has about 3% recoil and can result in greater efficiency and less fatigue when compared to a steel head with up to 30% recoil. Handles made of shock-absorbing materials or varying angles attempt to make it easier for the user to continue to wield this age-old device, even as nail guns and other powered drivers encroach on its traditional field of use.

===Effect of gravity===
Gravity exerts a force on the hammer head. If hammering downwards, gravity increases the acceleration during the hammer stroke and increases the energy delivered with each blow. If hammering upwards, gravity reduces the acceleration during the hammer stroke and therefore reduces the energy delivered with each blow. Some hammering methods, such as pile drivers, rely entirely on gravity for acceleration on the down stroke.

==War hammers==

A war hammer is a late medieval weapon of war intended for close combat action.

==Symbolic hammers==
The hammer, being one of the most used tools by Homo sapiens, has been used very much in symbols and arms. In the Middle Ages it was used often in blacksmith guild logos, as well as in many family symbols. The hammer and pick is used as a symbol of mining. A well known symbol with a hammer in it is the Hammer and Sickle, which was the symbol of the former Soviet Union and is very interlinked with Communism/Socialism. The hammer in this symbol represents the industrial working class (and the sickle the agricultural working class). The hammer is used in some coat of arms in (former) socialist countries like East Germany.

In Norse Mythology, Thor, the god of thunder and lightning, wields a hammer named Mjlnir. Many artifacts of decorative hammers have been found, leading modern practitioners of this religion to often wear reproductions as a sign of their faith.

Judah Maccabee, "The Hammer".

In American folkore, the hammer of John Henry represents the strength and endurance of a man.

The hammer in the song If I Had a Hammer represents a relentless message of justice broadcast across the land. The song became a symbol of the American Civil Rights movement.

==Gallery==

File:Ball-peen hammer 380mm.JPG|Ball-peen hammer
File:Hammer ball pane.jpg|Ball peen hammer
File:Stockhammer.JPG|Bush hammer
File:hammer2.jpg|Claw hammer
File:Hammer-1.jpg|Cross-peen hammer
File:Hammer dog-head.jpg|Dog-head hammer (blacksmithing)
File:Framing hammer.jpg|Framing hammer
File:BrokenConcretion22.jpg|Geologist's hammer
File:Hammer Long cross-face.jpg|Long cross-face hammer (blacksmithing)
File:Hammer stone head.jpg|Perforated hammer head of stone
File:Sledgehammer.jpg|Post maul
File:Mallet.jpg|Rubber mallet
File:Sledgehammers-1.jpg|Sledgehammers
File:Hammer stone tapping.jpg|Stone tapping hammer
File:Hammer straight pane sledge.jpg|Straight pane sledgehammer
File:Hammer twist.jpg|Twist hammer (blacksmithing)
File:Hammer tapissier.jpg|Upholstery hammer
File:Wooden mallet.jpg|Wooden mallet
File:StoneHammerDoverMN.JPG|An early stone hammer
File:Sacrificial hammer Dodona Louvre Br1183 n2.jpg|Ancient Greek bronze sacrificial hammer, 7th century BC, from Dodona
File:Melencolia I (Durero) hammer crop.jpg|16th century claw hammer from Drer's "Melencolia I" (1514)
File:hifit-hammer.jpg|HiFIT-hammer for aftertreatment of weld transitions

==See also==

* Category:Tools

==References==

==External links==

* Hammer types images and descriptions.
* The Hammer Museum
* "Choosing a Hammer." Popular Science, June 1960, pp. 164167.

 


[[Hiragana]]

 is a Japanese syllabary, one basic component of the Japanese writing system, along with katakana, kanji, and in some cases rmaji (the Latin-script alphabet). 

Hiragana and katakana are both kana systems; they have corresponding character sets in which each kana, or character, represents one mora (one sound in the Japanese language). Each kana is either a vowel such as "a" (hiragana ); a consonant followed by a vowel such as "ka" (hiragana ); or "n" (hiragana ), a nasal sonorant which, depending on the context, sounds either like English m, n, or ng (), or like the nasal vowels of French. Because the characters of the kana do not represent single consonants (except in the case of  "n"), the kana are referred to as syllabaries and not alphabets. 

Hiragana is used to write native words for which there are no kanji, including grammatical particles such as  kara "from", and suffixes such as  ~san "Mr., Mrs., Miss, Ms." Likewise, hiragana is used to write words whose kanji form is obscure, not known to the writer or readers, or too formal for the writing purpose. There is also some flexibility for words that have common kanji renditions to be optionally written instead in hiragana, according to an individual author's preference. Verb and adjective inflections, as, for example, be-ma-shi-ta () in , are written in hiragana, often following a verb or adjective root (here, "") that is written in kanji. When Hiragana is used to show the pronunciation of kanji characters as reading aid, it is referred to as furigana. The article Japanese writing system discusses in detail how the various systems of writing are used.

There are two main systems of ordering hiragana, the old-fashioned iroha ordering, and the more prevalent gojon ordering.

==Writing system==

 Hiragana base characters a i u e o       k      s      t      n      h      m      y    r      w      (N) Functional marksand diacritics     
 unused/obsolete 

The modern hiragana syllabary consists of 46 characters:
* 5 singular vowels
* Notionally, 45 consonantvowel unions, consisting of 9 consonants in combination with each of the 5 vowels, of which:
** 3 (yi, ye, and wu) are unused
** 2 (wi, and we) are obsolete in modern Japanese
** 1 (wo) is usually pronounced as a vowel (o) in modern Japanese, and is preserved in only one use, as a particle
* 1 singular consonant

These are conceived as a 510 grid (gojon, , lit. "Fifty Sounds"), as illustrated in the adjacent table, with the extra character being the anomalous singular consonant  (N). 

Romanisation of the kana does not always strictly follow the consonant-vowel scheme laid out in the table. For example, , nominally ti, is very often romanised as chi in an attempt to better represent the actual sound in Japanese.

These basic characters can be modified in various ways. By adding a dakuten marker ( ), a voiceless consonant is turned into a voiced consonant: kg, ts/sz, td, hb and ch/shj. Hiragana beginning with an h can also add a handakuten marker ( ) changing the h to a p.

A small version of the hiragana for ya, yu or yo (,  or  respectively) may be added to hiragana ending in i. This changes the i vowel sound to a glide (palatalization) to a, u or o. Addition of the small y kana is called yon. For example,  (ki) plus  (small ya) becomes  (kya).

A small tsu , called a sokuon, indicates that the following consonant is geminated (doubled). For example, compare  saka "hill" with  sakka "author". It also sometimes appears at the end of utterances, where it denotes a glottal stop, as in ! ( Ouch!). However, it cannot be used to double the na, ni, nu, ne, no syllables' consonants  to double them, the singular n () is added in front of the syllable.

Hiragana usually spells long vowels with the addition of a second vowel kana. The chonpu (long vowel mark) () used in katakana is rarely used with hiragana, for example in the word , rmen, but this usage is considered non-standard. In informal writing, small versions of the five vowel kana are sometimes used to represent trailing off sounds ( haa,  nee). Standard and voiced iteration marks are written in hiragana as  and  respectively.

==Table of hiragana==
The following table shows the complete hiragana together with the Hepburn romanization and IPA transcription in the gojon order. Hiragana with dakuten or handakuten follow the gojon kana without them, with the yon kana following. Obsolete and normally unused kana are shown in gray. For all syllables besides , the pronunciation indicated is for word-initial syllables, for mid-word pronunciations see below.

 Hiragana syllabograms 
 Monographs (gojon) Digraphs (yon) 
 a i u e o ya yu yo 
   a  i  u  e  o 
 K  ka  ki  ku  ke  ko  kya  kyu  kyo 
 S  sa  shi  su  se  so  sha  shu  sho 
 T  ta  chi  tsu  te  to  cha  chu  cho 
 N  na  ni  nu  ne  no  nya  nyu  nyo 
 H  ha ( as particle)  hi  fu  he ( as particle)  ho  hya  hyu  hyo 
 M  ma  mi  mu  me  mo  mya  myu  myo 
 Y  ya  yu  yo 
 R  ra  ri  ru  re  ro  rya  ryu  ryo 
 W  wa  i/wi  e/we  o/wo (particle) 
 
 *  n before stop consonants; elsewhere  (indicates a geminate consonant)  (reduplicates andunvoices syllable)  (reduplicates andvoices syllable) 
 
 Diacritics (gojon with (han)dakuten) Digraphs with diacritics (yon with (han)dakuten) 
 a i u e o ya yu yo 
 G  ga  gi  gu  ge  go  gya  gyu  gyo 
 Z  za  ji  zu  ze  zo  ja  ju  jo 
 D  da  ji  zu  de  do  ja  ju  jo 
 B  ba  bi  bu  be  bo  bya  byu  byo 
 P  pa  pi  pu  pe  po  pya  pyu  pyo 
 V  vu/u 

In the middle of words, the g sound (normally ) often turns into a velar nasal and less often (although increasing recently) into the voiced velar fricative . An exception to this is numerals; 15 juugo is considered to be one word, but is pronounced as if it was j and go stacked end to end: .

Additionally, the j sound (normally ) can be pronounced in the middle of words. For example  sji 'number'.

In archaic forms of Japanese, there existed the kwa ( ) and gwa ( ) digraphs. In modern Japanese, these phonemes have been phased out of usage and only exist in the extended katakana digraphs for approximating foreign language words.

The singular n is pronounced before t, ch, ts, n, r, z, j and d, before m, b and p, before k and g, at the end of utterances, before vowels, palatal approximants (y), consonants s, sh, h, f and w, and finally after the vowel i if another vowel, palatal approximant or consonant s, sh, h, f or w follows.

In kanji readings, the diphthongs ou and ei are today usually pronounced (long o) and (long e) respectively. For example  (lit. toukyou) is pronounced 'Tokyo', and  sensei is 'teacher'. However,  tou is pronounced 'to inquire', because the o and u are considered distinct, u being the infinitive verb ending. Similarly,  shite iru is pronounced 'is doing'.

For a more thorough discussion on the sounds of Japanese, please refer to Japanese phonology.

==Spelling rules==

With a few exceptions for sentence particles , , and  (pronounced as wa, o, and e), and a few other arbitrary rules, Japanese, when written in kana, is phonemically orthographic, i.e. there is a one-to-one correspondence between kana characters and sounds, leaving only words' pitch accent unrepresented. This has not always been the case: a previous system of spelling, now referred to as historical kana usage, differed substantially from pronunciation; the three above-mentioned exceptions in modern usage are the legacy of that system. The old spelling is referred to as .

There are two hiragana pronounced ji ( and ) and two hiragana pronounced zu ( and ), but to distinguish them, sometimes  is written as di and  is written as dzu. These pairs are not interchangeable. Usually, ji is written as  and zu is written as . There are some exceptions. If the first two syllables of a word consist of one syllable without a dakuten and the same syllable with a dakuten, the same hiragana is used to write the sounds. For example chijimeru ('to boil down' or 'to shrink') is spelled  and tsudzuku ('to continue') is . For compound words where the dakuten reflects rendaku voicing, the original hiragana is used. For example, chi ( 'blood') is spelled  in plain hiragana. When hana ('nose') and chi ('blood') combine to make hanaji 'nose bleed'), the sound of  changes from chi to dji. So hanadji is spelled  according to : the basic hiragana used to transcribe . Similarly, tsukau (; 'to use') is spelled  in hiragana, so kanazukai (; 'kana use', or 'kana orthography') is spelled  in hiragana.

However, this does not apply when kanji are used phonetically to write words which do not relate directly to the meaning of the kanji (see also ateji). The Japanese word for 'lightning', for example, is inazuma (). The component means 'rice plant', is written  in hiragana and is pronounced: ina. The component means 'wife' and is pronounced tsuma () when written in isolationor frequently as zuma () when it features after another syllable. Neither of these components have anything to do with 'lightning', but together they do when they compose the word for 'lightning'. In this case, the default spelling in hiragana  rather than  is used.

Officially,  and  do not occur word-initially pursuant to modern spelling rules. There were words such as  jiban 'ground' in the historical kana usage, but they were unified under  in the modern kana usage in 1946, so today it is spelled exclusively . However,  zura 'wig' (from  katsura) and  zuke (a sushi term for lean tuna soaked in soy sauce) are examples of word-initial  today. Some people write the word for hemorrhoids as  (normally ) for emphasis.

No standard Japanese words begin with the kana  (n). This is the basis of the word game shiritori.  n is normally treated as its own syllable and is separate from the other n-based kana (na, ni etc.). A notable exception to this is the colloquial negative verb conjugation; for example  wakaranai meaning " don't understand" is rendered as  wakaran. It is however not a contraction of the former, but instead comes from the classic negative verb conjugation  nu ( wakaranu).

 is sometimes directly followed by a vowel (a, i, u, e or o) or a palatal approximant (ya, yu or yo). These are clearly distinct from the na, ni etc. syllables, and there are minimal pairs such as  kin'en 'smoking forbidden',  kinen 'commemoration',  kinnen 'recent years'. In Hepburn romanization, they are distinguished with an apostrophe, but not all romanization methods make the distinction. For example past prime minister Junichiro Koizumi's first name is actually  Jun'ichir pronounced 

There are a few hiragana which are rarely used.  wi and  we are obsolete outside of Okinawan dialects.  vu is a modern addition used to represent the /v/ sound in foreign languages such as English, but since Japanese from a phonological standpoint does not have a /v/ sound, it is pronounced as /b/ and mostly serves as a more accurate indicator of a word's pronunciation in its original language. However, it is rarely seen because loanwords and transliterated words are usually written in katakana, where the corresponding character would be written as . , ,  for ja/ju/jo are theoretically possible in rendaku, but are practically never used. For example  'throughout Japan' could be written , but is practically always .

The  myu kana is extremely rare in originally Japanese words; linguist Haruhiko Kindaichi raises the example of the Japanese family name Omamyda () and claims it is the only occurrence amongst pure Japanese words. Its katakana counterpart is used in many loanwords, however.

==History==
Hiragana characters' shapes were derived from the Chinese cursive script (ssho). Shown here is a sample of the cursive script by Chinese Tang Dynasty calligrapher Sun Guoting, from the late 7th century.
Hiragana developed from man'ygana, Chinese characters used for their pronunciations, a practice which started in the 5th century. Yookoso! An Invitation to Contemporary Japanese 1st edition McGraw-Hill, page 13 "Linguistic Note: The Origins of Hiragana and Katakana" The oldest example of Man'ygana is Inariyama Sword which is an iron sword excavated at the Inariyama Kofun in 1968. This sword is thought to be made in year of  (which is A.D. 471 in commonly accepted theory). Seeley (2000:19-23) 
The forms of the hiragana originate from the cursive script style of Chinese calligraphy. The figure below shows the derivation of hiragana from manygana via cursive script. The upper part shows the character in the regular script form, the center character in red shows the cursive script form of the character, and the bottom shows the equivalent hiragana. Note also that the cursive script forms are not strictly confined to those in the illustration.

right When they were first developed, hiragana were not accepted by everyone. The educated or elites preferred to use only the kanji system. Historically, in Japan, the regular script (kaisho) form of the characters was used by men and called , "men's writing", while the cursive script (ssho) form of the kanji was used by women. Hence hiragana first gained popularity among women, who were generally not allowed access to the same levels of education as men. And thus hiragana was first widely used among court women in the writing of personal communications and literature. From this comes the alternative name of "women's writing". For example, The Tale of Genji and other early novels by female authors used hiragana extensively or exclusively.

Male authors came to write literature using hiragana. Hiragana was used for unofficial writing such as personal letters, while katakana and Chinese were used for official documents. In modern times, the usage of hiragana has become mixed with katakana writing. Katakana is now relegated to special uses such as recently borrowed words (i.e., since the 19th century), names in transliteration, the names of animals, in telegrams, and for emphasis.

Originally, for all syllables there was more than one possible hiragana. In 1900, the system was simplified so each syllable had only one hiragana. The deprecated hiragana are now known as .

The pangram poem Iroha-uta ("ABC song/poem"), which dates to the 10th century, uses every hiragana once (except n , which was just a variant of  before Muromachi era).

== Stroke order and direction ==
The following table shows the method for writing each hiragana character. It is arranged in the traditional way, beginning top right and reading columns down. The numbers and arrows indicate the stroke order and direction respectively. 
center

== Unicode ==

Hiragana was added to the Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the release of version 1.0.

The Unicode block for Hiragana is U+3040 ... U+309F. Grey areas indicate non-assigned code points:

The Unicode hiragana block contains precomposed characters for all hiragana in the modern set, including small vowels and yon kana for compound syllables, plus the archaic  wi and  we and the rare  vu; the archaic  ye is included in plane 1 at U+1B001 (see below). All combinations of hiragana with dakuten and handakuten used in modern Japanese are available as precomposed characters, and can also be produced by using a base hiragana followed by the combining dakuten and handakuten characters (U+3099 and U+309A, respectively). This method is used to add the diacritics to kana that are not normally used with them, for example applying the dakuten to a pure vowel or the handakuten to a kana not in the h-group.

Characters U+3095 and U+3096 are small  (ka) and small  (ke), respectively. U+309F is a ligature of  (yori) occasionally used in vertical text. U+309B and U+309C are spacing (non-combining) equivalents to the combining dakuten and handakuten characters, respectively.

Historic and variant forms of Japanese kana characters were added to the Unicode Standard in October, 2010 with the release of version 6.0.

The Unicode block for Kana Supplement is U+1B000 ... U+1B0FF. Grey areas indicate non-assigned code points:

==See also==
*Bopomofo (Zhyn fho, "phonetic symbols"), a phonetic system of 37 characters for writing Chinese developed in the 1900s and common in Taiwan.
*Iteration mark explains the iteration marks used with hiragana.
*Japanese phonology explains Japanese pronunciation in detail.
*Japanese typographic symbols gives other non-kana, non-kanji symbols.
*Katakana
*N Shu, a syllabary writing system used by women in China's Hunan province
*Shodo, Japanese calligraphy.

== References ==

* "The Art of Japanese Calligraphy", Yujiro Nakata, ISBN 0-8348-1013-1, gives details of the development of onode and onnade.

== External links ==

* Hiragana learning exercises
* Hiragana unicode chart



[[House of Hohenstaufen]]

The House of Hohenstaufen, also known as the Swabian dynasty or the Staufer, was a dynasty of German monarchs in the High Middle Ages, reigning from 1138 to 1254. Three members of the dynasty were crowned Holy Roman Emperors. In 1194, the Hohenstaufens were granted the Kingdom of Sicily. The name Hohenstaufen (High-Staufen) for the Staufer was used in subsequent periods parallel with the name of the chiefly Prussian Hohenzollern dynasty.

The terms Hohenstaufen also identified the family's Hohenstaufen Castle in Swabia, located on an eponymous mountain near Gppingen which gave the name. This second castle was built by the first known member of the dynasty, Duke Frederick I.

==Origins as dukes of Swabia==
In 1079, the Salian king Henry IV of Germany appointed Count Frederick I at Hohenstaufen Castle as Duke of Swabia. At the same time, Frederick was engaged to the king's approximately seventeen-year old daughter, Agnes. Nothing is known about Frederick's life before this event, but he proved to be Imperial ally throughout Henry's struggles against other Swabian lords, namely Rudolf of Rheinfelden, Frederick's predecessor, and the Zhringen and Welf lords. Frederick's brother Otto was elevated to the Strasbourg bishopric in 1082.
Hohenstaufen Castle Ruins
Upon Frederick's death, he was succeeded by his son, Duke Frederick II, in 1105. Frederick II remained a close ally of the Salians, he and his younger brother Conrad were named the king's representatives in Germany when the king was in Italy. Around 1120, Frederick II married Judith of Bavaria from the rival House of Welf.

==Coat of arms==
When Frederick I became Duke of Swabia in 1079, his coat of arms depicted a black lion on a gold shield. Whilst members of the dynasty reigned over monarchies, and, eventually, the whole of the Holy Roman Empire, the Hohenstaufen coat of arms was used as a breast shield on the empires coat of arms. Philip of Swabia, elected German king in 1198, changed the coat of arms, and the lion was replaced by three leopards, probably derived from the arms of his Welf rival Otto IV.

==Ruling in Germany==
When the last male member of the Salian dynasty, Emperor Henry V, died without heirs in 1125, a controversy arose about the succession. Duke Frederick II and Conrad, the two current male Staufers, by their mother Agnes were grandsons of late Emperor Henry IV and nephews of Henry V. Frederick attempted to succeed to the throne of the Holy Roman Emperor (formally known as the King of the Romans) through a customary election, but lost to the Saxon duke Lothair of Supplinburg. A civil war between Frederick's dynasty and Lothair's ended with Frederick's submission in 1134. After Lothair's death in 1137, Frederick's brother Conrad was elected King as Conrad III.

Because the Welf duke Henry the Proud, son-in-law and heir of Lothair and the most powerful prince in Germany, who had been passed over in the election, refused to acknowledge the new king, Conrad III deprived him of all his territories, giving the Duchy of Saxony to Albert the Bear and that of Bavaria to Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria. In 1147, Conrad heard Bernard of Clairvaux preach the Second Crusade at Speyer, and he agreed to join King Louis VII of France in a great expedition to the Holy Land which failed.

Conrad's brother Duke Frederick II died in 1147, and was succeeded in Swabia by his son, Duke Frederick III. When King Conrad III died without adult heir in 1152, Frederick also succeeded him, taking both German royal and Imperial titles.

===Frederick Barbarossa===
Frederick III and I, known as Frederick Barbarossa because of his red beard, struggled throughout his reign to restore the power and prestige of the German monarchy against the dukes, whose power had grown both before and after the Investiture Controversy under his Salian predecessors. As royal access to the resources of the church in Germany was much reduced, Frederick was forced to go to Italy to find the finances needed to restore the king's power in Germany. He was soon crowned emperor in Italy, but decades of warfare on the peninsula yielded scant results. The Papacy and the prosperous city-states of the Lombard League in northern Italy were traditional enemies, but the fear of Imperial domination caused them to join ranks to fight Frederick. Under the skilled leadership of Pope Alexander III, the alliance suffered many defeats but ultimately was able to deny the emperor a complete victory in Italy. Frederick returned to Germany. He had vanquished one notable opponent, his Welf cousin, Duke Henry the Lion of Saxony and Bavaria in 1180, but his hopes of restoring the power and prestige of the monarchy seemed unlikely to be met by the end of his life.

During Frederick's long stays in Italy, the German princes became stronger and began a successful colonization of Slavic lands. Offers of reduced taxes and manorial duties enticed many Germans to settle in the east in the course of the Ostsiedlung. In 1163 Frederick waged a successful campaign against the Kingdom of Poland in order to re-install the Silesian dukes of the Piast dynasty. With the German colonization, the Empire increased in size and came to include the Duchy of Pomerania as well as Bohemia and the March of Moravia. A quickening economic life in Germany increased the number of towns and Imperial cities, and gave them greater importance. It was also during this period that castles and courts replaced monasteries as centers of culture. Growing out of this courtly culture, Middle High German literature reached its peak in lyrical love poetry, the Minnesang, and in narrative epic poems such as Tristan, Parzival, and the Nibelungenlied.
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and his sons King Henry VI and Duke Frederick V of Swabia, Welfenchronik, 1167/79, Weingarten Abbey

===Henry VI===
Frederick died in 1190 while on the Third Crusade and was succeeded by his son, Henry VI. Elected king even before his father's death, Henry went to Rome to be crowned emperor. He married Queen Constance of Sicily, and a death in his wife's family in 1194 gave him possession of the Kingdom of Sicily, a source of vast wealth. Henry failed to make royal and Imperial succession hereditary, but in 1196 he succeeded in gaining a pledge that his infant son Frederick would receive the German crown. Faced with difficulties in Italy and confident that he would realize his wishes in Germany at a later date, Henry returned to the south, where it appeared he might unify the peninsula under the Hohenstaufen name. After a series of military victories, however, he fell ill and died of natural causes in Sicily in 1197. His underage son Frederick could only succeed him in Sicily and Malta, while in the Empire the struggle between the House of Staufen and the House of Welf erupted once again.

===Philip of Swabia===
Because the election of a three-year-old boy to be German king appeared likely to make orderly rule difficult, the boy's uncle, Duke Philip of Swabia, brother of late Henry VI, was designated to serve in his place. Other factions however favoured a Welf candidate. In 1198, two rival kings were chosen: the Hohenstaufen Philip of Swabia and the son of the deprived Duke Henry the Lion, the Welf Otto IV. A long civil war began; Philip was about to win when he was murdered by the Bavarian count palatine Otto VIII of Wittelsbach in 1208. Pope Innocent III initially had supported the Welfs, but when Otto, now sole elected monarch, moved to appropriate Sicily, Innocent changed sides and accepted young Frederick II and his ally, King Philip II of France, who defeated Otto at the 1214 Battle of Bouvines. Frederick had returned to Germany in 1212 from Sicily, where he had grown up, and was elected king in 1215. When Otto died in 1218, Fredrick became the undisputed ruler, and in 1220 was crowned Holy Roman Emperor.

==Decline==
The conflict between the Staufer dynasty and the Welf had irrevocably weakened the Imperial authority and the Norman kingdom of Sicily became the base for Staufer rule.

===Frederick II===
Emperor Frederick II spent little time in Germany as his main concerns lay in Southern Italy. He founded the University of Naples in 1224 to train future state officials and reigned over Germany primarily through the allocation of royal prerogatives, leaving the sovereign authority and imperial estates to the ecclesiastical and secular princes. He made significant concessions to the German nobles, such as those put forth in an imperial statute of 1232, which made princes virtually independent rulers within their territories. These measures favoured the further fragmentation of the Empire.
Frederick's Castel del Monte, in Andria, Apulia, Italy.
By the 1226 Golden Bull of Rimini, Frederick had assigned the military order of the Teutonic Knights to complete the conquest and conversion of the Prussian lands. A reconciliation with the Welfs took place in 1235, whereby Otto the Child, grandson of the late Saxon duke Henry the Lion, was named Duke of Brunswick and Lneburg. The power struggle with the popes continued and resulted in Fredrick's excommunication in 1227. In 1239, Pope Gregory IX excommunicated Fredrick again, and in 1245 he was condemned as a heretic by a church council. Although Frederick was one of the most energetic, imaginative, and capable rulers of the time, he was not concerned with drawing the disparate forces in Germany together. His legacy was thus that local rulers had more authority after his reign than before it. The clergy also had become more powerful.
Frederick II with his falcon, from De arte venandi cum avibus, c. 1240, Vatican Library
By the time of Frederick's death in 1250, little centralized power remained in Germany. The Great Interregnum, a period in which there were several elected rival kings, none of whom was able to achieve any position of authority, followed the death of Frederick's son King Conrad IV of Germany in 1254. The German princes vied for individual advantage and managed to strip many powers away from the diminished monarchy. Rather than establish sovereign states however, many nobles tended to look after their families. Their many male heirs created more and smaller estates, and from a largely free class of officials previously formed, many of these assumed or acquired hereditary rights to administrative and legal offices. These trends compounded political fragmentation within Germany. The period was ended in 1273 with the election of Rudolph of Habsburg, a godson of Frederick.

===End of the Staufer dynasty ===
Conrad IV was succeeded as duke of Swabia by his only son, two-year old Conradin. By this time, the office of duke of Swabia had been fully subsumed into the office of the king, and without royal authority had become meaningless. In 1261, attempts to elect young Conradin king were unsuccessful. He also had to defend Sicily against an invasion by Charles of Anjou, a brother of the French king. Charles had defeated Conradin's uncle Manfred, King of Sicily in the Battle of Benevento on 26 February 1266. The king himself, refusing to flee, rushed into the midst of his enemies and was killed. Conradin's campaign to retake control ended with his defeat in 1268 at the Battle of Tagliacozzo after which he was handed over to Charles, who had him publicly executed at Naples. With Conradin, the direct line of the Dukes of Swabia finally ceased to exist, though most of the later emperors were descended from the Staufer dynasty indirectly.

During the political decentralization of the late Staufer period, the population had grown from an estimated 8 million in 1200 to about 14 million in 1300, and the number of towns increased tenfold. The most heavily urbanized areas of Germany were located in the south and the west. Towns often developed a degree of independence, but many were subordinate to local rulers if not immediate to the emperor. Colonization of the east also continued in the thirteenth century, most notably through the efforts of the Teutonic Knights. German merchants also began trading extensively on the Baltic.

==Members of the Hohenstaufen family==
Family tree of the Hohenstaufen emperors including their relation to succeeding dynasties

===Holy Roman Emperors and Kings of the Romans===
*Conrad III, king 1138-1152
*Frederick Barbarossa, king 1152-1190, emperor after 1155
*Henry VI, king 1190-1197, emperor after 1191
*Philip of Swabia, king 1198-1208
*Frederick II, king 1208-1250, emperor after 1220
*Henry (VII), king 1220 - 1235 (under his father Emperor Frederick II)
*Conrad IV, king 1237-1254 (until 1250 under his father Emperor Frederick II)
Like the first ruling Hohenstaufen, Conrad III, also the last one, Conrad IV, was never crowned emperor. After a 20 year period (Great interregnum 1254-1273) the first Habsburg was elected king.

===Kings of Italy===
Note: Some of the following kings are already listed above as German Kings
*Conrad III 11281135
*Frederick I 11541190 
*Henry VI 11911197 

===Kings of Sicily===
Arms of the Hohenstaufen Sicily
Note: Some of the following kings are already listed above as German Kings
*Henry VI 1194-1197
*Frederick 1198-1250
**Henry (VII) 12121217 (nominal king under his father)
*Conrad 1250-1254
*Conradin 1254-1258/1268
*Manfred 1258-1266

===Dukes of Swabia===
Note: Some of the following dukes are already listed above as German Kings
* Frederick I, Duke of Swabia (Friedrich) (r. 1079 - 1105)
* Frederick II, Duke of Swabia (r. 1105 - 1147)
* Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor (Frederick III of Swabia)(r. 1147 - 1152) King in 1152 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1155
* Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia (r. 1152 - 1167)
* Frederick V, Duke of Swabia (r. 1167 - 1170)
* Frederick VI, Duke of Swabia (r. 1170 - 1191)
* Conrad II, Duke of Swabia (r. 1191 - 1196)
* Philip of Swabia (r. 1196 - 1208) King in 1198
* Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor (r. 1212 - 1216) King in 1212 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1220
* Henry (VII) of Germany (r. 1216 - 1235), King 1220 - 1235
* Conrad IV (r. 1235 - 1254) King in 1237
* Conrad V (Conradin) (r. 1254 - 1268)

==See also==

*Kings of Germany family tree. The Hohenstaufen were the 6th dynasty to rule Germany and were related by marriage to all the earlier dynasties.
* Dukes of Swabia family tree
* Guelphs and Ghibellines
* List of monarchs of Sicily. Hohenstaufen kings ruled in Sicily from 1194 till Manfred of Sicily was killed in the Battle of Benevento in 1266.
* the Barbarossa Legend at Frederick I (HRR); Legend

;Modern history
* During the Third Reich, the Waffen-SS named an SS Panzer division "Hohenstaufen".
* Coat of arms of Baden-Wrttemberg

==References==

* 

*



[[History of Malaysia]]

Malaysia is a country in South East Asia whose strategic sea-lane position brought trade and foreign influences that fundamentally influenced its history. Hindu and Buddhist cultures imported from India dominated early Malaysian history. They reached their peak in the Sumatran-based Srivijaya civilisation, whose influence extended through Sumatra, Java, the Malay Peninsula and much of Borneo from the 7th to the 14th centuries.

Although Muslims had passed through Malaysia as early as the 10th century, it was not until the 14th and 15th centuries that Islam first established itself on the Malay Peninsula. The adoption of Islam by the 15th century saw the rise of number sultanates, the most prominent of which was the Melaka (Malacca). Islamic culture has had a profound influence on the Malay people, but has also been influenced by them. The Portuguese were the first European colonial powers to establish themselves in Malaysia, capturing Malacca in 1511, followed by the Dutch. However, it was the British, who after initially establishing bases at Jesselton, Kuching, Penang, and Singapore, ultimately secured their hegemony across the territory that is now Malaysia. The Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 defined the boundaries between British Malaya and the Netherlands East Indies (which became Indonesia). A fourth phase of foreign influence was immigration of Chinese and Indian workers to meet the needs of the colonial economy created by the British in the Malay Peninsula and Borneo. Annual Report on the Federation of Malaya: 1951 in C.C. Chin and Karl Hack, Dialogues with Chin Peng pp. 380, 81. 

Japanese invasion during World War II ended British domination in Malaysia. The subsequent occupation of Malaya, North Borneo and Sarawak from 1942 to 1945 unleashed nationalism. In the Peninsula, the Malayan Communist Party took up arms against the British. A tough military response was needed to end the insurgency and bring about the establishment of an independent, multi-racial Federation of Malaya in 1957. On 31 August 1963, the British territories in North Borneo and Singapore were granted independence and formed Malaysia with the Peninsular states on 16 September 1963. Approximately two years later, the Malaysian parliament passed a bill to separate Singapore from the Federation. A confrontation with Indonesia occurred in the early-1960s. Race riots in 1969 led to the imposition of emergency rule, and a curtailment of political life and civil liberties which has never been fully reversed. Since 1970 the "National Front coalition" headed by United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) has governed Malaysia. Economic growth dramatically increased living standards by the 1990s. This growing prosperity helped minimise political discontent.

==Prehistory==

The founding of an oldest skull which estimates around 40,000 years ago on Niah Caves in Sarawak, it has been identified as the earliest evidence for human settlement in Malaysian Borneo. 
Stone hand-axes from early hominoids, probably Homo erectus, have been unearthed in Lenggong. They date back 1.83 million years, the oldest evidence of hominid habitation in Southeast Asia. http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5j4NR2q7FWeVMwDjWVzYcF_R4qXEg The earliest evidence of modern human habitation in Malaysia is the 40,000 year old skull excavated from the Niah Caves in Borneo in 1958. A study of Asian genetics points to the idea that the original humans in East Asia came from Southeast Asia. The oldest complete skeleton found in Malaysia is 11,000-year old Perak Man unearthed in 1991. http://www.wildasia.org/main.cfm/library/Perak_man_and_Lenggong_Museum The indigenous groups on the peninsula can be divided into three ethnicities, the Negritos, the Senois, and the proto-Malays. The first inhabitants of the Malay Peninsula were most probably Negritos. These Mesolithic hunters were probably the ancestors of the Semang, an ethnic Negrito group who have a long history in the Malay Peninsula. 

The Senoi appear to be a composite group, with approximately half of the maternal mitochondrial DNA lineages tracing back to the ancestors of the Semang and about half to later ancestral migrations from Indochina. Scholars suggest they are descendants of early Austroasiatic-speaking agriculturalists, who brought both their language and their technology to the southern part of the peninsula approximately 4,000 years ago. They united and coalesced with the indigenous population. 

The Proto Malays have a more diverse origin Minority Rights Group International, World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples  Malaysia : Orang Asli, 2008, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/49749ce85.html 7 July 2010 and had settled in Malaysia by 1000 BC. Although they show some connections with other inhabitants in Maritime Southeast Asia, some also have an ancestry in Indochina around the time of the Last Glacial Maximum about 20,000 years ago. Anthropologists support the notion that the Proto-Malays originated from what is today Yunnan, China. R.H von Geldern, J.H.C Kern, J.R Foster, J.R Logen, Slametmuljana and Asmah Haji Omar.A history of Malaya and her neighbours  Page 21  by Francis Joseph Moorhead, published by Longmans of Malaysia, 1965India and ancient Malaya (from the earliest times to circa A.D. 1400)  Page 3  by D. Devahuti, Published by D. Moore for Eastern Universities Press, 1965The making of modern Malaya: a history from earliest times to independence  Page 5  by N. J. Ryan, Oxford University Press, 1965The cultural heritage of Malaya  Page 2  by N. J. Ryan published by Longman Malaysia, 1971A history of Malaysia and Singapore  Page 5  by N. J. Ryan published by Oxford University Press, 1976"How the dominoes fell": Southeast Asia in perspective  Page 7  by Mae H. Esterline, Hamilton Press, 1986A design guide of public parks in Malaysia  Page 38  by Jamil Abu Bakar published by Penerbit UTM, 2002, ISBN 983-52-0274-5, ISBN 978-983-52-0274-2An introduction to the Malaysian legal system  Page 1  by Min Aun Wu, Heinemann Educational Books (Asia), 1975A short history of Malaysia  Page 22  by Harry Miller published by F.A. Praeger, 1966Malaya and its history  Page 14  by Sir Richard Olaf Winstedt published by Hutchinson University Library, 1962Southeast Asia, past & present  Page 10  by D. R. SarDesai published by Westview Press, 1994Malaya  Page 17  by Norton Sydney Ginsburg, Chester F. Roberts published by University of Washington Press, 1958Asia: a social study  Page 43  by David Tulloch published by Angus and Robertson, 1969Area handbook on Malaya University of Chicago, Chester F. Roberts, Bettyann Carner published by University of Chicago for the Human Relations Area Files, 1955Thailand into the 80's  Page 12  by Samnak Nyok Ratthamontr published by the Office of the Prime Minister, Kingdom of Thailand, 1979Man in Malaya  Page 22  by B. W. Hodder published by Greenwood Press, 1973The modern anthropology of South-East Asia: an introduction, Volume 1 of The modern anthropology of South-East Asia, RoutledgeCurzon Research on Southeast Asia Series  Page 54  by Victor T. King, William D. Wilder published by Routledge, 2003, ISBN 0-415-29751-6, ISBN 978-0-415-29751-6Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society  Page 17  by Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Malaysian Branch, Singapore, 1936Malay and Indonesian leadership in perspective  Page 9  by Ahmad Kamar 1984The Malay peoples of Malaysia and their languages  Page 36  by Asmah Haji Omar published by Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, Kementerian Pelajaran Malaysia, 1983Encyclopedia of world cultures Volume 5  Page 174  by David Levinson  History  1993 published by G.K. Hall, 1993Indigenous peoples of Asia  Page 274  by Robert Harrison Barnes, Andrew Gray, Benedict Kingsbury published by the Association for Asian Studies, 1995Peoples of the Earth: Indonesia, Philippines and Malaysia edited by Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard published by Danbury Press, 1973American anthropologist Vol 60  Page 1228  by American Anthropological Association, Anthropological Society of Washington (Washington, D.C.), American Ethnological Society, 1958Encyclopaedia Of Southeast Asia (set Of 5 Vols.)  Page 4  by Brajendra Kumar published by Akansha Publishing House, 2006, ISBN 81-8370-073-X, ISBN 978-81-8370-073-3 This was followed by an early-Holocene dispersal through the Malay Peninsula into the Malay Archipelago. Around 300 BC, they were pushed inland by the Deutero-Malays, an Iron Age or Bronze Age people descended partly from the Chams of Cambodia and Vietnam. The first group in the peninsula to use metal tools, the Deutero-Malays were the direct ancestors of today's Malaysian Malays, and brought with them advanced farming techniques. The Malays remained politically fragmented throughout the Malay archipelago, although a common culture and social structure was shared. 

==Early kingdoms==
The Buddha-Gupta stone, dating to the 4th5th century CE, was dedicated by an Indian Merchant, Buddha Gupta, as an expression of gratitude for his safe arrival after a voyage to the Malay peninsula. It was found in Seberang Perai, Malaysia and is kept in the National Museum, Calcutta, India.
In the first millennium CE, Malays became the dominant race on the peninsula. The small early states that were established were greatly influenced by Indian culture. Indian influence in the region dates back to at least the 3rd century BCE. South Indian culture was spread to Southeast Asia by the south Indian Pallava dynasty in the 4th and 5th century. History of Humanity: From the seventh century B.C. to the seventh century A.D. by Sigfried J. de Laet p.395 

The Malay Peninsula was known to ancient Tamils as Suvarnadvipa or the "Golden Peninsula". It was shown on Ptolemy's map as the "Golden Khersonese". He referred to the Straits of Melaka as Sinus Sabaricus. ASEAN Member: Malaysia Retrieved 29 May 2008. Trade relations with China and India were established in the 1st century BC. Shards of Chinese pottery have been found in Borneo dating from the 1st century following the southward expansion of the Han Dynasty. In the early centuries of the first millennium, the people of the Malay Peninsula adopted the Indian religions of Hinduism and Buddhism, religions which had a major effect on the language and culture of those living in Malaysia. The Sanskrit writing system was used as early as the 4th century. 

There were numerous Malay kingdoms in the 2nd and 3rd century, as many as 30, mainly based on the Eastern side of the Malay peninsula. Among the earliest kingdoms known to have been based in what is now Malaysia is the ancient empire of Langkasuka, located in the northern Malay Peninsula and based somewhere in Kedah. It was closely tied to Funan in Cambodia, which also ruled part of northern Malaysia until the 6th century. According to the Sejarah Melayu ("Malay Annals"), the Khmer prince Raja Ganji Sarjuna founded the kingdom of Gangga Negara (modern-day Beruas, Perak) in the 700s. Chinese chronicles of the 5th century CE speak of a great port in the south called Guantoli, which is thought to have been in the Straits of Malacca. In the 7th century, a new port called Shilifoshi is mentioned, and this is believed to be a Chinese rendering of Srivijaya.

Between the 7th and the 13th century, much of the Malay peninsula was under the Buddhist Srivijaya empire. The site of Srivijaya's centre is thought be at a river mouth in eastern Sumatra, based near what is now Palembang. For over six centuries the Maharajahs of Srivijaya ruled a maritime empire that became the main power in the archipelago. The empire was based around trade, with local kings (dhatus or community leaders) swearing allegiance to the central lord for mutual profit. 

The relation between Srivijaya and the Chola Empire of south India was friendly during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I but during the reign of Rajendra Chola I the Chola Empire attacked Srivijaya cities. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium by Ronald Findlay,Kevin H. O'Rourke p.67 
In 1025 and 1026 Gangga Negara was attacked by Rajendra Chola I of the Chola Empire, the Tamil emperor who is now thought to have laid Kota Gelanggi to waste. Kedahknown as Kedaram, Cheh-Cha (according to I-Ching) or Kataha, in ancient Pallava or Sanskritwas in the direct route of the invasions and was ruled by the Cholas from 1025. A second invasion was led by Virarajendra Chola of the Chola dynasty who conquered Kedah in the late 11th century. History of Asia by B. V. Rao (2005), p. 211 The senior Chola's successor, Vira Rajendra Chola, had to put down a Kedah rebellion to overthrow other invaders. The coming of the Chola reduced the majesty of Srivijaya, which had exerted influence over Kedah, Pattani and as far as Ligor.

Avalokiteshvara statue found in Perak, 8th9th century bronze
Pattinapalai, a Tamil poem of the 2nd century CE, describes goods from Kedaram heaped in the broad streets of the Chola capital. A 7th-century Indian drama, Kaumudhimahotsva, refers to Kedah as Kataha-nagari. The Agnipurana also mentions a territory known as Anda-Kataha with one of its boundaries delineated by a peak, which scholars believe is Gunung Jerai. Stories from the Katasaritasagaram describe the elegance of life in Kataha. The Buddhist kingdom of Ligor took control of Kedah shortly after. Its king Chandrabhanu used it as a base to attack Sri Lanka in the 11th century, an event noted in a stone inscription in Nagapattinum in Tamil Nadu and in the Sri Lankan chronicles, Mahavamsa.

At times, the Khmer kingdom, the Siamese kingdom, and even Cholas kingdom tried to exert control over the smaller Malay states. The power of Srivijaya declined from the 12th century as the relationship between the capital and its vassals broke down. Wars with the Javanese caused it to request assistance from China, and wars with Indian states are also suspected. In the 11th century CE the centre of power shifted to Melayu, a port possibly located further up the Sumatran coast at near the Jambi River. The power of the Buddhist Maharajas was further undermined by the spread of Islam. Areas which were converted to Islam early, such as Aceh, broke away from Srivijayas control. By the late 13th century, the Siamese kings of Sukhothai had brought most of Malaya under their rule. In the 14th century, the Hindu Java-based Majapahit empire came into possession of the peninsula. 

==Arrival of Islam==
Islam came to the Malay Archipelago via Arab and Indian traders in the 13th century, ending the age of Hinduism and Buddhism. It arrived in the region gradually, and became the religion of the elite before it spread to the commoners. The Islam in Malaysia was influenced by previous religions and was originally not orthodox. 

The port of Malacca on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula was founded in 1402 by Parameswara, a Srivijaya prince fleeing Temasek (now Singapore), who was claimed in the Sejarah Melayu to be a descendant of Alexander the Great. Parameswara in particular sailed to Temasek to escape persecution. There he came under the protection of Temagi, a Malay chief from Patani who was appointed by the king of Siam as regent of Temasek. Within a few days, Parameswara killed Temagi and appointed himself regent. Some five years later he had to leave Temasek, due to threats from Siam. During this period, a Javanese fleet from Majapahit attacked Temasek.

The earliest record of a local law influenced by Islamic teaching and written in Jawi. The stone monument is found in Terengganu.
Parameswara headed north to found a new settlement. At Muar, Parameswara considered siting his new kingdom at either Biawak Busuk or at Kota Buruk. Finding that the Muar location was not suitable, he continued his journey northwards. Along the way, he reportedly visited Sening Ujong (former name of present-day Sungai Ujong) before reaching a fishing village at the mouth of the Bertam River (former name of the Melaka River), and founded what would become the Malacca Sultanate. Over time this developed into modern-day Malacca Town. According to the Malay Annals, here Parameswara saw a mouse deer outwitting a dog resting under a Malacca tree. Taking this as a good omen, he decided to establish a kingdom called Malacca. He built and improved facilities for trade. The Malacca Sultanate is commonly considered the first independent state in the peninsula. 

At the time of Melaka's founding, the emperor of Ming Dynasty China was sending out fleets of ships to expand trade. Admiral Zheng He called at Malacca and brought Parameswara with him on his return to China, a recognition of his position as legitimate ruler of Malacca. In exchange for regular tribute, the Chinese emperor offered Melaka protection from the constant threat of a Siamese attack. The Chinese and Indians who settled in the Malay Peninsula before and during this period are the ancestors of today's Baba-Nyonya and Chetti community. According to one theory, Parameswara became a Muslim when he married a Princess of Pasai and he took the fashionable Persian title "Shah", calling himself Iskandar Shah. A History of the Malay Peninsula. Chinese chronicles mention that in 1414, the son of the first ruler of Malacca visited the Ming emperor to inform them that his father had died. Parameswara's son was then officially recognised as the second ruler of Melaka by the Chinese Emperor and styled Raja Sri Rama Vikrama, Raja of Parameswara of Temasek and Malacca and he was known to his Muslim subjects as Sultan Sri Iskandar Zulkarnain Shah or Sultan Megat Iskandar Shah. He ruled Malacca from 1414 to 1424. Through the influence of Indian Muslims and, to a lesser extent, Hui people from China, Islam became increasingly common during the 15th century.

After an initial period paying tribute to the Ayutthaya, the kingdom rapidly assumed the place previously held by Srivijaya, establishing independent relations with China, and exploiting its position dominating the Straits to control the China-India maritime trade, which became increasingly important when the Mongol conquests closed the overland route between China and the west.

Within a few years of its establishment, Malacca officially adopted Islam. Parameswara became a Muslim, and due to the fact Malacca was under a Muslim Prince the conversion of Malays to Islam accelerated in the 15th century. The political power of the Malaccan Sultanate helped Islams rapid spread through the archipelago. Malacca was an important commercial centre during this time, attracting trade from around the region. By the start of the 16th century, with Malaccan Sultanate in the Malay peninsula and parts of Sumatra, sultanate of Malacca." Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Encyclopdia Britannica, 2011. Web. 29 June 2011. . the Sultanate of Demak in Java, "Demak." Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Encyclopdia Britannica, 2011. Web. 29 June 2011. . and other kingdoms around the Malay archipelago increasingly converting to Islam, Anthony Reid, "Islamization and Christianization in Southeast Asia: the Critical Phase, 15501650". IN Southeast Asia in the Early Modern Era: Trade, Power, and Belief, ed. Anthony Reid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp.15179 it had become the dominant religion among Malays, and reached as far as the modern-day Philippines, leaving Bali as an isolated outpost of Hinduism today.

Malacca's reign lasted little more than a century, but during this time became the established centre of Malay culture. Most future Malay states originated from this period. Malacca became a cultural centre, creating the matrix of the modern Malay culture: a blend of indigenous Malay and imported Indian, Chinese and Islamic elements. Malacca's fashions in literature, art, music, dance and dress, and the ornate titles of its royal court, came to be seen as the standard for all ethnic Malays. The court of Malacca also gave great prestige to the Malay language, which had originally evolved in Sumatra and been brought to Malacca at the time of its foundation. In time Malay came to be the official language of all the Malaysian states, although local languages survived in many places. After the fall of Malacca, the Sultanate of Brunei became the major centre of Islam. 

==Struggles for hegemony==
The closing of the overland route from Asia to Europe by the Ottoman Empire and the claim towards trade monopoly with India and southeast Asia by Arab traders, led European powers to look for a maritime route. In 1511 Afonso de Albuquerque led an expedition to Malaya which seized Malacca with the intent of using it as a base for activities in southeast Asia. This was the first colonial claim on what is now Malaysia. The son of the last Sultan of Malacca, Sultan Alauddin Riayat Shah II fled to the southern tip of the peninsula, where he founded a state that which became the Sultanate of Johor. Another son created the Perak Sultanate to the north. By the late 16th century the tin mines of northern Malaya had been discovered by European traders, and Perak grew wealthy on the proceeds of tin exports. Portuguese influence was strong, as they aggressively tried to convert the population of Malacca to Catholicism. In 1571 the Spanish captured Manila and established a colony in the Philippines, reducing the Sultanate of Brunei's power. 

A Famosa fortress in Malacca. It was built by the Portuguese in the 16th century.
After the fall of Malacca to Portugal, the Johor Sultanate and the Sultanate of Aceh on northern Sumatra moved to fill in the power vacuum left behind. The three powers struggled to dominate the Malay peninsula and the surrounding islands. Johor founded in the wake of Malacca's conquest grew powerful enough to rival the Portuguese, although it was never able to recapture the city. Instead it expanded in other directions, building in 130 years one of the largest Malay states. In this time the numerous attempts to recapture Malacca led to a strong backlash from the Portuguese, whose raids even reached Johor's capital of Johor Lama in 1587. 

In 1607, the Sultanate of Aceh rose as the powerful and wealthiest state in Malay archipelago. Under Iskandar Muda reign, he extended the sultanate's control over a number of Malay states. A notable conquest was Perak, a tin-producing state on the Peninsula. The strength of his formidable fleet was brought to an end with a disastrous campaign against Malacca in 1629, when the combined Portuguese and Johor forces managed to destroy all his ships and 19,000 troops according to Portuguese account. Aceh forces was not destroyed, however, as Aceh was able to conquer Kedah within the same year and taking many of its citizens to Aceh. The Sultan's son in law, Iskandar Thani, former prince of Pahang later became his successor. The conflict over control of the straits went on until 1641, when the Dutch (allied to Johor) gained control of Malacca.

In the early 17th century the Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie, or VOC) was established. During this time the Dutch were at war with Spain, who obtained the Portuguese Empire due to the Iberian Union. From there they expanded across the archipelago, forming an alliance with Johor and using this to push the Portuguese out of Malacca in 1641. Backed by the Dutch, Johore established a loose hegemony over the Malay states, except Perak, which was able to play off Johore against the Siamese to the north and retain its independence. The Dutch did not interfere in local matters in Malacca, but at the same time diverted most trade to its colonies on Java. 

The weakness of the small coastal Malay states led to the immigration of the Bugis, escaping from Dutch colonisation of Sulawesi, who established numerous settlements on the peninsula which they used to interfere with Dutch trade. They seized control of Johor following the assassination of the last Sultan of the old Melaka royal line in 1699. Bugis expanded their power in the states of Johor, Kedah, Perak, and Selangor. The Minangkabau from center Sumatra migrated into Malaya, and eventually established their own state in Negeri Sembilan. The fall of Johore left a power vacuum on the Malay Peninsula which was partly filled by the Siamese kings of Ayutthaya kingdom, who made the five northern Malay statesKedah, Kelantan, Patani, Perlis, and Terengganu  their vassals. Johores eclipse also left Perak as the unrivalled leader of the Malay states.

The economic importance of Malaya to Europe grew rapidly during the 18th century. The fast-growing tea trade between China and United Kingdom increased the demand for high-quality Malayan tin, which was used to line tea-chests. Malayan pepper also had a high reputation in Europe, while Kelantan and Pahang had gold mines. The growth of tin and gold mining and associated service industries led to the first influx of foreign settlers into the Malay worldinitially Arabs and Indians, later Chinesewho colonised the towns and soon dominated economic activities. This established a pattern which characterised Malayan society for the next 200 yearsa rural Malay population increasingly under the domination of wealthy urban immigrant communities, whose power the Sultans were unable to resist.

==British influence==

Evolution of Malaysia
English traders had been present in Malay waters since the 17th century. Until the arrival of the British European power became fully apparent in Malaysia. Before the mid-19th-century British interests in the region were predominantly economic, with little interest in territorial control. Already the most powerful coloniser in India, they were looking towards southeast Asia for new resources. The growth of the China trade in British ships increased the Companys desire for bases in the region. Various islands were used for this purpose, but the first permanent acquisition was Penang, leased from the Sultan of Kedah in 1786. This was followed soon after by the leasing of a block of territory on the mainland opposite Penang (known as Province Wellesley). In 1795, during the Napoleonic Wars, the British with the consent of the Netherlands occupied Dutch Melaka to forestall possible French interest in the area. 

When Malacca was handed back to the Dutch in 1815, the British governor, Stamford Raffles, looked for an alternative base, and in 1819 he acquired Singapore from the Sultan of Johor. The exchange of the British colony of Bencoolen for Malacca with the Dutch left the British as the sole colonial power on the peninsula. The territories of the British were set up as free ports, attempting to break the monopoly held by other colonial powers as the time, and making them large bases of trade. They allowed Britain to control all trade through the straits of Malacca. British influence was increased by Malayan fears of Siamese expansionism, to which Britain made a useful counterweight. During the 19th century the Malay Sultans aligned themselves the British Empire, due to the benefits of associations with the British and the belief in superior British civilisation. 

In 1824 British hegemony in Malaya (before the name Malaysia) was formalised by the Anglo-Dutch Treaty, which divided the Malay archipelago between Britain and the Netherlands. The Dutch evacuated Melaka and renounced all interest in Malaya, while the British recognised Dutch rule over the rest of the East Indies. By 1826 the British controlled Penang, Malacca, Singapore, and the island of Labuan, which they established as the crown colony of the Straits Settlements, administered first under the East India Company until 1867, when they were transferred to the Colonial Office in London. 

===Federated and Unfederated Malay States===
Initially, the British followed a policy of non-intervention in relation between the Malay states. See: by the Government of the United Kingdom The commercial importance of tin mining in the Malay states to merchants in the Straits Settlements led to infighting between the aristocracy on the peninsula. The destabilisation of these states damaged the commerce in the area, causing British intervention. The wealth of Peraks tin mines made political stability there a priority for British investors, and Perak was thus the first Malay state to agree to the supervision of a British resident. British gunboat diplomacy was employed to bring about a peaceful resolution to civil disturbances caused by Chinese and Malay gangsters employed in a political tussle between Ngah Ibrahim and Raja Muda Abdullah. The Pangkor Treaty of 1874 paved the way for the expansion of British influence in Malaya. The British concluded treaties with some Malay states, installing residents who advised the Sultans and soon became the effective rulers of their states. These advisors held power in everything except to do with Malay religion and customs. 

Johore alone resisted, by modernising and giving British and Chinese investors legal protection. By the turn of the 20th century, the states of Pahang, Selangor, Perak, and Negeri Sembilan, known together as the Federated Malay States, had British advisors. In 1909 the Siamese kingdom was compelled to cede Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis and Terengganu, which already had British advisors, over to the British. Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor and Queen Victoria were personal acquaintances who recognised each other as equals. It was not until 1914 that Sultan Abu Bakar's successor, Sultan Ibrahim accepted a British adviser. The four previously Thai states and Johor were known as the Unfederated Malay States. The states under the most direct British control developed rapidly, becoming the largest suppliers in the world of first tin, then rubber. 

===19th-century Borneo===
During the late 19th century the British also gained control of the north coast of Borneo, where Dutch rule had never been established. Development on the Peninsula and Borneo were generally separate until the 19th century. The eastern part of this region (now Sabah) was under the nominal control of the Sultan of Sulu, a vassal of the Spanish Philippines. The rest was the territory of the Sultanate of Brunei. In 1841, British adventurer James Brooke helped the Sultan of Brunei suppress a revolt, and in return received the title of raja and the right to govern the Sarawak River District. In 1846, his title was recognised as hereditary, and the "White Rajahs" began ruling Sarawak as a recognised independent state. The Brookes expanded Sarawak at the expense of Brunei. 

In 1881, the British North Borneo Company was granted control of the territory of British North Borneo, appointing a governor and legislature. It was ruled from the office in London. Its status was similar to that of a British Protectorate, and like Sarawak it expanded at the expense of Brunei. The Philippines never recognised the loss of the Sultan of Sulus territory, laying the basis of the subsequent Filipino claim to eastern Sabah. In 1888, what was left of Brunei was made a British protectorate, and in 1891 another Anglo-Dutch treaty formalised the border between British and Dutch Borneo.

By 1910, the pattern of British rule in the Malay lands was established. The Straits Settlements were a Crown Colony, ruled by a governor under the supervision of the Colonial Office in London. Their population was about half Chinese, but all residents, regardless of race, were British subjects. The first four states to accept British residents, Perak, Selangor, Negeri Sembilan, and Pahang, were termed the Federated Malay States: while technically independent, they were placed under a Resident-General in 1895, making them British colonies in all but name. The Unfederated Malay States (Johore, Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis, and Terengganu) had a slightly larger degree of independence, although they were unable to resist the wishes of their British Residents for long. Johore, as Britains closest ally in Malay affairs, had the privilege of a written constitution, which gave the Sultan the right to appoint his own Cabinet, but he was generally careful to consult the British first. 

==Race relations==
Unlike some colonial powers, the British always saw their empire as primarily an economic concern, and its colonies were expected to turn a profit for British shareholders. Malayas obvious attractions were its tin and gold mines, but British planters soon began to experiment with tropical plantation cropstapioca, gambier, pepper, and coffee. But in 1877 the rubber plant was introduced from Brazil, and rubber soon became Malayas staple export, stimulated by booming demand from European industry. Rubber was later joined by palm oil as an export earner. All these industries required a large and disciplined labour force, and the British did not regard the Malays as reliable workers. The solution was the importation of plantation workers from India, mainly Tamil-speakers from South India. The mines, mills and docks also attracted a flood of immigrant workers from southern China. Soon towns like Singapore, Penang, and Ipoh were majority Chinese, as was Kuala Lumpur, founded as a tin-mining centre in 1857. By 1891, when Malayas first census was taken, Perak and Selangor, the main tin-mining states, had Chinese majorities.

The Chinese mostly arrived poor; yet, their belief in industriousness and frugality, their emphasis in their children's education and their maintenance of Confucian family hierarchy, as well as their voluntary connection with tightly knit networks of mutual aid societies (run by "Hui-Guan" , or non-profit organisations with nominal geographic affiliations from different parts of China) all contributed to their prosperity. In the 1890s Yap Ah Loy, who held the title of Kapitan China of Kuala Lumpur, was the richest man in Malaya, owning a chain of mines, plantations and shops. Malayas banking and insurance industries were run by the Chinese from the start, and Chinese businesses, usually in partnership with London firms, soon had a stranglehold on the economy. Since the Malay Sultans tended to spend well beyond their means, they were soon indebted to Chinese bankers, and this gave the Chinese political as well as economic leverage. At first the Chinese immigrants were mostly men, and many intended to return home when they had made their fortunes. Many did go home, but many more stayed. At first they married Malay women, producing a community of Sino-Malayans or baba people, but soon they began importing Chinese brides, establishing permanent communities and building schools and temples.

The Indians were initially less successful, since unlike the Chinese they came mainly as indentured labourers to work in the rubber plantations, and had few of the economic opportunities that the Chinese had. They were also a less united community, since they were divided between Hindus and Muslims and along lines of language and caste. An Indian commercial and professional class emerged during the early 20th century, but the majority of Indians remained poor and uneducated in rural ghettos in the rubber-growing areas.

Traditional Malay society had great difficulty coping with both the loss of political sovereignty to the British and of economic power to the Chinese. By the early 20th century it seemed possible that the Malays would become a minority in their own country. The Sultans, who were seen as collaborators with both the British and the Chinese, lost some of their traditional prestige, particularly among the increasing number of Malays with a western education, but the mass of rural Malays continued to revere the Sultans and their prestige was thus an important prop for colonial rule. A small class of Malay nationalist intellectuals began to emerge during the early 20th century, and there was also a revival of Islam in response to the perceived threat of other imported religions, particularly Christianity. In fact few Malays converted to Christianity, although many Chinese did. The northern regions, which were less influenced by western ideas, became strongholds of Islamic conservatism, as they have remained.

The one consolation to Malay pride was that the British allowed them a virtual monopoly of positions in the police and local military units, as well as a majority of those administrative positions open to non-Europeans. While the Chinese mostly built and paid for their own schools and colleges, importing teachers from China, the colonial government fostered education for Malays, opening Malay College in 1905 and creating the Malay Administrative Service in 1910. (The college was dubbed Bab ud-Darajat  the Gateway to High Rank.) A Malay Teachers College followed in 1922, and a Malay Womens Training College in 1935. All this reflected the official British policy that Malaya belonged to the Malays, and that the other races were but temporary residents. This view was increasingly out of line with reality, and contained the seeds of much future trouble.

The Malay teacher's college had lectures and writings that nurtured Malay nationalism and anti-colonialist sentiments. Due to this it is known as the birthplace of Malay nationalism. In 1938, Ibrahim Yaacob, an alumnus of Sultan Idris College, established the Kesatuan Melayu Muda (Young Malays Union or KMM) in Kuala Lumpur. It was the first nationalist political organisation in British Malaya, advocating for the union of all Malays regardless of origin, and fighting for Malay rights and against British Imperialism. A specific ideal the KMM held was Panji Melayu Raya, which called for the unification of British Malaya and Dutch East Indies. 

In the years before World War II, the British were concerned with finding the balance between a centralised state and maintaining the power of the Sultans in Malaya. There were no moves to give Malaya a unitary government, and in fact in 1935 the position of Resident-General of the Federated States was abolished, and its powers decentralised to the individual states. With their usual tendency to racial stereotyping, the British regarded the Malays as amiable but unsophisticated and rather lazy, incapable of self-government, although making good soldiers under British officers. They regarded the Chinese as clever but dangerousand indeed during the 1920s and 1930s, reflecting events in China, the Chinese Nationalist Party (the Kuomintang) and the Communist Party of China built rival clandestine organisations in Malaya, leading to regular disturbances in the Chinese towns. The British saw no way that Malayas disparate collection of states and races could become a nation, let alone an independent one.

==War and emergency==
Tugu Negara, the Malaysian national monument is dedicated to those who fell during World War II and the Malayan Emergency
Malaya saw little action during World War I, except for the sinking of the Russian cruiser Zhemchug by the German submarine Emden on 28 October 1914 during the Battle of Penang.

The outbreak of war in the Pacific in December 1941 found the British in Malaya completely unprepared. During the 1930s, anticipating the rising threat of Japanese naval power, they had built a great naval base at Singapore, but never anticipated an invasion of Malaya from the north. Because of the demands of the war in Europe, there was virtually no British air capacity in the Far East. The Japanese were thus able to attack from their bases in French Indo-China with impunity, and despite stubborn resistance from British, Australian, and Indian forces, they overran Malaya in two months. Singapore, with no landward defences, no air cover, and no water supply, was forced to surrender in February 1942, doing irreparable damage to British prestige. British North Borneo and Brunei were also occupied.

The Japanese had a racial policy just as the British did. They regarded the Malays as a colonial people liberated from British imperialist rule, and fostered a limited form of Malay nationalism, which gained them some degree of collaboration from the Malay civil service and intellectuals. (Most of the Sultans also collaborated with the Japanese, although they maintained later that they had done so unwillingly.) The Malay nationalist Kesatuan Melayu Muda, advocates of Melayu Raya, collaborated with the Japanese, based on the understanding that Japan would unite the Dutch East Indies, Malaya and Borneo and grant them independence. The occupiers regarded the Chinese, however, as enemy aliens, and treated them with great harshness: during the so-called sook ching (purification through suffering), up to 80,000 Chinese in Malaya and Singapore were killed. Chinese businesses were expropriated and Chinese schools either closed or burned down. Not surprisingly the Chinese, led by the Malayan Communist Party (MCP), became the backbone of the Malayan Peoples' Anti-Japanese Army (MPAJA), which with British assistance became the most effective resistance force in the occupied Asian countries.

Although the Japanese argued that they supported Malay nationalism, they offended Malay nationalism by allowing their ally Thailand to re-annex the four northern states, Kedah, Perlis, Kelantan, and Terengganu that had been surrendered to the British in 1909. The loss of Malayas export markets soon produced mass unemployment which affected all races and made the Japanese increasingly unpopular.

During occupation, ethnic tensions were raised and nationalism grew. The Malayans were thus on the whole glad to see the British back in 1945, but things could not remain as they were before the war, and a stronger desire for independence grew. Britain was bankrupt and the new Labour government was keen to withdraw its forces from the East as soon as possible. Colonial self-rule and eventual independence were now British policy. The tide of colonial nationalism sweeping through Asia soon reached Malaya. But most Malays were more concerned with defending themselves against the Malayan Communist Party (MCP) which was mostly made up of Chinese, than with demanding independence from the British; indeed, their immediate concern was that the British not leave and abandon the Malays to the armed Communists of the MPAJA, which was the largest armed force in the country.

Japanese troops moving through Kuala Lumpur during their advance through Malaya

In 1944 the British drew up plans for a Malayan Union, which would turn the Federated and Unfederated Malay States, plus Penang and Malacca (but not Singapore), into a single Crown colony, with a view towards independence. The Bornean territories and Singapore were left out as it was thought this would make union more difficult to achieve. There was however strong opposition from the Malays, who opposed the weakening of the Malay rulers and the granting of citizenship to the ethnic Chinese and other minorities. The British had decided on equality between races as they perceived the Chinese and Indians as more loyal to the British during the war than the Malays. The Sultans, who had initially supported it, backed down and placed themselves at the head of the resistance.

In 1946 the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) was founded by Malay nationalists led by Dato Onn bin Jaafar, the Chief Minister of Johore. UMNO favoured independence for Malaya, but only if the new state was run exclusively by the Malays. Faced with implacable Malay opposition, the British dropped the plan for equal citizenship. The Malayan Union was thus established in 1946, and was dissolved in 1948 and replaced by the Federation of Malaya, which restored the autonomy of the rulers of the Malay states under British protection.

Meanwhile the Communists were moving towards open insurrection. The MPAJA had been disbanded in December 1945, and the MCP organised as a legal political party, but the MPAJAs arms were carefully stored for future use. The MCP policy was for immediate independence with full equality for all races. This meant it recruited very few Malays. The Partys strength was in the Chinese-dominated trade unions, particularly in Singapore, and in the Chinese schools, where the teachers, mostly born in China, saw the Communist Party of China as the leader of Chinas national revival. In March 1947, reflecting the international Communist movements turn to left as the Cold War set in, the MCP leader Lai Tek was purged and replaced by the veteran MPAJA guerrilla leader Chin Peng, who turned the party increasingly to direct action. These rebels, under the leadership of the Malayan Communist Party, launched guerrilla operations designed to force the British out of Malaya. In July, following a string of assassinations of plantation managers, the colonial government struck back, declaring a State of Emergency, banning the MCP and arresting hundreds of its militants. The Party retreated to the jungle and formed the Malayan Peoples Liberation Army, with about 13,000 men under arms, all Chinese.

The Malayan Emergency as it was known, lasted from 1948 to 1960, and involved a long anti-insurgency campaign by Commonwealth troops in Malaya. The British strategy, which proved ultimately successful, was to isolate the MCP from its support base by a combination of economic and political concessions to the Chinese and the resettlement of Chinese squatters into New Villages in white areas free of MCP influence. The effective mobilisation of the Malays against the MCP was also an important part of the British strategy. From 1949 the MCP campaign lost momentum and the number of recruits fell sharply. Although the MCP succeeded in assassinating the British High Commissioner, Sir Henry Gurney, in October 1951, this turn to terrorist tactics alienated many moderate Chinese from the Party. The arrival of Lt.-Gen Sir Gerald Templer as British commander in 1952 was the beginning of the end of the Emergency. Templer invented the techniques of counter-insurgency warfare in Malaya and applied them ruthlessly. Although the insurgency was defeated Commonwealth troops remained with the backdrop of the Cold War. "Malaya: Siege's End", Time, New York, 2 May 1960. Against this backdrop, independence for the Federation within the Commonwealth was granted on 31 August 1957, "A New Nation", Time, New York, 9 September 1957 with Tunku Abdul Rahman as the first prime minister. 

==Towards Malaysia==
Dataran Merdeka (Independence Square) in Kuala Lumpur, where Malaysians celebrate Independence Day on 31 August each year
Chinese reaction against the MCP was shown by the formation of the Malayan Chinese Association (MCA) in 1949 as a vehicle for moderate Chinese political opinion. Its leader Tan Cheng Lock favoured a policy of collaboration with UMNO to win Malayan independence on a policy of equal citizenship, but with sufficient concessions to Malay sensitivities to ease nationalist fears. Tan formed a close collaboration with Tunku (Prince) Abdul Rahman, the Chief Minister of Kedah and from 1951 successor to Datuk Onn as leader of UMNO. Since the British had announced in 1949 that Malaya would soon become independent whether the Malayans liked it or not, both leaders were determined to forge an agreement their communities could live with as a basis for a stable independent state. The UMNO-MCA Alliance, which was later joined by the Malayan Indian Congress (MIC), won convincing victories in local and state elections in both Malay and Chinese areas between 1952 and 1955. See: 

The introduction of elected local government was another important step in defeating the Communists. After Joseph Stalins death in 1953, there was a split in the MCP leadership over the wisdom of continuing the armed struggle. Many MCP militants lost heart and went home, and by the time Templer left Malaya in 1954 the Emergency was over, although Chin Peng led a diehard group that lurked in the inaccessible country along the Thai border for many years. The Emergency left a lasting legacy of bitterness between Malays and Chinese.

During 1955 and 1956 UMNO, the MCA and the British hammered out a constitutional settlement for a principle of equal citizenship for all races. In exchange, the MCA agreed that Malayas head of state would be drawn from the ranks of the Malay Sultans, that Malay would be the official language, and that Malay education and economic development would be promoted and subsidised. In effect this meant that Malaya would be run by the Malays, particularly since they continued to dominate the civil service, the army and the police, but that the Chinese and Indians would have proportionate representation in the Cabinet and the parliament, would run those states where they were the majority, and would have their economic position protected. The difficult issue of who would control the education system was deferred until after independence. This came on August 31, 1957, when Tunku Abdul Rahman became the first Prime Minister of independent Malaya.

This left the unfinished business of the other British-ruled territories in the region. After the Japanese surrender the Brooke family and the British North Borneo Company gave up their control of Sarawak and North Borneo respectively, and these became British Crown Colonies. They were much less economically developed than Malaya, and their local political leaderships were too weak to demand independence. Singapore, with its large Chinese majority, achieved autonomy in 1955, and in 1959 the young socialist leader Lee Kuan Yew became Prime Minister. The Sultan of Brunei remained as a British client in his oil-rich enclave. Between 1959 and 1962 the British government orchestrated complex negotiations between these local leaders and the Malayan government.

In 1961 Abdul Rahman mooted the idea of forming "Malaysia", which would consist of Brunei, Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore, all of which had been British colonies. The reasoning behind this was that this would allow the central government to control and combat communist activities, especially in Singapore. It was also feared that if Singapore achieved independence, it would become a base for Chinese chauvinists to threaten Malayan sovereignty. To balance out the ethnic composition of the new nation, the other states, whose Malay and indigenous populations would cancel out the Singaporean Chinese majority, were also included. Shuid, Mahdi & Yunus, Mohd. Fauzi (2001). Malaysian Studies, p. 29. Longman. ISBN 983-74-2024-3. 

Although Lee Kuan Yew supported the proposal, his opponents from the Singaporean Socialist Front resisted, arguing that this was a ploy for the British to continue controlling the region. Most political parties in Sarawak were also against the merger, and in North Borneo, where there were no political parties, community representatives also stated their opposition. Although the Sultan of Brunei supported the merger, the Parti Rakyat Brunei opposed it as well. At the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in 1961, Abdul Rahman explained his proposal further to its opponents. In October, he obtained agreement from the British government to the plan, provided that feedback be obtained from the communities involved in the merger.

The Cobbold Commission, named after its head, Lord Cobbold, conducted a study in the Borneo territories and approved a merger with North Borneo and Sarawak; however, it was found that a substantial number of Bruneians opposed merger. North Borneo drew up a list of points, referred to as the 20-point agreement, proposing terms for its inclusion in the new federation. Sarawak prepared a similar memorandum, known as the 18-point agreement. Some of the points in these agreements were incorporated into the eventual constitution, some were instead accepted orally. These memoranda are often cited by those who believe that Sarawak's and North Borneo's rights have been eroded over time. A referendum was conducted in Singapore to gauge opinion, and 70% supported merger with substantial autonomy given to the state government. Shuid & Yunus, pp. 3031. Adam, Ramlah binti, Samuri, Abdul Hakim bin & Fadzil, Muslimin bin (2004). Sejarah Tingkatan 3, p. 207. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. ISBN 983-62-8285-8. The Sultanate of Brunei withdrew from the planned merger due to opposition from certain segments of its population as well as arguments over the payment of oil royalties and the status of the Sultan in the planned merger. "Malaysia: Hurray for Harry", Time, New York, 20 September 1963. "Malaysia: Fighting the Federation", Time, New York, 21 December 1962. Additionally, the Bruneian Parti Rakyat Brunei staged an armed revolt, which, though it was put down, was viewed as potentially destabilising to the new nation. Shuid & Yunus, p. 31. 

After reviewing the Cobbold Commission's findings, the British government appointed the Landsdowne Commission to draft a constitution for Malaysia. The eventual constitution was essentially the same as the 1957 constitution, albeit with some rewording. For instance, giving recognition to the special position of the natives of the Borneo States. North Borneo, Sarawak and Singapore were also granted some autonomy unavailable to the states of Malaya. After negotiations in July 1963, it was agreed that Malaysia would come into being on 31 August 1963, consisting of Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak and Singapore. The date was to coincide with the independence day of Malaya and the British giving self-rule to Sarawak and North Borneo. However, the Philippines and Indonesia strenuously objected to this development, with Indonesia claiming Malaysia represented a form of "neocolonialism" and the Philippines claiming North Borneo as its territory. The opposition from the Indonesian government led by Sukarno and attempts by the Sarawak United People's Party delayed the formation of Malaysia. Due to these factors, an eight-member UN team had to be formed to re-ascertain whether North Borneo and Sarawak truly wanted to join Malaysia. "Malaysia: Tunku Yes, Sukarno No", Time, New York, 6 September 1963. Malaysia formally came into being on 16 September 1963, consisting of Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore. In 1963 the total population of Malaysia was about 10 million.

==Challenges of independence==
At the time of independence Malaya had great economic advantages. It was among the worlds leading producers of three valuable commodities, rubber, tin, and palm oil, and also a significant iron ore producer. These export industries gave the Malayan government a healthy surplus to invest in industrial development and infrastructure projects. Like other developing nations in the 1950s and 1960s, Malaya (and later Malaysia) placed great stress on state planning, although UMNO was never a socialist party. The First and Second Malayan Plans (195660 and 196165 respectively) stimulated economic growth through state investment in industry and repairing infrastructure such as roads and ports, which had been damaged and neglected during the war and the Emergency. The government was keen to reduce Malayas dependence on commodity exports, which put the country at the mercy of fluctuating prices. The government was also aware that demand for natural rubber was bound to fall as the production and use of synthetic rubber expanded. Since a third of the Malay workforce worked in the rubber industry it was important to develop alternative sources of employment. Competition for Malayas rubber markets meant that the profitability of the rubber industry increasingly depended on keeping wages low, which perpetuated rural Malay poverty.

===Foreign objection===
Indonesian President Sukarno, backed by the powerful Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI), chose to regard Malaysia as a "neocolonialist" plot against his country, and backed a Communist insurgency in Sarawak, mainly involving elements of the local Chinese community. Indonesian irregular forces were infiltrated into Sarawak, where they were contained by Malaysian and Commonwealth of Nations forces. This period of Konfrontasi, an economic, political, and military confrontation lasted until the downfall of Sukarno in 1966. The Philippines objected to the formation of the federation, claiming North Borneo was part of Sulu, and thus the Philippines. In 1966 the new president, Ferdinand Marcos, dropped the claim, although it has since been revived and is still a point of contention marring Philippine-Malaysian relations. 

===Racial strife===
The Depression of the 1930s, followed by the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War, had the effect of ending Chinese emigration to Malaya. This stabilised the demographic situation and ended the prospect of the Malays becoming a minority in their own country. At the time of independence in 1957, the Malays were 55% of the population, the Chinese 35% and the Indians 10%. This balance was altered by the inclusion of the majority Chinese Singapore, upsetting many Malays. The federation increased the Chinese proportion to close to 40%. Both UMNO and the MCA were nervous about the possible appeal of Lee's People's Action Party (then seen as a radical socialist party) to voters in Malaya, and tried to organise a party in Singapore to challenge Lee's position there. Lee in turn threatened to run PAP candidates in Malaya at the 1964 federal elections, despite an earlier agreement that he would not do so (see PAP-UMNO Relations). Racial tensions intensified as PAP created an opposition alliance aiming for equality between races. This provoked Tunku Abdul Rahman to demand that Singapore withdraw from Malaysia, which it did in August 1965. 

The most vexed issues of independent Malaysia were education and the disparity of economic power among the ethnic communities. The Malays felt unhappy with the wealth of the Chinese community, even after the expulsion of Singapore. Malay political movements emerged based around this. However, since there was no effective opposition party, these issues were contested mainly within the coalition government, which won all but one seat in the first post-independence Malayan Parliament. The two issues were related, since the Chinese advantage in education played a large part in maintaining their control of the economy, which the UMNO leaders were determined to end. The MCA leaders were torn between the need to defend their own communitys interests and the need to maintain good relations with UMNO. This produced a crisis in the MCA in 1959, in which a more assertive leadership under Lim Chong Eu defied UMNO over the education issue, only to be forced to back down when Tunku Abdul Rahman threatened to break up the coalition.

The Education Act of 1961 put UMNOs victory on the education issue into legislative form. Henceforward Malay and English would be the only teaching languages in secondary schools, and state primary schools would teach in Malay only. Although the Chinese and Indian communities could maintain their own Chinese and Tamil-language primary schools, all their students were required to learn Malay, and to study an agreed Malayan curriculum. Most importantly, the entry exam to the University of Malaya (which moved from Singapore to Kuala Lumpur in 1963) would be conducted in Malay, even though most teaching at the university was in English until the 1970s. This had the effect of excluding many Chinese students. At the same time Malay schools were heavily subsidised, and Malays were given preferential treatment. This obvious defeat for the MCA greatly weakened its support in the Chinese community.

As in education, the UMNO governments unspoken agenda in the field of economic development was to shift economic power away from the Chinese and towards the Malays. The two Malayan Plans, and the First Malaysian Plan (196670), directed resources heavily into developments which would benefit the rural Malay community, such as village schools, rural roads, clinics, and irrigation projects. Several agencies were set up to enable Malay smallholders to upgrade their production and increase their incomes. The Federal Land Development Authority (FELDA) helped many Malays buy farms or upgrade ones they already owned. The state also provided a range of incentives and low-interest loans to help Malays start businesses, and government tendering systematically favoured Malay companies, leading many Chinese-owned businesses to Malayanise their management. All this certainly tended to reduce to gap between Chinese and Malay standards of living, although some argued that this would have happened anyway as Malaysias trade and general prosperity increased.

==The crisis of 1969==

The collaboration of the MCA and the MIC in these policies weakened their hold on the Chinese and Indian electorates. At the same time, the effects of the governments affirmative action policies of the 1950s and 1960s had been to create a discontented class of educated but underemployed Malays. This was a dangerous combination, and led to the formation of a new party, the Malaysian Peoples Movement (Gerakan Rakyat Malaysia) in 1968. Gerakan was a deliberately non-communal party, bringing in Malay trade unionists and intellectuals as well as Chinese and Indian leaders. At the same time, an Islamist party, the Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS) and a Chinese socialist party, the Democratic Action Party (DAP), gained increasing support, at the expense of UMNO and the MCA respectively. 

At the May 1969 federal elections, the UMNO-MCA-MIC Alliance polled only 48% of the vote, although it retained a majority in the legislature. The MCA lost most of the Chinese-majority seats to Gerakan or DAP candidates. The victorious opposition celebrated by holding a motorcade on the main streets of Kuala Lumpur with supporters holding up brooms as a signal of its intention to make sweeping changes. Fear of what the changes might mean for them (as much of the country's businesses were Chinese-owned), a Malay backlash resulted, leading rapidly to riots and inter-communal violence in which about 6,000 Chinese homes and businesses were burned and at least 184 people were killed. The government declared a state of emergency, and a National Operations Council, headed by Deputy Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak, took power from the government of Tunku Abdul Rahman, who, in September 1970, was forced to retire in favour of Abdul Razak. It consisted of nine members, mostly Malay, and wielded full political and military power. 

Using the Emergency-era Internal Security Act (ISA), the new government suspended Parliament and political parties, imposed press censorship and placed severe restrictions on political activity. The ISA gave the government power to intern any person indefinitely without trial. These powers were widely used to silence the governments critics, and have never been repealed. The Constitution was changed to make illegal any criticism, even in Parliament, of the Malaysian monarchy, the special position of Malays in the country, or the status of Malay as the national language.

In 1971 Parliament reconvened, and a new government coalition, the National Front (Barisan Nasional), took office. This included UMNO, the MCA, the MIC, the much weakened Gerakan, and regional parties in Sabah and Sarawak. The DAP was left outside as the only significant opposition party. The PAS also joined the Front but was expelled in 1977. Abdul Razak held office until his death in 1976. He was succeeded by Datuk Hussein Onn, the son of UMNOs founder Onn Jaafar, and then by Tun Mahathir bin Mohamad, who had been Education Minister since 1981, and who held power for 22 years. During these years policies were put in place which led to the rapid transformation of Malaysias economy and society, such as the controversial New Economic Policy, which was intended to increase proportionally the share of the economic "pie" of the bumiputras ("indigenous people", which includes the majority Malays, but not always the indigenous population) as compared to other ethnic groupswas launched by Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak. Malaysia has since maintained a delicate ethno-political balance, with a system of government that has attempted to combine overall economic development with political and economic policies that promote equitable participation of all races. 

==Modern Malaysia==

Kuala Lumpur, a blend of old and new.
In 1970 three quarters of Malaysians living below the poverty line were Malays, the majority of Malays were still rural workers, and Malays were still largely excluded from the modern economy. The governments response was the New Economic Policy of 1971, which was to be implemented through a series of four five-year plans from 1971 to 1990. The plan had two objectives: the elimination of poverty, particularly rural poverty, and the elimination of the identification between race and prosperity. This latter policy was understood to mean a decisive shift in economic power from the Chinese to the Malays, who until then made up only 5% of the professional class. 

Poverty was tackled through an agricultural policy which resettled 250,000 Malays on newly cleared farmland, more investment in rural infrastructure, and the creation of free trade zones in rural areas to create new manufacturing jobs. Little was done to improve the living standards of the low-paid workers in plantation agriculture, although this group steadily declined as a proportion of the workforce. By 1990 the poorest parts of Malaysia were rural Sabah and Sarawak, which lagged significantly behind the rest of the country. During the 1970s and 80s rural poverty did decline, particularly in the Malayan Peninsula, but critics of the governments policy contend that this was mainly due to the growth of overall national prosperity (due in large part to the discovery of important oil and gas reserves) and migration of rural people to the cities rather than to state intervention. These years saw rapid growth in Malaysian cities, particularly Kuala Lumpur, which became a magnet for immigration both from rural Malaya and from poorer neighbours such as Indonesia, Bangladesh, Thailand and the Philippines. Urban poverty became a problem for the first time, with shanty towns growing up around the cities.

The second arm of government policy, driven mainly by Mahathir first as Education Minister and then as Prime Minister, was the transfer of economic power to the Malays. Mahathir greatly expanded the number of secondary schools and universities throughout the country, and enforced the policy of teaching in Malay rather than English. This had the effect of creating a large new Malay professional class. It also created an unofficial barrier against Chinese access to higher education, since few Chinese are sufficiently fluent in Malay to study at Malay-language universities. Chinese families therefore sent their children to universities in Singapore, Australia, Britain or the United States  by 2000, for example, 60,000 Malaysians held degrees from Australian universities. This had the unintended consequence of exposing large numbers of Malaysians to life in Western countries, creating a new source of discontent. Mahathir also greatly expanded educational opportunities for Malay women  by 2000 half of all university students were women.

Petronas Twin Towers, Kuala Lumpur the tallest building in South-East Asia.
To find jobs for all these new Malay graduates, the government created several agencies for intervention in the economy. The most important of these were PERNAS (National Corporation Ltd.), PETRONAS (National Petroleum Ltd.), and HICOM (Heavy Industry Corporation of Malaysia), which not only directly employed many Malays but also invested in growing areas of the economy to create new technical and administrative jobs which were preferentially allocated to Malays. As a result, the share of Malay equity in the economy rose from 1.5% in 1969 to 20.3% in 1990, and the percentage of businesses of all kinds owned by Malays rose from 39 percent to 68 percent. This latter figure was deceptive because many businesses that appeared to be Malay-owned were still indirectly controlled by Chinese, but there is no doubt that the Malay share of the economy considerably increased. The Chinese remained disproportionately powerful in Malaysian economic life, but by 2000 the distinction between Chinese and Malay business was fading as many new corporations, particularly in growth sectors such as information technology, were owned and managed by people from both ethnic groups.

Malaysias rapid economic progress since 1970, which was only temporarily disrupted by the Asian financial crisis of 1997, has not been matched by change in Malaysian politics. The repressive measures passed in 1970 remain in place. Malaysia has had regular elections since 1974, and although campaigning is reasonably free at election time, it is in effect a one-party state, with the UMNO-controlled National Front usually winning nearly all the seats, while the DAP wins some Chinese urban seats and the PAS some rural Malay ones. Since the DAP and the PAS have diametrically opposed policies, they have been unable to form an effective opposition coalition. There is almost no criticism of the government in the media and public protest remains severely restricted. The ISA continues to be used to silence dissidents, and the members of the UMNO youth movement are deployed to physically intimidate opponents.

===Mahathir administration===
Mahathir bin Mohamad was the leading force in making Malaysia into a major industrial power.
The restoration of democracy after the 1969 crisis caused disputes in the UMNO, a struggle of power which increased after the death of Tun Abdul Razak. The ailing Datuk Hussein Bin Onn replaced him, but the fight for control shifted to appointing the deputy prime minister. Mahathir bin Mahamad was chosen, an advocate of Bumiputra who also tried to benefit the other ethnic communities. 

Under the premiership of Mahathir bin Mohamad, Malaysia experienced economic growth from the 1980s, a 198586 property market depression, and returned to growth through to the mid-1990s. Mahathir increased privatisation and introduced the New Development Policy (NDP), designed to increase economic wealth for all Malaysians, rather than just Malays. The period saw a shift from an agriculture-based economy to one based on manufacturing and industry in areas such as computers and consumer electronics. It was during this period, too, that the physical landscape of Malaysia changed with the emergence of numerous mega-projects. Notable amongst these projects were the construction of the Petronas Twin Towers (at the time the tallest building in the world, and, as of 2010, still the tallest twin building), KL International Airport (KLIA), the North-South Expressway, the Sepang International Circuit, the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC), the Bakun hydroelectric dam, and Putrajaya, the new federal administrative capital.

Under Mahathir bin Mohamads long Prime Ministership (19812003), Malaysias political culture became increasingly centralised and authoritarian, due to Mahathir's belief that the multiethnic Malaysia could only remain stable through controlled democracy. In 198687, he faced leadership challenges among his own party. The Internal Security Act was invoked in October 1987 arresting 106 people, including opposition leaders. The head of the judiciary and five members of the supreme court who had questioned his use of the ISA were also arrested, and a clampdown on Malaysia's press occurred. 

This culminated in the dismissal and imprisonment on unsubstantiated charges of the Deputy Prime Minister, Anwar Ibrahim, in 1997 after an internal dispute within the government. The complicity of the judiciary in this piece of persecution was seen as a particularly clear sign of the decline of Malaysian democracy. The Anwar affair led to the formation of a new party, the People's Justice Party, or Keadilan, led by Anwars wife, Wan Azizah Wan Ismail. At the 1999 elections Keadilan formed a coalition with the DAP and the PAS known as the Alternative Front (Barisan Alternatif). The result of this was that the PAS won a number of Malay seats from UMNO, but many Chinese voters disapproved of this unnatural alliance with the Islamist PAS, causing the DAP to lose many of its seats to the MCA, including that of its veteran leader, Lim Kit Siang. Wan Azizah won her husbands former constituency in Penang but otherwise Keadilan made little impact.

In the late 1990s, Malaysia was shaken by the Asian financial crisis, which damaged Malaysia's assembly line-based economy. Mahathir combated it initially with IMF approved policies. However, the devaluation of the Ringgit and the deepening recession caused him to create his own programme, based on protecting Malaysia from foreign investors and reinvigorating the economy through construction projects and the lowering of interest rates. The policies caused Malaysia's economy to rebound by 2002, but brought disagreement between Mahathir and his deputy, Anwar Ibrahim, who backed the IMF policies. This led to the sacking of the Anwar, causing political unrest. Anwar was arrested and banned from politics on what are considered trumped up charges. In 2003 Mahathir, Malaysia's longest serving prime minister, voluntarily retired in favour of his new deputy, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi. In November 2007 two anti-government rallies occurred, precipitated by allegations of corruption and discrepancies in the election system that heavily favoured the ruling political party, National Front, which has been in power since Malaya achieved independence. 

===Badawi administration===
Dato Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi freed Anwar, which was seen as a portent of a mild liberalisation. At the 2004 election, the National Front led by Abdullah had a massive victory, virtually wiping out the PAS and Keadilan, although theDAPrecovered the seats it had lost in 1999. This victory was seen as the result mainly of Abdullah's personal popularity and the strong recovery of Malaysias economy, which has lifted the living standards of most Malaysians to almost first world standards, coupled with an ineffective opposition. The government's objective is for Malaysia to become a fully developed country by 2020 as expressed in Wawasan 2020. It leaves unanswered, however, the question of when and how Malaysia will acquire a first world political system (a multi-party democracy, a free press, an independent judiciary and the restoration of civil and political liberties) to go with its new economic maturity.

In November 2007, Malaysia was rocked by two anti-government rallies. The 2007 Bersih Rally which was attended by 40,000 people was held in Kuala Lumpur on 10 November 2007, to campaign for electoral reform. It was precipitated by allegations of corruption and discrepancies in the Malaysian election system that heavily favour the ruling political party, Barisan Nasional, which has been in power since Malaysia achieved its independence in 1957. 

 Another rally was held on 25 November 2007, in Kuala Lumpur led by HINDRAF. The rally organiser, the Hindu Rights Action Force, had called the protest over alleged discriminatory policies favouring ethnic Malays. The crowd was estimated to be between 5,000 and 30,000. 30,000 Hindraf protesters rally in KL streets, Malaysiakini, 25 November 2007. In both cases the government and police tried to prevent the gatherings from taking place.

On 16 October 2008, HINDRAF was banned when the government labelled the organisation as "a threat to national security". 

==See also==

* The formation of Malaysia
* History of Southeast Asia
* List of Prime Ministers of Malaysia
* Japanese occupation of Malaya
* Japanese occupation of British Borneo

==Notes==

==References==
*
*Goh, Cheng Teik (1994). Malaysia: Beyond Communal Politics. Pelanduk Publications. ISBN 967-978-475-4.
*Musa, M. Bakri (1999). The Malay Dilemma Revisited. Merantau Publishers. ISBN 1-58348-367-5.
*Ye, Lin-Sheng (2003). The Chinese Dilemma. East West Publishing. ISBN 0-9751646-1-9.

==External links==
* 
* Economic History of Malaysia
* "Malaysia" entry at Library of Congress

 

[[History of Israel]]

The history of Israel encompasses the history of the modern State of Israel, as well as that of the Jews in the Land of Israel. The area of modern Israel is small, about the size of Wales or half the size of Costa Rica, and is located roughly on the site of the ancient kingdoms of Israel and Judah except that these ancient kingdoms also included what is now the West Bank. It is the birthplace of the Hebrew language spoken in Israel, and of Judaism and Christianity. It contains sites sacred to Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Druze and Bah' Faith.

Although coming under the sway of various empires and home to a variety of ethnicities, the area of ancient Israel was predominantly Jewish until the JewishRoman wars after which Jews became a minority in most regions, except Galilee. The area became increasingly Christian after the 3rd century and then largely Muslim from the 7th century conquest until well past the middle of the 20th century. It was a focal point of conflict between Christianity and Islam between 1096 and 1291, and from the end of the Crusades until the British conquest in 1917 was part of the Syrian province of first the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt and then (from 1517) the Ottoman Empire.

In the late-19th century, persecution of Jews, particularly in Europe, led to the creation of the Zionist movement. Following the British conquest of Syria, the Balfour Declaration in World War I and the formation of the Mandate of Palestine, Aliyah (Jewish immigration to the Land of Israel) increased and gave rise to ArabJewish tensions, and a collision of the Arab and Jewish nationalist movements. Israeli independence in 1948 was marked by massive migration of Jews from both Europe and the Muslim countries to Israel, and of Arabs from Israel leading to the extensive ArabIsraeli conflict. About 42% of the world's Jews live in Israel today.

Since about 1970, the United States has become the principal ally of Israel. In 1979 an uneasy EgyptIsrael Peace Treaty was signed, based on the Camp David Accords. In 1993 Israel signed Oslo I Accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization and in 1994 IsraelJordan Treaty of Peace was signed. Despite efforts to establish peace between Israel and Palestinians, many of whom live in Israel or in Israeli-occupied territories, the conflict continues to play a major role in Israeli and international political, social and economic life.

The economy of Israel was initially primarily socialist and the country dominated by social democratic parties until the 1970s. Since then the Israeli economy has gradually moved to capitalism and a free market economy, partially retaining the social welfare system.

==Ancient times==

===Prehistory===

Between 2.6 and 0.9 million years ago, at least four episodes of hominine dispersal from Africa to the Levant are known, each culturally distinct. The flint tool artifacts of these early humans have been discovered on the territory of the current state of Israel, including, at Yiron, the oldest stone tools found anywhere outside Africa. Other groups include 1.4 million years old Acheulean industry, the Bizat Ruhama group and Gesher Bnot Yaakov. 

In the Carmel mountain range at el-Tabun, and Es Skhul, Neanderthal and early modern human remains were found, including the skeleton of a Neanderthal female, named Tabun I, which is regarded as one of the most important human fossils ever found. Christopher Stringer, custodian of Tabun I, Natural History Museum, quoted in an exhibition in honour of Garrod; Callander and Smith, 1998 The excavation at el-Tabun produced the longest stratigraphic record in the region, spanning 600,000 or more years of human activity, from the Lower Paleolithic to the present day, representing roughly a million years of human evolution. 

===Egyptian rule===
Map of the Ancient Near East during the Amarna Period, showing the great powers of the day: Egypt (orange), Hatti (blue), the Kassite kingdom of Babylon (black), Middle Assyrian Empire (yellow), and Mitanni (brown). The extent of the Achaean/Mycenaean civilization is shown in purple.

During the 2nd millennium BC, Canaan, part of which later became known as Israel, was dominated by Egypt.

===Early Israelites===

The Merneptah stele. While alternative translations exist, the majority of biblical archeologists translate a set of hieroglyphs as "Israel", representing the first instance of the name Israel in the historical record.
The first record of the name Israel (as ) occurs in the Merneptah stele, erected for Egyptian Pharaoh Merneptah c. 1209 BCE, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is not." Stager in Coogan 1998, p. 91. William Dever sees this "Israel" in the central highlands as a cultural and probably political entity, more an ethnic group rather than an organized state. Dever 2003, p. 206. 

Ancestors of the Israelites may have included Semites native to Canaan and the Sea Peoples. Miller 1986, pp. 789. McNutt says, "It is probably safe to assume that sometime during Iron Age I a population began to identify itself as 'Israelite'", differentiating itself from the Canaanites through such markers as the prohibition of intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and religion. McNutt 1999, p. 35. 

The first use of grapheme-based writing originated in the area, probably among Canaanite peoples resident in Egypt. All modern alphabets are descended from this writing. Written evidence of the use of Classical Hebrew exists from about 1000 BCE. It was written using the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet.

Villages had populations of up to 300 or 400, McNutt 1999, p. 70. Miller 2005, p. 98. which lived by farming and herding, and were largely self-sufficient; McNutt 1999, p. 72. economic interchange was prevalent. Miller 2005, p. 99. Writing was known and available for recording, even in small sites. Miller 2005, p. 105. The archaeological evidence indicates a society of village-like centres, but with more limited resources and a small population. Lehman in Vaughn 1992, pp. 15662. 

===Israel and Judah===

Kingdoms of Israel and Judah
The Hebrew Bible describes constant warfare between the Jews and other tribes, including the Philistines, whose capital was Gaza. The Bible states that King David founded a dynasty of kings and that his son Solomon built a Temple. No material evidence indisputably of Solomon's reign has been found. Yigael Yadin's excavations at Hazor, Megiddo, Beit Shean and Gezer uncovered structures that he and others have argued date from his reign, but others, such as Israel Finkelstein and Neil Silberman (who agree that Solomon was historical king), argue that they should be dated to the Omride period, more than a century after Solomon. Finkelstein The Bible Unearthed This building is not mentioned in surviving extra-biblical accounts. Possible references to the "House of David" have been found at two sites, the Tel Dan Stele and the Mesha Stele. Jerusalem: The Biography by Simon Sebag Montefiore pp 28 and 39 Phoenix 2011 Both David and Solomon are widely referenced in Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts.

Around 930 BCE, the kingdom split into a southern Kingdom of Judah and a northern Kingdom of Israel.

It is possible that an alliance between Ahab of Israel and Ben Hadad II of Damascus managed to repulse the incursions of the Assyrians, with a victory at the Battle of Qarqar (854 BCE). (see the Kurkh Monoliths). Kurkh stela: http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=367117&partId=1 For original inscription see http://rbedrosian.com/Downloads3/ancient_records_assyria1.pdf page 223 However, the Kingdom of Israel was eventually destroyed by Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III around 750 BCE. The Philistine kingdom was also destroyed. The Assyrians sent most of the northern Israelite kingdom into exile, thus creating the "Lost Tribes of Israel". The Samaritans claim to be descended from survivors of the Assyrian conquest. An Israelite revolt (724722 BCE) was crushed after the siege and capture of Samaria by the Assyrian king Sargon II. Sargon's son, Sennacherib, tried and failed to conquer Judah. Assyrian records say he levelled 46 walled cities and besieged Jerusalem, leaving after receiving extensive tribute. http://www.utexas.edu/courses/classicalarch/readings/sennprism.html column 2 line 61 to column 3 line 49 

===Babylonian rule 586538 BCE===

In 586 BCE King Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon conquered Judah. According to the Hebrew Bible, he destroyed Solomon's Temple and exiled the Jews to Babylon. The defeat was also recorded by the Babylonians http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/me/c/cuneiform_nebuchadnezzar_ii.aspx See http://www.livius.org/cg-cm/chronicles/abc5/jerusalem.html reverse side, line 12. (see the Babylonian Chronicles). It is believed that the Jewish king, Jehoiakim, switched allegiances between the Egyptians and the Babylonians and that invasion was a punishment for allying with Babylon's principle rival, Egypt. The exiled Jews may have been restricted to the elite.

Jehoiakim was eventually released by the Babylonians (see Jehoiachin's Rations Tablets) and according to both the Bible and the Talmud, the Judean royal family (the Davidic line) continued as head of the exile in Babylon (the Exilarch).

==Classical era (538 BCE636 CE)==

===Persian and Hellenistic rule 538160 BCE===

Second Temple model (Israel Museum)
In 538 BCE, Cyrus the Great of Persia conquered Babylon and took over its empire. Cyrus issued a proclamation granting subjugated nations (including the people of Judah) religious freedom (for the original text see the Cyrus Cylinder). According to the Hebrew Bible 50,000 Judeans, led by Zerubabel, returned to Judah and rebuilt the temple. A second group of 5,000, led by Ezra and Nehemiah, returned to Judah in 456 BCE although non-Jews wrote to Cyrus to try to prevent their return.

Scholars believe that the final Hebrew versions of the Torah and Books of Kings date from this period, that the returning Israelites adopted an Aramaic script (also known as the Ashuri alphabet) which they brought back from Babylon; this is the current Hebrew script. The Hebrew Calendar closely resembles the Babylonian calendar and probably dates from this period.

In 333 BCE, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great defeated Persia and conquered the region. Sometime thereafter, the first translation of the Hebrew Bible, the Septuagint, was begun in Alexandria. After Alexander's death, his generals fought over the territory he had conquered. Judah became the frontier between the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Egypt, eventually becoming part of the Seleucid Empire in 198 BCE. In the 2nd century BCE, Antiochus IV Epiphanes (ruler of the Seleucid Empire) tried to eradicate Judaism in favour of Hellenistic religion. This provoked the 174135 BCE Maccabean Revolt led by Judas Maccabeus (whose victory is celebrated in the Jewish festival of Hanukkah). The Books of the Maccabees describe the uprising and the end of Greek rule. A Jewish party called the Hasideans opposed both Hellenism and the revolt but eventually gave their support to the Maccabees. Modern interpretations see this period as a civil war between Hellenized and orthodox forms of Judaism. 

===Hasmonean dynasty 16037 BCE===

The Hasmonean dynasty of (Jewish) priest-kings ruled Judea with the Pharisees, Saducees and Essenes as the principal Jewish social movements. As part of the struggle against Hellenistic civilization, the Pharisee leader Simeon ben Shetach established the first schools based around meeting houses. Paul Johnson, History of the Jews, p. 106, Harper 1988 This led to Rabbinical Judaism. Justice was administered by the Sanhedrin, which was a Rabbincal assembly and law court whose leader was known as the Nasi. The Nasi's religious authority gradually superseded that of the Temple's high priest (under the Hasmoneans this was the king).

In 125 BCE the Hasmonean King John Hyrcanus subjugated Edom and forcibly converted the population to Judaism. In 64 BCE the Roman general Pompey conquered Syria and intervened in the Hasmonean civil war in Jerusalem. In 47 BCE the lives of Julius Caesar and his protege Cleopatra were saved by 3,000 crack Jewish troops sent by King Hyrcanus II and commanded by Antipater, whose descendants Caesar made kings of Judea. Julius Caesar: The Life and Times of the People's Dictator By Luciano Canfora chapter 24 "Caesar Saved by the Jews". 

===Herodian kingdom 37 BCE6 CE===

From 37 BCE to 6 CE, the Herodian dynasty, Jewish-Roman client kings, descended from Antipater, ruled Judea. Herod the Great considerably enlarged the temple (see Herod's Temple), making it one of the largest religious structures in the world. Despite its fame, it was in this period that Rabbinical Judaism, led by Hillel the Elder, began to assume popular prominence over the Temple priesthood.

The Jewish Temple in Jerusalem was granted special permission not to display an effigy of the emperor, becoming the only religious structure in the Roman Empire that did not do so. Special dispensation was granted for Jewish citizens of the Roman Empire to pay a tax to the temple.

===Roman rule 6390===

Judea was made a Roman province in 6 CE, following the transition of Judean tetrarchy into a Roman realm. Following the next decades, though prosperous, the society suffered increasing tensions between Greco-Roman and Judean populations.

In 64 CE, the High Priest Joshua ben Gamla introduced a religious requirement for Jewish boys to learn to read from the age of 6. Over the next few hundred years this requirement became steadily more ingrained in Jewish traditions. The Chosen Few: How education shaped Jewish History, Botticini and Eckstein, Princeton 2012, page 71 and chapters 4 and 5 

In 66 CE, the Jews of Judea rose in revolt against Rome, naming their new state as "Israel". Martin Goodman, Rome and Jerusalem: The Clash of Ancient Civilizations, Penguin 2008 pp. 1819 The events were described by the Jewish leader/historian Josephus, including the desperate defense of Jotapata, the siege of Jerusalem (6970 CE) and the heroic last stand at Masada under Eleazar ben Yair (7273 CE). Much of Jerusalem and the Temple lay in ruins. During the Jewish revolt, most Christians, at this time a sub-sect of Judaism, removed themselves from Judea. The rabbinical/Pharisee movement led by Yochanan ben Zakai, who opposed the Sadducee temple priesthood, made peace with Rome and survived. After the war Jews continued to be taxed in the Fiscus Judaicus, which was used to fund a temple to Jupiter.
Nabratein synagogue remains in the upper Galilee

From 115 to 117, Jews in Libya, Egypt, Cyprus, Mesopotamia and Lod rose in revolt against Rome. This conflict was accompanied by large-scale massacres of both Romans and Jews. Cyprus was severely depopulated and Jews banned from living there. 

In 131, the Emperor Hadrian renamed Jerusalem "Aelia Capitolina" and constructed a Temple of Jupiter on the site of the former Jewish temple. Jews were banned from living in Jerusalem itself (a ban that persisted until the Arab conquest), and the Roman province, until then known as Iudaea Province, was renamed Palaestina, no other revolt led to a province being renamed. Martin Goodman, Rome and Jerusalem: The Clash of Ancient Civilizations, Penguin 2008 p. 494 The names "Palestine" (in English) and "Filistin" (in Arabic) are derived from this. From 132 to 136, the Jewish leader Simon Bar Kokhba led another major revolt against the Romans, again renaming the country "Israel" Martin Goodman, Rome and Jerusalem: The Clash of Ancient Civilizations, Penguin 2008 p. 490 (see Bar Kochba Revolt coinage). The Bar-Kochba revolt probably caused more trouble for the Romans than the more famous (and better documented) revolt of 70. M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 pp. 1214 The Christians refused to participate in the revolt and from this point the Jews regarded Christianity as a separate religion. M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 p. 143 The revolt was eventually crushed by Emperor Hadrian himself. Although uncertain, it is widely thought that during the Bar Kokhba revolt, when a rabbinical assembly decided which books could be regarded as part of the Hebrew Bible, the Jewish apocrypha were left out. For more information see The Canon Debate edited by McDonald and Sanders, 2002 Hendrickson A rabbi of this period, Simeon bar Yochai, is regarded as the author of the Zohar, the foundational text for Kabbalistic thought. However, modern scholars believe it was written in Medieval Spain. 

After suppressing the Bar Kochba revolt, the Romans exiled most of Jews from Judea, but not from Galilee and permitted a hereditary Rabbinical Patriarch (from the House of Hillel, based in Galilee) to represent the Jews in dealings with the Romans. The most famous of these was Judah haNasi who is credited with compiling the final version of the Mishnah (a massive body of Jewish religious texts interpreting the Bible) and with strengthening the educational demands of Judaism by requiring that illiterate Jews be treated as outcasts. As a result many illiterate Jews may have converted to Christianity. The Chosen Few: How education shaped Jewish History, Botticini and Eckstein, Princeton 2012, page 116 

Jewish seminaries, such as those at Shefaram and Bet Shearim continued to produce scholars and the best of these became members of the Sanhedrin M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 sections II to V which was located first at Tzippori and later at Tiberias. Vailh Simon, "Diocaesarea" in The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 7 Nov. 2013 . Before the Bar-Kochba uprising, an estimated 2/3 of the population of Gallilee and 1/3 of the coastal region were Jewish. M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 chapter I In the Galillee, many Synagogues have been found dating from this period. However, persecution and the economic crisis that affected the Roman empire in the 3rd century led to further Jewish migration from Syria Palaestina to the more tolerant Persian Sassanid Empire, where a prosperous Jewish community with extensive seminaries existed in the area of Babylon.

Early in the 4th century, Constantinople became the capital of the East Roman Empire and Christianity was adopted as the official religion. The name Jerusalem was restored to Aelia Capitolina and it became a Christian city. Jews were still banned from living in Jerusalem, but were allowed to visit, and it is in this period that the surviving Western Wall of the temple became sacred. In 3512, another Jewish revolt in the Galilee erupted against a corrupt Roman governor. Antisemitism: Its History and Causes by Bernard Lazare, 1894. Accessed January 2009 In 362, the last pagan Roman Emperor, Julian the Apostate, announced plans to rebuild the Jewish Temple. He died while fighting the Persians in 363 and the project was discontinued.

===Byzantine rule 390611===

The Roman Empire split in 390 CE and the region became part of the (Christian) East Roman Empire, known as the Byzantine Empire. Byzantines Christianity was dominated by the (Greek) Orthodox Church. In the 5th century, the Western Roman Empire collapsed leading to Christian migration into the Roman province of Palaestina Prima and development of a Christian majority. Jews numbered 1015% of the population, concentrated largely in the Galilee. Judaism was the only non-Christian religion tolerated, but there were bans on Jews building new places of worship, holding public office or owning slaves. Several Samaritan Revolts erupted in this period, M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 chapters XIXII resulting in the decrease of Samaritan community from about a million to a near extinction. Sacred Jewish texts written in the Holyland at this time are the Gemara (400), the Jerusalem Talmud (500) and the Passover Haggadah.

In 611, Sassanid Persia invaded the Byzantine Empire and, after a long siege, Khosrau II captured Jerusalem in 614, with Jewish help, including possibly the Jewish Himyarite Kingdom in Yemen. Jews were left to govern Jerusalem when the Persians took over, though the short-lived Jewish commonwealth lasted only until about 617, when the Persians capitulated. The Byzantine Emperor, Heraclius, promised to restore Jewish rights and received Jewish help in defeating the Persians, but he soon reneged on the agreement after reconquering Palaestina Prima, issuing an edict banning Judaism from the Byzantine Empire. (Egyptian) Coptic Christians took responsibility for this broken pledge and fasted in penance. While the Syrians and the Melchite Greeks ceased to observe the penance after the death of Heraclius; Elijah of Nisibis (Beweis der Wahrheit des Glaubens, translation by Horst, p. 108, Colmar, 1886) see Jews fleeing Byzantium settled in the Baltic area, where the Khazar nobility and some of the population subsequently converted to Judaism.

==Middle Ages (6361517)==

===Arab rule 6361099===

According to Muslim tradition, in 620 Muhammed was taken on spiritual journey from Mecca to the "farthest mosque", whose location many consider to be the Temple Mount, returning the same night. In 634636 the Arabs conquered Palaestina Prima and renamed it Jund Filastin, ending the Byzantine ban on Jews living in Jerusalem. Over the next few centuries, Islam replaced Christianity as the dominant religion of the region.

From 636 until the beginning of the Crusades, Jund Filastin was ruled first by Medinah-based Rashidun Caliphs, then by the Damascus-based Umayyad Caliphate and after that the Baghdad-based Abbasid Caliphs. In 691, Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik (685705) constructed the Dome of the Rock shrine on the Temple Mount. Jews consider it to contain the Foundation Stone (see also Holy of Holies), which is the holiest site in Judaism. A second building, the Al-Aqsa Mosque, was also erected on the Temple Mount in 705.

Between the 7th and 11th centuries, Jewish scribes, called the Masoretes and located in Galilee and Jerusalem, established the Masoretic Text, the final text of the Hebrew Bible.

===Crusader and Ayyubid rule 10991291===

The Siege of Jerusalem, 1099, during the First Crusade
In 1099, the first crusade took Jerusalem and established a Catholic kingdom, known as the Kingdom of Jerusalem. During the conquest, both Muslims and Jews were indiscriminately massacred or sold into slavery. Jerusalem in the Crusader Period Jerusalem: Life throughout the ages in a holy city] David Eisenstadt, March 1997 The murder of Jews began as the Crusaders traveled across Europe and continued when they reached the Holy Land. Ashkenazi orthodox Jews still recite a prayer in memory of the death and destruction caused by the Crusades.

In 1187, the Ayyubid Sultan Saladin defeated the Crusaders in the Battle of Hattin (above Tiberias), taking Jerusalem and most of the former Kingdom of Jerusalem. Saladin's court physician was Maimonides, whose work had an enormous influence on Judaism. Maimonides was buried in Tiberias. A Crusader state centred round Acre survived in weakened form for another century. 

From 1260 to 1291 the area became the frontier between Mongol invaders (occasional Crusader allies) and the Mamluks of Egypt. The conflict impoverished the country and severely reduced the population. Sultan Qutuz of Egypt eventually defeated the Mongols in the Battle of Ain Jalut (near Ein Harod), and his successor (and assassin), Baibars, eliminated the last Crusader Kingdom of Acre in 1291, thereby ending the Crusades.

===Mamluk rule 12601517===

Egyptian Mamluk Sultan, Baibars (12601277), conquered the region and the Mamluks ruled it until 1517, regarding it as part of Syria. In Hebron, Baibars banned Jews from worshiping at the Cave of the Patriarchs (the second holiest site in Judaism), the ban remained in place until its conquest by Israel 700 years later. International Dictionary of Historic Places: Middle East and Africa by Trudy Ring, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Boda, pp. 336339 

The collapse of the Crusades was followed by increased persecution and expulsions of Jews in Europe. Expulsions began in England (1290) and were followed by France (1306). In Spain, persecution of the highly integrated and successful Jewish community began, including massacres and forced conversions. During the Black Death, many Jews were murdered after being accused of poisoning wells. The completion of the Christian reconquest of Spain led to expulsion of the Jews of Spain in 1492 and Portugal in 1497. These were the wealthiest and most integrated Jewish communities in Europe. Many Jews converted to Christianity, however many secretly practised Judaism and prejudice against converts (regardless of their sincerity) persisted, leading many former Jews to move to the New World (see History of the Jews in Latin America). Most of the expelled Spanish Jews moved to North Africa, Poland, to the Ottoman Empire and to the region of Bilad a-Sham which roughly corresponds to the ancient Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy). In Italy, Jews living in the Papal States were required to live in ghettos (see Cum nimis absurdum). The last compulsory Ghetto, in Rome, was abolished in the 1880s.

==Ottoman rule (15171920)==
Under the Mamluks, the area was a province of Bilad a-Sham (Syria). It was conquered by Turkish Sultan Selim I in 151617, becoming a part of the province of Ottoman Syria for the next four centuries, first as the Damascus Eyalet and later as the Syria Vilayet (following the Tanzimat reorganization of 1864).

===Old Yishuv===

18th-century Palestinian rabbi Chaim Joseph David Azulai
From the Middle Ages on, there was small scale individual Jewish migration to the Damascus Eyalet of Ottoman Syria, which tended to increase when persecution was bad elsewhere, such as following the expulsion from Spain. The Jewish population was concentrated in Jerusalem, Hebron, Safed and Tiberias, known in Jewish tradition as the Four Holy Cities. In the 16th century Safed became a centre for study of the Kabbalah. However economic decline and conflict between the Druze and the Ottomans, led to the community's gradual decline by the mid-17th century. In 1660, a Druze revolt led to the destruction of the major Old Yishuv cities of Safed and Tiberias. Barnay, Y. The Jews in Ottoman Syria in the eighteenth century: under the patronage of the Istanbul Committee of Officials for Palestine (University of Alabama Press 1992) ISBN 978-0-8173-0572-7 p. 149 Joel Rappel, History of Eretz Israel from Prehistory up to 1882 (1980), vol. 2, p. 531. "In 1662 Sabbathai Sevi arrived to Jerusalem. It was the time when the Jewish settlements of Galilee were destroyed by the Druze: Tiberias was completely desolate and only a few of former Safed residents had returned ..." In the late 18th century a local Bedouin Sheikh Daher el-Omar created a de facto independent Emirate in the Galilee. Ottoman attempts to subdue the Sheikh failed, but after Daher's death the Ottomans restored their rule in the area.

In 1799 Napoleon briefly occupied the country and planned a proclamation inviting Jews to create a state. The proclamation was shelved following his defeat at Acre. Barbara Tuchman, Bible and Sword: How the British came to Palestine, Macmillan 1956, chapter 9 In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt conquered Ottoman Syria and decided to revive and resettle much of its regions. His conscription policies led to a popular Arab revolt in 1834, resulting in major casualties for the local Arab peasants, and massacres of Christian and Jewish communities by the rebels. Following the revolt, Muhammad Pasha, the son of Muhammad Ali, expelled nearly 10,000 of the local peasants to Egypt, while bringing loyal Arab peasants from Egypt and discharged soldiers to settle the coastline of Ottoman Syria. Northern Jordan Valley was settled by his Sudanese troops.

In 1838 there was another revolt by the Druze. In 1839 Moses Montefiore met with Muhammed in Egypt and signed an agreement to establish 100-200 Jewish villages in the Damascus Eyalet of Ottoman Syria, Barbara Tuchman, Bible and Sword: How the British came to Palestine, Macmillan 1956, page 194-5 but in 1840 the Egyptians withdrew before the deal was implemented, returning the area to Ottoman governorship. In 1844, Jews constituted the largest population group in Jerusalem and by 1890 an absolute majority in the city, but as a whole the Jewish population made up far less than 10% of the country. In 1868, the Ottomans banished the Bah'u'llh, one of the founders of the Bahai religion, to Acre where he is buried, and the movement subsequently established its global administrative centre in nearby Haifa. In 1874, Ottoman reforms led to the area of Jerusalem gaining special status as the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem. Hasan Afif El-Hasan. p. 38 

===Birth of Zionism===

During the 19th century, Jews in Western Europe were increasingly granted citizenship and equality before the law; however, in Eastern Europe, where they were more numerous, they faced growing persecution and legal restrictions, including widespread pogroms. As a result millions of Jews began leaving Eastern Europe in the late 19th century, mainly for the United States, with a small percentage heading for what the Ottomans regarded as Southern Syria. In this period, national movements were emerging across Europe. Many such national movements rejected Jews as aliens, while some Jews were attracted by the notion that Jews were a nation. The movement began as a religious movement in Russia, evolving into a secular movement that became popular among Jews around the world. It coincided with a wave of Jewish migration to the Holy Land and Messianism among Yemenite Jews and Bukharan Jews.

In 1870, an agricultural school, the Mikveh Israel, was founded near Jaffa by the Alliance Israelite Universelle, a French Jewish association. In 1878, Russian Jewish emigrants established the village of Petah Tikva, followed by Rishon LeZion in 1882. Russian Jews established the Bilu and Hovevei Zion ("Love of Zion") movements to assist settlers and these created additional communities which, unlike the traditional Ashkenazi-Jewish communities, sought to be self-reliant rather than dependent on donations from abroad. Existing Ashkenazi-Jewish communities were concentrated in the Four Holy Cities, extremely poor and lived on donations from Europe. The new migrants avoided these communities and tended to create small agricultural settlements. In Jaffa a vibrant commercial community developed in which Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews inter-mingled. Many early migrants left due to difficulty finding work and the early settlements often remained dependant on foreign donations. Despite the difficulties, new settlements arose and the community grew.

The new migration was accompanied by a revival of the Hebrew language and attracted Jews of all kinds; religious, secular, nationalists and left-wing socialists. Socialists aimed to reclaim the land by becoming peasants and forming collectives. In Zionist history, the different waves of Jewish settlement are known as "aliyah". During the First Aliyah, between 1882 and 1903, approximately 35,000 Jews moved to what is now Israel. By 1890, Jews were a majority in Jerusalem, although the area was populated mainly by Muslim (settled and nomad Bedouins) and Christian Arabs.

In 1896 Theodor Herzl published Der Judenstaat (The Jewish State), in which he asserted that the solution to growing antisemitism in Europe (the so-called "Jewish Question") was to establish a Jewish state. In 1897, the Zionist Organisation was founded and the First Zionist Congress proclaimed its aim "to establish a home for the Jewish people in Palestine secured under public law." However, Zionism was regarded with suspicion by the Ottoman rulers and was unable to make major progress.

Between 1904 and 1914, around 40,000 Jews settled in Southern Syria (the Second Aliyah). In 1908 the Zionist Organisation set up the Palestine Bureau (also known as the "Eretz Israel Office") in Jaffa and began to adopt a systematic Jewish settlement policy. Migrants were mainly from Russia (which then included part of Poland), escaping persecution. The first Kibbutz, Degania, was founded by 9 Russian socialists in 1909. In 1909 residents of Jaffa established the first entirely Hebrew-speaking city, Ahuzat Bayit (later renamed Tel Aviv). Hebrew newspapers and books were published, Hebrew schools, Jewish political parties and workers organizations were established.

===World War I===

French and British influence and control (SykesPicot Agreement, 1916)
During World War I, most Jews supported the Germans because they were fighting the Russians who were regarded as the Jews' main enemy. Weizmann, the Making of a Statesman by Jehuda Reinharz, Oxford 1993, chapters 3 & 4 In Britain, the government sought Jewish support for the war effort for a variety of reasons including an erroneous antisemitic perception of "Jewish power" over the Ottoman Empire's Young Turks movement, David Fromkin, A Peace to End All Peace, part VI pp. 253305 and a desire to secure American Jewish support for US intervention on Britain's behalf.

There was already sympathy for the aims of Zionism in the British government, including the Prime Minister Lloyd George. God, Guns and Israel, Jill Hamilton, UK 2004, Especially chapter 14. In late 1917, the British Army drove the Turks out of Southern Syria, God, Guns and Israel, Jill Hamilton, UK 2004, Especially chapter 15 and the British foreign minister, Lord Balfour, sent a public letter to Lord Rothschild, a leading member of his party and leader of the Jewish community. The letter subsequently became known as the Balfour Declaration of 1917. It stated that the British Government "view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people". The declaration provided the British government with a pretext for claiming and governing the country. A Line in the Sand: Britain, France and the Struggle That Shaped the Middle East by James Barr, Simon & Schuster 2011, pages 375-376. New Middle Eastern boundaries were decided by an agreement between British and French bureaucrats. The agreement gave Britain control over what parties would begin to call "Palestine". This appellation would remain uncontroversial until the rise of Anti-Zionism in the 1940s.

A Jewish Legion composed largely of Zionist volunteers organized by Jabotinsky and Trumpeldor participated in the British invasion. It previously participated in the failed Gallipoli Campaign. A Zionist spy network provided the British with details of Ottoman troops. In 1918 Chaim Weizmann, president of the British Zionist Federation, formed a Zionist Commission, which went to Palestine to promote Zionist objectives there.

==British Mandate of Palestine (19201948)==

===First years===

Balfour Declaration of 1917, which supported the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine
The British Mandate (in effect, British rule) of Palestine, including the Balfour Declaration, was confirmed by the League of Nations in 1922 and came into effect in 1923. The boundaries of Palestine initially included modern Jordan, which was removed from the territory by Churchill a few years later. Britain signed a treaty with the United States (which did not join the League of Nations) in which the United States endorsed the terms of the Mandate.

In 1921, the Zionist Commission was granted official status as the Jewish Agency for Palestine in Article 4 of the Mandate. An offer to create a similar Arab Agency was rejected by Arab leaders of Palestine. Between 1919 and 1923, another 40,000 Jews arrived in Palestine, mainly escaping the post-revolutionary chaos of Russia (Third Aliyah), as over 100,000 Jews were massacred in this period in Ukraine and Russia. Many of these immigrants became known as "pioneers" (halutzim), experienced or trained in agriculture and capable of establishing self-sustaining economies. The Jezreel Valley and the Hefer Plain marshes were drained and converted to agricultural use. Land was bought by the Jewish National Fund, a Zionist charity which collected money abroad for that purpose. A mainly socialist underground Jewish militia, Haganah ("Defense"), was established to defend outlying Jewish settlements.
The opening ceremony of The Hebrew University of Jerusalem visited by Arthur Balfour, 1 April 1925

The French victory over the Arab Kingdom of Syria and the Balfour Declaration led to the emergence of Palestinian Nationalism and Arab rioting in 1920 and 1921. In response, the British authorities imposed immigration quotas for Jews. Exceptions were made for Jews with over 1,000 pounds in cash (roughly 100,000 pounds at year 2000 rates) or Jewish professionals with over 500 pounds. The Jewish Agency decided who received the British entry permits and distributed funds donated by Jews abroad. Peel Commission, (Peel report) p. 172 Between 1924 and 1929, 82,000 more Jews arrived (Fourth Aliyah), fleeing antisemitism in Poland and Hungary, and because the United States Immigration Act of 1924 now kept Jews out. The new arrivals included many middle-class families who moved into towns and established small businesses and workshopsalthough lack of economic opportunities meant that approximately a quarter later left. The first electricity generator was built in Tel Aviv in 1923 under the guidance of Pinhas Rutenberg, a former Commissar of St Petersburg in Russia's pre-Bolshevik Kerensky Government. In 1925 the Jewish Agency established the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and the Technion (technological university) in Haifa.

From 1928, the democratically elected Va'ad Leumi (Jewish National Council or JNC) became the main institution of the Palestine Jewish community ("Yishuv") and included non-Zionist Jews. As the Yishuv grew, the JNC adopted more government-type functions, such as education, health care and security. With British permission, the Va'ad raised its own taxes http://www.amalnet.k12.il/meida/history/hisi1085.htm (in Hebrew accessed 22/4/2009) Peel Commission, (Peel report) pp. 4849 and ran independent services for the Jewish population. Peel Commission, (Peel report) chapters 5, 8 and 16 From 1929 its leadership was elected by Jews from 26 countries.

In 1929 tensions grew over the Kotel (Wailing Wall), a narrow alleyway where Jews were banned from using chairs or any furniture (many of the worshipers were elderly). The Mufti claimed it was Muslim property and that the Jews were seeking control of the Temple Mount. This (and general animosity) led to the August 1929 Palestine riots. The main victims were the ancient Jewish community at Hebron which came to an end. The riots led to right-wing Zionists establishing their own militia in 1931, the Irgun Tzvai Leumi (National Military Organization, known in Hebrew by its acronym "Etzel").

Zionist political parties provided private education and health care: the General Zionists, the Mizrahi and the Socialist Zionists, each established independent health and education services and operated sports organizations funded by local taxes, donations and fees (the British administration did not invest in public services). During the whole interwar period, the British, appealing to the terms of the Mandate, rejected the principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give the Arab population, who formed the majority of the population, control over Palestinian territory.

===Increase of Jewish immigration===

In 1933, the Jewish Agency and the Nazis negotiated the Ha'avara Agreement (transfer agreement), under which 50,000 Jews would be transferred to Palestine. The Jews possessions were confiscated and in return the Nazis allowed the Ha'avara organization to purchase 14 million pounds worth of German goods for export to Palestine (which was used to compensate the immigrants). The Nazis did not normally allow Jews to leave with any money or to take more than two suitcases. The agreement was controversial and the Labour Zionist leader who negotiated the agreement, Haim Arlosoroff, was assassinated in Tel Aviv in 1933. The assassination was a long source of anger between the Zionist left and Zionist right. Arlosoroff once dated Magda Goebbels and may have been assassinated by the Nazis to hide the connection which only emerged recently. In Palestine, Jewish immigration (and the Ha'avara goods) helped the economy to flourish. A port and oil refineries were built at Haifa and there was a growth of industrialization in the predominantly agricultural Palestinian economy.

Between 1929 and 1939, 250,000 Jews arrived in Palestine (Fifth Aliyah). 174,000 arrived between 1933 and 1936, after which the British increasingly restricted immigration. The influx contributed to the 1933 Palestine riots. Migration was mostly from Europe and included professionals, doctors, lawyers and professors from Germany. As a consequence German architects of the Bauhaus school made Tel-Aviv the world's only city with purely Bauhaus neighborhoods and Palestine had the highest per-capita percentage of doctors in the world.

As Fascist regimes emerged across Europe, persecution of Jews massively increased, and Jews reverted to being non-citizens deprived of civil and economic rights, subject to arbitrary persecution. Significantly antisemitic governments came to power in Poland (from 1935 the government boycotted Jews), Hungary, Romania and the Nazi created states of Croatia and Slovakia, while Germany annexed Austria and the Czech territories.

===Arab revolt and the White Paper===

Jewish Settlement Police members watching the settlement Nesher during 19361939 Arab revolt
Jewish immigration and Nazi propaganda contributed to the large-scale 19361939 Arab revolt in Palestine, a largely nationalist uprising directed at ending British rule. The head of the Jewish Agency, Ben-Gurion, responded to the Arab Revolt with a policy of "Havlagah"self-restraint and a refusal to be provoked by Arab attacks in order to prevent polarization. The Etzel group broke off from the Haganah in opposition to this policy.

The British responded to the revolt with the Peel Commission (193637), a public inquiry which recommended that an exclusively Jewish territory be created in the Galilee and western coast (requiring the transfer of 200,000 Arabs); the rest becoming an exclusively Arab area. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion, had convinced the Zionist Congress to approve equivocally the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation. William Roger Louis, Ends of British Imperialism: The Scramble for Empire, Suez, and Decolonization, 2006, p.391 Benny Morris, One state, two states:resolving the Israel/Palestine conflict, 2009, p. 66 Benny Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited, p. 48; p. 11 "while the Zionist movement, after much agonising, accepted the principle of partition and the proposals as a basis for negotiation"; p. 49 "In the end, after bitter debate, the Congress equivocally approved by a vote of 299 to 160  the Peel recommendations as a basis for further negotiation." The plan was rejected outright by the Palestinian Arabs and they renewed the revolt, which caused the British to appease the Arabs, and to abandon the plan as unworkable. For more information see Palestine: Retreat from the Mandate, The making of British Policy, 19361945 by Michael Cohen, New York 1979 Chapter 3 The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited, p. 11, "The AHC renewed the revolt. Whitehall...took vigorous steps to appease the palestinians" 

Testifying before the Peel Commission, Weizmann said "There are in Europe 6,000,000 people ... for whom the world is divided into places where they cannot live and places where they cannot enter." In 1938, the US called an international conference to address the question of the vast numbers of Jews trying to escape Europe. Britain made its attendance contingent on Palestine being kept out of the discussion. No Jewish representatives were invited. The Nazis proposed their own solution: That the Jews of Europe be shipped to Madagascar (the Madagascar Plan).

Another British commission, the Woodhead Commission (1938), reported that the Peel Commission was unworkable, and recommended setting up smaller Arab and Jewish zones, but this plan was rejected by both Arabs and Jews. Twenty years later, the Jewish Agency leader, David Ben-Gurion, wrote: "Had partition to the Peel Commission partition plan been carried out, the history of our people would have been different and six million Jews in Europe would not have been killedmost of them would be in Israel." Tom Segev, One Palestine Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate, 2001, p. 414) 

With war in Europe increasingly likely and with every country in the world closed to Jewish migration, the British tried to appease the Arabs. The White Paper of 1939, stated that with over 450,000 Jews having now arrived in Palestine, the Balfour Declaration aim of "a national home for the Jewish people" had been achieved. The White Paper recommended an independent Palestine, governed jointly by Arabs and Jews, be established within 10 years. The White Paper agreed to allow 75,000 Jewish immigrants into Palestine over the period 194044, after which migration would require Arab approval. Both the Arab and Jewish leadership rejected the White Paper. In March 1940 the British High Commissioner for Palestine issued an edict banning Jews from purchasing land in 95% of Palestine. Jews now resorted to illegal immigration: (Aliyah Bet or "Ha'apalah"), often organized by the Mossad Le'aliyah Bet and the Irgun. Jewish refugees arrived in secret by sea, or, to a lesser extent, overland through Syria. Very few Jews managed to escape Europe between 1939 and 1945. Those caught by the British were mostly sent to Mauritius.

===World War II and the Holocaust===

Jewish Brigade headquarters under both Union Flag and Jewish flag
During the 2nd World War, the Jewish Agency worked to establish a Jewish army that would fight alongside the British forces. Churchill supported the plan but British Military and government opposition led to its rejection. The British demanded that the number of Jewish recruits match the number of Palestinian Arab recruits, Palestine: Retreat from the Mandate, The making of British Policy, 19361945 by Michael Cohen, New York 1979 p. 103 but very few Arabs were willing to fight for Britain. In May 1941, the Palmach was established to defend the Yishuv against the eventual occupation of Palestine by the Axis in the event of their victory over the British in North Africa. The British refusal to provide arms to the Jews, even when Rommel's forces were advancing through Egypt in June 1942 (intent on occupying Palestine) and the 1939 White Paper, led to the emergence of a Zionist leadership in Palestine that believed conflict with Britain was inevitable. Palestine: Retreat from the Mandate, The making of British Policy, 19361945 by Michael Cohen, New York 1979 pp. 122130 In the meantime the Jewish Agency called on Palestine's Jewish youth to volunteer for the British Army (both men and women). 30,000 Palestinian Jews. and 6,000 Palestinian Arabs The Palestine Chronicle enlisted in the British armed forces during the war. In June 1944 the British agreed to create a Jewish Brigade that would fight in Italy.

According to the website of Yad Vashem, approximately 1.5 million Jews around the world served in every branch of the allied armies, mainly in the Soviet and U.S. armies. 200,000 Jews died serving in the Soviet army alone. "Combat and Resistance Jewish Soldiers in the Allied Armies". Yad Vashem. Many of these war veterans later volunteered to fight for Israel or were active in its support.

A small group (with about 200 activists), dedicated to Jewish resistance to the British administration in Palestine, broke away from the Etzel (which advocated support for Britain during the war) and formed the "Lehi" (Stern Gang), led by Avraham Stern. In 1943, the USSR released the Revisionist Zionist leader Menachem Begin from the Gulag and he went to Palestine, taking command of the Etzel organization with a policy of increased conflict against the British. At about the same time Yitzhak Shamir escaped from the camp in Eritrea where the British were holding Lehi activists without trial, taking command of the Lehi (Stern Gang).

Jews in the Middle East were also affected by the war. Most of North Africa came under Nazi control and many Jews were used as slaves. accessed October 2011 The 1941 pro-Axis coup in Iraq was accompanied by massacres of Jews. The Jewish Agency put together plans for a last stand in the event of Rommel invading Palestine (the Nazis planned to exterminate Palestine's Jews). Nazi Palestine: The Plans for the Extermination of the Jews in Palestine by Mallman and Cuppers, 2010 

Between 1939 and 1945, the Nazis, usually aided by local forces, led systematic efforts to kill every person of Jewish extraction in Europe (The Holocaust), causing the deaths of approximately 6 million Jews. Almost a quarter of those killed were children. The Polish and German Jewish communities, which played an important role in defining the pre-1945 Jewish world, mostly ceased to exist. In the United States and Palestine, Jews of European origin became disconnected from their families and roots. Sepharadi and Mizrahi Jews, who had been a minority, became a much more significant factor in the Jewish world. Those Jews who survived in central Europe, were displaced persons (refugees); an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, established to examine the Palestine issue, surveyed their ambitions and found that over 95% wanted to migrate to Palestine. Between National Socialism and Soviet Communism: Displaced Persons in Postwar Germany by Anna Holian Michigan 2011 pp 181-2 

In the Zionist movement the moderate Pro-British (and British citizen) Weizmann, whose son died flying in the RAF, was undermined by Britain's anti-Zionist policies. Palestine: Retreat from the Mandate, The making of British Policy, 19361945 by Michael Cohen, New York 1979 pp. 125135 Leadership of the movement passed to the Jewish Agency in Palestine, now led by the anti-British Socialist-Zionist party (Mapai) and led by David Ben-Gurion. In the diaspora, U.S. Jews now dominated the Zionist movement.

===Illegal Jewish immigration and insurgency===

The British Empire was severely weakened by the war. In the Middle East, the war had made Britain conscious of its dependence on Arab oil and it attached more importance to cordial relations with the Arabs than to helping the Jewish people establish a homeland. Shortly after VE Day, the Labour Party won the general election in Britain. Although Labour Party conferences had for years called for the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, the Labour government now decided to maintain the 1939 White Paper restrictions.

Buchenwald survivors arrive in Haifa to be arrested by the British, 15 July 1945
Illegal migration (Aliyah Bet) became the main form of Jewish entry into Palestine. Across Europe Bricha ("flight"), an organization of former partisans and ghetto fighters, smuggled Holocaust survivors from Eastern Europe to Mediterranean ports, where small boats tried to breach the British blockade of Palestine. Meanwhile, Jews from Arab countries began moving into Palestine overland. Despite British efforts to curb immigration, during the 14 years of the Aliyah Bet, over 110,000 Jews eventually entered Palestine.

In an effort to win independence, Zionists now waged a bitter guerrilla war against the British. The main underground Jewish militia, the Haganah, formed an alliance called the Jewish Resistance Movement with the Etzel and Stern Gang to fight the British. In June 1946, following instances of Jewish sabotage, the British launched Operation Agatha, arresting 2700 Jews, including the leadership of the Jewish Agency, whose headquarters were raided. Those arrested were held without trial.

In Poland, the Kielce Pogrom (July 1946) led to a wave of Holocaust survivors escaping Europe towards Palestine. Between 1945 and 1948, 100,000120,000 Jews left Poland. Their departure was largely organized by the Zionist activists in Poland such as Adolf Berman and Icchak Cukierman under the umbrella of the semi-clandestine organization Berihah ("Flight"). Berihah was also responsible for the organized emigration of Jews from Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, totaling 250,000 (including Poland) Holocaust survivors. The British responded by imprisoning the growing numbers of Jews trying to illegally enter Palestine by sea in the Atlit detainee camp and Cyprus internment camps. Those held were mainly Holocaust survivors, including large numbers of children and orphans. In response to Cypriot fears that the Jews would never leave (since they lacked a state or documentation), the British later allowed the refugees to enter Palestine at a rate of 750 per month.

The unified Jewish resistance movement broke up in July 1946, after Etzel bombed the British Military Headquarters in the King David Hotel killing 92 people. In the days following the bombing, Tel Aviv was placed under curfew and over 120,000 Jews, nearly 20% of the Jewish population of Palestine, were questioned by the police. In the U.S., Congress criticized British handling of the situation and delayed loans that were vital to British post-war recovery. By 1947 the Labour Government was ready to refer the Palestine problem to the newly created United Nations.

===United Nations Partition Plan===

United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine, 1947
On 2 April 1947, the United Kingdom delegation addressed a letter to the Acting Secretary-General of the United Nations requesting that the question of Palestine be placed on the agenda of the next regular session of the General Assembly. UNITED NATIONS: General Assembly: A/364 3 September 1947: CHAPTER I: THE ORIGIN AND ACTIVITIES OF UNSCOP: A. CREATION OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE: ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE AND COMPOSITION On 15 May the General Assembly resolved (Resolution 106) that a committee, United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP), be created "to prepare for consideration at the next regular session of the Assembly a report on the question of Palestine". A/RES/106 (S-1) of 15 May 1947 General Assembly Resolution 106 Constituting the UNSCOP: Retrieved 30 May 2012 In July 1947 the UNSCOP visited Palestine and met with Jewish and Zionist delegations. The Arab Higher Committee boycotted the meetings. At this time, there was further controversy when the British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin ordered an illegal immigrant ship, the Exodus 1947, to be sent back to Europe. The migrants on the ship were forcibly removed by British troops at Hamburg after a long period in prison ships.

The principal non-Zionist Orthodox Jewish (or Haredi) party, Agudat Israel, recommended to UNSCOP that a Jewish state be set up after reaching a religious status quo agreement with Ben-Gurion regarding the future Jewish state. The agreement would grant exemption to a quota of yeshiva (religious seminary) students and to all orthodox women from military service, would make the Sabbath the national weekend, promised Kosher food in government institutions and would allow them to maintain a separate education system. 

In the Report of the Committee dated September 3, 1947 to the UN General Assembly, United Nations: General Assembly: A/364: 3 September 1947: Official Records of the Second Session of the General Assembly: Supplement No. 11: United Nations Special Committee on Palestine: Report to the General Assembly Volume 1: Lake Success, New York 1947: Retrieved 30 May 2012 the majority of the Committee in Chapter VI proposed a plan to replace the British Mandate with "an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem" ..., the last to be under "an International Trusteeship System". On November 29, 1947, in Resolution 181 (II), the General Assembly recommended to the United Kingdom, as the mandatory Power for Palestine, and to all other Members of the United Nations, the adoption and implementation, with regard to the future government of Palestine, of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union set out in the resolution. The Plan was to replace the British Mandate with "Independent Arab and Jewish States" and a "Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem administered by the United Nations". The Plan of Partition in Part 1 A. Clause 2 provided that Britain "should use its best endeavours to ensure than an area situated in the territory of the Jewish State, including a seaport and hinterland adequate to provide facilities for a substantial immigration, shall be evacuated at the earliest possible date and in any event not later than 1 February 1948". Clause 3. provided that "Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem ... shall come into existence in Palestine two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of the mandatory Power has been completed but in any case not later than 1 October 1948."

Neither Britain nor the UN Security Council took any action to implement the resolution and Britain continued detaining Jews attempting to enter Palestine. Concerned that partition would severely damage Anglo-Arab relations, Britain denied UN representatives access to Palestine during the period between the adoption of Resolution 181 (II) and the termination of the British Mandate. Trygve Lie, In the Cause of Peace, Seven Years with the United Nations (New York: MacMillan 1954) p. 163 The British withdrawal was finally completed in May 1948. However, Britain continued to hold Jews of "fighting age" and their families on Cyprus until March 1949. Morris Laub, Last barrier to freedom: internment of Jewish holocaust survivors on Cyprus 19461949, Berkeley 1985 

===Civil War===

In the immediate aftermath of the General Assembly's vote on the Partition plan, the explosions of joy among the Jewish community were counterbalanced by the expression of discontent among the Arab community. Soon after, violence broke out and became more and more prevalent. Murders, reprisals, and counter-reprisals came fast on each other's heels, resulting in dozens of victims killed on both sides in the process. The impasse persisted as no force intervened to put a stop to the escalating cycles of violence. Ilan Papp (2000), p. 111 Morris (2008), p. 76 Efram Karsh (2002), p. 30 Benny Morris (2003), p. 101 By the end of March, there was a total of 2,000 dead and 4,000 wounded. Yoav Gelber (2006), p. 85 These figures correspond to an average of more than 100 deaths and 200 casualties per week in a population of 2,000,000.
Shielded Jewish convoy during the blockade of Tel AvivJerusalem road

From January onwards, operations became increasingly militarized, with the intervention of a number of Arab Liberation Army regiments inside Palestine, each active in a variety of distinct sectors around the different coastal towns. They consolidated their presence in Galilee and Samaria. Yoav Gelber (2006), pp. 5156 Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni came from Egypt with several hundred men of the Army of the Holy War. Having recruited a few thousand volunteers, he organized the blockade of the 100,000 Jewish residents of Jerusalem. Dominique Lapierre et Larry Collins (1971), chap. 7, pp. 131153 To counter this, the Yishuv authorities tried to supply the city with convoys of up to 100 armoured vehicles, but the operation became more and more impractical as the number of casualties in the relief convoys surged. By March, Al-Hussayni's tactic had paid off. Almost all of Haganah's armoured vehicles had been destroyed, the blockade was in full operation, and hundreds of Haganah members who had tried to bring supplies into the city were killed. Benny Morris (2003), p. 163 

While the Jewish population had received strict orders requiring them to hold their ground everywhere at all costs, Dominique Lapierre et Larry Collins (1971), p. 163 the Arab population was more affected by the general conditions of insecurity to which the country was exposed. Up to 100,000 Arabs, from the urban upper and middle classes in Haifa, Jaffa and Jerusalem, or Jewish-dominated areas, evacuated abroad or to Arab centres eastwards. Benny Morris (2003), p. 67 This situation caused the US to withdraw their support for the Partition plan, thus encouraging the Arab League to believe that the Palestinian Arabs, reinforced by the Arab Liberation Army, could put an end to the plan for partition. The British, on the other hand, decided on February 7, 1948, to support the annexation of the Arab part of Palestine by Transjordan. Henry Laurens (2005), p. 83 

Supply convoy on its way to besieged Jerusalem, April 1948
Although a certain level of doubt took hold among Yishuv supporters, their apparent defeats were due more to their wait-and-see policy than to weakness. David Ben-Gurion reorganized Haganah and made conscription obligatory. Every Jewish man and woman in the country had to receive military training. Thanks to funds raised by Golda Meir from sympathisers in the United States, and Stalin's decision to support the Zionist cause, the Jewish representatives of Palestine were able to sign very important armament contracts in the East. Other Haganah agents recuperated stockpiles from the Second World War, which helped improve the army's equipment and logistics. Operation Balak allowed arms and other equipment to be transported for the first time by the end of March.

Ben-Gurion invested Yigael Yadin with the responsibility to come up with a plan in preparation for the announced intervention of the Arab states. The result of his analysis was Plan Dalet, which was put in place from the start of April onwards. The adoption of Plan Dalet marked the second stage of the war, in which Haganah passed from the defensive to the offensive. Within the framework of the establishment of Jewish territorial continuity foreseen by Plan Dalet, the forces of Haganah, Palmach and Irgun intended to conquer mixed zones. Palestinian Arab society was shaken. Tiberias, Haifa, Safed, Beisan, Jaffa and Acre fell, resulting in the flight of more than 250,000 Palestinian Arabs. Henry Laurens (2005), pp. 8586 

The British had, at that time, essentially withdrawn their troops. The situation pushed the leaders of the neighbouring Arab states to intervene, but their preparation was not finalized, and they could not assemble sufficient forces to turn the tide of the war. Most Palestinian Arab hopes lay with the Arab Legion of Transjordan's monarch, King Abdullah I, but he had no intention of creating a Palestinian Arab-run state since he hoped to annex as much of the territory of the British Mandate for Palestine as he could. He was playing a double game and was just as much in contact with the Jewish authorities as with the Arab League.

On May 14, 1948, on the day in which the British Mandate over Palestine expired, the Jewish People's Council gathered at the Tel Aviv Museum and approved a proclamation declaring the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz Israel, to be known as the State of Israel. Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948: Retrieved 2 June 2012 The 1948 Palestine war entered its second phase with the intervention of the Arab state armies and the beginning of the 1948 ArabIsraeli War.

==State of Israel (1948present)==

On May 14, 1948, the last British forces left through Haifa. The same day, in a public ceremony in Tel-Aviv, Ben-Gurion read the Israeli Declaration of Independence, declaring the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz-Israel, to be known as the State of Israel. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affirs: Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948 Both superpower leaders, U.S. President Harry S. Truman and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, immediately recognized the new state.

===War of Independence===

Avraham Adan raising the Ink Flag marking the end of the 1948 ArabIsraeli War

The Arab League members Egypt, Transjordan, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq refused to accept the UN partition plan and proclaimed the right of self-determination for the Arabs across the whole of Palestine. The Arab states marched their forces into what had, until the previous day, been the British Mandate for Palestine. The new state of Israel had an organized and efficient army, the Haganah, under the command of Israel Galili. The Arab forces were of varying quality, but Arab states had heavy military equipment at their disposal. The invading Arab armies were initially on the offensive but the Israelis soon recovered from the initial shock of being invaded on all sides. On May 29, 1948, the British initiated United Nations Security Council Resolution 50 and declared an arms embargo on the region. Czechoslovakia violated the resolution supplying the Jewish state with critical military hardware to match the (mainly British) heavy equipment and planes already owned by the invading Arab states. On June 11, a month-long UN truce was put into effect.

Following the announcement of independence, the Haganah became the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). The Palmach, Etzel and Lehi were required to cease independent operations and join the IDF. During the ceasefire, Etzel attempted to bring in a private arms shipment aboard a ship called "Altalena". When they refused to hand the arms to the government, Ben-Gurion ordered that the ship be sunk. Several Etzel members were killed in the fighting. Large numbers of Jewish immigrants, many of them World War II veterans and Holocaust survivors, now began arriving in the new state of Israel, and many joined the IDF. 

After an initial loss of territory by the Jewish state and occupation of Arab Palestine by the Arab armies, from July the tide gradually turned in the Israelis favour and they pushed the Arab armies out and conquered some of the territory which had been included in the proposed Arab state. At the end of November, tenuous local ceasefires were arranged between the Israelis, Syrians and Lebanese. On December 1, King Abdullah announced the union of Transjordan with Arab Palestine west of the Jordan, the new state name being the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. He adopted the title "King of Arab Palestine"; only Britain recognized the annexation.

====Armistice Agreements====

The 1949 Green Line borders
Peace talks were held on Rhodes, under the chairmanship of UN mediator Dr. Ralph Bunche. Israel signed armistices with Egypt (February 24), Lebanon (March 23), Jordan (April 3) and Syria (July 20). No actual peace agreements were signed. With permanent ceasefire coming into effect, Israel's new borders, later known as the Green Line, were established. Green Line: the name given to the 1949 Armistice lines that constituted the de facto borders of pre-1967 Israel &mdash; "Glossary: Israel", Library of Congress Country Studies The IDF had overrun Galilee, Jezreel Valley, West Jerusalem, the coastal plain and the Negev. The Syrians remained in control of a strip of territory along the Sea of Galilee originally allocated to the Jewish state, the Lebanese occupied a tiny area at Rosh Hanikra, and the Egyptians retained the Gaza strip and still had some forces surrounded inside Israeli territory. Jordanian forces remained in occupation of the West Bank, exactly where the British had stationed them before the war. Jordan annexed the areas it occupied while Egypt kept Gaza as an occupied zone.

Following the ceasefire declaration, Britain released over 2,000 Jewish detainees it was still holding in Cyprus and recognized the state of Israel. On May 11, 1949, Israel was admitted as a member of the United Nations. NationMaster  UN membership date (most recent) by country Out of an Israeli population of 650,000, some 6,000 men and women were killed in the fighting, including 4,000 soldiers in the IDF. According to United Nations figures, 726,000 Palestinians had fled or were evicted by the Israelis between 1947 and 1949. Except in Jordan, the Palestinian refugees were settled in large refugee camps in poor, overcrowded conditions. In December 1949, the UN (in response to a British proposal) established an agency (UNRWA) to provide aid to the Palestinian refugees.

===19481954: Ben-Gurion I===

A 120-seat parliament, the Knesset, met first in Tel Aviv then moved to Jerusalem after the 1949 ceasefire. In January 1949, Israel held its first elections. The Socialist-Zionist parties Mapai and Mapam won the most seats (46 and 19 respectively), but not an outright majority. Mapai's leader, David Ben-Gurion, was appointed Prime Minister. The Knesset elected Chaim Weizmann as the first (largely ceremonial) President of Israel. Hebrew and Arabic were made the official languages of the new state. All governments have been coalitionsno party has ever won a majority in the Knesset. From 1948 until 1977 all governments were led by Mapai and the Alignment, predecessors of the Labour Party. In those years Labour Zionists, initially led by David Ben-Gurion, dominated Israeli politics and the economy was run on primarily socialist lines.

Within three years (1948 to 1951), immigration doubled the Jewish population of Israel and left an indelible imprint on Israeli society. Immigrants in Turmoil: Mass Immigration to Israel and its Repercussions in the 1950s and After Dvora Hacohen, Syracuse University Press, 2003 Overall, 700,000 Jews settled in Israel during this period. Benny Morris, Righteous Victims, chap.VI. Some 300,000 arrived from Asian and North African nations as part of the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries. Sachar, pp. 395403. Among them, the largest group (over 100,000) was from Iraq. The rest of the immigrants were from Europe, including more than 270,000 who came from Eastern Europe, Tom Segev, 1949. The First Israelis, Owl Books, 1986, p.96. mainly Romania and Poland (over 100,000 each). Nearly all the Jewish immigrants could be described as refugees, however only 136,000 who immigrated to Israel from Central Europe, had international certification because they belonged to the 250,000 Jews registered by the allies as displaced after World War II and living in Displaced persons camps in Germany, Austria and Italy. 

In 1950 the Knesset passed the Law of Return, which granted to all Jews and those of Jewish ancestry, and their spouses, the right to settle in Israel and gain citizenship. That year, 50,000 Yemenite Jews (99%) were secretly flown to Israel. In 1951 Iraqi Jews were granted temporary permission to leave the country and 120,000 (over 90%) opted to move to Israel. Jews also fled from Lebanon, Syria and Egypt. By the late sixties, about 500,000 Jews had left Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. Over the course of twenty years, some 850,000 Jews from Arab countries (almost the entire Jewish population of the Arab lands) relocated to Israel (680,000), France and the Americas. VI- THE ARAB REFUGEES  INTRODUCTION The land and property left behind by the Jews (much of it in Arab city centres) is still a matter of some dispute. Today there are about 9,000 Jews living in Arab states, of whom 75% live in Morocco and 15% in Tunisia.
Menachem Begin addressing a mass demonstration in Tel Aviv against negotiations with Germany in 1952. The sign reads: "Our honor shall not be sold for money; Our blood shall not be atoned by goods. We shall wipe out the disgrace!"

Between 1948 and 1958, the population of Israel rose from 800,000 to two million. During this period, food, clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the Austerity Period (Tkufat haTsena). Immigrants were mostly refugees with no money or possessions and many were housed in temporary camps known as ma'abarot. By 1952, over 200,000 immigrants were living in tents or prefabricated shacks built by the government. Israel received financial aid from private donations from outside the country (mainly the United States). Mishtar HaTsena (in Hebrew), Dr Avigail Cohen & Haya Oren, Tel Aviv 1995 The pressure on the new state's finances led Ben-Gurion to sign a reparations agreement with West Germany. During the Knesset debate some 5,000 demonstrators gathered and riot police had to cordon the building. Israel received several billion marks and in return agreed to open diplomatic relations with Germany.

At the end of 1953, Ben-Gurion retired to Kibbutz Sde Boker in the Negev.

In 1949, education was made free and compulsory for all citizens until the age of 14. The state now funded the party-affiliated Zionist education system and a new body created by the Haredi Agudat Israel party. A separate body was created to provide education for the remaining Palestinian-Arab population. The major political parties now competed for immigrants to join their education systems. Fearing that the immigrants lacked sufficient "Zionist motivation", the government banned the existing educational bodies from the transit camps and tried to mandate a unitary secular socialist education. The melting pot in Israel: the commission of inquiry concerning education in the early years of the state by Tzvi Tzameret, Albany 2002 chapter 7 Education came under the control of "camp managers" who also had to provide work, food and housing for the immigrants. There were attempts to force orthodox Yemenite children to adopt a secular life style by teachers, including many instances of Yemenite children having their side-curls cut by teachers. This treatment of Orthodox children led to the first Israeli public enquiry (the Fromkin Inquiry). For more information see The melting pot in Israel by Tzvi Tzameret, Albany 2002 The crisis led to the collapse of the coalition and an election in 1951, with little change in the results from the previous election. In 1953 the party-affiliated education system was scrapped. The General Zionist and Socialist Zionist education systems were united to become the secular state education system while the Mizrahi became the State Modern Orthodox system. Agudat Israel were allowed to maintain their existing school system.

In its early years Israel sought to maintain a non-aligned position between the super-powers. However, in 1952, an antisemitic public trial was staged in Moscow in which a group of Jewish doctors were accused of trying to poison Stalin (the Doctors' plot), followed by a similar trial in Czechoslovakia (Slnsk trial). This, and the failure of Israel to be included in the Bandung Conference (of non-aligned states), effectively ended Israel's pursuit of non-alignment. On May 19, 1950, Egypt announced that the Suez Canal was closed to Israeli ships and commerce. In 1952 a military coup in Egypt brought Abdel Nasser to power. The United States pursued close relations with the new Arab states, particularly the Nasser-led Egyptian Free Officers Movement and Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia. Israel's solution to diplomatic isolation was to establish good relations with newly independent states in Africa "Israel's Military Aid to Africa, 196066", Abel Jacob in The Journal of Modern African Studies, vol. 9, no. 2 (Aug., 1971), pp. 165187 and with France, which was engaged in the Algerian War.

===19541955: Sharett===

In the January 1955 elections Mapai won 40 seats and the Labour Party 10, Moshe Sharett became prime minister of Israel at the head of a left-wing coalition. Between 1953 and 1956, there were intermittent clashes along all of Israel's borders as Arab terrorism and breaches of the ceasefire resulted in Israeli counter-raids. Palestinian fedayeen attacks, often organized and sponsored by the Egyptians, were made from (Egyptian occupied) Gaza. Fedayeen attacks led to a growing cycle of violence as Israel launched reprisal attacks against Gaza. Spencer C. Tucker, Priscilla Mary Roberts (eds.). The Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Conflict: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. p. 229. ISBN 978-1-85109-842-2 In 1954 the Uzi submachine gun first entered use by the Israel Defense Forces. In 1955 the Egyptian government began recruiting former Nazi rocket scientists for a missile program. Nasser and the Missile Age in the Middle East (Contemporary Security Studies) by Owen Sirrs, Routledge 2006. ISBN 978-0-415-37003-5. The Germans involved had worked on the V-1 and V-2 programs. 

Archaeologist and General Yigael Yadin, purchased the Dead Sea Scrolls on behalf of the State of Israel. The entire first batch to be discovered were now owned by Israel and housed in the Shrine of the Book at the Israel Museum.

Sharett's government was brought down by the Lavon Affair, a crude plan to disrupt U.S.Egyptian relations, involving Israeli agents planting bombs at American sites in Egypt. The plan failed when eleven agents were arrested. Defense Minister Lavon was blamed despite his denial of responsibility. The Lavon affair led to Sharett's resignation and Ben-Gurion returned to the post of prime minister.

===19551963: Ben-Gurion II===

In 1956, the increasingly pro-Soviet President Nasser of Egypt, announced the nationalization of the (French and British owned) Suez Canal, which was Egypt's main source of foreign currency. Egypt also blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba preventing Israeli access to the Red Sea. Israel made a secret agreement with the French at Svres to coordinate military operations against Egypt. Britain and France had already begun secret preparations for military action. It has been alleged that the French also agreed to build a nuclear plant for the Israelis and that by 1968 this was able to produce nuclear weapons. Britain and France arranged for Israel to give them a pretext for seizing the Suez Canal. Israel was to attack Egypt, and Britain and France would then call on both sides to withdraw. When, as expected, the Egyptians refused, Anglo-French forces would invade to take control of the Canal.
U.S. newsreel on the Sinai and Gaza invasions

Israeli forces, commanded by General Moshe Dayan, attacked Egypt on October 29, 1956. On October 30, Britain and France made their pre-arranged call for both sides to stop fighting and withdraw from the Canal area, and for them to be allowed to take up positions at key points on the Canal. Egypt refused and the allies commenced air strikes on October 31 aimed at neutralizing the Egyptian air force. By November 5 the Israelis had overrun the Sinai. The Anglo-French invasion began that day. There was uproar in the UN, with the United States and USSR for once in agreement in denouncing the actions of Israel, Britain and France. A demand for a ceasefire was reluctantly accepted on November 7.

At Egypt's request, the UN sent an Emergency Force (UNEF), consisting of 6,000 peacekeeping troops from 10 nations to supervise the ceasefire. From November 15, the UN troops marked out a zone across the Sinai to separate the Israeli and Egyptian forces. Upon receiving U.S. guarantees of Israeli access to the Suez Canal, freedom of access out of the Gulf of Aqaba and Egyptian action to stop Palestinian raids from Gaza, the Israelis withdrew to the Negev. In practice the Suez Canal remained closed to Israeli shipping. The conflict signalled the end of West-European dominance in the Middle East.

In 1956, two modern-orthodox (and religious-zionist) parties, Mizrachi and Hapoel HaMizrachi, joined to form the National Religious Party. The party was a component of every Israeli coalition until 1992, usually running the Ministry of Education. Mapai was once again victorious in the 1959 elections, increasing its number of seats to 47, Labour had 7. Ben-Gurion remained Prime Minister.

In 1959, there were renewed skirmishes along Israel's borders that continued throughout the early 1960s. The Arab League continued to maintain an economic boycott and there was a dispute over water rights in the River Jordan basin. With Soviet backing, the Arab states, particularly Egypt, were continuing to build up their forces. Israel's main military hardware supplier was France.

Rudolph Kastner, a minor political functionary, was accused of collaborating with the Nazis and sued his accuser. Kastner lost the trial and was assassinated two years later. In 1958 the Supreme Court exonerated him. In May 1960 the Mossad located Adolf Eichmann, one of the chief administrators of the Nazi Holocaust, in Argentina and kidnapped him to Israel. In 1961 he was put on trial, and after several months found guilty and sentenced to death. He was hanged in 1962 and is the only person ever sentenced to death by an Israeli court. Testimonies by Holocaust survivors at the trial and the extensive publicity that surrounded it has led the trial to be considered a turning point in public awareness of the Holocaust. "The Eichmann Trial and American Jewry: A Reassessment", Franoise S. Ouzan in Jewish Political Studies Review 19:12 (Spring 2007), see also Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem (published 1963) 

In 1961 a Herut no-confidence motion over the Lavon affair led to Ben-Gurion's resignation. Ben-Gurion declared that he would only accept office if Lavon was fired from the position of the head of Histadrut, Israel's labour union organization. His demands were accepted and Mapai won the 1961 election (42 seats keeping Ben-Gurion as PM) with a slight reduction in its share of the seats. Menachem Begin's Herut party and the Liberals came next with 17 seats each. In 1962 the Mossad began assassinating German rocket scientists working in Egypt after one of them reported the missile program was designed to carry chemical warheads. This action was condemned by Ben-Gurion and led to the Mossad director, Isser Harel, resignation. In 1963 Ben-Gurion quit again over the Lavon scandal. His attempts to make his party Mapai support him over the issue failed. Levi Eshkol became leader of Mapai and the new prime minister.

===19631969: Eshkol===

In 1963 Yigael Yadin began excavating Masada. In 1964, Egypt, Jordan and Syria developed a unified military command. Israel completed work on a national water carrier, a huge engineering project designed to transfer Israel's allocation of the Jordan river's waters towards the south of the country in realization of Ben-Gurion's dream of mass Jewish settlement of the Negev desert. The Arabs responded by trying to divert the headwaters of the Jordan, leading to growing conflict between Israel and Syria. 

In 1964, Israeli Rabbinical authorities accepted that the Bene Israel of India were indeed Jewish and most of the remaining Indian Jews migrated to Israel. The 2,000-strong Jewish community of Cochin had already migrated in 1954. Ben-Gurion quit Mapai to form the new party Rafi, he was joined by Shimon Peres and Moshe Dayan. Begin's Herut party joined with the Liberals to form Gahal. Mapai and Labour united for the 1965 elections, winning 45 seats and maintaining Levi Eshkol as Prime Minister. Ben-Gurion's Rafi party received 10 seats, Gahal got 26 seats becoming the second largest party.

Until 1966, Israel's principal arms supplier was France, however in 1966, following the withdrawal from Algeria, de Gaulle#196268: Politics of grandeur|Charles de Gaulle] announced France would cease supplying Israel with arms (and refused to refund money paid for 50 warplanes). On February 5, 1966, the United States announced that it was taking over the former French and West German obligations, to maintain military "stabilization" in the Middle East. Included in the military hardware would be over 200 M48 tanks. In May of that year the U.S. also agreed to provide A-4 Skyhawk tactical aircraft to Israel. In 1966 security restrictions placed on Arab-Israelis were eased and efforts made to integrate them into Israeli life.

In 1966, Black and white TV broadcasts began. On May 15, 1967, the first public performance of Naomi Shemer's classic song "Jerusalem of Gold" took place and over the next few weeks it dominated the Israeli airwaves. Two days later Syria, Egypt and Jordan amassed troops along the Israeli borders, and Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping. Nasser demanded that the UNEF leave Sinai, threatening escalation to a full war. Egyptian radio broadcasts talked of a coming genocide. On 26 May Nasser declared, "The battle will be a general one and our basic objective will be to destroy Israel". Israel considered the Straits of Tiran closure a Casus belli. Israel responded by calling up its civilian reserves, bringing much of the Israeli economy to a halt. The Israelis set up a national unity coalition, including for the first time Menachem Begin's party, Herut, in a coalition. During a national radio broadcast, Prime Minister Levi Eshkol stammered, causing widespread fear in Israel. To calm public concern Moshe Dayan (Chief of Staff during the Sinai war) was appointed Defence Minister.
Gen. Uzi Narkiss, Defense Minister Moshe Dayan, Chief of staff Yitzhak Rabin and Gen. Rehavam Ze'evi in the Old City of Jerusalem, 7 June 1967

On the morning before Dayan was sworn in, June 5, 1967, the Israeli air force launched pre-emptive attacks destroying first the Egyptian air force, and then later the same day destroying the air forces of Jordan and Syria. Israel then defeated (almost successively) Egypt, Jordan and Syria. By June 11 the Arab forces were routed and all parties had accepted the cease-fire called for by UN Security Council Resolutions 235 and 236. Israel gained control of the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights, and the formerly Jordanian-controlled West Bank of the Jordan River. East Jerusalem was arguably annexed by Israel. Residents were given permanent residency status and the option of applying for Israeli citizenship. The annexation was not recognized internationally (the Jordanian annexation of 1948 was also unrecognized).

Other areas occupied remained under military rule (Israeli civil law did not apply to them) pending a final settlement. The Golan was also annexed in 1981. On November 22, 1967, the Security Council adopted Resolution 242, the "land for peace" formula, which called for the establishment of a just and lasting peace based on Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in 1967 in return for the end of all states of belligerency, respect for the sovereignty of all states in the area, and the right to live in peace within secure, recognized boundaries. The resolution was accepted by both sides, though with different interpretations, and has been the basis of all subsequent peace negotiations. After 1967 the U.S. began supplying Israel with aircraft and the Soviet block (except Romania) broke off relations with Israel. Antisemitic purges led to the final migration of the last Polish Jews to Israel.

For the first time since the end of the British Mandate, Jews could visit the Old City of Jerusalem and pray at the Western Wall (the holiest site in modern Judaism), to which they had been denied access by the Jordanians in contravention of the 1949 Armistice agreement. The four-meter-wide public alley beside the Wall was expanded into a massive plaza and worshippers were allowed to sit, or use other furniture, for the first time in centuries. In Hebron, Jews gained access to the Cave of the Patriarchs (the second most holy site in Judaism) for the first time since the 14th century (previously Jews were only allowed to pray at the entrance). Accessed December 2007 A third Jewish holy site, Rachel's Tomb, in Bethlehem, also became accessible. Sinai oil fields made Israel self-sufficient in energy.

In 1968 Moshe Levinger led a group of Religious Zionists who created the first Jewish settlement, a town near Hebron called Kiryat Arba. There were no other religious settlements until after 1974. Ben-Gurion's Rafi party merged with the Labour-Mapai alliance. Ben-Gurion remained outside as an independent. In 1968, compulsory education was extended until the age of 16 for all citizens (it had been 14) and the government embarked on an extensive program of integration in education. In the major cities children from mainly Sephardi/Mizrahi neighbourhoods were bused to newly established middle schools in better areas. The system remained in place until after 2000.

In March 1968, Israeli forces attacked the Palestinian militia, Fatah, at its base in the Jordanian town of Karameh. The attack was in response to land mines placed on Israeli roads. The Israelis retreated after destroying the camp. Despite heavy casualties, Palestinians claimed victory, while Fatah and the PLO (of which it formed part) became famous across the Arab world. In early 1969, fighting broke out between Egypt and Israel along the Suez Canal. In retaliation for repeated Egyptian shelling of Israeli positions along the Suez Canal, Israeli planes made deep strikes into Egypt in the 19691970 "War of Attrition".

===19691974: Meir===

In late 1969, Levi Eshkol died in office of a heart attack and Golda Meir became Prime Minister with the largest percentage of the vote ever won by an Israeli party, winning 56 of the 120 seats after the 1969 election. Meir was the first female prime minister of Israel and the first woman to have headed a Middle Eastern state in modern times. Gahal remained on 26 seats, and was the second largest party.
MV Netanya, one of the ships assigned to support boats in the Cherbourg Project

In December 1969, Israeli naval commandos took five missile boats during the night from Cherbourg Harbour in France. Israel had paid for the boats but the French had refused to supply them. In July 1970 the Israelis shot down five Soviet fighters that were aiding the Egyptians in the course of the War of Attrition. Following this, the U.S. worked to calm the situation and in August 1970 a cease fire was agreed.

In September 1970 King Hussein of Jordan drove the Palestine Liberation Organization out of his country. On September 18, 1970, Syrian tanks invaded Jordan, intending to aid the PLO. At the request of the U.S., Israel moved troops to the border and threatened Syria, causing the Syrians to withdraw. The center of PLO activity then shifted to Lebanon, where the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the Palestinians autonomy within the south of the country. The area controlled by the PLO became known by the international press and locals as "Fatahland" and contributed to the 19751990 Lebanese Civil War. The event also led to Hafez al-Assad taking power in Syria. Egyptian President Nasser died immediately after and was succeeded by Anwar Sadat.

Increased Soviet antisemitism and enthusiasm generated by the 1967 victory led to a wave of Soviet Jews applying to emigrate to Israel. Those who left could only take two suitcases. Most Jews were refused exit visas and persecuted by the authorities. Some were arrested and sent to Gulag camps, becoming known as Prisoners of Zion. During 1971, violent demonstrations by the Israeli Black Panthers, made the Israeli public aware of resentment among Mizrahi Jews at ongoing discrimination and social gaps. In 1972 the U.S. Jewish Mafia leader, Meyer Lansky, who had taken refuge in Israel, was deported to the United States.

At the 1972 Munich Olympics, eleven members of the Israeli team were taken hostage by Palestinian terrorists. A botched German rescue attempt led to them all being killed, along with five of the eight hijackers. The surviving Palestinians were released by the West German authorities eight weeks later without having stood trial, in exchange for the hostages of hijacked Lufthansa Flight 615. The Israeli government responded with a bombing, an assassination campaign against the organizers of the massacre and a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon (led by future Prime Minister, Ehud Barak).

In 1972 the new Egyptian President Anwar Sadat expelled the Soviet advisers from Egypt. This and frequent invasion exercises by Egypt and Syria led to Israeli complacency about the threat from these countries. In addition the desire not to be held responsible for initiating conflict and an election campaign highlighting security, led to an Israeli failure to mobilize, despite receiving warnings of an impending attack. 
143rd Division crossing the Suez Canal in the direction of Cairo during the Yom Kippur War, 15 October 1973

The Yom Kippur War (also known as the October War) began on October 6, 1973 (the Jewish Day of Atonement), the holiest day in the Jewish calendar and a day when adult Jews are required to fast. The Syrian and Egyptian armies launched a well-planned surprise attack against the unprepared Israeli Defense Forces. For the first few days there was a great deal of uncertainty about Israel's capacity to repel the invaders. Both the Soviets and the Americans (at the orders of Richard Nixon) rushed arms to their allies. The Syrians were repulsed by the tiny remnant of the Israeli tank force on the Golan and, although the Egyptians captured a strip of territory in Sinai, Israeli forces crossed the Suez Canal, trapping the Egyptian Third Army in Sinai and were 100 kilometres from Cairo. The war cost Israel over 2,000 dead, resulted in a heavy arms bill (for both sides) and made Israelis more aware of their vulnerability. It also led to heightened superpower tension. Following the war, both Israelis and Egyptians showed greater willingness to negotiate. On January 18, 1974, extensive diplomacy by U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger led to a Disengagement of Forces agreement with the Egyptian government and on May 31 with the Syrian government.

The war led the Saudi government to initiate the 1973 oil crisis, an oil embargo in conjunction with OPEC, against countries trading with Israel. Severe shortages led to massive increases in the price of oil, and as a result, many countries broke off relations with Israel or downgraded relations, and Israel was banned from participation in the Asian Games and other Asian sporting events.

State funding was introduced for elected parties. The new system made parties independent of wealthy donors and gave Knesset members more power over party funding, however it also made them less dependent on existing party structures and able to take their funding elsewhere. http://www.knesset.gov.il/mmm/data/pdf/me00636.pdf accessed March 2013 Prior to the December 1973 elections, Gahal and a number of right-wing parties united to form the Likud (led by Begin). In the December 1973 elections, Labour won 51 seats, leaving Golda Meir as Prime Minister. The Likud won 39 seats.

In May 1974, Palestinians attacked a school in Ma'alot, holding 102 children hostage. Twenty-two children were killed. In November 1974 the PLO was granted observer status at the UN and Yasser Arafat addressed the General Assembly. Later that year the Agranat Commission, appointed to assess responsibility for Israel's lack of preparedness for the war, exonerated the government of responsibility, and held the Chief of Staff and head of military intelligence responsible. Despite the report, public anger at the Government led to Golda Meir's resignation.

===19741977: Rabin I===

Following Meir's resignation, Yitzhak Rabin (Chief of Staff during the Six Day War) became prime minister. Modern Orthodox Jews (Religious Zionist followers of the teachings of Rabbi Kook), formed the Gush Emunim movement, and began an organized drive to settle the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In November 1975 the United Nations General Assembly, under the guidance of Austrian Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, adopted Resolution 3379, which asserted Zionism to be a form of racism. The General Assembly rescinded this resolution in December 1991 with Resolution 46/86. In March 1976 there was a massive strike by Israeli-Arabs in protest at a government plan to expropriate land in the Galilee.

In July 1976, an Air France plane carrying 260 people was hijacked by Palestinian and German terrorists and flown to Uganda, then ruled by Idi Amin Dada. There, the Germans separated the Jewish passengers from the non-Jewish passengers, releasing the non-Jews. The hijackers threatened to kill the remaining, 100-odd Jewish passengers (and the French crew who had refused to leave). Despite the distances involved, Rabin ordered a daring rescue operation in which the kidnapped Jews were freed. UN Secretary General Waldheim described the raid as "a serious violation of the national sovereignty of a United Nations member state" (meaning Uganda). National Review, July 9, 2007, vol. LIX, no. 12 Waldheim was a former Nazi and suspected war criminal, with a record of offending Jewish sensibilities. 

In 1976, the ongoing Lebanese Civil War led Israel to allow South Lebanese to cross the border and work in Israel. In January 1977, French authorities arrested Abu Daoud, the planner of the Munich massacre, releasing him a few days later. In March 1977 Anatoly Sharansky, a prominent Refusenik and spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group, was sentenced to 13 years' hard labour.

Rabin resigned on April 1977 after it emerged that his wife maintained a dollar account in the United States (illegal at the time), which had been opened while Rabin was Israeli ambassador. The incident became known as the Dollar Account affair. Shimon Peres informally replaced him as prime minister, leading the Alignment in the subsequent elections.

===19771983: Begin===

In a surprise result, the Likud led by Menachem Begin won 43 seats in the 1977 elections (Labour got 32 seats). This was the first time in Israeli history that the government was not led by the left. A key reason for the victory was anger among Mizrahi Jews at discrimination, which was to play an important role in Israeli politics for many years. Talented small town Mizrahi social activists, unable to advance in the Labour party, were readily embraced by Begin. Moroccan-born David Levy and Iranian-born Moshe Katzav were part of a group who won Mizrahi support for Begin. Many Labour voters voted for the Democratic Movement for Change (15 seats) in protest at high-profile corruption cases. The party joined in coalition with Begin and disappeared at the next election.

In addition to starting a process of healing the MizrahiAshkenazi divide, Begin's government included Ultra-Orthodox Jews and was instrumental in healing the ZionistUltra-Orthodox rift, however it did so at the cost of expanding the exemption from military service to all Haredi Jewish students of military age. This led to creation of a huge class of unemployed Haredi Jews (the exemption was conditional on attendance of a religious seminary, so they kept studying until they were too old for military service). By remaining students, they were a massive burden on the state, while also failing to participate in the military burden.

Begin's liberalization of the economy led to hyper-inflation (around 150% inflation) but enabled Israel to begin receiving U.S. financial aid. Begin actively supported Gush Emunim's efforts to settle the West Bank and Jewish settlements in the occupied territories received government support, thus laying the grounds for intense conflict with the Palestinian population of the occupied territories.

In November 1977, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat broke 30 years of hostility with Israel by visiting Jerusalem at the invitation of Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin. Sadat's two-day visit included a speech before the Knesset and was a turning point in the history of the conflict. The Egyptian leader created a new psychological climate in the Middle East in which peace between Israel and its Arab neighbours seemed possible. Sadat recognized Israel's right to exist and established the basis for direct negotiations between Egypt and Israel. Following Sadat's visit, 350 Yom Kippur War veterans organized the Peace Now movement to encourage Israeli governments to make peace with the Arabs.

In March 1978, eleven armed Lebanese Palestinians reached Israel in boats and hijacked a bus carrying families on a day outing, killing 38 people, including 13 children. The attackers opposed the EgyptianIsraeli peace process. Three days later, Israeli forces crossed into Lebanon beginning Operation Litani. After passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 425, calling for Israeli withdrawal and the creation of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) peace-keeping force, Israel withdrew its troops.
Menachem Begin, Jimmy Carter and Anwar Sadat celebrating the signing of the Camp David Accords

In September 1978, U.S. President Jimmy Carter invited President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin to meet with him at Camp David, and on September 11 they agreed on a framework for peace between Israel and Egypt, and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It set out broad principles to guide negotiations between Israel and the Arab states. It also established guidelines for a West BankGaza transitional regime of full autonomy for the Palestinians residing in these territories, and for a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. The treaty was signed on March 26, 1979, by Begin and Sadat, with President Carter signing as witness. Under the treaty, Israel returned the Sinai peninsula to Egypt in April 1982. The final piece of territory to be repatriated was Taba, adjacent to Eilat, returned in 1989. The Arab League reacted to the peace treaty by suspending Egypt from the organization and moving its headquarters from Cairo to Tunis. Sadat was assassinated in 1981 by Islamic fundamentalist members of the Egyptian army who opposed peace with Israel. Following the agreement Israel and Egypt became the two largest recipients of U.S. military and financial aid (Iraq and Afghanistan have now overtaken them).

In December 1978 the Israeli Merkava battle tank entered use with the IDF. In 1979, over 40,000 Iranian Jews migrated to Israel, escaping the Islamic Revolution there. On June 30, 1981, the Israeli air force destroyed the Osirak nuclear reactor that France was building for Iraq. Three weeks later, Begin won yet again, in the 1981 elections (48 seats Likud, 47 Labour). Ariel Sharon was made defence minister. The new government annexed the Golan Heights and banned the national airline from flying on the Sabbath. By the 1980s a diverse set of high-tech industries had developed in Israel.

In the decades following the 1948 war, Israel's border with Lebanon was quiet compared to its borders with other neighbours. But the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the PLO a free hand to attack Israel from South Lebanon. The area was governed by the PLO independently of the Lebanese Government and became known as "Fatahland" (Fatah was the largest faction in the PLO). Palestinian irregulars constantly shelled the Israeli north, especially the town of Kiryat Shmona, which was a Likud stronghold inhabited primarily by Jews who had fled the Arab world. Lack of control over Palestinian areas was an important factor in causing civil war in Lebanon.

In June 1982, the attempted assassination of Shlomo Argov, the ambassador to Britain, was used as a pretext for an Israeli invasion aiming to drive the PLO out of the southern half of Lebanon. Sharon agreed with Chief of Staff Raphael Eitan to expand the invasion deep into Lebanon even though the cabinet had only authorized a 40 kilometre deep invasion. Israel's Lebanon War by Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari, Touchstone 1985 The invasion became known as the 1982 Lebanon War and the Israeli army occupied Beirut, the only time an Arab capital has been occupied by Israel. Some of the Shia and Christian population of South Lebanon welcomed the Israelis, as PLO forces had maltreated them, but Lebanese resentment of Israeli occupation grew over time and the Shia became gradually radicalized under Iranian guidance. Constant casualties among Israeli soldiers and Lebanese civilians led to growing opposition to the war in Israel.

In August 1982, the PLO withdrew its forces from Lebanon (moving to Tunisia). Israel helped engineer the election of a new Lebanese president, Bashir Gemayel, who agreed to recognize Israel and sign a peace treaty. Gemayal was assassinated before an agreement could be signed, and one day later Phalangist Christian forces led by Elie Hobeika entered two Palestinian refugee camps and massacred the occupants. The massacres led to the biggest demonstration ever in Israel against the war, with as many as 400,000 people (almost 10% of the population) gathering in Tel Aviv. In 1983, an Israeli public inquiry found that Israel's defence minister, Sharon, was indirectly but personally responsible for the massacres. It also recommended that he never again be allowed to hold the post (it did not forbid him from being Prime Minister). In 1983, the May 17 Agreement was signed between Israel and Lebanon, paving the way for an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory through a few stages. Israel continued to operate against the PLO until its eventual departure in 1985, and kept a small force stationed in Southern Lebanon in support of the South Lebanon Army until May 2000.

===19831992: Shamir I; Peres I; Shamir II===

In September 1983, Begin resigned and was succeeded by Yitzhak Shamir as prime minister. The 1984 election was inconclusive, and led to a power sharing agreement between Shimon Peres of the Alignment (44 seats) and Shamir of Likud (41 seats). Peres was prime minister from 1984 to 1986 and Shamir from 1986 to 1988. In 1984, continual discrimination against Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox Jews by the Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox establishment led political activist Aryeh Deri to leave the Agudat Israel party and join former chief Rabbi Ovadia Yosef in forming Shas, a new party aimed at the non-Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox vote. The party won 4 seats in the first election it contested and over the next twenty years was the third largest party in the Knesset. Shas established a nationwide network of free Sephardi Orthodox schools. In 1984, during a severe famine in Ethiopia, 8,000 Ethiopian Jews were secretly transported to Israel. In 1986 Natan Sharansky, a famous Russian human rights activist and Zionist refusenik (denied an exit visa), was released from the Gulag in return for two Soviet spies.

In June 1985, Israel withdrew most of its troops from Lebanon, leaving a residual Israeli force and an Israeli-supported militia in southern Lebanon as a "security zone" and buffer against attacks on its northern territory. Since then, IDF fought for many years against Hezbollah Shia organization, which became a growing threat to Israel. By July 1985, Israel's inflation, buttressed by complex index linking of salaries, had reached 480% per annum and was the highest in the world. Peres introduced emergency control of prices and cut government expenditure successfully bringing inflation under control. The currency (known as the old Israeli shekel) was replaced and renamed the Israeli new shekel at a rate of 1,000 old shkalim = 1 new shekel. In October 1985, Israel responded to a Palestinian terrorist attack in Cyprus by bombing the PLO headquarters in Tunis. Growing Israeli settlement and continuing occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, led to the first Palestinian Intifada (uprising) in 1987, which lasted until the Madrid Conference of 1991, despite Israeli attempts to suppress it. Human rights abuses by Israeli troops led a group of Israelis to form B'Tselem, an organization devoted to improving awareness and compliance with human rights requirements in Israel.

In August 1987, the Israeli government cancelled the IAI Lavi project, an attempt to develop an independent Israeli fighter aircraft. The Israelis found themselves unable to sustain the huge development costs, and faced U.S. opposition to a project that threatened U.S. influence in Israel and U.S. global military ascendancy. In September 1988, Israel launched an Ofeq reconsaissance satellite into orbit, using a Shavit rocket, thus becoming one of only eight countries possessing a capacity to independently launch satellites into space (two more have since developed this ability). The Alignment and Likud remained neck and neck in the 1988 elections (39:40 seats). Shamir successfully formed a national unity coalition with the Labour Alignment. In March 1990, Alignment leader Shimon Peres engineered a defeat of the government in a non-confidence vote and then tried to form a new government. He failed and Shamir became prime minister at the head of a right-wing coalition.

In 1990, the Soviet Union finally permitted free emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel. Prior to this, Jews trying to leave the USSR faced persecution; those who succeeded arrived as refugees. Over the next few years some one million Soviet citizens migrated to Israel. Although there was concern that some of the new immigrants had only a very tenuous connection to Judaism, and many were accompanied by non-Jewish relatives, this massive wave of migration slowly transformed Israel, bringing large numbers of highly educated Soviet Jews and creating a powerful Russian culture in Israel.

In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, triggering the Gulf War between Iraq and a large allied force, led by the United States. Iraq attacked Israel with 39 Scud missiles. Israel did not retaliate at request of the U.S., fearing that if Israel responded against Iraq, other Arab nations might desert the allied coalition. Israel provided gas masks for both the Palestinian population and Israeli citizens. In May 1991, during a 36 hour period, 15,000 Beta Israel (Ethiopian Jews) were secretly airlifted to Israel. The coalition's victory in the Gulf War opened new possibilities for regional peace, and in October 1991 the U.S. President, George H.W. Bush, and Soviet Union Premier, Mikhail Gorbachev, jointly convened a historic meeting in Madrid of Israeli, Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian, and Palestinian leaders. Shamir opposed the idea but agreed in return for loan guarantees to help with absorption of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. His participation in the conference led to the collapse of his (right-wing) coalition.

===19921996: Rabin II; Peres II===

In the 1992 elections, the Labour Party, led by Yitzhak Rabin, won a significant victory (44 seats) promising to pursue peace while promoting Rabin as a "tough general" and pledging not to deal with the PLO in any way. The pro-peace Zionist party Meretz won 12 seats, and the Arab and communist parties a further 5, meaning that parties supporting a peace treaty had a full (albeit small) majority in the Knesset. Later that year, the Israeli electoral system was changed to allow for direct election of the prime minister. It was hoped this would reduce the power of small parties (mainly the religious parties) to extract concessions in return for coalition agreements. The new system had the opposite effect; voters could split their vote for prime minister from their (interest based) party vote, and as a result larger parties won fewer votes and smaller parties becoming more attractive to voters. It thus increased the power of the smaller parties. By the 2006 election the system was abandoned.
alt=A man in a dark suit on the left shakes the hand of a man in traditional Arab headdress on the right. Another man stands with open arms in the center behind them.

On July 25, 1993, Israel carried out a week-long military operation in Lebanon to attack Hezbollah positions. On September 13, 1993, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) signed the Oslo Accords (a Declaration of Principles) Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements Jewish Virtual Library on the South Lawn of the White House. The principles established objectives relating to a transfer of authority from Israel to an interim Palestinian Authority, as a prelude to a final treaty establishing a Palestinian state, in exchange for mutual recognition. The DOP established May 1999 as the date by which a permanent status agreement for the West Bank and Gaza Strip would take effect. In February 1994, Baruch Goldstein, a follower of the Kach party, killed 29 Palestinians and wounded 125 at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron, which became known as the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre. Kach had been barred from participation in the 1992 elections (on the grounds that the movement was racist). It was subsequently made illegal. Israel and the PLO signed the GazaJericho Agreement in May 1994, and the Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities in August, which began the process of transferring authority from Israel to the Palestinians. On July 25, 1994, Jordan and Israel signed the Washington Declaration, which formally ended the state of war that had existed between them since 1948 and on October 26 the IsraelJordan Treaty of Peace, witnessed by U.S. President Bill Clinton. Main Points of Israel-Jordan Peace Treaty October 26, 1994 Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs Treaty of Peace between The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and The State of Israel King Hussein website 

Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat signed the IsraeliPalestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip on September 28, 1995, in Washington. The agreement was witnessed by President Bill Clinton on behalf of the United States and by Russia, Egypt, Norway and the European Union, and incorporates and supersedes the previous agreements, marking the conclusion of the first stage of negotiations between Israel and the PLO. The agreement allowed the PLO leadership to relocate to the occupied territories and granted autonomy to the Palestinians with talks to follow regarding final status. In return the Palestinians promised to abstain from use of terror and changed the Palestinian National Covenant, which had called for the expulsion of all Jews who migrated after 1917 and the elimination of Israel. accessed January 2010 

The agreement was opposed by Hamas and other Palestinian factions, which launched suicide bomber attacks at Israel. Rabin had a barrier constructed around Gaza to prevent attacks. The growing separation between Israel and the "Palestinian Territories" led to a labour shortage in Israel, mainly in the construction industry. Israeli firms began importing labourers from the Philippines, Thailand, China and Romania; some of these labourers stayed on without visas. In addition, a growing number of Africans began illegally migrating to Israel. On November 4, 1995, a far-right-wing religious Zionist opponent of the Oslo Accords, assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. In February 1996 Rabin's successor, Shimon Peres, called early elections. In April 1996, Israel launched an operation in southern Lebanon as a result of Hezbollah's Katyusha rocket attacks on Israeli population centers along the border.

===19961999: Netanyahu I===

The May 1996 elections were the first featuring direct election of the prime minister and resulted in a narrow election victory for Likud leader Binyamin Netanyahu. A spate of suicide bombings reinforced the Likud position for security. Hamas claimed responsibility for most of the bombings. Despite his stated differences with the Oslo Accords, Prime Minister Netanyahu continued their implementation, but his prime ministership saw a marked slow-down in the Peace Process. Netanyahu also pledged to gradually reduce U.S. aid to Israel. 

In September 1996, a Palestinian riot broke out against the creation of an exit in the Western Wall tunnel. Over the subsequent few weeks, around 80 people were killed as a result. In January 1997 Netanyahu signed the Hebron Protocol with the Palestinian Authority, resulting in the redeployment of Israeli forces in Hebron and the turnover of civilian authority in much of the area to the Palestinian Authority.

===19992001: Barak===

In the election of July 1999, Ehud Barak of the Labour Party became Prime Minister. His party was the largest in the Knesset with 26 seats. In September 1999 the Supreme Court of Israel ruled that the use of torture in interrogation of Palestinian prisoners was illegal. On March 21, 2000, Pope John Paul II arrived in Israel for a historic visit.

On May 25, 2000, Israel unilaterally Lebanon conflict (19822000)#2000: Israeli withdrawal|withdrew] its remaining forces from the "security zone" in southern Lebanon. Several thousand members of the South Lebanon Army (and their families) left with the Israelis. The UN Secretary-General concluded Security Council endorses Secretary-General's conclusion on Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon as of 16 June United Nations, 18 June 2000 that, as of June 16, 2000, Israel had withdrawn its forces from Lebanon in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 425. Lebanon claims that Israel continues to occupy Lebanese territory called "Sheba'a Farms" (however this area was governed by Syria until 1967 when Israel took control). Kaufman, Asher (Autumn 2002). "Who owns the Shebaa Farms? Chronicle of a territorial dispute". Middle East Journal (Middle East Institute) 56 (4): 576596. The Sheba'a Farms provided Hezbollah with a ruse to maintain warfare with Israel. The Lebanese government, in contravention of the UN resolution, did not assert sovereignty in the area, which came under the control of Hezbollah. In the Fall of 2000, talks were held at Camp David to reach a final agreement on the Israel/Palestine conflict. Ehud Barak offered to meet most of the Palestinian teams requests for territory and political concessions, including Arab parts of east Jerusalem; however, Arafat abandoned the talks without making a counterproposal. Israeli Proposal to Palestinians and Syria Information Regarding Israel's Security (IRIS) 

In July 2000, Aryeh Deri was sentenced to 3 years in prison for bribe taking. Deri is regarded as the mastermind behind the rise of Shas and was a government minister at the age of 24. Political manipulation meant the investigation had lasted for years. Deri subsequently sued a Police Officer who alleged that he was linked to the traffic-accident death of a witness, who was run over in New York by a driver who had once been in the employ of an associate of Deri. http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/features/if-i-could-sue-the-judges-for-libel-i-would-1.17233 accessed Feb 2013, see also http://bektzara.blogspot.co.il/2012/10/blog-post_8671.html (in Hebrew) 

On September 28, 2000, Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon visited the Al-Aqsa compound, or Temple Mount, the following day the Palestinians launched the al-Aqsa Intifada. David Samuels and Khaled Abu Toameh have stated that the uprising was planned much earlier. In October 2000, Palestinians destroyed Joseph's Tomb, a Jewish shrine in Nablus.

The Arrow missile, a missile designed to destroy ballistic missiles, including Scud missiles, was first deployed by Israel. In 2001, with the Peace Process increasingly in disarray, Ehud Barak called a special election for Prime Minister. Barak hoped a victory would give him renewed authority in negotiations with the Palestinians. Instead opposition leader Ariel Sharon was elected PM. After this election, the system of directly electing the Premier was abandoned.

===20012006: Sharon===

The Israeli West Bank barrier route built (red), under construction (pink) and proposed (white), 
The failure of the peace process, increased Palestinian terror and occasional attacks by Hezbollah from Lebanon, led much of the Israeli public and political leadership to lose confidence in the Palestinian Authority as a peace partner. Most felt that many Palestinians viewed the peace treaty with Israel as a temporary measure only. Many Israelis were thus anxious to disengage from the Palestinians. In response to a wave of suicide bomb attacks, culminating in the "Passover massacre" (see List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada), Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield in March 2002, and Sharon began the construction of a barrier around the West Bank. Around the same time, the Israeli town of Sderot and other Israeli communities near Gaza became subject to constant shelling and mortar bomb attacks from Gaza.

Thousands of Jews from Latin America began arriving in Israel due to economic crises in their countries of origin. In January 2003 separate elections were held for the Knesset. Likud won the most seats (27). An anti-religion party, Shinui, led by media pundit Tommy Lapid, won 15 seats on a secularist platform, making it the third largest party (ahead of orthodox Shas). Internal fighting led to Shinui's demise at the next election. In 2004, the Black Hebrews were granted permanent residency in Israel. The group had begun migrating to Israel 25 years earlier from the United States, but had not been recognized as Jews by the state and hence not granted citizenship under Israel's Law of Return. They had settled in Israel without official status. From 2004 onwards, they received citizen's rights.

In May 2004, Israel launched Operation Rainbow in southern Gaza to create a safer environment for the IDF soldiers along the Philadelphi Route. On September 30, 2004, Israel carried out Operation Days of Penitence in northern Gaza to destroy the launching sites of Palestinian rockets which were used to attack Israeli towns. In 2005, all Jewish settlers were evacuated from Gaza (some forcibly) and their homes demolished. Disengagement from the Gaza Strip was completed on September 12, 2005. Military disengagement from the northern West Bank was completed ten days later.

In 2005 Sharon left the Likud and formed a new party called Kadima, which accepted that the peace process would lead to creation of a Palestinian state. He was joined by many leading figures from both Likud and Labour.

Hamas won the Palestinian legislative election, 2006, the first and only genuinely free Palestinian elections. Hamas' leaders rejected all agreements signed with Israel, refused to recognize Israel's right to exist, refused to abandon terror, and occasionally claimed the Holocaust was a Jewish conspiracy. The withdrawal and Hamas victory left the status of Gaza unclear, Israel claimed it was no longer an occupying power but continued to control air and sea access to Gaza although it did not exercise sovereignty on the ground. Egypt insisted that it was still occupied and refused to open border crossings with Gaza, although it was free to do so. On April 14, 2006, after Ariel Sharon was incapacitated by a severe haemorrhagic stroke, Ehud Olmert became Prime Minister. 

===20062009: Olmert===

Ehud Olmert was elected Prime Minister after his party, Kadima, won the most seats (29) in the Israeli legislative election, 2006. In 2005 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was officially elected president of Iran; since then, Iranian policy towards Israel has grown more confrontational. Israeli analysts believe Ahmadinejad has worked to undermine the peace process with arms supplies and aid to Hezbullah in South Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza, and is developing nuclear weapons, possibly for use against Israel. Iranian support for Hezbollah and its nuclear arms program are in contravention of UN Security Council resolutions 1559 and 1747. Iran also encourages Holocaust denial. Following the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, Hezbollah had mounted periodic attacks on Israel, which did not lead to Israeli retaliation. Similarly, the withdrawal from Gaza led to incessant shelling of towns around the Gaza area with only minimal Israeli response. The failure to react led to criticism from the Israeli right and undermined the government.

On March 14, 2006, Israel carried out an operation in the Palestinian Authority prison of Jericho in order to capture Ahmad Sa'adat and several Palestinian Arab prisoners located there who assassinated Israeli politician Rehavam Ze'evi in 2001. The operation was conducted as a result of the expressed intentions of the newly elected Hamas government to release these prisoners. On June 25, 2006, a Hamas force crossed the border from Gaza and attacked a tank, capturing Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, sparking clashes in Gaza. 
Nahal Brigade soldiers returning after the 2006 Lebanon War

On July 12, Hezbollah attacked Israel from Lebanon, shelled Israeli towns and attacked a border patrol, taking two dead or badly wounded Israeli soldiers. These incidents led Israel to initiate the Second Lebanon War, which lasted through August 2006. Israeli forces entered some villages in Southern Lebanon, while the air force attacked targets all across the country. Israel only made limited ground gains until the launch of Operation Changing Direction 11, which lasted for 3 days with disputed results. Shortly before a UN ceasefire came into effect, Israeli troops captured Wadi Saluki. The war concluded with Hezbollah evacuating its forces from Southern Lebanon, while the IDF remained until its positions could be handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL.

In 2007 education was made compulsory until the age of 18 for all citizens (it had been 16). Refugees from the genocide in Darfur, mostly Muslim, arrived in Israel illegally, with some given Asylum. Illegal immigrants arrived mainly from Africa in addition to foreign workers overstaying their visas. The numbers of such migrants are not known, and estimates vary between 30,000 and over 100,000.

In June 2007, Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in the course of the Battle of Gaza, seizing government institutions and replacing Fatah and other government officials with its own. Following the takeover, Egypt and Israel largely sealed their border crossings with Gaza imposing a blockade, on the grounds that Fatah had fled and was no longer providing security on the Palestinian side, and to prevent arms smuggling by terrorist groups. On September 6, 2007, the Israeli Air Force destroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria. On February 28, 2008, Israel launched a military campaign in Gaza in response to the constant firing of Qassam rockets by Hamas militants. On July 16, 2008, Hezbollah swapped the bodies of Israeli soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped in 2006, in exchange for the Lebanese terrorist Samir Kuntar, four Hezbollah prisoners, and the bodies of 199 Palestinian Arab and Lebanese fighters.

Olmert also came under investigation for corruption and this ultimately led him to announce, on July 30, 2008, that he would be stepping down as Prime Minister following election of a new leader of the Kadima party in September 2008. Tzippi Livni won the election, but was unable to form a coalition and Olmert remained in office until the general election. Israel carried out Operation Cast Lead in the Gaza Strip from December 27, 2008, to January 18, 2009 in response to rocket attacks from Hamas militants, leading to a decrease of Palestinian rocket attacks. 

===2009present: Netanyahu II===

In the 2009 legislative election Likud won 27 seats and Kadima 28; however, the right-wing camp won a majority of seats, and President Shimon Peres called on Netanyahu to form the government. Russian immigrant-dominated Yisrael Beiteinu came third with 15 seats, and Labour was reduced to fourth place with 13 seats. In 2009, Israeli billionaire Yitzhak Tshuva announced the discovery of huge natural gas reserves off the coast of Israel. 

On May 31, 2010, an international incident broke out in the Mediterranean Sea when foreign activists trying to break the maritime blockade over Gaza, clashed with Israeli troops. During the struggle, nine Turkish activists were killed. In late September 2010 took place direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians without success. As a defensive countermeasure to the rocket threat against Israel's civilian population, at the end of March 2011 Israel began to operate the advanced mobile air defence system "Iron Dome" in the southern region of Israel and along the border with the Gaza Strip.
Protest in Tel Aviv on 6 August 2011

On 14 July 2011, the largest social protest in the history of Israel began in which hundreds of thousands of protesters from a variety of socio-economic and religious backgrounds in Israel protested against the continuing rise in the cost of living (particularly housing) and the deterioration of public services in the country (such as health and education). The peak of the demonstrations took place on September 3, 2011, in which about 400,000 people demonstrated across the country.

In October 2011, a deal was reached between Israel and Hamas, by which the kidnapped Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit was released in exchange for 1,027 Palestinians and Arab-Israeli prisoners. Hamas to gain politically from prisoner swap deal. News.xinhuanet.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-20. In March 2012, Secretary-general of the Popular Resistance Committees, Zuhir al-Qaisi, a senior PRC member and two additional Palestinian militants were assassinated during a targeted killing carried out by Israeli forces in Gaza. Israel kills 10 Palestinian militants in Gaza strikes | Reuters BBC News - Israel launches deadly air strikes on Gaza The Palestinian armed factions in the Gaza Strip, led by the Islamic Jihad and the Popular Resistance Committees, fired a massive amount of rockets towards southern Israel in retaliation, sparking five days of clashes along the Gaza border.

In May 2012, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu reached an agreement with the Head of Opposition Shaul Mofaz for Kadima to join the government, thus canceling the early election supposed to be held in September. However, on July Kadima party left Netanyahu's government due to a dispute concerning military conscription for ultra-Orthodox Jews in Israel. BBC News - Kadima quits Israel government over conscription law 

In June 2012, Israel transferred the bodies of 91 Palestinian suicide bombers and other militants as part of what Mark Regev, spokesman for Netanyahu, described as a "humanitarian gesture" to PA chairman Mahmoud Abbas to help revive the peace talks, and reinstate direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. On October 21, 2012, United States and Israel began their biggest joint air and missile defense exercise, known as Austere Challenge 12, involving around 3,500 U.S. troops in the region along with 1,000 IDF personnel, expected to last three weeks. US and Israel launch joint military drill, Al Jazeera. October 21, 2012 Germany and Britain also participated. U.S.-Israeli Military Exercise Sending Message to Iran In response to over a hundred rocket attacks on southern Israeli cities, Israel began an operation in Gaza on November 14, 2012, with the targeted killing of Ahmed Jabari, chief of Hamas military wing, and airstrikes against twenty underground sites housing long-range missile launchers capable of striking Tel Aviv. In January 2013, construction of the barrier on the Israeli-Egyptian border was completed in its main section. Israel completes most of Egypt border fence, Los Angeles Times. January 2, 2013 

Benjamin Netanyahu was elected Prime Minister again after the Likud Yisrael Beiteinu alliance won the most seats (31) in the 2013 legislative election and formed a coalition government with secular centrist Yesh Atid party (19), rightist The Jewish Home (12) and Livni's Hatnuah (6), excluding Haredi parties. Labour came in third with 15 seats. In July 2013, as a "good will gesture" to restart peace talks with the Palestinian Authority, Israel agreed to release 104 Palestinian prisoners, most of whom have been in jail since before the 1993 Oslo Accords. Peace talks set to begin after Israel agrees to free 104 Palestinian prisoners, Washington Post. July 28, 2013 

==Statistics==

 Development of Israel by decade 
 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 
 Population (thousands) 1,370.1 2,150.4 3,022.1 3,921.7 4,821.7 6,369.3 7,695.1 
 World Jewry percentage 6% 15% 20% 25% 30% 38% 42% 
 GDP per capita (current US$) 1,366 1,806 5,617 11,264 19,859 28,522 

==See also==

* Timeline of Israeli history
* Years in Israel
* Archaeology of Israel
* Culture of Israel
* Economy of Israel
* Geography of Israel
* Hebrew calendar
* History of Israeli nationality
* History of Jerusalem
* History of Palestine
* History of the ArabIsraeli conflict
* History of the Jews in the Land of Israel
* History of the Israel Defense Forces
* History of the Levant
* Jewish history
* LGBT history in Israel
* List of Israeli museums
* List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel
* List of Prime Ministers of Israel
* Outline of Israel
* Politics of Israel

==Notes==

==References==

* 

==Further reading==

* Berger, Earl The Covenant and the Sword: ArabIsraeli Relations, 194856, London, Routledge K. Paul, 1965.
* Bregman, Ahron A History of Israel, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002 ISBN 0-333-67632-7.
* 
* Butler, L.J. Britain and Empire: Adjusting to a Post-Imperial World I.B. Tauris 2002 ISBN 1-86064-449-X
* 
* Darwin, John Britain and Decolonisation: The Retreat from Empire in the Post-War World Palgrave Macmillan 1988 ISBN 0-333-29258-8
* Davis, John, The Evasive Peace: a Study of the Zionist-Arab Problem, London: J. Murray, 1968.
* 
* Eytan, Walter The First Ten Years: a Diplomatic History of Israel, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1958
* Gilbert, Martin Israel: A History, New York: Morrow, 1998 ISBN 0-688-12362-7.
* Horrox, James A Living Revolution: Anarchism in the Kibbutz Movement, Oakland: AK Press, 2009
* Herzog, Haim The ArabIsraeli Wars: War and Peace in the Middle East from the War of Independence to Lebanon, London: Arms and Armour; Tel Aviv, Israel: Steimatzky, 1984 ISBN 0-85368-613-0.
* Israel Office of Information Israe's Struggle for Peace, New York, 1960.
* 
* Laqueur, Walter Confrontation: the Middle-East War and World Politics, London: Wildwood House, 1974, ISBN 0-7045-0096-5.
* Lucas, Noah The Modern History of Israel, New York: Praeger, 1975.
* 
* 
* 
* Morris, Benny 1948: A History of the First ArabIsraeli War, Yale University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-300-12696-9.
* O'Brian, Conor Cruise The Siege: the Saga of Israel and Zionism, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986 ISBN 0-671-60044-3.
* Oren, Michael Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle East, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 ISBN 0-19-515174-7.
* Rubinstein, Alvin Z. (editor) The ArabIsraeli Conflict: Perspectives, New York: Praeger, 1984 ISBN 0-03-068778-0.
* Lord Russell of Liverpool, If I Forget Thee; the Story of a Nation's Rebirth, London, Cassell 1960.
* Sachar, Howard M. A History of Israel, New York: Knopf, 1976 ISBN 0-394-48564-5.
* Samuel, Rinna A History of Israel: the Birth, Growth and Development of Today's Jewish State, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989 ISBN 0-297-79329-2.
* Schultz, Joseph & Klausner, Carla From Destruction to Rebirth: The Holocaust and the State of Israel, Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1978 ISBN 0-8191-0574-0.
* Segev, Tom The Seventh Million: the Israelis and the Holocaust, New York: Hill and Wang, 1993 ISBN 0-8090-8563-1.
* Shapira Anita. Israel: A History (Brandeis University Press/University Press of New England; 2012) 502 pages;
* Shlaim, Avi, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (2001)
* Talmon, Jacob L. Israel Among the Nations, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1970 ISBN 0-297-00227-9.
* 
* Wolffsohn, Michael Eternal Guilt?: Forty years of German-Jewish-Israeli Relations, New York: Columbia University Press, 1993 ISBN 0-231-08274-6.

==External links==

*
*
*Facts About Israel: History at the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs
*History of Israel: Key events at the BBC News Online
*History of Israel at the Knesset website
*Official website of the Israel State Archives
*Holy Land Maps, National Library of Israel
*

 

[[Harvey Mudd College]]

Harvey Mudd College is a private residential liberal arts college of science, engineering, and mathematics, founded in 1955 and located in Claremont, California, United States. It is one of the institutions of the contiguous Claremont Colleges, which share adjoining campus grounds.

Harvey Mudd College shares university resources such as libraries, dining halls, health services, and campus security, with the other institutions in the Claremont Colleges, including Pitzer College, Scripps College, Claremont McKenna College, Pomona College, Claremont Graduate University, and Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences, but each college is independently managed by its own faculty, board of trustees, and college endowment and has its own separate admissions process. Students at Harvey Mudd are encouraged to take classes (acceptable for academic credit at Harvey Mudd) at the other four Claremont colleges, especially classes outside their major of study. Together the Claremont Colleges provide the resources and opportunities of a large university while enabling the specialization and personal attention afforded by the individual colleges. The Bachelor of Science diploma received at graduation is issued by Harvey Mudd College.

The college is named after Harvey Seeley Mudd, one of the initial investors in the Cyprus Mines Corporation. Although involved in the planning of the new institution, Mudd died before it opened. Harvey Mudd College was funded by Mudd's friends and family, and named in his honor. 

==Academics==
Harvey Mudd College entrance on Dartmouth Ave
Harvey Mudd College's mission is to educate scientists, engineers, and mathematicians to be well-versed in the social sciences and humanities so that they better understand the impact of their work on society. The college offers four-year degrees in chemistry, mathematics, physics, computer science, biology, and engineering, as well as interdisciplinary degrees in mathematical biology, and a joint major in either computer science and mathematics; or biology and chemistry. Students may also elect to complete an Individual Program of Study (IPS) made up of courses of their own choosing. Usually between two and five students graduate with an IPS degree each year. Finally, one may choose an off-campus major offered by any of the other Claremont Colleges, provided one also completes a minor in one of the technical fields that Harvey Mudd offers as a major.

Because of its mission statement, Harvey Mudd College places an unusually strong emphasis on general science education, requiring a full one-third of math, science, and engineering courses, known as the "common core," outside of one's major. Students are also required to take another one-third of their courses in the humanities, social sciences, and the arts, in keeping with the school's tradition of "science with a conscience." The final one-third of courses comprises those in the student's major. The integration of research and education is an important component of the educational experience at Harvey Mudd College; upon graduation, every student has experienced some kind of research, usually in the form of a senior thesis or a Clinic Program. The undergraduate focus of HMC means that, unlike many larger science and engineering institutions, undergraduates at HMC get unique access to research positions over the summer and during the school year.

A unique opportunity for HMC students is the Clinic Program, which focuses primarily on projects in the fields of engineering, computer science, physics, and math. In the Clinic Program, teams of students work for a year on a project suggested by a company. They are expected to make regular reports to the company and to deliver a product at the end of the year. The Clinic Program offers students a first-hand look at a particular industry and allows the sponsoring company to hire an inexpensive Clinic team of four students, whom they often try to recruit after graduation.

===Reputation===
For the class of 2017, the middle 50% of SAT scores for enrolled freshmen were 720800 (out of 800) in mathematics, 680760 in critical reading, and 670760 in writing. A third of the student body are National Merit Scholars, and at one point, about 40 percent of graduates were going on to earn a Ph.D.  the highest rate of any college or university in the nation. Harvey Mudd today still maintains the highest rate of science and engineering Ph.D. production among all undergraduate colleges and second highest (Caltech ranks first and MIT third) compared to all universities and colleges, according to a 2008 report by the National Science Foundation. 

According to U.S. News & World Reports 2014 America's Best Colleges report, Harvey Mudd College is ranked the 16th best liberal arts college in the United States and has the #2 ranking for undergraduate engineering schools in the US whose highest degree is a Master's. Forbes in 2014 rated Harvey Mudd College #52 of its America's Best Colleges ranking, which includes military academies, national universities, and liberal arts colleges. 
In 2006, Harvey Mudd was also named one of the "new Ivy leagues" by Kaplan and Newsweek. 

Harvey Mudd College is one of the few colleges in the US with very low grade inflation. As of 2010, only seven students in the history of the college have achieved a perfect 4.0 GPA. 

In 1997, Harvey Mudd College became the sole American undergraduate-only institution ever to win 1st place in the ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest. As of 2012, no American school has won the world competition since. 

Harvey Mudd College, along with Wake Forest University, long held out as the last four-year colleges or universities in the U.S. to accept only SAT and not ACT test scores in their admissions process. In August 2007, however (the beginning of the application process for the class of 2012), HMC began accepting ACT results, a year after Wake Forest abandoned its former SAT-only policy. 

According to PayScale, graduates of Harvey Mudd College earn the highest salaries among graduates of any college in the United States. The Harvey Mudd College mathematics department is highly ranked and was the 2006 recipient of the American Mathematical Society award for an Exemplary Program or Achievement in a Mathematics Department. The department's alumni, Josh Greene and Aaron Archer were winner and honorable mention for the Morgan Prize, the highest undergraduate research award in mathematics in the United States.

==Student life==

The cost for attending Harvey Mudd (tuition, student body fee, and room & board) total $56,268 for the 20112012 academic year. Financial aid is offered on the basis of both need and merit. Approximately 83% of students receive financial aid, and 40% qualify for merit-based awards. 

===Harvey Mudd College dormitories===
View of central campus, looking out of the former Norman F. Sprague Memorial Library.
The official names for the dormitories are (listed in order of construction): 
* Mildred E. Mudd Hall ("East")
* West Hall ("West")
* North Hall ("North")
* Marks Residence Hall ("South")
* J. L. Atwood Residence Hall (Atwood)
* Case Residence Hall (Case)
* Ronald and Maxine Linde Residence Hall (Linde)
* Frederick and Susan Sontag Residence Hall (Sontag)
Until the addition of the Linde and Sontag dorms, Atwood and Case dorms were occasionally referred to as New Dorm and New Dorm II; Mildred E. Mudd Hall and Marks Hall are almost invariably referred to as East dorm and South dorm.

During the construction of Case Dorm some students decided as a prank to move all of the survey stakes exactly six inches in one direction. They did such a precise job that the construction crew didn't notice until after they had laid the foundation (and after the prank team informed someone on the project about the shifted stakes), but California earthquake law forced them to re-survey the site and bring in engineering consultation. The cost of this (nearly $5,000) was borne by the pranksters .

Galileo Hall and Hixon CourtyardSouth Dorm is in the northwest corner of the quad. "East" was the first dorm, but it wasn't until "West" was built west of it that it was actually referred to as "East". Then "North" was built, directly north of "East". When the fourth dorm (Marks) was built, there was one corner of the quad available (the northwest) and one directional name, "South", remaining. To this day "South" dorm is the northernmost HMC dorm.

The fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth dorms built are Atwood, Case, Linde, and Sontag, respectively. They were initially referred to as "the colonies" by some students, a reference to the fact that they were newer and at the farthest end of the campus; these dorms are now more commonly referred to as "the outer dorms." The college had initially purchased an apartment building adjacent to the newer dorms to house additional students, but it was demolished to make room for the newest dorm, Sontag.

Since any HMC student, regardless of class year, can live in any of the dormitories, several of the dorms have accumulated long-standing traditions and so-called 'personalities'. Two examples of these traditions are the parties Long Tall Glasses (a formal affair thrown by North) and TQ Day (a tequila-centered "beach" party thrown by West). The personality of a given dorm experiences changes over the years, however, as Harvey Mudd alumni may find upon visiting their alma mater long after graduation.

===Athletics===
Athletics teams from Claremont McKenna College, Harvey Mudd College, and Scripps College compete as one team. Male athletic teams are called the Stags, and women's teams are called the Athenas. The teams participate in the NCAA's Division III and in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference.

===College traditions===
Individual dorms at Harvey Mudd have their own unique traditions, but the college itself hosts some campus traditions.

In the early 1970s the first unicycle appeared on campus. The unicycling club, known as Gonzo Unicycle Madness, was formed, and to this day organizes an annual 9.6 mile ride known as "The Foster's Run," to the "Donut Man" donut shop in Glendora (originally known as "Foster's Donuts" hence the name of the event) for strawberry donuts. Gonzo Unicycle Madness Upon return to the campus, the ritual of the "shakedown" takes place (dismounting and then repeatedly jumping up and down), a necessary procedure after a unicycle ride of nearly twenty miles. Sometimes unicyclists on campus also meet to play unicycle hockey. The 1990s saw a short wane in unicycle riding, however the club is once again popular on campus.

A student-led organization, Increasing Harvey Mudd's Traditional Practices (IHTP), works to revive college traditions that have slowly faded over the years, and also starts new traditions that the group hopes to see take root on campus. It hosts annual events such as the 5-Class Competition, Friday Nooners, Wednesday Nighters, Frosh/Soph Games, and the Thomas-Garrett Affair. 

Interdorm competitions are also regularly held, ranging from water polo to broomball.

==Architecture==
The former Norman F. Sprague Memorial Library
The original buildings of campus were designed by Edward Durell Stone. Most are covered with thousands of square concrete features, called "warts" by the students, which would be perfectly suited to buildering except that, while some are set into the wall, others are simply glued on. In addition, these warts have the unusual usefulness of being great 'shelves' for unicycles and skateboards. One can walk towards Galileo Hall and see the warts (especially those near the entrances of buildings) being used as racks for unicycles and skateboards. Interestingly enough, the unofficial mascot of Harvey Mudd (featured on many college handbooks and other publications) is one of these concrete blocks with a face, arms, and legs, named "Wally the Wart."

Most of the computer labs and many classrooms are located in the basements (called the Libra Complex) of the concrete-block buildings. All of the buildings that make up the Libra Complex are interconnected via a series of underground tunnels, enabling convenient inter-building access.

Travel and Leisure's October 2013 issue named the college as one of the ugliest college campuses in America, noting that while Stone regarded his design as a "Modernist masterpiece with a twist", the result was "layering drab, slab-sided buildings with Beaux-Arts decoration". "America's Ugliest College Campuses", Travel + Leisure, October 2013 

==Relations with Caltech==
The California Institute of Technology, another school known for its strength in the natural sciences and engineering, is located 26 miles away from Harvey Mudd College. From time to time, Mudders have been known to amuse themselves by pranking Caltech. For example, in 1986, students from Mudd stole a memorial cannon from Fleming House at Caltech (originally from the National Guard) by dressing as maintenance people and carting it off on a flatbed truck for "cleaning." Harvey Mudd eventually returned the cannon after Caltech threatened to take legal action. In 2006, MIT replicated the prank and moved the same cannon to their campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Another Mudd prank involved slight modifications to a freeway sign. By placing parentheses around Pasadena City College, a nearby community college, Mudd students changed the sign to read:

California Institute of Technology
(Pasadena City College)
Next Exit

==Notable alumni==

Notable Harvey Mudd College alumni include astronauts George "Pinky" Nelson (1972) and Stan Love (1987), diplomat Richard H. Jones (1972), and former Starcraft: Brood War pro-gamer and professional Starcraft 2 commentator Sean Plott-Day.

==Notable faculty==

==Commencement speakers==
Commencement speakers at Harvey Mudd College have included inventors, entertainers, educators, astronauts, and civil rights leaders, among others.

* 2013  Carl Wieman 
* 2012  Bill Nye (the Science Guy) 
* 2011  Marissa Mayer 
* 2010  Freeman A. Hrabowski III 
* 2009  Dean Kamen 
* 2008  Bill Nye (the Science Guy) 
* 2007  Mae C. Jemison 
* 2006  Joseph B. Platt (founding president of Harvey Mudd College)
* 2005  Michael G. Wilson (Class of 1963) 
* 2004  Henry Petroski
* 2003  Orson Scott Card
* 2002  George "Pinky" Nelson (Class of 1972)
* 2001  Joseph Costello (Class of 1974) (Douglas Adams was originally scheduled to speak but died two days before the ceremony)
* 2000  Bill Nye (the Science Guy)
* 1999  Donna Shirley
* 1998  Sheila Widnall
* 1997  John Shalikashvili
* 1996  Clifford Stoll
* 1995  George E. Brown, Jr. (Democrat Representative)
* 1994  Walter E. Massey (Provost/VP Univ. Calif.; former President of NSF)
* 1993  Daniel Goldin
* 1992  Denis Hayes (Environmentalist)
* 1991  Ben J. Wattenberg (Author/Columnist/Commentator)
* 1990  Sandra Kurtzig (CEO/Founder of ASK Computers)
* 1989  Robert N. Bellah (Professor/Sociologist/Author)
* 1988  Ben Bova (Author/Editor/Lecturer)
* 1987  Ray Bradbury
* 1986  Margaret L.A. MacVicar (Dean for Undergraduate Education, MIT)
* 1985  Michael G. Wilson 63 (Film Producer/Writer)
* 1984  Bill Cosby
* 1983  Arthur Laffer
* 1982  James L. Gould (Associate Professor of Biology, Princeton)
* 1981  Ray Bradbury (Science Fiction Writer)
* 1980  Walter J. Mead (Professor of Economics, UCSB)
* 1979  Richard F. Post (Deputy Associate Director of Magnetic Fusion Energy at UC Lawrence Livermore Laboratories)
* 1978  John A. McCone (Former Director of CIA and Former Chair of US Atomic Energy Commission)
* 1977  D. Kenneth Baker (President, HMC)
* 1976  Joseph B. Platt (President, HMC)
* 1975  E. M. Benson, Jr. (Executive Vice President and Director, Atlantic Richfield Co., and HMC Trustee)
* 1974  Alvin M. Weinberg (Director, Office of Research and Development, Federal Energy Office)
* 1973  William H. Davenport (Founding Professor, HMC)
* 1972  Harvey Mudd II (Environmentalist)
* 1971  Myron Tribus (Senior Vice President, Xerox Corp.)
* 1970  Paul D. Saltman (Provost, Revelle College, UCSD)
* 1969  Eugene Hotchkiss III (Executive Dean, Chatham College)
* 1968  Joseph B. Platt (President, HMC)
* 1967  Herbert F. York (Professor of Physics and Former Chancellor, UCSD)
* 1966  T. Keith Glennan (President, Case Institute of Technology)
* 1965  Frank R. Collbohm (President, The RAND Corp.)
* 1964  Herman T. Spieth (Chancellor, UCR)
* 1963  Detlev W. Bronk (President, The Rockefeller Institute)
* 1962  Donald J. Russell (President, Southern Pacific Company)
* 1961  Kenneth S. Pitzer (Dean of the College of Chemistry, UCB)
* 1960  Leonard Carmichael (Secretary, Smithsonian Institution)
* 1959  Lee A. DuBridge (President, Caltech)

== See also ==

* Association of Independent Technological Universities

==References==

==External links==
* Official website
* Official athletics website
* The HMC Honor Code  ASHMC home page

 



[[Heaven]]

Dante and Beatrice gaze upon the highest heavens; from Gustave Dor's illustrations to the Divine Comedy.

Heaven, the Heavens or Seven Heavens, is a common religious, cosmological or transcendent place from which heavenly beings (such as a God, angels, the jinn, and sky deities like King or Queen of Heaven, Heavenly Father, Heavenly Mother, Son of Heaven, heavenly saints or venerated ancestors) originate, are enthroned or inhabit. It is commonly believed that heavenly beings can descend to earth or incarnate and that earthly beings can ascend to Heaven in the afterlife or, in exceptional cases, enter Heaven alive.

Heaven is often described as a "higher place", the holiest place, a Paradise, in contrast to Hell or the Underworld or the "low places", and universally or conditionally accessible by earthly beings according to various standards of divinity, goodness, piety, faith, or other virtues or right beliefs or simply the Will of God. Some believe in the possibility of a Heaven on Earth in a World to Come.

Another belief is in an Axis mundi or World tree which connects the heavens, the world, and the underworld. In Indian religions, Heaven is considered as Svarga loka, and soul is again subjected to rebirth in different living forms according to its karma. This cycle can be broken after a soul achieves Moksha or Nirvana. Any place of existence, either of humans, souls or deities, outside the tangible world (heaven, hell or other) is called otherworld. 

==Etymology==
The modern English word heaven is derived from the earlier (Middle English) heven (attested 1159); this in turn was developed from the previous Old English form heofon. By c. 1000, heofon was being used in reference to the Christianized "place where God dwells", but originally, it had signified "sky, firmament" The Anglo-Saxons knew the concept of Paradise, which they expressed with words such as neorxnawang. (e.g. in Beowulf, c. 725). The English term has cognates in the other Germanic languages: Old Saxon hean "sky, heaven", Middle Low German heven "sky", Old Icelandic himinn "sky, heaven", Gothic himins; and those with a variant final -l: Old Frisian himel, himul "sky, heaven", Old Saxon/Old High German himil, Dutch hemel, and modern German Himmel. All of these have been derived from a reconstructed Proto-Germanic form *Hemina-. Barnhart (1995:357). In many languages, the word for "heaven" is the same as the word for "sky".

==Entry into heaven==

Religions that speak about heaven differ on how (and if) one gets into it, either in the afterlife or while still alive. In many religions, entrance to heaven is conditional on having lived a "good life" (within the terms of the spiritual system). Some religions uphold the belief that other forms of afterlife exist in addition to heaven and hell, such as purgatory, though many hells, such as Naraka, serve as purgatories themselves. Some belief systems contain universalism, the belief that everyone will go to heaven eventually, no matter what they have done or believed on earth. Some forms of Christianity and other religions believe hell to be the termination of the soul.

==Ancient Near East religions==

===Assyria===

===Egypt===

In Ancient Egyptian faith, belief in an afterlife is much more stressed than in ancient Judaism. Heaven was a physical place far above the Earth in a "dark area" of space where there were no stars, basically beyond the Universe. According to the Book of the Dead, departed souls would undergo a literal journey to reach Heaven, along the way to which there could exist hazards and other entities attempting to deny the reaching of Heaven. Their heart would finally be weighed with the feather of truth, and if the sins weighed it down their heart was devoured.

===Canaanite and Phoenician views of heaven===
:
Almost nothing is known of Bronze Age (pre-1200 BC) Canaanite views of heaven, and the archeological findings at Ugarit (destroyed c. 1200 BC) have not provided information. The 1st century Greek author Philo of Byblos may preserve elements of Iron Age Phoenician religion in his Sanchuniathon. Attridge, Harold. W., and R. A. Oden, Jr. (1981), Philo of Byblos: The Phoenician History: Introduction, Critical Text, Translation, Notes, CBQMS 9 (Washington: D. C.: The Catholic Biblical Association of America). 

===Hurrian and Hittite myths===
In the Middle Hittite myths heaven is the abode of the gods. In the Song of Kumarbi, Alalu was king in heaven for nine years before giving birth to his son Anu. Anu was himself overthrown by his son Kumarbi. Harry A. Hoffner, Gary M. Beckman - 1990 
 Sabatino Moscati Face of the Ancient Orient 2001 Page 174 "The first, called 'Kingship in Heaven', tells how this kingship passes from Alalu to Anu, ... was king in heaven, Alalu was seated on the throne and the mighty Anu, first among the gods," Moscatti, Sabatino (1968), "The World of the Phoenicians" (Phoenix Giant) Ribichini, Sergio "Beliefs and Religious Life" in Maoscati Sabatino (1997), "The Phoenicians" (Rissoli) 

===Judaism (Iron Age)===
The term for heavens in the Tanakh is shamayim, located above the firmament (a solid, transparent dome which covered the earth and separated it from the "waters" above). The God of Israel (Yahweh) lived in Heaven or in the "Heaven of Heavens" (the exact difference between these two, if any, is unclear) in a heavenly palace. His dwelling on earth was Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem, which was a model of the cosmos and included a section which represented Heaven.

==Christianity==

The Ascension, by Dosso Dossi, 16th century. Many ascension scenes have an upper (heavenly) and a lower (earthly) part. http://www.bigli.com/quadro/279/dosso-dossi/ascensione-di-cristo.aspx 
In the "sola fide" belief of many mainstream Protestant Christians, one does not have to live a perfectly "good life", but one must accept (believe and put faith in) Jesus Christ as one's saviour, and then Jesus Christ will assume the guilt of one's sins; believers are believed to be forgiven regardless of any good or bad "works" they have done. Catholic Christians too speak of heaven as unattainable by even heroic human effort and having been "opened" instead by the death and resurrection of Jesus. Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1026 They see heaven as "God's eternal reward for good works accomplished with the grace of Christ" and giving rise to no strict merit on the part of human beings, Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1821 and 2007-2011 while "the works of the flesh" exclude from heaven. cited in Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1852 For the Orthodox too, "free will and our cooperation with God is always understood to be an act of grace" Carmen Fragapane, "A Response to Credenda / Agenda on Orthodoxys Teaching of Theosis and the Doctrine of Salvation Christian Universalism, on the other hand, holds that, because of divine love and mercy, all will ultimately be reconciled to God, regardless of present faith or good deeds. Some Christian denominations believe in an Intermediate state between death and the Resurrection of the Dead.

Christianity is based on the biblical belief in heaven as the Throne of God. Philip Edgecumbe Hughes A Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews p401 1988 "The theme of Christ's heavenly session, announced here by the statement he sat down at the right hand of God, .. Hebrews 8:1 "we have such a high priest, one who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven")" To this is added the belief that grace enables believers to ascend to heaven, as exemplified by Elijah and Enoch, Vatican Audience Talk, 21 July 1999 and to which all the elect will be admitted. Ehrman, Bart. Peter, Paul, and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in History and Legend. Oxford University Press, USA. 2006. ISBN 0-19-530013-0 The First Book of Maccabees (part of the Deuterocanonicals) uses "Heaven" as a name for God, but the spatial metaphor does not identify God with heaven, which is incapable of containing God. 

Creedal beliefs about heaven are expressed in the Nicene Creed, such as belief in the Ascension of Jesus to heaven and the Session of Christ at the Right Hand of God, and in the belief in the Second Coming of Christ from heaven to earth. Creedal beliefs about the afterlife include the statement: "I look forward to the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come".

Catholic beliefs about Mary include that she was assumed into heaven and titled the Queen of Heaven. In addition it is believed that St. Peter was given the Keys of Heaven, derived from .

The Gospel of Matthew frequently uses the phrase "kingdom of heaven", where the other Synoptic Gospels speak of the "kingdom of God", one of the key elements of the teachings of Jesus in the New Testament. The Gospel of Matthew by R.T. France (21 Aug 2007) ISBN 080282501X pages 101-103 speaks of a war in heaven between Michael the Archangel and his angels against the Dragon and his angels, after which the Dragon and his angels are "thrown down to the earth".

In the 2nd century AD, Irenaeus of Lyons recorded a belief that, in accordance with , those who in the afterlife see the Saviour are in different mansions, some dwelling in the heavens, others in paradise and others in "the city". Irenaeus, Adversus haereses, book V, chapter XXXVI, 1-2 

While the word used in all these writings, in particular the New Testament Greek word  (ouranos), applies primarily to the sky, it is also used metaphorically of the dwelling place of God and the blessed. Liddell and Scott  G3772  - Strong's Greek Lexicon Number Wiktionary Similarly, though the English word "heaven" still keeps its original physical meaning when used, for instance, in allusions to the stars as "lights shining through from heaven", and in phrases such as heavenly body to mean an astronomical object, the heaven or happiness that Christianity looks forward to "is neither an abstraction nor a physical place in the clouds, but a living, personal relationship with the Holy Trinity. It is our meeting with the Father which takes place in the risen Christ through the communion of the Holy Spirit." 

==Judaism==

===Rabbinical Judaism===

While the concept of heaven (malkuth hashamaim  , the Kingdom of Heaven) is well-defined within the Christian and Islamic religions, the Jewish concept of the afterlife, sometimes known as olam haba, the World-to-come, is not so precise. The Torah has little to say on the subject of survival after death, but by the time of the rabbis two ideas had made inroads among the Jews: one, which is probably derived from Greek thought, is that of the immortal soul which returns to its creator after death; the other, which is thought to be of Persian origin, is that of resurrection of the dead.

Jewish writings refer to a "new earth" as the abode of mankind following the resurrection of the dead. Originally, the two ideas of immortality and resurrection were different but in rabbinic thought they are combined: the soul departs from the body at death but is returned to it at the resurrection. This idea is linked to another rabbinic teaching, that men's good and bad actions are rewarded and punished not in this life but after death, whether immediately or at the subsequent resurrection. Around 1 CE, the Pharisees are said to have maintained belief in resurrection but the Sadducees are said to have denied it (Matt. 22:23).

Some scholars assert that the Sheol mentioned in Isaiah 38:18, Psalm 6:5 and Job 7:7-10 was an earlier concept than Heaven, but this theory is not universally held.

The Mishnah has many sayings about the World to Come, for example, "Rabbi Yaakov said: This world is like a lobby before the World to Come; prepare yourself in the lobby so that you may enter the banquet hall." Pirkei Avot, 4:21 

Judaism holds that the righteous of all nations have a share in the World-to-come. jewfaq.org/olamhaba.htm 

According to Nicholas de Lange, Judaism offers no clear teaching about the destiny which lies in wait for the individual after death and its attitude to life after death has been expressed as follows: "For the future is inscrutable, and the accepted sources of knowledge, whether experience, or reason, or revelation, offer no clear guidance about what is to come. The only certainty is that each man must die - beyond that we can only guess." Nicholas de Lange, Judaism, Oxford University Press, 1986 

According to Tracey R. Rich of the website "Judaism 101", Judaism, unlike other world-religions, is not focused on the quest of getting into heaven but on life and how to live it. "Some people look at these teachings and deduce that Jews try to "earn our way into Heaven" by performing the mitzvot. This is a gross mischaracterization of our religion. It is important to remember that unlike some religions, Judaism is not focused on the question of how to get into heaven. Judaism is focused on life and how to live it." Olam Ha-Ba: The World to Come Judaism 101; websource 02-11-2010. 

===Kabbalah Jewish mysticism===
In order from lowest to highest, the Seven Heavens, Shamayim (), according to the Talmud, are listed alongside the angels who govern them: The Seven Heavens in the Talmud.(see Ps. lxviii. 5). http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=1521&letter=A#4364 

# Vilon () also called "Araphel": The first Heaven, governed by Archangel Gabriel, is the closest of heavenly realms to the Earth; it is also considered the abode of Adam and Eve.
# Raqi'a (): The second Heaven is dually controlled by Zachariel and Raphael. It was in this Heaven that Moses, during his visit to Paradise, encountered the angel Nuriel who stood "300 parasangs high, with a retinue of 50 myriads of angels all fashioned out of water and fire". Also, Raquia is considered the realm where the fallen angels are imprisoned and the planets fastened. The Legends of the Jews I, 131, and II, 306. 
# Shehaqim (): The third Heaven, under the leadership of Anahel, serves as the home of the Garden of Eden and the Tree of Life; it is also the realm where manna, the holy food of angels, is produced. The Legends of the Jews V, 374. The Second Book of Enoch, meanwhile, states that both Paradise and Hell are accommodated in Shehaqim with Hell being located simply "on the northern side".
# Ma'on (): The fourth Heaven is ruled by the Archangel Michael, and according to Talmud Hagiga 12, it contains the heavenly Jerusalem, the Temple, and the Altar.
# Makhon (): The fifth Heaven is under the administration of Samael, an angel referred to as evil by some, but who is to others merely a dark servant of God.
# Zebul (): The sixth Heaven falls under the jurisdiction of Sachiel.
# Araboth (): The seventh Heaven, under the leadership of Cassiel, is the holiest of the seven Heavens because it houses the Throne of Glory attended by the Seven Archangels and serves as the realm in which God dwells; underneath the throne itself lies the abode of all unborn human souls. It is also considered the home of the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and the Hayyoth. Ginzberg, Louis. Henrietta Szold (trans.). The Legends of the Jews. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 190938. ISBN 0-8018-5890-9. 

==Islam==

The Qur'an contains many references to an afterlife in Eden for those who do good deeds. Regarding the concept of heaven (Jannah) in the Qu'ran, verse 35 of Surah Al-Rad says, "The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised! Beneath it flow rivers. Perpetual is the fruits thereof and the shade therein. Such is the End of the Righteous; and the end of the unbelievers is the Fire." Islam rejects the concept of original sin, and Muslims believe that all human beings are born pure. Children automatically go to heaven when they die, regardless of the religion of their parents.

The concept of heaven in Islam differs in many respects to the concept in Judaism and Christianity. Heaven is described primarily in physical terms as a place where every wish is immediately fulfilled when asked. Islamic texts describe immortal life in heaven as happy, without negative emotions. Those who dwell in heaven are said to wear costly apparel, partake in exquisite banquets, and recline on couches inlaid with gold or precious stones. Inhabitants will rejoice in the company of their parents, wives, and children. In Islam if one's good deeds weigh out one's sins then one may gain entrance to heaven. Conversely, if one's sins outweigh their good deeds they are sent to hell. The more good deeds one has performed the higher the level of heaven one is directed to. It has been said that the lowest level of heaven is one-hundred times better than the greatest life on earth. The highest level is the seventh heaven. Palaces are built by angels for the occupants using solid gold.

Verses which describe heaven include: , , , , .

Islamic texts refer to several levels of heaven: Firdaus or Paradise, 'Adn, Na'iim, Ma'wa, Darussalaam, Daarul Muaqaamah, Al-Muqqamul, Amin & Khuldi.

===Ahmadiyya===

According to the Ahmadiyya view, much of the imagery presented in the Qur'an regarding heaven, but also hell, is in fact metaphorical. They propound the verse which describes, according to them how the life to come after death is very different from the life here on earth. The Quran says: According to Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of Ahmadiyya sect in Islam, the soul will give birth to another rarer entity and will resemble the life on this earth in the sense that this entity will bear a similar relationship to the soul, as the soul bears relationship with the human existence on earth. On earth, if a person leads a righteous life and submits to the will of God, his or her tastes become attuned to enjoying spiritual pleasures as opposed to carnal desires. With this, an "embyonic soul" begins to take shape. Different tastes are said to be born which a person given to carnal passions finds no enjoyment. For example, sacrifice of one's own's rights over that of other's becomes enjoyable, or that forgiveness becomes second nature. In such a state a person finds contentment and Peace at heart and at this stage, according to Ahmadiyya beliefs, it can be said that a soul within the soul has begun to take shape. 

==Bah' Faith==

The Bah' Faith regards the conventional description of heaven (and hell) as a specific place as symbolic. The Bah' writings describe heaven as a "spiritual condition" where closeness to God is defined as heaven; conversely hell is seen as a state of remoteness from God. Bah'u'llh, the founder of the Bah' Faith, has stated that the nature of the life of the soul in the afterlife is beyond comprehension in the physical plane, but has stated that the soul will retain its consciousness and individuality and remember its physical life; the soul will be able to recognize other souls and communicate with them. 

For Bah's, entry into the next life has the potential to bring great joy. Bah'u'llh likened death to the process of birth. He explains: "The world beyond is as different from this world as this world is different from that of the child while still in the womb of its mother." The analogy to the womb in many ways summarizes the Bah' view of earthly existence: just as the womb constitutes an important place for a person's initial physical development, the physical world provides for the development of the individual soul. Accordingly, Bah's view life as a preparatory stage, where one can develop and perfect those qualities which will be needed in the next life. The key to spiritual progress is to follow the path outlined by the current Manifestation of God, which Bah's believe is currently Bah'u'llh. Bah'u'llh wrote, "Know thou, of a truth, that if the soul of man hath walked in the ways of God, it will, assuredly return and be gathered to the glory of the Beloved." 

The Bah' teachings state that there exists a hierarchy of souls in the afterlife, where the merits of each soul determines their place in the hierarchy, and that souls lower in the hierarchy cannot completely understand the station of those above. Each soul can continue to progress in the afterlife, but the soul's development is not entirely dependent on its own conscious efforts, the nature of which we are not aware, but also augmented by the grace of God, the prayers of others, and good deeds performed by others on Earth in the name of that person. 

==Buddhism==
In Buddhism there are several heavens, all of which are still part of samsara (illusionary reality). Those who accumulate good karma may be reborn (but no soul actually goes through rebirth; see anatta) in one of them. However, their stay in the heaven is not eternaleventually they will use up their good karma and will undergo a different rebirth into another realm, as humans, animals or other beings. Because heaven is temporary and part of samsara, Buddhists focus more on escaping the cycle of rebirth and reaching enlightenment (Nirvana). Nirvana is not a heaven but a mental state.

There are several different types of heavens also based on how the human lives a life along career lines. It is declared that a warrior who fights for good, and dies for his or her duties will enter the realm of the "devas of passionate delight", while an actor that makes audiences laugh will enter the realm of the "laughing devas". P. 93 Society at the Time of the Buddha By Narendra K. Wagle 

According to Buddhist cosmology the universe is impermanent and beings transmigrate through a number of existential "planes" in which this human world is only one "realm" or "path". Salvation Versus Liberation, A Buddhist View of the Paradise or Heavenly Worlds. 

These are traditionally envisioned as a vertical continuum with the heavens existing above the human realm, and the realms of the animals, Hungry ghosts and hell beings existing beneath it. According to Jan Chozen Bays in her book, Jizo: Guardian of Children, Travelers, and Other Voyagers, the realm of the asura is a later refinement of the heavenly realm and was inserted between the human realm and the heavens. One important Buddhist heaven is the Tryastria, which resembles Olympus of Greek mythology.

In the Mahayana world view, there are also pure lands which lie outside this continuum and are created by the Buddhas upon attaining enlightenment. These should not be confused with the heavens as the pure lands are abodes of Buddhas, which the heavens are not and heavens are looked at "impermanent" places to be reincarnated in, as heavenly beings still have to die and be reincarnated into lower realms. This confusion can be made worse when writers use such words "paradise" to denote such pure lands.

One notable Buddhist pure land is the Pure Land of Amitabha Buddha. Rebirth in the pure land of Amitabha is seen as an assurance of Buddhahood for once reborn there, beings do not fall back into cyclical existence unless they choose to do so to save other beings, the goal of Buddhism being the obtainment of enlightenment and freeing oneself and others from the birthdeath cycle.

One of the Buddhist Sutras states that a hundred years of our existence is equal to one day and one night in the world of the thirty-three gods. Thirty such days add up to their one month. Twelve such months become their one year, while they live for a thousand such years though existence in the heavens is ultimately finite and the beings who reside there will reappear in other realms based on their karma.

The Tibetan word Bardo means literally "intermediate state". In Sanskrit the concept has the name 
antarabhva.

===Different heavens===

====According to Anguttara Nikaya====
Brahmloka

Here the denizens are Brahms, and the ruler is Mahbrahm.

Of all the devas, Brahms are the wisest of all gods and declared in Buddhism to be the highest but the Buddha and monks having reached the state of Arahant can surpass the Brahms by status. Brahms also are asexual and do not desire to procreate.

After developing the four Brahmavihras, King Makhdeva rebirths here after death. The monk Tissa and Brhmana Jnussoni were also reborn here.

For a monk, the next best thing to Nirvana is to be reborn in this Brahmloka.

The lifespan of a Brahms is not stated but is not eternal.

Kmvacaraloka

The lifespan of a Kmvacara is not stated but is not eternal.

Ctummaharaja

Here some denizens are kings that came from human lives as being kings.

The Anguttara Nikaya says that on the 15th day, the Ctummaharaja gods look down to earth and see of the humans are still paying reverence to mother, father, samanas and brahmanas.

Bimbisra (the king of Magadha), and Pysi (the king of Kosla) were reborn here.

The denizens here have a lifespan of 9,216,000,000 years.

Nimmnarati

The denizens here have a lifespan of 2,284,000,000 years.

Parinimmitavasavatti

The denizens here have a lifespan of 9,216,000,000 years.

Tvatimsa

The ruler of this heaven is Indra or Shakra, and the realm is also called Trayatrimia.

Each denizen addresses other denizens as the title "mrisa".

The governing hall of this heaven is called Sudhamma Hall.

This heaven has a garden Nandanavana with damsels, as its most magnificent sight.

Ajita the Licchavi army general was reborn here. Gopika the Skyan girl was reborn as a male god in this realm.

Any Buddhist reborn in this realm can outshine any of the previously dwelling denizens because of the extra merit acquired for following the Buddha's teachings.

The denizens here have a lifespan of 36,000,000 years.

Tusita

Anthapindika, a Koslan householder and benefactor to the Buddha's order was reborn here.

The denizens here have a lifespan of 576,000,000 years.

Yma

The denizens here have a lifespan of 1,444,000,000 years.

====According to Tibetan Buddhism====
There are 5 major types of heavens.

#Akanishtha or Ghanavyiiha This is the most supreme heaven wherein beings that have achieved Nirvana live for eternity.
#Heaven of the Jinas
#Heavens of Formless Spirits These are 4 in number.
#Brahmaloka These are 16 in number, and are free from sensuality. 
#Devaloka These are 6 in number, and contain sensuality.

==Jainism==

 Structure of Universe as per the Jain Scriptures.

The shape of the Universe as described in Jainism is shown alongside. Unlike the current convention of using North direction as the top of map, this uses South as the top. The shape is similar to a part of human form standing upright.

The Deva Loka (Heavens) are at the symbolic "chest", where all souls enjoying the positive karmic effects reside. The heavenly beings are referred to as devas (masculine form) and devis (feminine form). According to Jainism, there is not one heavenly abode, but several layers to reward appropriately the souls of varying degree of karmit merits. Similarly, beneath the "waist" are the Narka Loka (Hell). Human, animal, insect, plant and microscopic life forms reside on the middle.

The pure souls (who reached Siddha status) reside at the very south end (top) of the Universe. They are referred to in Tamil literature as  (Kural 43).

==Chinese faiths==
Chinese Zhou Dynasty Oracle script for Tian, the character for Heaven or sky.

In the native Chinese Confucian traditions Heaven (Tian) is an important concept, where the ancestors reside and from which emperors drew their mandate to rule in their dynastic propaganda, for example.

Heaven is a key concept in Chinese mythology, philosophies and religions, and is on one end of the spectrum a synonym of Shangdi ("Supreme Deity") and on the other naturalistic end, a synonym for nature and the sky. The Chinese term for Heaven, Tian (), derives from the name of the supreme deity of the Zhou Dynasty. After their conquest of the Shang Dynasty in 1122 BC, the Zhou people considered their supreme deity Tian to be identical with the Shang supreme deity Shangdi. Herrlee Creel "The Origin of the Deity T'ien" (1970:493-506) The Zhou people attributed Heaven with anthropomorphic attributes, evidenced in the etymology of the Chinese character for Heaven or sky, which originally depicted a person with a large cranium. Heaven is said to see, hear and watch over all men. Heaven is affected by man's doings, and having personality, is happy and angry with them. Heaven blesses those who please it and sends calamities upon those who offend it. Joseph Shih, "The Notion of God in the Ancient Chinese Religion," Numen, Vol. 16, Fasc. 2, pp 99-138, Brill: 1969 Heaven was also believed to transcend all other spirits and gods, with Confucius asserting, "He who offends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray." 

Other philosophers born around the time of Confucius such as Mozi took an even more theistic view of Heaven, believing that Heaven is the divine ruler, just as the Son of Heaven (the King of Zhou) is the earthly ruler. Mozi believed that spirits and minor gods exist, but their function is merely to carry out the will of Heaven, watching for evil-doers and punishing them. Thus they function
as angels of Heaven and do not detract from its monotheistic government of the world. With such a high monotheism, it is not surprising that Mohism championed a concept called "universal love" (jian'ai, ), which taught that Heaven loves all people equally and that each person should similarly love all human beings without distinguishing between his own relatives and those of others. Homer Dubs, "Theism and Naturalism in Ancient Chinese Philosophy," Philosophy of East and West, Vol 9, No 3/4, pp 163-172, University of Hawaii Press: 1960. In Mozi's Will of Heaven (), he writes:

Mozi criticized the Confucians of his own time for not following the teachings of Confucius. By the time of the later Han Dynasty, however, under the influence of Xunzi, the Chinese concept of Heaven and Confucianism itself had become mostly naturalistic, though some Confucians argued that Heaven was where ancestors reside. Worship of Heaven in China continued with the erection of shrines, the last and greatest being the Temple of Heaven in Beijing, and the offering of prayers. The ruler of China in every Chinese dynasty would perform annual sacrificial rituals to Heaven, usually by slaughtering two healthy bulls as sacrifice.

==Hinduism==

Attaining heaven is not the final pursuit in Hinduism as heaven itself is ephemeral and related to physical body. Being tied by the bhoot-tatvas, heaven cannot be perfect either and is just another name for pleasurable and mundane material life. According to Hindu cosmology, above the earthly plane, are other planes: (1) Bhuva Loka, (2) Swarga Loka, meaning Good Kingdom, is the general name for heaven in Hinduism, a heavenly paradise of pleasure, where most of the Hindu Devatas (Deva) reside along with the king of Devas, Indra, and beatified mortals. Some other planes are Mahar Loka, Jana Loka, Tapa Loka and Satya Loka. Since heavenly abodes are also tied to the cycle of birth and death, any dweller of heaven or hell will again be recycled to a different plane and in a different form as per the karma and "maya" i.e. the illusion of Samsara. This cycle is broken only by self-realization by the Jivatma. This self-realization is Moksha (Turiya, Kaivalya).

The concept of moksha is unique to Hinduism and is unparalleled. Moksha stands for liberation from the cycle of birth and death and final communion with Brahman. With moksha, a liberated soul attains the stature and oneness with Brahman or Pramatma. Different schools such as Vedanta, Mimansa, Sankhya, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, and Yoga offer subtle differences in the concept of Brahman, obvious Universe, its genesis and regular destruction, Jivatma, Nature (Prakriti) and also the right way in attaining perfect bliss or moksha.

In the Vaishnava traditions the highest heaven is Vaikuntha, which exists above the six heavenly lokas and outside of the mahat-tattva or mundane world. It's where eternally liberated souls who have attained moksha reside in eternal sublime beauty with Lakshmi and Narayana (a manifestation of Vishnu).

==Mesoamerican religions==

The Nahua people such as the Aztecs, Chichimecs and the Toltecs believed that the heavens were constructed and separated into 13 levels. Each level had from one to many Lords living in and ruling these heavens. Most important of these heavens was Omeyocan (Place of Two). The thirteen heavens were ruled by Ometeotl, the dual Lord, creator of the Dual-Genesis who, as male, takes the name Ometecuhtli (Two Lord), and as female is named Omecihuatl (Two Lady).

==Polynesia==

In the creation myths of Polynesian mythology are found various concepts of the heavens and the underworld. These differ from one island to another. What they share is the view of the universe as an egg or coconut that is divided between the world of humans (earth), the upper world of heavenly gods, and the underworld. Each of these is subdivided in a manner reminiscent of Dante's Divine Comedy, but the number of divisions and their names differs from one Polynesian culture to another. Craig, Robert D. Dictionary of Polynesian Mythology. Greenwood Press: New York, 1989. ISBN 0-313-25890-2. Page 57. 

===Mori===
In Mori mythology, the heavens are divided into a number of realms. Different tribes number the heaven differently, with as few as two and as many as fourteen levels. One of the more common versions divides heaven thus:
# Kiko-rangi, presided over by the god Toumau
# Waka-maru, the heaven of sunshine and rain
# Nga-roto, the heaven of lakes where the god Maru rules
# Hau-ora, where the spirits of newborn children originate
# Nga-Tauira, home of the servant gods
# Nga-atua, which is ruled over by the hero Tawhaki
# Autoia, where human souls are created
# Aukumea, where spirits live
# Wairua, where spirit gods live while waiting on those in
# Naherangi or Tuwarea, where the great gods live presided over by Rehua

The Mori believe these heavens are supported by pillars. Other Polynesian peoples see them being supported by gods (as in Hawai'i). In one Tahitian legend, heaven is supported by an octopus.

===Paumotu, Tuamotus===
An 1869 illustration by a Tuomatuan chief portraying nine heavens.
The Polynesian conception of the universe and its division is nicely illustrated by a famous drawing made by a Tuomotuan chief in 1869. Here, the nine heavens are further divided into left and right, and each stage is associated with a stage in the evolution of the earth that is portrayed below. The lowest division represents a period when the heavens hung low over the earth, which was inhabited by animals that were not known to the islanders. In the third division is shown the first murder, the first burials, and the first canoes, built by Rata. In the fourth division, the first coconut tree and other significant plants are born. Young, J.L. "The Paumotu Conception of the Heavens and of Creation", Journal of the Polynesian Society, 28 (1919), 209211. 

==Theosophy==

It is believed in Theosophy of Helena Blavatsky that each religion (including Theosophy) has its own individual Heaven in various regions of the upper astral plane that fits the description of that Heaven that is given in each religion, which a soul that has been good in their previous life on Earth will go to. The area of the upper astral plane of Earth in the upper atmosphere where the various Heavens are located is called Summerland (Theosophists believe Hell is located in the lower astral plane of Earth which extends downward from the surface of the earth down to its center). However, Theosophists believe that the soul is recalled back to Earth after an average of about 1400 years by the Lords of Karma to incarnate again. The final Heaven that souls go to billions of years in the future after they finish their cycle of incarnations is called Devachan. Leadbeater, C.W. Outline of Theosophy Wheaton, Illinois, USA:1915 Theosophical Publishing House 

==Criticism of the belief in Heaven==
Most Marxists regard heaven, like religion generally, as a tool employed by authorities to bribe their subjects into a certain way of life by promising a reward after death. Animal Farm Character Profiles at Charles' George Orwell Links. 

The anarchist Emma Goldman expressed this view when she wrote, "Consciously or unconsciously, most atheists see in gods and devils, heaven and hell; reward and punishment, a whip to lash the people into obedience, meekness and contentment." Goldman, Emma. "The Philosophy of Atheism". Mother Earth, February 1916. 

Many people consider George Orwell's use of Sugarcandy Mountain in his novel Animal Farm to be a literary expression of this view. In the book, the animals were told that after their miserable lives were over they would go to a place in which "it was Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges". Opinions: Essays: Orwell's Political Messages by Rhodri Williams. Background information for George Orwell's Animal Farm at Charles' George Orwell Links. However, George Orwell himself was a practicing, communicant member of the Church of England. 

Some atheists have argued that a belief in a reward after death is poor motivation for moral behavior while alive. The Atheist Philosophy Quote by Albert Einstein at Quote DB. Sam Harris wrote, "It is rather more noble to help people purely out of concern for their suffering than it is to help them because you think the Creator of the Universe wants you to do it, or will reward you for doing it, or will punish you for not doing it. The problem with this linkage between religion and morality is that it gives people bad reasons to help other human beings when good reasons are available." Sam Harris at the 2006 Belief: Science, Religion, Reason and Survival|Beyond Belief] conference (watch here). C.S. Lewis commented: "We are afraid that Heaven is a bribe, and that if we make it our goal we shall no longer be disinterested. It is not so. Heaven offers nothing that a mercenary soul can desire. It is safe to tell the pure in heart that they shall see God, for only the pure in heart want to. There are rewards that do not sully motives." C.S. Lewis, Joyful Christian (Simon and Schuster 1996 ISBN 978-0-68482377-5), p. 227 

== Neuroscience ==

The Assumption of the Virgin by Francesco Botticini at the National Gallery London, shows three hierarchies and nine orders of angels, each with different characteristics.

In Inside the Neolithic Mind, Lewis-Williams and Pearce argue that a tiered structure of heaven, along with similarly structured circles of hell, is neurally perceived by members of many cultures around the world and through history. The reports are so similar across time and space that Lewis-Williams and Pearce argue for a neuroscientific explanation, accepting the percepts as real neural activations and subjective percepts during particular altered states of consciousness.

Many people who come close to death and have near death experiences report meeting relatives or entering "the Light" in an otherworldly dimension, which share similarities with the religious concept of Heaven. Even though there are also reports of distressing experiences and negative life-reviews, which share some similarities with the concept of Hell, the positive experiences of meeting or entering "the Light" is reported as an immensely intense feeling state of love, peace and joy beyond human comprehension. Together with this intensely positive feeling state, people who have near death experiences also report that consciousness or a heightened state of awareness seems as if it is at the heart of experiencing a taste of "Heaven". Jorgensen, Rene. Awakening After Life BookSurge, 2007 ISBN 1-4196-6347-X 

==Postmodern views==
* Omega Point (Tipler)

==Representations in arts==

===Literature===
* Works of fiction have included numerous different conceptions of Heaven and Hell. The two most famous descriptions of Heaven are given in Dante Alighieri's Paradiso (of the Divine Comedy) and John Milton's Paradise Lost.
* The Chronicles of Narnia, a series by C. S. Lewis offers a description of Heaven at the end of the sequence in the 'Last Battle', depicted as a lush green land surrounded by mountains under the rule of a lion Aslan.
* Elric and Eternal Champion, two series by Michael Moorcock, is one of many who offer Chaos-Evil(-Hell) and Uniformity-Good(-Heaven) as equally unacceptable extremes which must be held in balance.
* In The Discovery of Heaven, a 1992 novel by Harry Mulisch, heaven is located "at the end of the Big Bang in negative space".
* In The Grand Tour of Heaven, an Autobiography by Tobiah Neiditch, Heaven is depicted as looking like halos around the Sun, and shows how weather phenomena on earth portrays what heaven really looks like when you die.
*In Mary K. Baxter's book The Divine Revelation of Heaven, Mary describes a time in which she claims she was taken into heaven for 10 days with Jesus Christ.

===Film===

* Made in Heaven, a 1987 film which concerns two souls who cross paths in Heaven and then attempt to reconnect once they are reborn on Earth.
* What Dreams May Come, a 1998 movie that won an Academy Award for its depiction of heaven and hell as the subjective creations of the individual, was an essentially mystical interpretation of heaven, hell and reincarnation. It was based on the eponymous novel by Richard Matheson.
* Heaven, a 2002 film that implies heaven can be reached the higher up one goes (in the film's case, in a helicopter).
* Field of Dreams, a 1989 film in which heaven is symbolized by a baseball field. Several players ask Ray if they are in heaven, but he assures them that they are just in Iowa. At the end, Ray asks his father if there is a heaven, to which his father replies that it is the place where dreams come true.

===Television===
* In the South Park episodes "Do the Handicapped Go to Hell?" and "Probably", it is revealed that Mormons go to Heaven while everyone else lives in Hell. Due to a war between Heaven and Hell in "Best Friends Forever", God allows more people in.
* In the American Dad! episode "The Most Adequate Christmas Ever", Heaven is featured. Anyone who has done good in their life is flown from Limbo to the Gates of Heaven by a large griffin (which might be Ziz). There was a reference that Jim Henson tried to sneak into Heaven only for him and Kermit the Frog to end up in a flat rectangle prison (similar to General Zod in Superman II) as Kermit begs for them to be released.
* Heaven is featured in the Renkin 3-ky Magical? Pokn episode "The Spell of Rebirth is a Trip Through Hell." Uma ends up sent to Heaven with a letter to God (portrayed by Keimie) that Uma has been banished from Hell for all eternity. Uma spends time in Heaven until she gets bored and takes God's option to restore Uma to life.
* In the Simpsons episode "The Father, the Son, and the Holy Guest Star" when Bart and Homer became Catholic, Marge imagined herself in Heaven, which is split into two parts. First there is Catholic Heaven, full of Irish, Italian, and Mexican people where everyone is partying, including Bart, Homer and Jesus. Then there is Protestant Heaven, where people play croquet or tennis.

===Documentaries===
* Heaven: Beyond the Grave. A&E Network. (IMDB)
* Mysteries of the Bible: "Heaven and Hell". A&E Network.

==See also==
*Baptism
*Blessed
*Death
*God
*Hell
*Indulgence
*Paradise
*Penance
*Purgatory
*Redemption
*Saint
*Salvation
*Servant of God
*Venerable

==References==

==Further reading==
* Smith, Gary Scott, Heaven in the American Imagination (Oxford University Press; 2011) 339 pages; draws on art, music, folklore, sermons, literature, psychology, and other realms in a study of how Americans since the Puritans have imagined heaven.

==External links==

* 
* Catechism of the Catholic Church I believe in Life Everlasting Explanation of Catholic teaching about Heaven, Hell & Purgatory
* Catholic Encyclopedia: Heaven
* Jewish Encyclopedia: Heaven
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Heaven and Hell
* In Films, Heavens No Paradise New York Times, Wed. July 22, 2009
* Heaven: A fool's paradise, The Independent, April 21, 2010
* Swedenborg, E. Heaven and its Wonders and Hell. From Things Heard and Seen (Swedenborg Foundation, 1946)

 



[[History of Libya]]

The history of Libya includes the history of its rich mix of ethnic groups added to the indigenous Berber tribes. Berbers have been present throughout the entire history of the country. For most of its history, Libya has been subjected to varying degrees of foreign control, from Europe and Africa. The modern history of independent Libya began in 1951.

The history of Libya comprises six distinct periods: Ancient Libya, the Roman era, the Islamic era, Ottoman rule, Italian rule, and the Modern era.

==Prehistoric and Berber Libya==

Prehistoric Libyan rock paintings in Tadrart Acacus reveal a Sahara once lush in vegetation and wildlife.
Tens of thousands of years ago, the Sahara Desert, which now covers roughly 90% of Libya, was lush with green vegetation. It was home to lakes, forests, diverse wildlife and a temperate Mediterranean climate. Archaeological evidence indicates that the coastal plain of was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC. These peoples were perhaps drawn by the climate, which enabled their culture to grow, subsisting on the domestication of cattle and the cultivation of crops. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress, (1987), "Early History of Libya", U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 11 July 2006. 

Rock paintings and carvings at Wadi Mathendous and the mountainous region of Jebel Acacus are the best sources of information about prehistoric Libya, and the pastoralist culture that settled there. The paintings reveal that the Libyan Sahara contained rivers, grassy plateaus and an abundance of wildlife such as giraffes, elephants and crocodiles. Oliver, Roland (1999), The African Experience: From Olduvai Gorge to the 21st Century (Series: History of Civilization), London: Phoenix Press, revised edition, pg 39. 

The onset of the 5.9 kiloyear event's intense aridification resulted in the "green Sahara" rapidly transforming into the Sahara Desert. Dispersal in Africa from the Atlantic coast to the Siwa Oasis in Egypt seems to have followed, due to climatic changes which caused increasing desertification. 

The Afro-Asiatic ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe is that of the Garamantes, who were based in Germa. The Garamantes were a Saharan people of Berber origin who used an elaborate underground irrigation system; they were probably present as tribal people in the Fezzan by about 1000 BC, and were a local power in the Sahara between 500 BC and 500 AD. By the time of contact with the Phoenicians, the first of the Semitic civilizations to arrive in Libya from the East, the Lebu, Garamantes, Bebers and other tribes that lived in the Sahara were already well established.

==Phoenician and Greek Libya==

The temple of Zeus in the ancient Greek city of Cyrene. Libya has a number of World Heritage Sites from the ancient Greek era.
The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya, when the merchants of Tyre (in present-day Lebanon) developed commercial relations with the Berber tribes and made treaties with them to ensure their cooperation in the exploitation of raw materials. Herodotus, (c.430 BC), "'The Histories', Book IV.4243" Fordham University, New York. Retrieved 18 July 2006. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress, (1987), "Tripolitania and the Phoenicians", U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 11 July 2006. By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being. Punic settlements on the Libyan coast included Oea (later Tripoli), Libdah (later Leptis Magna) and Sabratha. These cities were in an area that was later called Tripolis, or "Three Cities", from which Libya's modern capital Tripoli takes its name.

In 630 BC, the Ancient Greeks colonized Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress, (1987), "Cyrenaica and the Greeks", U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 11 July 2006. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica: Barce (later Marj); Euhesperides (later Berenice, present-day Benghazi); Taucheira (later Arsinoe, present-day Taucheria); Balagrae (later Bayda and Beda Littoria under Italian occupation, present-day Bayda); and Apollonia (later Susa), the port of Cyrene. History of Libya The History Files. Retrieved 29 September 2011 Together with Cyrene, they were known as the Pentapolis (Five Cities). Cyrene became one of the greatest intellectual and artistic centers of the Greek world, and was famous for its medical school, learned academies, and architecture. The Greeks of the Pentapolis resisted encroachments by the Ancient Egyptians from the East, as well as by the Carthaginians from the West, but in 525 BC the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander the Great was greeted by the Greeks when he entered Cyrenaica in 331 BC, and Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Later, a federation of the Pentapolis was formed that was customarily ruled by a king drawn from the Ptolemaic royal house.

==Roman Libya==

The Arch of Septimius Severus at Leptis Magna. The patronage of Roman emperor Septimus Severus allowed the city to become one of the most prominent in Roman Africa.
After the fall of Carthage the Romans did not occupy immediately Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it under control of the kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Bertarelli (1929), p. 202. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. During the Roman civil wars Tripolitania (still not formally annexed) and Cyrenaica sustained Pompey and Marc Antony against respectively Caesar and Octavian. Bertarelli (1929), p. 417. The Romans completed the conquest of the region under Augustus, occupying northern Fezzan ("Fasania") with Cornelius Balbus Minor. Bertarelli (1929), p. 382. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height. On the other side, Cyrenaica's first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius but was heavily devastated during the Kitos War Rostovtzeff (1957), p. 364. and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike, Cassius Dio, lxviii. 32 and, although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decadence. 

Regardless, for more than 400 years Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were part of a cosmopolitan state whose citizens shared a common language, legal system, and Roman identity. Roman ruins like those of Leptis Magna and Sabratha, extant in present-day Libya, attest to the vitality of the region, where populous cities and even smaller towns enjoyed the amenities of urban lifethe forum, markets, public entertainments, and bathsfound in every corner of the Roman Empire. Merchants and artisans from many parts of the Roman world established themselves in North Africa, but the character of the cities of Tripolitania remained decidedly Punic and, in Cyrenaica, Greek. Tripolitania was a major exporter of olive oil, Rostovtzeff (1957), p. 335. as well as a center for the trade of ivory and wild animals conveyed to the coast by the Garamantes, while Cyrenaica remained an important source of wines, drugs, and horses. The bulk of the population in the countryside consisted of Berber farmers, who in the west were thoroughly "romanized" in language and customs. Heuser, Stephen, (24 July 2005), "When Romans lived in Libya", The Boston Globe. Retrieved 18 July 2006. Until the 10th century the African Romance remained in use in some Tripolitanian areas, mainly near the Tunisian border. Tadeusz Lewicki, "Une langue romane oublie de l'Afrique du Nord. Observations d'un arabisant", Rocznik Orient. XVII (1958), pp. 415480. 

The decline of the Roman Empire saw the classical cities fall into ruin, a process hastened by the Vandals' destructive sweep though North Africa in the 5th century. The region's prosperity had shrunk under Vandal domination, and the old Roman political and social order, disrupted by the Vandals, could not be restored. In outlying areas neglected by the Vandals, the inhabitants had sought the protection of tribal chieftains and, having grown accustomed to their autonomy, resisted re-assimilation into the imperial system.

When the Empire returned (now as East Romans) as part of Justinian's reconquests of the 6th century, efforts were made to strengthen the old cities, but it was only a last gasp before they collapsed into disuse. Cyrenaica, which had remained an outpost of the Byzantine Empire during the Vandal period, also took on the characteristics of an armed camp. Unpopular Byzantine governors imposed burdensome taxation to meet military costs, while the towns and public servicesincluding the water systemwere left to decay. Byzantine rule in Africa did prolong the Roman ideal of imperial unity there for another century and a half however, and prevented the ascendancy of the Berber nomads in the coastal region. By the beginning of the 7th century, Byzantine control over the region was weak, Berber rebellions were becoming more frequent, and there was little to oppose Muslim invasion. Rodd, Francis. "Kahena, Queen of the Berbers: A Sketch of the Arab Invasion of Ifrikiya in the First Century of the Hijra" Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London, Vol. 3, No. 4, (1925), 7312 

==Islamic Libya==

The Atiq Mosque in Awjila is the oldest mosque in the Sahara.
Tenuous Byzantine control over Libya was restricted to a few poorly defended coastal strongholds, and as such, the Arab horsemen who first crossed into the Pentapolis of Cyrenaica in September 642 AD encountered little resistance. Under the command of 'Amr ibn al-'As, the armies of Islam conquered Cyrenaica, and renamed the Pentapolis, Barqa. They took also Tripoli, but after destroying the Roman walls of the city and getting a tribute they withdrew. Bertarelli (1929), p. 278. In 647 an army of 40,000 Arabs, led by Abdullah ibn Saad, the foster-brother of Caliph Uthman, penetrated deep into Western Libya and took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. From Barqa, the Fezzan (Libya's Southern region) was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663 and Berber resistance was overcome. During the following centuries Libya came under the rule of several Islamic dynasties, under various levels of autonomy from Ummayad, Abbasid and Fatimid caliphates of the time. Arab rule was easily imposed in the coastal farming areas and on the towns, which prospered again under Arab patronage. Townsmen valued the security that permitted them to practice their commerce and trade in peace, while the Punicized farmers recognized their affinity with the Semitic Arabs to whom they looked to protect their lands. In Cyrenaica, Monophysite adherents of the Coptic Church had welcomed the Muslim Arabs as liberators from Byzantine oppression. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule. 

For the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Ummayad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Ummayads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. The Aghlabids were amongst the most attentive Islamic rulers of Libya; they brought about a measure of order to the region, and restored Roman irrigation systems, which brought prosperity to the area from the agricultural surplus. By the end of the 9th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya from their capital in Mahdia, before they ruled the entire region from their new capital of Cairo in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor. During Fatimid rule, Tripoli thrived on the trade in slaves and gold brought from the Sudan and on the sale of wool, leather, and salt shipped from its docks to Italy in exchange for wood and iron goods. Ibn Ziri's Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognised the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from two troublesome Arab Bedouin tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region. Ibn Khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by Banu Hilal invaders had become completely arid desert. "Populations Crises and Population Cycles", Claire Russell and W.M.S. Russell. 

King Roger II of Sicily was the first Norman King to rule Tripoli when he captured it in 1146.
Zirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. Bertarelli (1929), p. 203. It was not until 1159 that the Moroccan Almohad leader Abd al-Mu'min reconquered Tripoli from European rule. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles between the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of a Tunisian Hafsid dynasty independent from the Almohads. The Hafsids ruled Tripolitania for nearly 300 years, and established significant trade with the city-states of Europe. Hafsid rulers also encouraged art, literature, architecture and scholarship. Ahmad Zarruq was one of the most famous Islamic scholars to settle in Libya, and did so during this time. By the 16th century however, the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire. After a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha finally took control of Libya in 1551. 

==Ottoman Tripolitania==

The Siege of Tripoli in 1551 allowed the Ottomans to capture the city from the Knights of St. John.
After a successful invasion by the of Habsburg#Division of the house: Austrian and Spanish Habsburgs|Habsburgs of Spain] in the early 16th century, Charles V entrusted its defense to the Knights of St. John in Malta. Lured by the piracy that spread through the Maghreb coastline, adventurers such as Barbarossa and his successors consolidated Ottoman control in the central Maghreb. The Ottoman Turks conquered Tripoli in 1551 under the command of Sinan Pasha. In the next year his successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. As Pasha, he adorned and built up Tripoli, making it one of the most impressive cities along the North African coast. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a pasha appointed directly by the sultan in Constantinople. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a bey was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli. 

In time, real power came to rest with the pashas corps of janissaries, a self-governing military guild, and in time the pashas role was reduced to that of ceremonial head of state. Mutinies and coups were frequent, and in 1611 the deys staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of deys effectively ruled Tripolitania, some for only a few weeks, and at various times the dey was also pasha-regent. The regency governed by the dey was autonomous in internal affairs and, although dependent on the sultan for fresh recruits to the corps of janissaries, his government was left to pursue a virtually independent foreign policy as well. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 163149) and Osman Saqizli (r. 164972), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. Bertarelli (1929), p. 204. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica. 

An elevation of the city of Ottoman Tripoli in 1675
Tripoli was the only city of size in Ottoman Tripolitania (then known as the Eyalet of Tripolitania) at the end of the 17th century and had a population of about 30,000. The bulk of its residents were Moors, as city-dwelling Arabs were then known. Several hundred Turks and renegades formed a governing elite, a large portion of which were kouloughlis (lit. sons of servantsoffspring of Turkish soldiers and Arab women); they identified with local interests and were respected by locals. Jews and Moriscos were active as merchants and craftsmen and a small number of European traders also frequented the city. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli. In 1551, Turgut Reis enslaved almost the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo, some 6,300 people, sending them to Libya. The most pronounced slavery activity involved the enslavement of black Africans who were brought via trans-Saharan trade routes. Even though the slave trade was officially abolished in Tripoli in 1853, in practice it continued until the 1890s. Lisa Anderson, "Nineteenth-Century Reform in Ottoman Libya", International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 16, No. 3. (August 1984), pp. 325348. 

USS Enterprise of the Mediterranean Squadron capturing Tripolitan Corsair during the First Barbary War, 1801
Lacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military disorder and upheaval during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1835 mainly in Tripolitania, but had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid 18th century. Ahmed was a Janissary and popular cavalry officer. He murdered the Ottoman Dey of Tripolitania and seized the throne in 1711. After persuading Sultan Ahmed III to recognize him as governor, Ahmed established himself as pasha and made his post hereditary. Though Tripolitania continued to pay nominal tribute to the Ottoman padishah, it otherwise acted as an independent kingdom. Ahmed greatly expanded his city's economy, particularly through the employment of corsairs (pirates) on crucial Mediterranean shipping routes; nations that wished to protect their ships from the corsairs were forced to pay tribute to the pasha. Ahmad's successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region's delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli to survive several dynastic crises without invasion. The 179395 Tripolitanian civil war occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Benghul deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. However, Hamet's brother Yusuf (r. 17951832) reestablished Tripolitania's independence.

In the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania's economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons; though Yusuf abdicated in 1832 in favor of his son Ali II, civil war soon resulted. Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, but instead deposed and exiled Ali II, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Bertarelli (1929), p. 205. Anyway, order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858. 

The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and what seemed as greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya. It would not be long before the Scramble for Africa and European colonial interests set their eyes on the marginal Turkish provinces of Libya. Reunification came about through the unlikely route of an invasion (Italo-Turkish War, 19111912) and occupation starting from 1911 when Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies. Country Profiles, (16 May 2006), "Timeline: Libya, a chronology of key events" BBC News. Retrieved 18 July 2006. 

==Italian Libya==

Australian infantry at Tobruk during World War II. Beginning on 10 April 1941, the Siege of Tobruk lasted for 240 days and finished with a victory of the Italians and Germans
From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population. Libya, Encyclopdia Britannica. 

Omar Mukhtar was the leader of Libyan resistance in Cyrenaica against the Italian colonization.
In 1934, Italy created the actual nation of Libya -with the union of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica- and adopted the name "Libya" (used by the Greeks for all of North Africa, except Egypt) as the official name of the colony (made up of the three provinces of Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan). Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, led Libyan resistance to Italian occupation during the first years between the two world wars. Ilan Papp estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military "killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in camps)".Ilan Papp, The Modern Middle East. Routledge, 2005, ISBN 0-415-21409-2, p. 26. Italian historian Emilio Gentile sets to about 50,000 the number of Libyan victims of the "pacification", even due to epidemies like the Spanish flu From 1935 Italian Libya enjoyed a huge economic development, that was stopped by the war in June 1940.

From 1943 to 1951, Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were under British administration, while the French controlled Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya. Hagos, Tecola W., (20 November 2004), "Treaty Of Peace With Italy (1947), Evaluation And Conclusion", Ethiopia Tecola Hagos. Retrieved 18 July 2006. 

==Kingdom==

King Idris I announced Libya's independence on 24 December 1951, and was King until the 1969 coup that overthrew his government.
On 21 November 1949, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution stating that Libya should become independent before 1 January 1952. Idris represented Libya in the subsequent UN negotiations. On 24 December 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris, Libya's only monarch.

1951 also saw the enactment of the first Libyan Constitution. The Libyan National Assembly drafted the Constitution and passed a resolution accepting it in a meeting held in the city of Benghazi on Sunday, 6th Muharram, Hegiras 1371: 7 October 1951. Mohamed Abulasad El-Alem, President of the National Assembly and the two Vice-Presidents of the National Assembly, Omar Faiek Shennib and Abu Baker Ahmed Abu Baker executed and submitted the Constitution to King Idris following which it was published in the Official Gazette of Libya. Chronology of International Events and Documents, Royal Institute of International Affairs. Vol. 7, No. 8 (518 April 1951), pp. 213244 

The enactment of the Libyan Constitution was significant in that it was the first piece of legislation to formally entrench the rights of Libyan citizens following the post-war creation of the Libyan nation state. Following on from the intense UN debates during which Idris had argued that the creation of a single Libyan state would be of benefit to the regions of Tripolitania, Fezzan, and Cyrenaica, the Libyan government was keen to formulate a constitution which contained many of the entrenched rights common to European and North American nation states. Though not creating a secular state  Article 5 proclaims Islam the religion of the State  the Libyan Constitution did formally set out rights such as equality before the law as well as equal civil and political rights, equal opportunities, and an equal responsibility for public duties and obligations, "without distinction of religion, belief, race, language, wealth, kinship or political or social opinions" (Article 11).

The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world's poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state. Although oil drastically improved the Libyan government's finances, resentment among some factions began to build over the increased concentration of the nation's wealth in the hands of King Idris. This discontent mounted with the rise of Nasserism and Arab nationalism throughout North Africa and the Middle East, so while the continued presence of Americans, Italians and British in Libya aided in the increased levels of wealth and tourism following WWII, it was seen by some as a threat.

During this period, Britain was involved in extensive engineering projects in Libya and was also the country's biggest supplier of arms. The United States also maintained the large Wheelus Air Base in Libya. 

==Arab Republic and Jamahiriya==

On 1 September 1969, a small group of military officers led by 27-year-old army officer Muammar Gaddafi staged a coup d'tat against King Idris, launching the Libyan Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the "Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution" in government statements and the official Libyan press. US Department of State's Background Notes, (November 2005) "Libya  History", U.S. Dept. of State. Retrieved 14 July 2006. 

Muammar Gaddafi, former leader of Libya, in 2009.
On the birthday of Muhammad in 1973, Gaddafi delivered a "Five-Point Address". He announced the suspension of all existing laws and the implementation of Sharia. He said that the country would be purged of the "politically sick". A "people's militia" would "protect the revolution". There would be an administrative revolution, and a cultural revolution. Gaddafi set up an extensive surveillance system. 10 to 20 percent of Libyans worked in surveillance for the Revolutionary committees, which monitored place in government, in factories, and in the education sector. Gaddafi executed dissidents publicly and the executions were often rebroadcast on state television channels. Gaddafi employed his network of diplomats and recruits to assassinate dozens of critical refugees around the world. Amnesty International listed at least 25 assassinations between 1980 and 1987. The Middle East and North Africa 2003 (2002). Eur. p. 758 

Flag of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (lasting from 1977 to 2011), the national anthem of which was " " (English: Allahu Akbar)
In 1977, Libya officially became the "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya". Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People's Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead, but domestic and international critics claimed the reforms gave him virtually unlimited power. Dissidents against the new system were not tolerated, with punitive actions including capital punishment authorized by Gaddafi himself. The new "jamahiriya" governance structure he established was officially referred to as a form of direct democracy, though the government refused to publish election results. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Libyan-Egyptian War, both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boumedine. 

In February 1977, Libya began to provide military supplies to Goukouni and the People's Armed Forces in Chad. The Chadian conflict began in earnest when the Libyan escalated Libya's support of rebel forces in northern Chad to the invasion. Hundreds of Libyans lost their lives in the war against Tanzania, when Gaddafi tried to save his friend Idi Amin. Gaddafi Mall various other groups of movements against nuclear weapons to the Australian trade unions. 

From 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US $11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. In addition, the country's literacy rate rose from 10% to 90%, life expectancy rose from 57 to 77 years, equal rights were established for women and black people, employment opportunities were established for migrant workers, and welfare systems were introduced that allowed access to free education, free healthcare, and financial assistance for housing. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs. 

Much of the countrys income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world. An airstrike failed to kill Gaddafi in 1986. Libya was finally put under United Nations sanctions after the bombing of a commercial flight killed hundreds of travellers. 

Gaddafi assumed the honorific title of "King of Kings of Africa" in 2008 as part of his campaign for a United States of Africa. By the early 2010s, in addition to attempting to assume a leadership role in the African Union, Libya was also viewed as having formed closer ties with Italy, one of its former colonial rulers, than any other country in the European Union. The eastern parts of the country have been "ruined" due to Gaddafi's economic theories, according to The Economist. 

==Uprising and civil war==

Demonstrations in Bayda, on 22 July 2011
After popular movements overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, its immediate neighbors to the west and east, Libya experienced a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February 2011. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. In the early hours of 21 February 2011, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, oldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, spoke on Libyan television of his fears that the country would fragment and be replaced by "15 Islamic fundamentalist emirates" if the uprising engulfed the entire state. He admitted that "mistakes had been made" in quelling recent protests and announced plans for a constitutional convention, but warned that the country's economic wealth and recent prosperity was at risk and warned of "rivers of blood" if the protests continued. 

On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established under the stewardship of Mustafa Abdul Jalil, Gaddafi's former justice minister, to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. This marked the first serious effort to organize the broad-based opposition to the Gaddafi regime. While the council was based in Benghazi, it claimed Tripoli as its capital. Hafiz Ghoga, a human rights lawyer, later assumed the role of spokesman for the council. On 10 March 2011, France became the first state to officially recognise the council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people. 

By early March 2011, some parts of Libya had tipped out of Gaddafi's control, coming under the control of a coalition of opposition forces, including soldiers who decided to support the rebels. Eastern Libya, centred on the port city of Benghazi, was said to be firmly in the hands of the opposition, while Tripoli and its environs remained in dispute. The Guardian Live Blog. Retrieved 10 March 2011 Pro-Gaddafi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the de facto centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, 48 km from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, "exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict." The Independent, 9 March 2011 P.4 

In several public appearances, Gaddafi threatened to destroy the protest movement, and Al Jazeera and other agencies reported his government was arming pro-Gaddafi militiamen to kill protesters and defectors against the regime in Tripoli. Organs of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action urged by Libya's own delegation to the UN. The United States imposed economic sanctions against Libya, followed shortly by Australia, Canada and the United Nations Security Council, which also voted to refer Gaddafi and other government officials to the International Criminal Court for investigation. 

On 17 March 2011 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973 with a 100 vote and five abstentions. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of "all means necessary" to protect civilians within Libya. 

Shortly afterwards, Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa stated that "Libya has decided an immediate ceasefire and an immediate halt to all military operations". 

On 19 March, the first Allied act to secure the no-fly zone began when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets. Allied military action to enforce the ceasefire commenced the same day when a French aircraft opened fire and destroyed a vehicle on the ground. French jets also destroyed five tanks belonging to the Gaddafi regime. The United States and United Kingdom launched attacks on over 20 "integrated air defense systems" using more than 110 Tomahawk cruise missiles during operations Odyssey Dawn and Ellamy. 

On 27 June 2011, the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Gaddafi, alleging that Gaddafi had been personally involved in planning and implementing "a policy of widespread and systematic attacks against civilians and demonstrators and dissidents". 

An effigy of Muammar Gaddafi hangs from a scaffold in Tripoli's Martyrs' Square, 29 August 2011
By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed to its original name, Martyrs' Square in honour of those killed during the Italian occupation. Meanwhile, Gaddafi asserted that he was still in Libya and would not concede power to the rebels. 

On 16 September 2011, the U.N. General Assembly approved a request from the National Transitional Council to accredit envoys of the countrys interim controlling body as Tripolis sole representatives at the UN, effectively recognising the National Transitional Council as the legitimate holder of that countrys UN seat. 

The National Transitional Council had been plagued by internal divisions during its tenure as Libya's interim governing authority. It postponed the formation of a caretaker, or "interim" government on several occasions during the period prior to the death of Muammar Gaddafi in his hometown of Sirte on 20 October 2011. Mustafa Abdul Jalil led the National Transitional Council and was generally considered to be the principal leadership figure. Mahmoud Jibril served as the NTC's de facto head of government from 5 March 2011 through the end of the war, but he announced he would resign after Libya was declared to have been "liberated" from Gaddafi's rule. 

The "liberation" of Libya was celebrated on 23 October 2011, and Jibril announced that consultations were under way to form an interim government within one month, followed by elections for a constitutional assembly within eight months and parliamentary and presidential elections to be held within a year after that. He stepped down as expected the same day and was succeeded by Ali Tarhouni. At least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war. 

==Post-civil war==

After the Libyan civil war, the National Transitional Council (NTC) has been responsible for the transition of the administration of the governing of Libya. The "liberation" of Libya was celebrated on 23 October 2011. Then Jibril announced that consultations were under way to form an interim government within one month, followed by elections for a constitutional assembly within eight months and parliamentary and presidential elections to be held within a year after that. He stepped down as expected the same day and was succeeded by Ali Tarhouni. 

On 24 November, Tarhouni was replaced by Abdurrahim El-Keib. El-Keib formed a provisional government, filling it with independent or CNT politicians, including women.

After the fall of Gaddhafi, Libya has been faced with internal struggles. A protest started against the new regime of NTC. The loyalists of Gaddhafi rebelled and fought with the new Libyan army.

Because the Constitutional Declaration allowed a multi-party system, the political parties, like Democratic Party, Party of Reform and Development, National Gathering for Freedom, Justice and Development appeared. The Islamist movement started. For stop it, CNT government deny the parties based on religion, tribal and ethnic bases.

On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in their first parliamentary elections since the end of Gaddafi's rule. The election, in which more than 100 political parties registered, formed an interim 200-member national assembly. This will replace the unelected National Transitional Council, name a prime minister, and form a committee to draft a constitution. The vote was postponed several times to resolve logistical and technical problems, and to give more time to register to vote, and to investigate candidates. 

On 8 August 2012, the National Transitional Council officially handed power to the wholly elected General National Congress, which is tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum. 

On 25 August 2012, in what "appears to be the most blatant sectarian attack" since the end of the civil war, unnamed organized assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves, in broad daylight in the center of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days. (Reuters by Yahoo News) 

On 7 October 2012, Libya's Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur stepped down after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate. Zeidan was sworn in after his cabinet had been approved by the GNC. 

In mid-2013 the country has plunged into a political and economic crisis. Libya has almost entirely stopped producing oil and the government lost control of much of the country to militia fighters. 

== See also ==
*Arab Spring
*History of North Africa
*History of the Jews in Libya
*List of heads of state of Libya
*Military history of Libya
*Politics of Libya

==Notes==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
* Tuccimei, Ercole (1999). La Banca d'Italia in Africa, Foreword by Arnaldo Mauri, Laterza, Bari.

==External links==
*History of Libya | Libya Connected
*Libya in Crisis: Modern History of Libya from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives

 



[[History of Afghanistan]]

The written history of Afghanistan can be traced back to around 500 BCE when the area was under the Achaemenid Empire, although evidence indicates that an advanced degree of urbanized culture has existed in the land since between 3000 and 2000 BCE. Alexander the Great and his Macedonian army arrived in what is now Afghanistan in 330 BCE after conquering Persia during the Battle of Gaugamela. Many powerful foreign kingdoms have established their capitals inside the modern state of Afghanistan, including the Greco-Bactrians, Mauryas, Kushans, Kabul Shahi, Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Timurids, Mughals, Hotakis, Durranis, and others. 

Afghanistan (meaning "land of the Afghans") has been a strategically important location throughout history. The land served as "a gateway to India, impinging on the ancient Silk Road, which carried trade from the Mediterranean to China". Sitting on many trade and migration routes, Afghanistan may be called the 'Central Asian roundabout' Afghanistan Beyond the Fog of Nation Building: Giving Economic Strategy a Chance. S. Frederick Starr http://www.silkroadstudies.org/new/docs/silkroadpapers/1101Afghanistan-Starr.pdf since routes converge from the Middle East, from the Indus Valley through the passes over the Hindu Kush, from the Far East via the Tarim Basin, and from the adjacent Eurasian Steppe.

The Aryans from Central Asia arrived in Afghanistan after the 20th century BCE, who left their languages that survived in the form of Pashto and Dari. The Arab invasions influenced the culture of Afghanistan, as its Zoroastrian, Macedonian and Buddhist past had long vanished, or had just started to decline, as it went with Buddhism. Turkic empire-builders such as the Ghaznavids, Ghurids and Timurids made the region now called Afghanistan of major importance.

Mirwais Hotak followed by Ahmad Shah Durrani unified Afghan tribes and founded the last Afghan Empire in the early 18th century CE. "Afghanistan and the Search for Unity" Omrani, Bijan, published in Asian Affairs, Volume 38, Issue 2, 2007, pp. 145157. Afghanistan's sovereignty has been held during the Anglo-Afghan Wars, the 1980s Soviet war, and the 2001-present war by the country's many and diverse people: the Pashtuns, Tajiks, Hazaras, Uzbeks, Turkmen, Aimak, Baloch, and others. The Pashtuns form the largest group, claiming to be descendants of ancient Israelites or Qais Abdur Rashid but scholars believe that they are a confederation of various peoples from the past who united under Pashtunwali.

==Prehistory==

Archaeological cultures associated with Indo-Iranian migrations (after EIEC). The Andronovo, BMAC and Yaz cultures have often been associated with Indo-Iranian migrations. The GGC, Cemetery H, Copper Hoard and PGW cultures are candidates for cultures associated with Indo-Aryan migrations.
Excavations of prehistoric sites by Louis Dupree and others at Darra-e Kur in 1966 where 800 stone implements were recovered along with a fragment of Neanderthal right temporal bone, suggest that early humans were living in what is now Afghanistan at least 52,000 years ago. Kara Kamar, a cave, contained Upper Paleolithic blades Carbon-14 dated at 34,000 years old. Farming communities in Afghanistan were among the earliest in the world. 

Urbanization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE. Baxter, Craig (1995) "Historical Setting" pp. 90120, page 91, In Gladstone, Cary (2001) Afghanistan revisited Nova Science Publications, New York, ISBN 1-59033-421-3 Zoroastrianism predominated as the religion in the area, even the modern Afghan solar calendar shows the influence of Zoroastrianism in the names of the months. Other religions such as Buddhism and Hinduism arrived in the region later, leaving a major mark in the region. Gandhara is the name of an ancient Hindu kingdom from the Vedic period and its capital city located between the Hindukush and Sulaiman Mountains (mountains of Solomon), Gandara...Link although Kandahar in modern times and the ancient Gandhara are not geographically identical. W. Vogelsang, "Gandahar", in The Circle Of Ancient Iranian Studies E. Herzfeld, "The Persian Empire: Studies on Geography and Ethnography of the Ancient Near East", ed. G. Walser, Wiesbaden 1968, pp. 279, 29394, 33638, 345 

Early inhabitants, around 3000 BCE were likely to have been connected through culture and trade to neighboring civilizations like Jiroft and Tappeh Sialk and more distantly to the Indus Valley Civilization. Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE, and it is possible that the early city of Mundigak (near Kandahar) was a colony of the nearby Indus Valley Civilization. The first known people were Indo-Iranians, but their date of arrival has been estimated widely from as early as about 3000 BCE to 1500 BCE. Francfort, H.-P. (2005) "La civilisation de l'Oxus et les Indo-iraniens et les Indo-aryens en Asie centrale" In (For further detail see Indo-Aryan migration.)

===Bactria-Margiana===

The Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex became prominent in the southwest region between 2200 and 1700 BCE (approximately). The city of Balkh (Bactra) was founded about this time (c. 20001500 BCE). It's possible that the BMAC may have been an Indo-European culture, perhaps the Proto-Indo-Aryans. But the standard model holds the arrival of Indo-Aryans to have been in the Late Harappan which gave rise to the Vedic civilization of the Early Iron Age. 

==Ancient history (700 BCE565 CE)==

===Medes===

Different opinions have been expressed about the extent of the Median kingdom. For instance, according to Ernst Herzfeld, it was a powerful empire, which stretched from central Anatolia to Bactria, to around the borders of nowadays India. On the other side, Heleen Sancisi-Weerdenburg insists that there is no real evidence about the very existence of the Median empire and that it was an unstable state formation. Nevertheless, the region of nowadays Afghanistan came under Median rule for a short time. 

===Achaemenid Empire===

Arachosia, Aria and Bactria were the ancient satraps of the Achaemenid Empire that made up most of what is now Afghanistan during 500 BCE. Some of the inhabitants of Arachosia were known as Pactyans, whose name possibly survives in today's Pakhtuns (Pashtuns).
Afghanistan became part of the Achaemenid Empire, after it was conquered by Darius I of Persia. The area was divided into several provinces called satrapies, which were each ruled by a governor, or satrap. These ancient satrapies included: Aria (Herat); Arachosia (Kandahar, Lashkar Gah, and Quetta); Bactriana (Balkh); Sattagydia (Ghazni); and Gandhara (Kabul, Jalalabad, Peshawar). Dupree, Louis: Afghanistan (1973), pg. 274. 

===Alexander and the Seleucids===

Alexander the Great arrived in the area of Afghanistan in 330 BCE after defeating Darius III of Persia a year earlier at the Battle of Gaugamela. His army faced very strong resistance in the Afghan tribal areas where he is said to have commented that Afghanistan is "easy to march into, hard to march out of." Although his expedition through Afghanistan was brief, Alexander left behind a Hellenic cultural influence that lasted several centuries. Several great cities were built in the region named "Alexandria," including: Alexandria-of-the-Arians (modern-day Herat); Alexandria-on-the-Tarnak (near Kandahar); Alexandria-ad-Caucasum (near Begram, at Bordj-i-Abdullah); and finally, Alexandria-Eschate (near Kojend), in the north. After Alexander's death, his loosely connected empire was divided. Seleucus, a Macedonian officer during Alexander's campaign, declared himself ruler of his own Seleucid Empire, encompassing Persia and Afghanistan. Dupree, Louis: Afghanistan (1973), pp. 276-283 

===Greco-Bactrian Kingdom===

Approximate maximum extent of the Greco-Bactrian kingdom circa 180 BCE, including the regions of Tapuria and Traxiane to the West, Sogdiana and Ferghana to the north, Bactria and Arachosia to the south.
The Greco-Bactrian Kingdom was founded when Diodotus I, the satrap of Bactria (and probably the surrounding provinces) seceded from the Seleucid Empire around 250 BCE. Greco-Bactria continued until c. 130 BCE, when Eucratides' son, King Heliocles I, was defeated and driven out of Bactria by the Yuezhi tribes. It is thought that his dynasty continued to rule in Kabul and Alexandria of the Caucasus until 70 BCE when King Hermaeus was defeated by the Yuezhi.

One of Demetrius' successors, Menander I, brought the Indo-Greek Kingdom to its height between 165130 BCE, expanding the kingdom in Afghanistan and Pakistan to even larger proportions than Demetrius. After Menander's death, the Indo-Greeks steadily declined and the last Indo-Greek king was defeated in c. 10 CE.

=== Mauryan Empire ===

Modern day Afghanistan was conquered by the Maurya Empire, which was led by Chandragupta Maurya from Magadha (modern day Bihar in India). They were Indians who practiced Hinduism and Buddhism and were focusing on taking over Central Asia. Seleucus is said to have reach a peace treaty with Chandragupta by given control of the territory south of the Hindu Kush to the Mauryas upon intermarriage and 500 elephants.
Maurya Empire under Ashoka the Great

Having consolidated power in the northwest, Chandragupta pushed east towards the Nanda Empire. Afghanistan's significant ancient tangible and intangible Buddhist heritage is recorded through wide-ranging archeological finds, including religious and artistic remnants. Buddhist doctrines are reported to have reached as far as Balkh even during the life of the Buddha (563 BCE to 483 BCE), as recorded by Husang Tsang.

===Sakas===

===Parthians===

===Kushans===

===Sassanids===

Much of the region of nowadays Afghanistan was under Sassanid control.

===Kidarites===

===Hephthalites (White Huns)===

The Hephthalite Empire in Afghanistan extended from Chinese Sinkiang to Sassanid Iran, from Sogdiana to the Punjab. Their chief antagonists were the Persian Sassanids. Consequently there was relatively little peace during this time. At about 565 CE, the Hephthalite Empire was overthrown by a combined force consisting of western Turks and Sassanids. Dupree, Louis: Afghanistan (1973), pg. 302-303 

==Middle Ages (5651504 CE)==
From the Middle Ages to around 1750 part of today's Afghanistan was recognized as Khorasan. Two of the four main capitals of Khorasan (Balkh and Herat) are now located in modern Afghanistan. The country of Kandahar, Ghazni and Kabul formed the frontier region between Khorasan and Hindustan. The land inhabited by the Afghan tribes (i.e. ancestors of Pashtuns) was called Afghanistan, which loosely covered a wide area between the Hindu Kush and the Indus River, principally around the Sulaiman Mountains. The earliest record of the name "Afghan" ("Abgn") being mentioned is by Shapur I of the Sassanid Empire during the 3rd century CE which is later recorded in the form of "Avagn" by the Indian astronomer Varha Mihira in his 6th century CE Brihat-samhita. It was used to refer to a common legendary ancestor known as "Afghana", grandson of King Saul of Israel. Hiven Tsiang, a Chinese pilgrim, visiting the Afghanistan area several times between 630 to 644 CE also speaks about them. Dawn News, The cradle of Pathan culture Ancestors of many of today's Turkic-speaking Afghans settled in the Hindu Kush area and began to assimilate much of the culture and language of the Pashtun tribes already present there. Among these were the Khalaj people which are known today as Ghilzai. 

===Hindu Shahi===

===Palas===

The Pla's were a Buddhist and Vaishnav Hindu Bengali dynasty of India, which lasted for four centuries (750-1120 CE). Dharmapala expanded the empire into the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once again the power struggle for the control of the subcontinent. Devapala, successor of Dharmapala, extended the empire even further, covering much of South Asia and several other territories. His empire stretched from Assam and Utkala in the east, and modern day Afghanistan in the north-west and Deccan in the south. According to Pala copperplate inscription Devapala exterminated the Utkalas, conquered the Pragjyotisha (Assam), shattered the pride of the Huna, and humbled the lords of Pratiharas, Gurjara and the Dravidas. The Pala Empire eventually disintegrated in the 12th century CE under the attack of the Sena dynasty.

===Islamic conquest===

The Afghan area during the Caliphate
In 642 CE, Rashidun Arabs had conquered most of West Asia from the Sassanids and Byzantines, and from the western city of Herat they introduced the religion of Islam as they entered new cities. Afghanistan at that period had a number of different independent rulers, depending on the area.

The early Arab forces did not fully explore Afghanistan due to attacks by the mountain tribes. Much of the eastern parts of the country remained independent, as part of the Hindu Shahi kingdoms of Kabul and Gandhara, which lasted that way until the forces of the Muslim Saffarid dynasty followed by the Ghaznavids conquered them.

The Shahi or Shahiya dynasties ruled portions of the Kabul Valley (in eastern Afghanistan) and the old province of Gandhara (northern Pakistan and Kashmir) from the decline of the Kushan Empire up to the early 9th century CE. The Shahis continued to rule eastern Afghanistan until the late 9th century until the Ghaznavid invasions.

===Janjau Rajput Empire (9001050 CE)===

Jaypala was the most powerful ruler of this empire rule over Pakistan and Jammu & Kasmir. He was eventually defeated by Ghazni and lost his empire.

===Ghaznavids===

was ruled from the city of Ghazni in eastern Afghanistan.
Mahmud of Ghazni consolidated the conquests of his predecessors and turned the city of Ghazni into a great cultural center as well as a base for frequent forays into the Indian subcontinent.

===Ghorids===

The Ghaznavid dynasty was defeated in 1148 by the Ghurids from Ghor, but the Ghaznavid Sultans continued to live in Ghazni as the 'Nasher' until the early 20th century. They did not regain their once vast power until about 500 years later when the Ghilzai Hotakis rose to power. Various princes and Seljuk rulers attempted to rule parts of the country until the Shah Muhammad II of the Khwarezmid Empire conquered all of Persia in 1205 CE. By 1219, the empire had fallen to the Mongols, led by Genghis Khan.

===Mongol invasion===

The Mongols resulted in massive destruction of many cities, including Bamiyan, Herat, and Balkh, and the despoliation of fertile agricultural areas. Large numbers of the inhabitants were also slaughtered. All the major cities and towns became part of the massive Mongol Empire,

===Timurids===

Timur (Tamerlane), incorporated what is today Afghanistan into his own vast Timurid Empire. The city of Herat became one of the capitals of his empire, and his grandson Pir Muhammad held the seat of Kandahar. Timur rebuilt most of Afghanistan's infrastructure which was destroyed by his early ancestor. The area was progressing under his rule. Timurid rule began declining in the early 16th century with the rise of a new ruler in Kabul, Babur.
Taimur, a descendent of Genghis Khan, created a vast new empire across Russia and Persia which he ruled from his capital in Samarkland in modern day Uzbekistan. Taimur captured Herat in 1381 and his son, Shah Rudkh moved the capital of the Timurid empire to Herat in 1405. The Timurks, a Turkic people, brought the Turkic nomadic culture of Central Asia within the orbit of Persian civilisation, establishing Herat as one of the most cultured and refined cities in the world. This fusion of Central Asian and Persian culture was a major legacy for the future Afghanistan. A century later, the emperor Babur, a descendent of Taimur, visited Herat and wrote, "the whole habitable world had not such a town as Herat." For the next 300 years the eastern Afghan tribes periodically invaded India creating vast Indo-Afghan empires. In 1500 CE, Taimur's descendent Babur was driven out of his home in the Ferghana valley. By the 16th century western Afghanistan again revereted to Persian rule under the Safavid dynasty.
 Babur-Nama, translated by Nette Beverage, Sang-e-Meel Publications, Lahore, 1979. 
 Taliban Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in Central Asia, 2nd ed. Rashid, Ahmed. Introduction, page 9. Yale University Press 

==Modern era (15041973)==

===Mughals and Safavids===

A miniature from Padshahnama depicting the surrender of the Shi'a Safavid garrison of Kandahar in 1638 to the Mughal army of Shah Jahan commanded by Kilij Khan.
In 1504, Babur, a descendant of Timur, arrived from what is now Uzbekistan and moved to the city of Kabul. He began exploring new territories in the region, with Kabul serving as his military headquarters. Instead of looking towards the powerful Safavids towards the west, Babur was more focused on the Indian subcontinent, which included the region known as Kabulistan. In 1526, he left with his army to capture the seat of the Delhi Sultanate, which at that point was possessed by the Afghan Lodi dynasty of India. After defeating Ibrahim Lodi and his army, Babur turned Delhi into the capital of his newly established Mughal Empire.

From the 16th century to the 17th century CE, Afghanistan was divided into three major areas. The north was ruled by the Khanate of Bukhara, the west was under the rule of the Iranian Shi'a Safavids as part of their eastern most territory, and the east belonged to the Sunni Mughals of India. The Kandahar region in the south served as a buffer zone between the Mughals and the powerful Safavids, with the native Afghans often switching support from one side to the other. Babur explored most cities of the region nowadays called Afghanistan before his campaign into India. In the city of Kandahar his personal epigraphy can be found in the Chilzina rock mountain.

===Hotaki dynasty===

Mirwais Hotak, seen as Afghanistan's George Washington, successfully obtained independence from Safavid Persia in 1709 and founded the Hotaki dynasty.
In 1704, the Safavid Shah Husayn appointed George XI (Gurgn Khn), a ruthless Georgian subject, to govern their easternmost territories in the Greater Kandahar region. One of Gurgn's main objectives was to crush the rebellions started by native Afghans. Under his rule the revolts were successfully suppressed and ruled Kandahar with uncomprising severity. He began imprisoning and executing many of the native Afghans, especially those suspected in having taken part in the rebellions. One of those arrested and imprisoned was Mirwais Hotak who belonged to an influential family in Kandahar. Mirwais was sent as a prisoner to the Persian court in Isfahan but the charges against him were dismissed by the king, so he was sent back to his native land as a free man. 

In April 1709, Mirwais along with his tribal army revolted against Gurgn and the heavily declining Safavids in Kandahar City. The uprising began when Gurgn and his escort were killed after a picnic and a banquet that were prepared by Mirwais at his farmhouse outside the city. " Around four days later, an army of well-trained Georgian troops arrived in the town after hearing of Gurgn's death but Mirwais and his Afghan forces successfully held off the town. From 1710 to 1713, the Afghan forces defeated several large Persian armies that were dispatched from Isfahan by the heavily declining Safavids, which included Qizilbash and Georgian/Circassian troops. 

Modern-day sketch work of Mahmud Hotaki

Southern Afghanistan was made into an independent local Pashtun kingdom. Refusing the title of a king, Mirwais was called "Prince of Qandahr and General of the national troops" by his Afghan countrymen. He died of a natural cause in November 1715 and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz Hotak. Aziz was killed about two years later by Mirwais' son Mahmud Hotaki, allegedly for planning to give Kandahar's sovereignty back to Persia. Mahmud led an Afghan army into Persia in 1722 and defeated the for decades declining Safavids at the Battle of Gulnabad. The Afghans captured Isfahan (Safavid capital) and Mahmud became briefly the new Persian Shah, known after that as Shah Mahmud.

Mahmud began a short-lived reign of terror against his Persian subjects who defied his rule from the very start, and he was eventually murdered in 1725 by his own cousin, Ashraf Hotaki. Some sources say he died of madness. Ashraf became the new Afghan Shah of Persia soon after Mahmud's death, while the home region of Afghanistan was ruled by Mahmud's younger brother Shah Hussain Hotaki. Ashraf was able to secure peace, at highly unfavourable terms, with the Ottoman Empire in 1727 winning against a superior Ottoman army, but the Russian Empire took advantage of the continuing political unrest, civil strife and utter disgust and disloyalty by the vast majority of people in the empire, to seize former Persian territories for themselves, limiting the amount of territory under Shah Mahmud's control.

The short lived Hotaki dynasty was a troubled and violent one from the very start as internecine conflict made it difficult to establish permanent control. The dynasty lived under great turmoil due to bloody succession feuds that made their hold on power tenuous, and after the massacre of thousands of civilians in Isfahan; including more than three thousand religious scholars, nobles, and members of the Safavid family. The vast majority of the Persians rejected the Afghan regime as usurping from the very start. Hotaki's rule continued in the region of Afghanistan until 1738 when Shah Hussain was defeated and banished by Nader Shah of Persia. 

The Ghilzai Hotakis were eventually removed from power by 1729, after a very short lived reign. They were defeated by the emerging Iranian military commander Nader Shah, head of the Afsharids, in the October 1729 Battle of Damghan, also banishing the Hotaki's to southern Afghanistan. The last ruler of the Hotaki dynasty, Shah Hussain, ruled southern Afghanistan until 1738 when the Afsharids and the Abdali Pashtuns crushed him at Kandahar. 

===Durrani Empire===

Nader Shah and his Afsharid Persian army arrived in the town of Kandahar in 1738 and defeated Hussain Hotaki, subsequently absorbing all of Afghanistan in his empire. Here, the young imprisoned teenager Ahmad Khan joined his service in his invasion of India. The greatest extent of the Durrani Empire in 1747 A.D.
Shah Shuja, the last Durrani King, sitting at his court inside the Bala Hissar before it was destroyed by the British Army.

Nadir Shah was assassinated on June 19, 1747, by several of his Persian officers, and the Asharid kingdom fell to pieces. At the same time the 25-year-old Ahmad Khan was busy in Afghanistan calling for a loya jirga ("grand assembly") to select a leader among his people. The Afghans gathered near Kandahar in October 1747 and chose Ahmad Shah among the challengers, making him their new head of state. After the inauguration or coronation, he became known as Ahmad Shah Durrani. He adopted the title padshah durr-i dawran ('King, "pearl of the age") and the Abdali tribe became known as the Durrani tribe after this. Ahmad Shah not only represented the Durranis but he also united all the Pashtun tribes. By 1751, Ahmad Shah Durrani and his Afghan army conquered the entire present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and for a short time, the Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with Delhi in India. He defeated the Maratha Empire in 1761 at the Battle of Panipat.

In October 1772, Ahmad Shah retired to his home in Kandahar where he died peacefully and was buried at a site that is now adjacent to the Shrine of the Cloak. He was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah Durrani, who transferred the capital of their Afghan Empire from Kandahar to Kabul. Timur died in 1793 and his son Zaman Shah Durrani took over the reign.

Zaman Shah and his brothers had a weak hold on the legacy left to them by their famous ancestor. They sorted out their differences through a "round robin of expulsions, blindings and executions," which resulted in the deterioration of the Afghan hold over far-flung territories, such as Attock and Kashmir. Durrani's other grandson, Shuja Shah Durrani, fled the wrath of his brother and sought refuge with the Sikhs. Not only had Durrani invaded the Punjab region many times, but had destroyed the holiest shrine of the Sikhs  the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar, defiling its sarowar with the blood of cows and decapitating Baba Deep Singh in 1757. The Sikhs, under Ranjit Singh, eventually wrested a large part of the Kingdom of Kabul (present day Pakistan, but not including Sindh) from the Afghans. Nalwa, V. (2009), Hari Singh Nalwa  Champion of the Khalsaji, New Delhi: Manohar, p. 18, ISBN 81-7304-785-5. In 1837, the Afghan army descended through the Khyber Pass on Sikh forces at Jamrud. Nalwa, V. (2009), Hari Singh Nalwa  Champion of the Khalsaji, New Delhi: Manohar, p. 198, ISBN 81-7304-785-5. The Sikhs were supported by the East India Company until they were defeated later by the British forces during the First and Second Anglo-Sikh Wars .

===Barakzai dynasty and British influence===

King Yaqub Khan with Britain's Sir Pierre Louis Napoleon Cavagnari on May 26, 1879, when the Treaty of Gandamak was signed.
Dost Mohammed Khan gained control in Kabul. Collision between the expanding British and Russian Empires significantly influenced Afghanistan during the 19th century in what was termed "The Great Game". British concern over Russian advances in Central Asia and growing influence in West Asia and Persia in particular culminated in two Anglo-Afghan wars and "The Siege of Herat" 18371838, in which the Persians, trying to retake Afghanistan and throw out the British, sent armies into the country and fought the British mostly around and in the city of Herat. The first Anglo-Afghan War (18391842) resulted in the destruction of a British army; it is remembered as an example of the ferocity of Afghan resistance to foreign rule. The Second Anglo-Afghan War (18781880) was sparked by Amir Shir Ali's refusal to accept a British mission in Kabul. This conflict brought Amir Abdur Rahman, known by some as the "Iron Amir", to the Afghan throne. During his reign (18801901), the British and Russians officially established the boundaries of what would become modern Afghanistan. The British retained effective control over Kabul's foreign affairs. Abdur Rahman's reforms of the army, legal system and structure of government were able to give Afghanistan a degree of unity and stability which it had not before known. This, however, came at the cost of strong centralisation, harsh punishments for crime and corruption, and a certain degree of international isolation. 

Afghanistan remained neutral during World War I, despite German encouragement of anti-British feelings and Afghan rebellion along the borders of British India. The Afghan king's policy of neutrality was not universally popular within the country, however.

Habibullah, Abdur Rahman's son and successor, was assassinated in 1919, possibly by family members opposed to British influence. His third son, Amanullah, regained control of Afghanistan's foreign policy after launching the Third Anglo-Afghan war with an attack on India in the same year. During the ensuing conflict, the war-weary British relinquished their control over Afghan foreign affairs by signing the Treaty of Rawalpindi in August 1920. In commemoration of this event, Afghans celebrate August 20 as their Independence Day.

===Reforms of Amanullah Khan and civil war===

King Amanullah Khan
King Amanullah Khan moved to end his country's traditional isolation in the years following the Third Anglo-Afghan war. He established diplomatic relations with most major countries and, following a 1927 tour of Europe and Turkey (during which he noted the modernization and secularization advanced by Atatrk), introduced several reforms intended to modernize Afghanistan. A key force behind these reforms was Mahmud Tarzi, Amanullah Khan's Foreign Minister and father-in-law  and an ardent supporter of the education of women. He fought for Article 68 of Afghanistan's first constitution (declared through a Loya Jirga), which made elementary education compulsory. "Education in Afghanistan", published in Encyclopaedia Iranica, volume VIII  pp. 237241 Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such as the abolition of the traditional Muslim veil for women and the opening of a number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious leaders. Faced with overwhelming armed opposition, Amanullah was forced to abdicate in January 1929 after Kabul fell to forces led by Habibullah Kalakani.

===Reigns of Nadir Khan and Zahir Khan===

Mohammad Zahir Shah in 1963
Prince Mohammed Nadir Khan, cousin of Amanullah Khan, in turn defeated and executed Habibullah Kalakani in early November 1929. He was soon declared King Nadir Khan. He began consolidating power and regenerating the country. He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favour of a more gradual approach to modernisation. In 1933, however, he was assassinated in a revenge killing by a student from Kabul.

Mohammad Zahir Shah, Nadir Khan's 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to 1973. Until 1946 Zahir Shah ruled with the assistance of his uncle Sardar Mohammad Hashim Khan, who held the post of Prime Minister and continued the policies of Nadir Khan. In 1946, another of Zahir Shah's uncles, Sardar Shah Mahmud Khan, became Prime Minister and began an experiment allowing greater political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he expected. In 1953, he was replaced as Prime Minister by Mohammed Daoud Khan, the king's cousin and brother-in-law. Daoud looked for a closer relationship with the Soviet Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan. However, disputes with Pakistan led to an economic crisis and he was asked to resign in 1963. From 1963 until 1973, Zahir Shah took a more active role.

In 1964, King Zahir Shah promulgated a liberal constitution providing for a bicameral legislature to which the king appointed one-third of the deputies. The people elected another third, and the remainder were selected indirectly by provincial assemblies. Although Zahir's "experiment in democracy" produced few lasting reforms, it permitted the growth of unofficial extremist parties on both the left and the right. This included the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), which had close ideological ties to the Soviet Union. In 1967, the PDPA split into two major rival factions: the Khalq (Masses) was headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin who were supported by elements within the military, and the Parcham (Banner) led by Babrak Karmal.

==Contemporary era (1973present)==
1973 film about contemporary events in Afghanistan

===Republic of Afghanistan and the end of monarchy===

Amid charges of corruption and malfeasance against the royal family and poor economic conditions created by the severe 197172 drought, former Prime Minister Mohammad Sardar Daoud Khan seized power in a non-violent coup on July 17, 1973, while Zahir Shah was receiving treatment for eye problems and therapy for lumbago in Italy. Barry Bearak, Former King of Afghanistan Dies at 92, The New York Times, July 23, 2007. Daoud abolished the monarchy, abrogated the 1964 constitution, and declared Afghanistan a republic with himself as its first President and Prime Minister. His attempts to carry out badly needed economic and social reforms met with little success, and the new constitution promulgated in February 1977 failed to quell chronic political instability.

As disillusionment set in, in 1978 a prominent member of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), Mir Akbar Khyber (or "Kaibar"), was killed by the government. The leaders of PDPA apparently feared that Daoud was planning to exterminate them all, especially since most of them were arrested by the government shortly after. Nonetheless, Hafizullah Amin and a number of military wing officers of the PDPA's Khalq faction managed to remain at large and organize a military coup.

===Democratic Republic and Soviet war===

Outside the Presidential Palace in Kabul, a day after the Marxist revolution on April 28, 1978.
The day after the Marxist revolution on April 28, 1978.

On 27 April 1978, the PDPA, led by Nur Mohammad Taraki, Babrak Karmal and Amin Taha overthrew the government of Mohammad Daoud, who was assassinated along with all his family members in a bloody military coup. The coup became known as the Saur Revolution. On 1 May, Taraki became President, Prime Minister and General Secretary of the PDPA. The country was then renamed the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), and the PDPA regime lasted, in some form or another, until April 1992.

In March 1979, Hafizullah Amin took over as prime minister, retaining the position of field marshal and becoming vice-president of the Supreme Defence Council. Taraki remained President and in control of the Army. On 14 September, Amin overthrew Taraki, who was killed. Amin stated that "the Afghans recognize only crude force." Afghanistan expert Amin Saikal writes: "As his powers grew, so apparently did his craving for personal dictatorship ... and his vision of the revolutionary process based on terror." 

Once in power, the PDPA implemented a liberal and Marxist-Leninist agenda. It moved to replace religious and traditional laws with secular and Marxist-Leninist ones. Men were obliged to cut their beards, women could not wear a chador, and mosques were placed off limits. The PDPA made a number of reforms on women's rights, banning forced marriages, giving state recognition of women's right to vote, and introducing women to political life. A prominent example was Anahita Ratebzad, who was a major Marxist leader and a member of the Revolutionary Council. Ratebzad wrote the famous New Kabul Times editorial (May 28, 1978) which declared: "Privileges which women, by right, must have are equal education, job security, health services, and free time to rear a healthy generation for building the future of the country ... Educating and enlightening women is now the subject of close government attention." The PDPA also carried out socialist land reforms and moved to promote state atheism. The Soviet-Afghan War:Breaking the Hammer & Sickle They also prohibited usury and took a number of measures in favor of women's rights, by declaring equality of the sexes and introducing women to political life. 
The PDPA invited the Soviet Union to assist in modernizing its economic infrastructure (predominantly its exploration and mining of rare minerals and natural gas). The USSR also sent contractors to build roads, hospitals and schools and to drill water wells; they also trained and equipped the Afghan army. Upon the PDPA's ascension to power, and the establishment of the DRA, the Soviet Union promised monetary aid amounting to at least $1.262 billion.

At the same time, the PDPA imprisoned, tortured or murdered thousands of members of the traditional elite, the religious establishment, and the intelligentsia. The government launched a campaign of violent repression, killing some 10,000 to 27,000 people and imprisoning 14,000 to 20,000 more, mostly at Pul-e-Charkhi prison. Benjamin A. Valentino. Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century Cornell University Press, 2004. p. 219. ISBN 0-8014-3965-5 Kaplan, Robert D., Soldiers of God: With Islamic Warriors in Afghanistan and Pakistan, New York, Vintage Departures, (2001), p.115 Kabul's prison of death BBC, February 27, 2006 In December 1978 the PDPA leadership signed an agreement with the Soviet Union which would allow military support for the PDPA in Afghanistan if needed. The majority of people in the cities including Kabul either welcomed or were ambivalent to these policies. However, the Marxist-Leninist and secular nature of the government as well as its heavy dependence on the Soviet Union made it unpopular with a majority of the Afghan population. Repressions plunged large parts of the country, especially the rural areas, into open revolt against the new Marxist-Leninist government. By spring 1979 unrests had reached 24 out of 28 Afghan provinces including major urban areas. Over half of the Afghan army would either desert or join the insurrection. Most of the government's new policies clashed directly with the traditional Afghan understanding of Islam, making religion one of the only forces capable of unifying the tribally and ethnically divided population against the unpopular new government, and ushering in the advent of Islamist participation in Afghan politics. 
Soviet troops (in right row) withdrawing from Afghanistan in 1988. Afghan government BTR on the left.

In the wake of the Iranian Revolution, the US sought rapprochement with the Afghan governmenta prospect that the USSR found unacceptable due to weakening Soviet leverage over the regime. Rubin, Michael, "Who is Responsible for the Taliban?", Middle East Review of International Affairs, Vol. 6, No. 1 (March 2002). In February 1979, U.S. Ambassador Adolph "Spike" Dubs was murdered in Kabul after Afghan security forces burst in on his kidnappers. The U.S. then reduced bilateral assistance and terminated a small military training program. All remaining assistance agreements were ended after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Following the Soviet invasion, the United States supported diplomatic efforts to achieve a Soviet withdrawal. In addition, generous U.S. contributions to the refugee program in Pakistan played a major part in efforts to assist Afghan refugees.

To bolster the Parcham faction, the Soviet Union decided to intervene on December 24, 1979, when the Red Army invaded its southern neighbor. Over 100,000 Soviet troops took part in the invasion, which was backed by another 100,000 Afghan military men and supporters of the Parcham faction. In the meantime, Hafizullah Amin was killed and replaced by Babrak Karmal.

In response to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the Carter administration and Reagan administration in the U.S. began arming the Mujahideen, thanks in large part to the efforts of Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Gust Avrakotos. Early reports estimated that $620 billion had been spent by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia but more recent reports state that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia provided as much as up to $40 billion in cash and weapons, which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles, for building up Islamic groups against the Soviet Union. The U.S. handled most of its support through Pakistan's ISI. Saudi Arabia was also providing financial support.

The 10-year Soviet occupation resulted in the deaths of between 850,000 and 1,500,000 Afghan civilians. Noor Ahmad Khalidi, "Afghanistan: Demographic Consequences of War: 1978-87," Central Asian Survey, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 101-126, 1991. Marek Sliwinski, "Afghanistan: The Decimation of a People," Orbis (Winter, 1989), p.39. About 6million fled as Afghan refugees to Pakistan and Iran, and from there over 38,000 made it to the United States "Refugee Admissions Program for Near East and South Asia". Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration. and many more to the European Union. Faced with mounting international pressure and great number of casualties on both sides, the Soviets withdrew in 1989. Their withdrawal from Afghanistan was seen as an ideological victory in the United States, which had backed some Mujahideen factions through three U.S. presidential administrations to counter Soviet influence in the vicinity of the oil-rich Persian Gulf. The USSR continued to support President Mohammad Najibullah (former head of the Afghan secret service, KHAD) until 1992. Afghanistan: History, Columbia Encyclopedia. 

===Foreign interference and civil war===

1992-1996

After the fall of the communist Najibullah-regime in 1992, the Afghan political parties agreed on a peace and power-sharing agreement (the Peshawar Accords). The Peshawar Accords created the Islamic State of Afghanistan and appointed an interim government for a transitional period. According to Human Rights Watch:

Gulbuddin Hekmatyar was directed, funded and supplied by the Pakistani army. Afghanistan analyst Amin Saikal concludes in his book Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival:

There was no time for the interim government to create working government departments, police units or a system of justice and accountability. Saudi Arabia and Iran also armed and directed Afghan militias. A publication by the George Washington University describes:

 According to Human Rights Watch, numerous Iranian agents were assisting the Shia Hezb-i Wahdat forces of Abdul Ali Mazari, as Iran was attempting to maximize Wahdat's military power and influence. GUTMAN, Roy (2008): How We Missed the Story: Osama Bin Laden, the Taliban and the Hijacking of Afghanistan, Endowment of the United States Institute of Peace, 1st ed., Washington D.C. Saudi Arabia was trying to strengthen the Wahhabite Abdul Rasul Sayyaf and his Ittihad-i Islami faction. Atrocities were committed by individuals of the different factions while Kabul descended into lawlessness and chaos as described in reports by Human Rights Watch and the Afghanistan Justice Project. Again, Human Rights Watch writes:

 The main forces involved during that period in Kabul, northern, central and eastern Afghanistan were the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar directed by Pakistan, the Hezb-i Wahdat of Abdul Ali Mazari directed by Iran, the Ittehad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf supported by Saudi Arabia, the Junbish-i Milli of Abdul Rashid Dostum backed by Uzbekisten, the Harakat-i Islami of Hussain Anwari and the Shura-i Nazar operating as the regular Islamic State forces (as agreed upon in the Peshawar Accords) under the defense ministry of Ahmad Shah Massoud.

Meanwhile southern Afghanistan was neither under the control of foreign-backed militias nor the interim government in Kabul, which had no hands in the affairs of southern Afghanistan during that time. Southern Afghanistan was ruled by Gul Agha Sherzai. The southern city of Kandahar was a centre of lawlessness, crime and atrocities fuelled by complex Pashtun tribal rivalries. Matinuddin, Kamal, The Taliban Phenomenon, Afghanistan 19941997, Oxford University Press, (1999), pp.256 In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor. Mullah Omar started his movement with fewer than 50 armed madrassah students in his hometown of Kandahar. As Gulbuddin Hekmatyar remained unsuccessful in conquering Kabul, Pakistan started its support to the Taliban. Many analysts like Amin Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for Pakistan's regional interests which the Taliban decline. In 1994 the Taliban took power in several provinces in southern and central Afghanistan.

In 1995 the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the Iranian-backed Hezb-i Wahdat as well as Rashid Dostum's Junbish forces were defeated militarily in the capital Kabul by forces of the interim government under Massoud who subsequently tried to initiate a nationwide political process with the goal of national consolidation and democratic elections, also inviting the Taliban to join the process. The Taliban declined. 

===Taliban and the United Front===
1996-2001

Former Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf sent more troops against the United Front of Ahmad Shah Massoud than the Afghan Taliban.
Map of the situation in Afghanistan in late 1996; Massoud (red), Dostum (green) and Taliban (yellow) territories.
Map of the situation in Afghanistan in August 2001 until October 2001
The Taliban started shelling Kabul in early 1995 but were defeated by forces of the Islamic State government under Ahmad Shah Massoud. Amnesty International. "DOCUMENT - AFGHANISTAN: FURTHER INFORMATION ON FEAR FOR SAFETY AND NEW CONCERN: DELIBERATE AND ARBITRARY KILLINGS: CIVILIANS IN KABUL." 16 November 1995 Accessed at: http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA11/015/1995/en/6d874caa-eb2a-11dd-92ac-295bdf97101f/asa110151995en.html Amnesty International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:

On September 26, 1996, as the Taliban, with military support by Pakistan and financial support by Saudi Arabia, prepared for another major offensive, Massoud ordered a full retreat from Kabul. Coll, Ghost Wars (New York: Penguin, 2005), 14. The Taliban seized Kabul on September 27, 1996, and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. They imposed on the parts of Afghanistan under their control their political and judicial interpretation of Islam, issuing edicts forbidding women from working outside the home, attending school or leaving their homes unless accompanied by a male relative. Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) said:

After the fall of Kabul to the Taliban on September 27, 1996, Ahmad Shah Massoud and Abdul Rashid Dostum, two former nemesis, created the United Front (Northern Alliance) against the Taliban, who were preparing offensives against the remaining areas under the control of Massoud and Dostum. Massoud's last stand against the Taliban on YouTube The United Front included beside the dominantly Tajik forces of Massoud and the Uzbek forces of Dostum, Hazara factions and Pashtun forces under the leadership of commanders such as Abdul Haq, Haji Abdul Qadir, Qari Baba or diplomat Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai. From the Taliban conquest in 1996 until November 2001 the United Front controlled roughly 30% of Afghanistan's population in provinces such as Badakhshan, Kapisa, Takhar and parts of Parwan, Kunar, Nuristan, Laghman, Samangan, Kunduz, Ghr and Bamyan.

According to a 55-page report by the United Nations, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres against civilians. UN officials stated that there had been "15 massacres" between 1996 and 2001. They also said, that "hese have been highly systematic and they all lead back to the Ministry of Defense or to Mullah Omar himself." The Taliban especially targeted people of Shia religious or Hazara ethnic background. Upon taking Mazar-i-Sharif in 1998, about 4,000 civilians were executed by the Taliban and many more reported tortured. Among those killed in Mazari Sharif were several Iranian diplomats. Others were kidnapped by the Taliban, touching off a hostage crisis that nearly escalated to a full-scale war, with 150,000 Iranian soldiers massed on the Afghan border at one time. It was later admitted that the diplomats were killed by the Taliban, and their bodies were returned to Iran. 

The documents also reveal the role of Arab and Pakistani support troops in these killings. Bin Laden's so-called 055 Brigade was responsible for mass-killings of Afghan civilians. The report by the United Nations quotes eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people. 

Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf - then as Chief of Army Staff - was responsible for sending thousands of Pakistanis to fight alongside the Taliban and Bin Laden against the forces of Massoud. In total there were believed to be 28,000 Pakistani nationals fighting inside Afghanistan. 20,000 were regular Pakistani soldiers either from the Frontier Corps or army and an estimated 8,000 were militants recruited in madrassas filling regular Taliban ranks. The estimated 25,000 Taliban regular force thus comprised more than 8,000 Pakistani nationals. A 1998 document by the U.S. State Department confirms that "20-40 percent of Taliban soldiers are Pakistani." The document further states that the parents of those Pakistani nationals "know nothing regarding their child's military involvement with the Taliban until their bodies are brought back to Pakistan." A further 3,000 fighter of the regular Taliban army were Arab and Central Asian militants. From 1996 to 2001 the Al Qaeda of Osama Bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri became a state within the Taliban state. Bin Laden sent Arab recruits to join the fight against the United Front. Of roughly 45,000 Pakistani, Taliban and Al Qaeda soldiers fighting against the forces of Massoud only 14,000 were Afghan. 

According to Human Rights Watch in 1997 Taliban soldiers were summarily executed in and around Mazar-i Sharif by Dostum's Junbish forces. Dostum was defeated by the Taliban in 1998 with the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif. Massoud remained the only leader of the United Front in Afghanistan.

In the areas under his control Ahmad Shah Massoud set up democratic institutions and signed the Women's Rights Charter. Human Rights Watch cites no human rights crimes for the forces under direct control of Massoud for the period from October 1996 until the assassination of Massoud in September 2001. As a consequence many civilians fled to the area of Ahmad Shah Massoud. National Geographic concluded in its documentary "Inside the Taliban":

The Taliban repeatedly offered Massoud a position of power to make him stop his resistance. Massoud declined for he did not fight to obtain a position of power. He explained in one interview:
:"The Taliban say: "Come and accept the post of prime minister and be with us", and they would keep the highest office in the country, the presidentship. But for what price?! The difference between us concerns mainly our way of thinking about the very principles of the society and the state. We can not accept their conditions of compromise, or else we would have to give up the principles of modern democracy. We are fundamentally against the system called "the Emirate of Afghanistan"." 
:"There should be an Afghanistan where every Afghan finds himself or herself happy. And I think that can only be assured by democracy based on consensus." 
Massoud wanted to convince the Taliban to join a political process leading towards democratic elections in a foreseeable future. His proposals for peace can be seen here: Proposal for Peace, promoted by Commander Massoud. Massoud also stated:
:"The Taliban are not a force to be considered invincible. They are distanced from the people now. They are weaker than in the past. There is only the assistance given by Pakistan, Osama bin Laden and other extremist groups that keep the Taliban on their feet. With a halt to that assistance, it is extremely difficult to survive." In early 2001 Massoud employed a new strategy of local military pressure and global political appeals. Resentment was increasingly gathering against Taliban rule from the bottom of Afghan society including the Pashtun areas. Massoud publicized their cause "popular consensus, general elections and democracy" worldwide. At the same time he was very wary not to revive the failed Kabul government of the early 1990s. Already in 1999 he started the training of police forces which he trained specifically to keep order and protect the civilian population in case the United Front would be successful. 

In early 2001 Massoud addressed the European Parliament in Brussels asking the international community to provide humanitarian help to the people of Afghanistan. He stated that the Taliban and Al Qaeda had introduced "a very wrong perception of Islam" and that without the support of Pakistan the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year. On this visit to Europe he also warned that his intelligence had gathered information about a large-scale attack on U.S. soil being imminent. Defense Intelligence Agency (2001) report http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB97/tal32.pdf 

===NATO presence and the Karzai administration===

Afghan President Hamid Karzai speaking before U.S. Congress in June 2004
On 9 September 2001, Ahmad Shah Massoud was assassinated by two Arab suicide attackers inside Afghanistan, and two days later about 3,000 people became victims of the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States. Then US President George W. Bush accused Osama bin Laden and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed as the faces behind the attacks. When the Taliban refused to hand over bin Laden to US authorities and to disband al-Qaeda bases in Afghanistan, Operation Enduring Freedom was launched in which teams of American and British special forces worked with commanders of the United Front (Northern Alliance) against the Taliban. At the same time the US-led forces were bombing Taliban and al-Qaeda targets everywhere inside Afghanistan with cruise missiles. These actions led to the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif in the north followed by all the other cities, as the Taliban and al-Qaeda crossed over the porous Durand Line border into Pakistan. In December 2001, after the Taliban government was toppled and the new Afghan government under Hamid Karzai was formed, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was established by the UN Security Council to help assist the Karzai administration and provide basic security to the Afghan people.  (UNSCR 1386) 
Soldiers of the Afghan National Army in 2010, including the ANA Commando Battalion standing in the front.

While the Taliban began regrouping inside Pakistan, more coalition troops entered the escalating US-led war. Meanwhile, the rebuilding of war-torn Afghanistan kicked off in 2002. The Afghan nation was able to build democratic structures over the years, and some progress was made in key areas such as governance, economy, health, education, transport, and agriculture. NATO is training the Afghan armed forces as well its national police. ISAF and Afghan troops led many offensives against the Taliban but failed to fully defeat them. By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to form in many parts of the country complete with their own version of mediation court. After U.S. President Barack Obama announced the deployment of another 30,000 soldiers in 2010 for a period of two years, Der Spiegel published images of the US soldiers who killed unarmed Afghan civilians. 

NATO's military terminal at Kabul International Airport

In FY 2009, the United States resettled just 328 refugees from Afghanistan. "Fiscal Year 2009 Refugee Arrivals". U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. By contrast, the U.S. admitted more than 100,000 Vietnamese refugees for resettlement during the Vietnam War. "Global Views: Iraq's refugees, by R. Nolan, Foreign Policy Association Features, Resource Library, June 12, 2007. On the other hand, over five million Afghan refugees were repatriated in the last decade, including many who were forcefully deported from NATO countries. This large return of Afghans may have helped the nation's economy but the country still remains one of the poorest in the world due to the decades of war, lack of foreign investment, ongoing government corruption and the Pakistani-backed Taliban insurgency. The United States also accuses neighboring Iran of providing small level of support to the Taliban insurgents. According to a report by the United Nations, the Taliban and other militants were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in 2009, 75% in 2010 and 80% in 2011. 

In October 2008 U.S. Defense Secretary Gates had asserted that a political settlement with the Taliban was the endgame for the Afghanistan war. "There has to be ultimately  and I'll underscore ultimately  reconciliation as part of a political outcome to this," Gates stated. By 2010 peace efforts began. In early January, Taliban commanders held secret exploratory talks with a United Nations special envoy to discuss peace terms. Regional commanders on the Taliban's leadership council, the Quetta Shura, sought a meeting with the UN special representative in Afghanistan, Kai Eide, and it took place in Dubai on January 8. It was the first such meeting between the UN and senior members of the Taliban. On 26 January 2010, at a major conference in London which brought together some 70 countries and organizations, Afghan President Hamid Karzai said he intends to reach out to the Taliban leadership (including Mullah Omar, Sirajuddin Haqqani and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar). Supported by NATO, Karzai called on the group's leadership to take part in a loya jirga meeting to initiate peace talks. These steps have resulted in an intensification of bombings, assassinations and ambushes. Some Afghan groups (including the former intelligence chief Amrullah Saleh and opposition leader Dr. Abdullah Abdullah) believe that Karzai plans to appease the insurgents' senior leadership at the cost of the democratic constitution, the democratic process and progress in the field of human rights especially women's rights. Dr. Abdullah stated:

:"I should say that Taliban are not fighting in order to be accommodated. They are fighting in order to bring the state down. So it's a futile exercise, and it's just misleading. ... There are groups that will fight to the death. Whether we like to talk to them or we don't like to talk to them, they will continue to fight. So, for them, I don't think that we have a way forward with talks or negotiations or contacts or anything as such. Then we have to be prepared to tackle and deal with them militarily. In terms of the Taliban on the ground, there are lots of possibilities and opportunities that with the help of the people in different parts of the country, we can attract them to the peace process; provided, we create a favorable environment on this side of the line. At the moment, the people are leaving support for the government because of corruption. So that expectation is also not realistic at this stage." 

Afghan President Hamid Karzai told world leaders during the London conference that he intends to reach out to the top echelons of the Taliban within a few weeks with a peace initiative. Karzai set the framework for dialogue with Taliban leaders when he called on the group's leadership to take part in a "loya jirga"  or large assembly of elders  to initiate peace talks. Karzai also asked for creation of a new peacemaking organization, to be called the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Reintegration. Karzai's top adviser on the reconciliation process with the insurgents said that the country must learn to forgive the Taliban. In March 2010, the Karzai government held preliminary talks with Hezb-i-Islami, who presented a plan which included the withdrawal of all foreign troops by the end of 2010. The Taliban declined to participate, saying "The Islamic Emirate has a clear position. We have said this many, many times. There will be no talks when there are foreign troops on Afghanistan's soil killing innocent Afghans on daily basis." In June 2010 the Afghan Peace Jirga 2010 took place. In September 2010 General David Petraeus commented on the progress of peace talks to date, stating, "The prospect for reconciliation with senior Taliban leaders certainly looms out there...and there have been approaches at (a) very senior level that hold some promise." 

After the May 2011 death of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, many prominent Afghan figures began being assassinated, including Mohammed Daud Daud, Ahmad Wali Karzai, Jan Mohammad Khan, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, Burhanuddin Rabbani and others. Also in the same year, the Pakistani-Afghan border skirmishes intensified and many large scale attacks by the Pakistani-based Haqqani network took place across Afghanistan. This led to the United States warning Pakistan of a possible military action against the Haqqanis in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. The U.S. blamed Pakistan's government, mainly Pakistani Army and its ISI spy network as the masterminds behind all of this. U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, Cameron Munter, told Radio Pakistan that "The attack that took place in Kabul a few days ago, that was the work of the Haqqani network. There is evidence linking the Haqqani Network to the Pakistan government. This is something that must stop." Other top U.S. officials such as Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta made similar statements. On October 16, 2011, "Operation Knife Edge" was launched by NATO and Afghan forces against the Haqqani network in south-eastern Afghanistan. Afghan Defense Minister, Abdul Rahim Wardak, explained that the operation will "help eliminate the insurgents before they struck in areas along the troubled frontier". Push launched against Haqqanis in border areas In November 2011, NATO forces killed 24 Pakistani Army soldiers around the border region with Pakistan.

==See also==
*Invasions of Afghanistan
*List of Pashtun empires and dynasties
*List of monarchs of Afghanistan
*List of presidents of Afghanistan
*Politics of Afghanistan

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==

*A Country Study: Afghanistan - Library of Congress Country Studies
*Video on Afghan-Soviet War from the [ http://repository.library.georgetown.edu/handle/10822/552494 Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives]
*Encyclopdia Britannica - History of Afghanistan
*Afghanistan (Southern Khorasan / Arachosia)
*Afghanistan's Importance From the Perspective of the History by Abdul Hai Habibi
*An Historical Guide to Kabul by Nancy Hatch Dupree
*Afghanistan Online  History of Afghanistan
*Afghanistan History: Prehistory
*British Museum Lecture: An Introduction to the History of Afghanistan by Bijan Omrani

 



[[History of modern Greece]]

The history of modern Greece covers the history of Greece from the recognition of its autonomy from the Ottoman Empire by the Great Powers (the United Kingdom, France, and Russia) in 1828, after the Greek War of Independence, to its present day status as a sovereign country.

==Background==

The Byzantine Empire had ruled most of the Greek-speaking world since late Antiquity, but was fatally weakened since the sacking of Constantinople by the Latin Crusaders in 1204. The establishment of Catholic Latin states on Greek soil, and the struggles of the Orthodox Byzantine Greeks against them, led to the emergence of a distinct "Greek" national identity. The Byzantine Empire was restored by the Palaiologos dynasty in 1261, but it was a shadow of its former self, and constant civil wars and foreign attacks in the 14th century brought about its terminal decline. As a result, most of Greece gradually became part of the Ottoman Empire in the late 14th and early 15th century, culminating in the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, the conquest of the Duchy of Athens in 1458, and of the Despotate of the Morea in 1460. 

Ottoman control was largely absent in the mountainous interior of Greece, and many fled there, often becoming brigands. Otherwise, only the islands of the Aegean and a few coastal fortresses on the mainland, under Venetian and Genoese rule, remained free from Ottoman rule, but by the mid-16th century, the Ottomans had conquered most of them as well. Rhodes fell in 1522, Cyprus in 1571, and the Venetians retained Crete until 1670. The Ionian Islands were only briefly ruled by the Ottomans (Kefalonia from 1479 to 1481 and from 1485 to 1500), and remained primarily under the rule of Venice. 

The first large-scale insurrection against Ottoman rule was the Orlov Revolt of the early 1770s, but it was brutally repressed. The same time, however, also marks the start of the Modern Greek Enlightenment, as Greeks who studied in Western Europe brought knowledge and ideas back to their homeland, and as Greek merchants and shipowners increased their wealth. As a result, especially in the aftermath of the French Revolution, liberal and nationalist ideas began to spread across the Greek lands. 

In 1821, the Greeks rose up against the Ottoman Empire. Initial successes were followed by infighting, which had almost seen the Greek struggle collapse; nevertheless, the prolongation of the fight forced the Great Powers (Britain, Russia and France) to recognize the claims of the Greek rebels to separate statehood (Treaty of London) and intervene against the Ottomans at the Battle of Navarino. Greece was initially to be an autonomous state under Ottoman suzerainty, but by 1832, in the Treaty of Constantinople, it was recognized as a fully independent kingdom. In the meantime, in 1827 the 3rd National Assembly of the Greek insurgents called upon Ioannis Kapodistrias, a former foreign minister of Russia, to take over the governance of the fledgling state.

==Administration of Ioannis Kapodistrias==
Ioannis Kapodistrias.

On his arrival, Kapodistrias launched a major reform and modernisation programme that covered all areas. He re-established military unity, bringing an end to the second phase of the civil war; re-organised the military, which was then able to reconquer territory lost to the Ottoman military during the civil wars, and introduced the first modern quarantine system in Greece, which brought epidemics like typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery under control for the first time since the start of the War of Independence; 

Kapodistrias negotiated with the Great Powers and the Ottoman Empire the borders and the degree of independence of the Greek state and signed the peace treaty that ended the War of Independence with the Ottomans; introduced the phoenix, the first modern Greek currency; organised local administration; and, in an effort to raise the living standards of the population, introduced the cultivation of the potato into Greece.

Face and Obverse of a Phoenix coin.

Furthermore, as part of his programme he tried to undermine the authority of the traditional clans or dynasties which he considered the useless legacy of a bygone and obsolete era. John S. Koliopoulos, Brigands with a Cause - Brigandage and Irredentism in Modern Greece 1821-1912, Clarendon Press Oxford (1987), p. 67. However, he underestimated the political and military strength of the capetanei ( &ndash; commanders) who had led the revolt against Ottoman Empire in 1821, and who had expected a leadership role in the post-revolution Government. When a dispute between the capetanei of Laconia and the appointed governor of the province escalated into an armed conflict, he called in Russian troops to restore order, because much of the army was controlled by capetanei who were part of the rebellion.

George Finlay's 1861 History of Greek Revolution records that by 1831 Kapodistrias's government had become hated, chiefly by the independent Maniates, but also by the Roumeliotes and the rich and influential merchant families of Hydra, Spetses and Psara. The Hydriots' customs dues were the chief source of the municipalities' revenue, so they refused to hand these over to Kapodistrias. It appears that Kapodistrias had refused to convene the National Assembly and was ruling as a despot, possibly influenced by his Russian experiences. The municipality of Hydra instructed Admiral Miaoulis and Mavrocordatos to go to Poros and to seize the Hellenic Navy's fleet there. This Miaoulis did, the intention being to prevent a blockade of the islands, so for a time it seemed as if the National Assembly would be called.

Kapodistrias called on the British and French residents to support him in putting down the rebellion, but this they refused to do, but Admiral Richord (or Ricord) took his ships north to Poros. Colonel (later General) Kallergis took a half-trained force of Greek Army regulars and a force of irregulars in support. With less than 200 men, Miaoulis was unable to make much of a fight; Fort Heidek on Bourtzi Island was overrun by the regulars and the brig Spetses (once Laskarina Bouboulina's Agamemnon) sunk by Richord's force. Encircled by the Russians in the harbor and Kallergis's force on land, Poros surrendered. Miaoulis was forced to set charges in the flagship Hellas and the corvette Hydra, blowing them up when he and his handful of followers returned to Hydra. Kallergis's men were enraged by the loss of the ships and sacked Poros, carrying off plunder to Nauplion.

The loss of the best ships in the fleet crippled the Hellenic Navy for many years, but it also weakened Kapodistrias's position. He did finally call the National Assembly but his other actions triggered more opposition and that led to his downfall.

==Assassination and creation of the Kingdom of Greece==

Assassination of Ioannis Kapodistrias by Dionysios Tsokos.
The Entry of King Otto in Athens by Peter von Hess.

In 1831, Kapodistrias ordered the imprisonment of Petrobey Mavromichalis, the Bey of the Mani Peninsula, one of the wildest and most rebellious parts of Greece. This was a mortal offence to the Mavromichalis family, and on 9 October 1831 (27 September in the Julian Calendar) Kapodistrias was assassinated by Petrobey's brother Konstantis and son Georgios on the steps of the church of Saint Spyridon in Nafplio.

Kapodistrias woke up early in the morning and decided to go to church despite the urges of his servants and bodyguards to stay at home. When he reached the church he saw his assassins waiting for him. When he reached the church steps, Konstantis and Georgios came close as if to greet him. Suddenly Konstantis drew his pistol and fired, missing, the bullet sticking in the church wall where it is still visible today. He then drew his dagger and stabbed Kapodistrias in the stomach while Georgios shot Kapodistrias in the head. 

Konstantis was shot by General Fotomaras, who watched the murder scene from his own window. Georgios managed to escape and hide in the French Embassy; after a few days he surrendered to the Greek authorities. He was sentenced to death by a court-martial and was executed by firing squad. His last wish was that the firing squad not shoot his face, and his last words were "Peace Brothers!"

Ioannis Kapodistrias was succeeded as Governor by his younger brother, Augustinos Kapodistrias. Augustinos ruled only for six months, during which the country was very much plunged into chaos. Under the protocol signed on 7 May 1832 between Bavaria and the protecting Powers, and basically dealing with the way in which the Regency was to be managed until Otto reached his majority (while also concluding the second Greek loan, for a sum of 2,400,000 sterling), Greece was defined as an independent kingdom, with the Arta-Volos line as its northern frontier. 

The Ottoman Empire was indemnified in the sum of 40,000,000 piastres for the loss of the territory. The borders of the Kingdom were reiterated in the London Protocol of 30 August 1832 signed by the Great Powers, which ratified the terms of the Constantinople Arrangement in connection with the border between Greece and the Ottoman Empire and marked the end of the Greek War of Independence creating modern Greece as an independent state free of the Ottoman Empire.

==Reign of King Otto, 18331863==

Otto, the first King of modern Greece.

Otto's reign would prove troubled, but managed to last for 30 years before he and his wife, Queen Amalia, left the way they came, aboard a British warship. During the early years of his reign a group of Bavarian Regents ruled in his name, and made themselves very unpopular by trying to impose German ideas of rigid hierarchical government on the Greeks, while keeping most significant state offices away from them. Nevertheless they laid the foundations of a Greek administration, army, justice system and education system. Otto was sincere in his desire to give Greece good government, but he suffered from two great handicaps, his Roman Catholic faith, and the fact that his marriage to Queen Amalia remained childless. This meant he could neither be crowned as King of Greece under the Orthodox rite nor establish a dynasty.

The Bavarian Regents ruled until 1837, when at the insistence of Britain and France, they were recalled and Otto thereafter appointed Greek ministers, although Bavarian officials still ran most of the administration and the army. But Greece still had no legislature and no constitution. Greek discontent grew until a revolt broke out in Athens in September 1843. Otto agreed to grant a constitution, and convened a National Assembly which met in November. The new constitution created a bicameral parliament, consisting of an Assembly (Vouli) and a Senate (Gerousia). Power then passed into the hands of a group of politicians, most of whom who had been commanders in the War of Independence against the Ottomans.

Greek politics in the 19th century was dominated by the national question. The majority of Greeks continued to live under Ottoman rule, and Greeks dreamed of liberating them all and reconstituting a state embracing all the Greek lands, with Constantinople as its capital. This was called the Great Idea (Megali Idea), and it was sustained by almost continuous rebellions against Ottoman rule in Greek-speaking territories, particularly Crete, Thessaly and Macedonia. During the Crimean War the British occupied Piraeus to prevent Greece declaring war on the Ottomans as a Russian ally.

A new generation of Greek politicians was growing increasingly intolerant of King Otto's continuing interference in government. In 1862, the King dismissed his Prime Minister, the former admiral Constantine Kanaris, the most prominent politician of the period. This provoked a military rebellion, forcing Otto to accept the inevitable and leave the country. 

The Greeks then asked Britain to send Queen Victoria's son Prince Alfred as their new king, but this was vetoed by the other Powers. Instead a young Danish Prince became King George I. George was a very popular choice as a constitutional monarch, and he agreed that his sons would be raised in the Greek Orthodox faith. As a reward to the Greeks for adopting a pro-British King, Britain ceded the Ionian Islands to Greece.

==Reign of King George I, 18641913==
King George I of the Hellenes.

At the urging of Britain and King George, Greece adopted a much more democratic constitution in 1864. The powers of the King were reduced and the Senate was abolished, and the franchise was extended to all adult males. Nevertheless Greek politics remained heavily dynastic, as it has always been. Family names such as Zaimis, Rallis and Trikoupis occurred repeatedly as Prime Ministers. 

Although parties were centered around the individual leaders, often bearing their names, two broad political tendencies existed: the liberals, led first by Charilaos Trikoupis and later by Eleftherios Venizelos, and the conservatives, led initially by Theodoros Deligiannis and later by Thrasivoulos Zaimis. Trikoupis and Deligiannis dominated Greek politics in the later 19th century, alternating in office. Trikoupis favoured co-operation with Great Britain in foreign affairs, the creation of infrastructure and an indigenous industry, raising protective tariffs and progressive social legislation, while the more populist Deligiannis depended on the promotion of Greek nationalism and the Megali Idea.

Greece remained a very poor country throughout the 19th century. The country lacked raw materials, infrastructure and capital. Agriculture was mostly at the subsistence level, and the only important export commodities were currants, raisins and tobacco. Some Greeks grew rich as merchants and shipowners, and Piraeus became a major port, but little of this wealth found its way to the Greek peasantry. Greece remained hopelessly in debt to London finance houses. 

By the 1890s Greece was virtually bankrupt, and public insolvency was declared in 1893. Poverty was rife in the rural areas and the islands, and was eased only by large-scale emigration to the United States. There was little education in the rural areas. Nevertheless there was progress in building communications and infrastructure, and fine public buildings were erected in Athens. Despite the bad financial situation, Athens staged the revival of the Olympic Games in 1896, which proved a great success.

The Hellenic Parliament in the 1880s, with PM Charilaos Trikoupis standing at the podium.
The parliamentary process developed greatly in Greece during the reign of George I. Initially, the royal prerogative in choosing his prime minister remained and contributed to governmental instability, until the introduction of the dedilomeni principle of parliamentary confidence in 1875 by the reformist Charilaos Trikoupis. Clientelism and frequent electoral upheavals however remained the norm in Greek politics, and frustrated the country's development. 

Corruption and Trikoupis' increased spending to create necessary infrastructure like the Corinth Canal overtaxed the weak Greek economy, forcing the declaration of public insolvency in 1893 and to accept the imposition of an International Financial Control authority to pay off the country's creditors. 

Another political issue in 19th-century Greece was uniquely Greek: the language question. The Greek people spoke a form of Greek called Demotic. Many of the educated elite saw this as a peasant dialect and were determined to restore the glories of Ancient Greek. Government documents and newspapers were consequently published in Katharevousa (purified) Greek, a form which few ordinary Greeks could read. Liberals favoured recognising Demotic as the national language, but conservatives and the Orthodox Church resisted all such efforts, to the extent that, when the New Testament was translated into Demotic in 1901, riots erupted in Athens and the government fell (the Evangeliaka). This issue would continue to plague Greek politics until the 1970s.

Map of the Kingdom of Greece, the Cretan State and the Principality of Samos in 1903, before the Balkan Wars.
All Greeks were united, however, in their determination to liberate the Greek-speaking provinces of the Ottoman Empire. Especially in Crete, a prolonged revolt in 18661869 had raised nationalist fervour. When war broke out between Russia and the Ottomans in 1877, Greek popular sentiment rallied to Russia's side, but Greece was too poor, and too concerned of British intervention, to officially enter the war. Nevertheless, in 1881, Thessaly and small parts of Epirus were ceded to Greece as part of the Treaty of Berlin, while frustrating Greek hopes of receiving Crete. 

Greeks in Crete continued to stage regular revolts, and in 1897, the Greek government under Theodoros Deligiannis, bowing to popular pressure, declared war on the Ottomans. In the ensuing Greco-Turkish War of 1897 the badly trained and equipped Greek army was defeated by the Ottomans. Through the intervention of the Great Powers however, Greece lost only a little territory along the border to Turkey, while Crete was established as an autonomous state under Prince George of Greece.

Popular lithograph celebrating the success of the Goudi pronunciamiento of 1909 as a national rebirth.
Nationalist sentiment among Greeks in the Ottoman Empire continued to grow, and by the 1890s there were constant disturbances in Macedonia. Here the Greeks were in competition not only with the Ottomans but also with the Bulgarians, engaged in an armed propaganda struggle for the hearts and minds of the ethnically mixed local population, the so-called "Macedonian Struggle". In July 1908, the Young Turk Revolution broke out in the Ottoman Empire. 

Taking advantage of the Ottoman internal turmoil, Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Bulgaria declared its independence from the Ottoman Empire. On Crete, the local population, led by a young politician named Eleftherios Venizelos, declared Enosis, Union with Greece, provoking another crisis. The fact that the Greek government, led by Dimitrios Rallis, proved unable to likewise take advantage of the situation and bring Crete into the fold, rankled with many Greeks, especially with young officers. These formed a secret society, the "Military League", with the purpose of emulating their Ottoman colleagues and seek reforms. 

The resulting Goudi coup on 15 August 1909 marked a watershed in modern Greek history: as the military conspirators were inexperienced in politics, they asked Venizelos, who had impeccable liberal credentials, to come to Greece as their political adviser. Venizelos quickly established himself as a powerful political figure, and his allies won the August 1910 elections. Venizelos became Prime Minister in October 1910, ushering a period of 25 years where his personality would dominate Greek politics.

==Wars and crises, 19121922==

The two protagonists of the fateful decade 19121922: King Constantine I and PM Eleftherios Venizelos in the days of their close cooperation during the Second Balkan War, before the deep political and personal rift between the two materialized and led to the National Schism.

Venizelos initiated a major reform program, including a new and more liberal constitution and reforms in the spheres of public administration, education and economy. French and British military missions were invited for the army and navy respectively, and arms purchases were made. In the meantime, the Ottoman Empire's weaknesses were revealed by the ongoing Italo-Turkish War in Libya. 

===Balkan Wars===
Through spring 1912, a series of bilateral agreements between the Christian Balkan states (Greece, Bulgaria, Montenegro and Serbia) formed the Balkan League, which in October 1912 declared war on the Ottoman Empire. In the First Balkan War, the Ottomans were defeated on all fronts, and the four allies rushed to grab as much territory as they could. The Greeks occupied Thessaloniki just ahead of the Bulgarians, and also took much of Epirus with Ioannina, as well as Crete and the Aegean Islands. 

The Treaty of London ended the war, but no one was left satisfied, and soon, the four allies fell out over the partition of Macedonia. In June 1913, Bulgaria attacked Greece and Serbia, beginning the Second Balkan War, but was beaten back. The Treaty of Bucharest, which concluded the war, left Greece with southern Epirus, the southern half of Macedonia, Crete and the Aegean islands, except for the Dodecanese, which had been occupied by Italy in 1911. These gains nearly doubled Greece's area and population.

In March 1913, an anarchist, Alexandros Schinas, assassinated King George in Thessaloniki, and his son came to the throne as Constantine I. Constantine was the first Greek king born in Greece and the first to be Greek Orthodox. His very name had been chosen in the spirit of romantic Greek nationalism (the Megali Idea), evoking the Byzantine emperors of that name. In addition, as the Commander-in-chief of the Greek Army during the Balkan Wars, his popularity was enormous, rivalled only by that of Venizelos, his Prime Minister. 

===World War I===
When World War I broke out in 1914, despite Greece's treaty of alliance with Serbia, both leaders preferred to maintain a neutral stance. But when, in early 1915, the Allies asked for Greek help in the Dardanelles campaign, offering Cyprus in exchange, their diverging views became apparent: Constantine had been educated in Germany, was married to Sophia of Prussia, sister of Kaiser Wilhelm, and was convinced of the Central Powers' victory. Venizelos on the other hand was an ardent anglophile, and believed in an Allied victory. 

Since Greece, a maritime country, could not oppose the mighty British navy, and citing the need for a respite after two wars, King Constantine favored continued neutrality, while Venizelos actively sought Greek entry in the war on the Allied side. Venizelos resigned, but won the next elections, and again formed the government. When Bulgaria entered the war as a German ally in October 1915, Venizelos invited Entente forces into Greece (the Salonika Front), for which he was again dismissed by Constantine.

Venizelos reviews a section of the Greek army on the Macedonian front during the First World War, 1917. He is accompanied by Admiral Pavlos Koundouriotis (left) and General Maurice Sarrail (right).

In August 1916, after several incidents where both combatants encroached upon the still theoretically neutral Greek territory, Venizelist officers rose up in Allied-controlled Thessaloniki, and Venizelos established a separate government there. Constantine was now ruling only in what was Greece before the Balkan Wars ("Old Greece"), and his government was subject to repeated humiliations from the Allies. In November 1916 the French occupied Piraeus, bombarded Athens and forced the Greek fleet to surrender. The royalist troops fired at them, leading to a battle between French and Greek royalist troops. There were also riots against supporters of Venizelos in Athens (the Noemvriana). 

Following the February Revolution in Russia, the Tsar's support for his cousin was removed, and Constantine was forced to leave the country, without actually abdicating, in June 1917. His second son Alexander became King, while the remaining royal family and the most prominent royalists followed into exile. Venizelos now led a superficially united Greece into the war on the Allied side, but underneath the surface, the division of Greek society into Venizelists and anti-Venizelists, the so-called National Schism, became more entrenched.

The Greek Kingdom and the Greek diaspora in the Balkans and western Asia Minor, according to a 1919 map submitted to the Paris Peace Conference.

===Greco-Turkish War (19191922)===

With the end of the war in November 1918, the moribund Ottoman Empire was ready to be carved up amongst the victors, and Greece now expected the Allies to deliver on their promises. In no small measure through the diplomatic efforts of Venizelos, Greece secured Western Thrace in the Treaty of Neuilly in November 1919 and Eastern Thrace and a zone around Smyrna in western Anatolia (already under Greek administration since May 1919) in the Treaty of Svres of August 1920. The future of Constantinople was left to be determined. But at the same time, a nationalist movement had arisen in Turkey, led by Mustafa Kemal (later Kemal Atatrk), who set up a rival government in Ankara and was engaged in fighting the Greek army.

At this point, nevertheless, the fulfillment of the Megali Idea seemed near. Yet so deep was the rift in Greek society, that on his return to Greece, an assassination attempt was made on Venizelos by two royalist former officers. Even more surprisingly, Venizelos' Liberal Party lost the elections called in November 1920, and in a referendum shortly after, the Greek people voted for the return of King Constantine from exile, following the sudden death of Alexander. 

The United Opposition, which had campaigned on the slogan of an end to the war in Anatolia, instead intensified it. But the royalist restoration had dire consequences: many veteran Venizelist officers were dismissed or left the army, while Italy and France found the return of the hated Constantine a useful pretext for switching their support to Kemal. Finally, in August 1922, the Turkish army shattered the Greek front, and took Smyrna.

The Greek army evacuated not only Anatolia, but also Eastern Thrace and the islands of Imbros and Tenedos (Treaty of Lausanne). A compulsory population exchange was agreed between the two countries, with over 1.5 million Christians and almost half a million Muslims being uprooted. This catastrophe marked the end of the Megali Idea, and left Greece financially exhausted, demoralized, and having to house and feed a proportionately huge number of refugees.

==Republic and Monarchy (19221940)==

Crowds celebrating in Athens the proclamation of the Republic, 1924, with placards of republican leaders Papanastasiou, Hatzikyriakos and Kondylis.

The catastrophe deepened the political crisis, with the returning army rising up under Venizelist officers and forcing King Constantine to abdicate again, in September 1922, in favour of his firstborn son, George II. The "Revolutionary Committee", headed by Colonels Stylianos Gonatas (soon to become Prime Minister) and Nikolaos Plastiras engaged in a witch-hunt against the royalists, culminating in the "Trial of the Six". 

In October 1923, elections were called for December, which would form a National Assembly with powers to draft a new constitution. Following a failed royalist coup, the monarchist parties abstained, leading to a landslide for the Liberals and their allies. King George II was asked to leave the country, and on 25 March 1924, Alexandros Papanastasiou proclaimed the Second Hellenic Republic, ratified by plebiscite a month later.

However, the new Republic was built on unstable foundations. The National Schism lived on, as the monarchists, with the exception of Ioannis Metaxas, did not acknowledge the Venizelist-sponsored Republican regime. The army, which had tasted power and provided many of the leading proponents of both sides, became a factor to be reckoned with, prone to intervene in politics. 

Greece was diplomatically isolated and vulnerable, as the Corfu incident of 1923 showed, and the economical foundations of the state were in ruins, after a decade of war and the sudden increase of the country's population by a quarter. The refugees, however, also brought a new air into Greece. They were impoverished now, but before 1922 many had been entrepreneurs and well-educated. Staunch supporters of Venizelos and the Republic, many would also radicalize and play a leading role in the nascent Communist Party of Greece.

In June 1925, General Theodoros Pangalos launched a coup, and ruled as a dictator for a year until a counter-coup by another General, Georgios Kondylis, unseated him and restored the Republic. In the meantime, he had managed to embroil Greece in a short-lived war with Bulgaria and make unacceptable concessions in Thessaloniki and its hinterland to Yugoslavia, in an effort to gain its support for his revanchist policies against Turkey. 

In 1928, Venizelos returned from exile and after a landslide victory formed a government. This was the only cabinet of the Second Republic to run its full four-year term, and the work it left behind was considerable. Alongside domestic reforms, Venizelos restored Greece's frayed international relations, even initiating the Greco-Turkish reconciliation with a visit to Ankara and the signing of a Friendship Agreement in 1930.

The Great Depression however hit Greece, as a poor country dependent on agricultural exports, particularly hard. Matters were made worse by the closing off of emigration to the United States, the traditional safety-valve of rural poverty. High unemployment and consequent social unrest resulted, and the Communist Party of Greece made rapid advances. Venizelos was forced to default on Greece's national debt in 1932, and he fell from office after the 1932 elections, being succeeded by a monarchist coalition government led by Panagis Tsaldaris of the People's Party. 

Two failed Venizelist military coups followed in an effort to preserve the Republic in 1933 and 1935, but they had the opposite effect. On 10 October 1935, a few months after he suppressed the second attempt in March 1935, Georgios Kondylis, the former Venizelist stalwart, abolished the Republic in another coup, and declared the monarchy restored. A rigged plebiscite confirmed the regime change (with an unsurprising 97.88% of votes), and King George II returned.

The conservative regime of Ioannis Metaxas (4th of August Regime) adopted many of the ideas and symbolism of Italian Fascism. Here members of the National Organisation of Youth give the Roman salute to Metaxas.

King George II immediately dismissed Kondylis and appointed Professor Konstantinos Demertzis as interim Prime Minister. Venizelos meanwhile, in exile, urged an end to the conflict over the monarchy in view of the threat to Greece from the rise of Fascist Italy. His successors as Liberal leader, Themistoklis Sophoulis and Georgios Papandreou, agreed, and the restoration of the monarchy was accepted. The 1936 elections resulted in a hung parliament, with the Communists holding the balance. As no government could be formed, Demertzis continued on. At the same time, a series of deaths left the Greek political scene in disarray: Kondylis died in February, Venizelos in March, Demertzis in April and Tsaldaris in May. The road was now clear for Ioannis Metaxas, who had succeeded Demertzis as interim Prime Minister.

Metaxas, a retired royalist general, believed that an authoritarian government was necessary to prevent social conflict and, especially, quell the rising power of the Communists. On 4 August 1936, with the King's support, he suspended parliament and established the 4th of August Regime. The Communists were suppressed and the Liberal leaders went into internal exile. Patterning itself after Benito Mussolini's Fascist Italy, Metaxas' regime promoted various concepts such as the "Third Hellenic Civilization", the Roman salute, a national youth organization, and introduced measures to gain popular support, such as the Greek Social Insurance Institute (IKA), still the biggest social security institution in Greece.

Despite these efforts the regime lacked a broad popular base or a mass movement supporting it. The Greek people were generally apathetic, without actively opposing Metaxas. Metaxas also improved the country's defenses in preparation for the forthcoming European war, constructing, among other defensive measures, the "Metaxas Line". Despite his aping of Fascism, and the strong economic ties with resurgent Nazi Germany, Metaxas followed a policy of neutrality, given Greece's traditionally strong ties to Britain, reinforced by King George II's personal anglophilia. In April 1939, the Italian threat suddenly loomed closer, as Italy annexed Albania, whereupon Britain publicly guaranteed Greece's borders. Thus, when World War II broke out in September 1939, Greece remained neutral.

==World War II==

The symbolic start of the Occupation: German soldiers raising the German War Flag over the Acropolis. It would be taken down in one of the first acts of the Greek Resistance.

Despite this declared neutrality, Greece became a target for Mussolini's expansionist policies. Provocations against Greece included the sinking of the light cruiser Elli on 15 August 1940. Italian troops crossed the border on 28 October 1940, beginning the Greco-Italian War, but were stopped by determined Greek defence, and ultimately driven back into Albania. 

Metaxas died suddenly in January 1941. His death raised hopes of a liberalization of his regime and the restoration of parliamentary rule, but King George quashed these hopes when he retained the regime's machinery in place. In the meantime, Adolf Hitler was reluctantly forced to divert German troops to rescue Mussolini from defeat, and attacked Greece through Yugoslavia and Bulgaria on 6 April 1941. Despite British assistance, by the end of May, the Germans had overrun most of the country. The King and the government escaped to Crete, where they stayed until the end of the Battle of Crete. They then transferred to Egypt, where a government in exile was established.

The three occupation zones. Blue indicates the Italian, red the German and green the territory annexed by Bulgaria. The Italian zone was taken over by the Germans in September 1943.
The occupied country was divided in three zones (German, Italian and Bulgarian) and in Athens, a puppet regime was established. The members were either conservatives or nationalists with fascist leanings. The three quisling prime ministers were Georgios Tsolakoglou, the general who had signed the armistice with the Wehrmacht, Konstantinos Logothetopoulos, and Ioannis Rallis, who took office when the German defeat was inevitable, and aimed primarily at combating the left-wing Resistance movement. To this end, he created the collaborationist Security Battalions.

Greece suffered terrible privations during World War II, as the Germans appropriated most of the country's agricultural production and prevented its fishing fleets from operating. As a result, and because a British blockade initially hindered foreign relief efforts, a wide-scale famine resulted, when hundreds of thousands perished, especially in the winter of 19411942. In the mountains of the Greek mainland, in the meantime, several resistance movements sprang up, and by mid-1943, the Axis forces controlled only the main towns and the connecting roads, while a "Free Greece" was set up in the mountains. 

The largest resistance group, the National Liberation Front (EAM), was controlled by the Communists, as was (Elas) led by Aris Velouchiotis and a civil war soon broke out between it and non-Communist groups such as the National Republican Greek League (EDES) in those areas liberated from the Germans. The exiled government in Cairo was only intermittently in touch with the resistance movement, and exercised virtually no influence in the occupied country. Part of this was due to the unpopularity of the King George II in Greece itself, but despite efforts by Greek politicians, British support ensured his retention at the head of the Cairo government. 

As the German defeat drew nearer, the various Greek political factions convened in Lebanon in May 1944, under British auspices, and formed a government of national unity, under George Papandreou, in which EAM was represented by six ministers.

==Civil War==

German forces withdrew on 12 October 1944, and the government in exile returned to Athens. After the German withdrawal, the EAM-ELAS guerrilla army effectively controlled most of Greece, but its leaders were reluctant to take control of the country, as they knew that Soviet premier Joseph Stalin had agreed that Greece would be in the British sphere of influence after the war. Tensions between the British-backed Papandreou and EAM, especially over the issue of disarmament of the various armed groups, led to the resignation of the latter's ministers from the government. 

A few days later, on 3 December 1944, a large-scale pro-EAM demonstration in Athens ended in violence and ushered an intense, house-to-house struggle with British and monarchist forces (the Dekemvriana). After three weeks, the Communists were defeated: the Varkiza agreement ended the conflict and disarmed ELAS, and an unstable coalition government was formed. The anti-EAM backlash grew into a full-scale "White Terror", which exacerbated tensions. 

The Communists boycotted the March 1946 elections, and on the same day, fighting broke out again. By the end of 1946, the Communist Democratic Army of Greece had been formed, pitted against the governmental National Army, which was backed first by Britain and after 1947 by the United States.

Communist successes in 19471948 enabled them to move freely over much of mainland Greece, but with extensive reorganization, the deportation of rural populations and American material support, the National Army was slowly able to regain control over most of the countryside. In 1949, the insurgents suffered a major blow, as Yugoslavia closed its borders following the split between Marshal Josip Broz Tito with the Soviet Union. Finally, in August 1949, the National Army under Marshal Alexander Papagos launched an offensive that forced the remaining insurgents to surrender or flee across the northern border into the territory of Greece's northern Communist neighbors. 

The civil war resulted in 100,000 killed and caused catastrophic economic disruption. In addition, at least 25,000 Greeks and an unspecified number of Macedonian Slavs were either voluntarily or forcibly evacuated to Eastern bloc countries, while 700,000 became displaced persons inside the country. Many more emigrated to Australia and other countries.

The postwar settlement ended Greece's territorial expansion, which had begun in 1832. The 1947 Treaty of Paris required Italy to hand over the Dodecanese islands to Greece. These were the last majority-Greek-speaking areas to be united with the Greek state, apart from Cyprus which was a British possession until it became independent in 1960. Greece's ethnic homogeneity was increased by the postwar expulsion of 25,000 Albanians from Epirus (see Cham Albanians). The only significant remaining minorities are the Muslims in Western Thrace (about 100,000) and a small Slavic-speaking minority in the north. Greek nationalists continued to claim southern Albania (which they called Northern Epirus), home of a significant Greek population (about 3%-12% in the whole of Albania CIA - The World Factbook ), and the Turkish-held islands of Imvros and Tenedos, where there were smaller Greek minorities.

==Postwar Greece (19501973)==

After the civil war, Greece sought to join the Western democracies and became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1952. 

Since the Civil war (194649) but even more after that, the parties in the parliament were divided in three political concentrations. The political formation Right-Centre-Left, given the exacerbation of political animosity that had preceded dividing the country in the 40s, tended to turn the concurrence of parties into ideological positions.

In the beginning of the 1950s, the forces of the Centre (EPEK) succeeded in gaining the power and under the leadership of the aged general N. Plastiras they governed for about half a four-year term. These were a series of governments having limited manoeuvre ability and inadequate influence in the political arena. This government, as well as those that followed, was constantly under the American auspices. The defeat of EPEK in the elections of 1952, apart from increasing the repressive measures that concerned the defeated of the Civil war, also marked the end of the general political position that it represented, namely political consensus and social reconciliation.

The Left, which had been ostracized from the political life of the country, found a way of expression through the constitution of EDA (United Democratic Left) in 1951, which turned out to be a significant pole, yet steadily excluded from the decision making centres. After the disbandment of the Centre as an autonomous political institution, EDA practically expanded its electoral influence to a significant part of the EAM-based Centre-Left.

The 1960s are part of the period 1953-72, during which Greek economy developed rapidly and was structured within the scope of European and worldwide economic developments. One of the main characteristics of that period was the major political event - as we have come to accept it - of the countrys accession in the EEC, in an attempt to create a common market. The relevant treaty was contracted in 1962.

The developmental strategy adopted by the country was embodied in centrally organized five-year plans; yet their orientation was indistinct. The average annual emigration, which absorbed the excess workforce and contributed to extremely high growth rates, exceeded the annual natural increase in population. The influx of large amounts of foreign private capital was being facilitated and consumption was expanded. These, associated with the rise of tourism, the expansion of shipping activity and with the migrant remittances, had a positive effect on the balance of payments. 

The peak of development was registered principally in manufacture, mainly in the textile and chemical industry and in the sector of metallurgy, the growth rate of which tended to reach 11% during 1965-70. The other large branch where obvious economic and social consequences were brought about, was that of construction. Consideration, a Greek invention, favoured the creation of a class of small-medium contractors on one hand and settled the housing system and property status on the other.

During that decade, youth came forth in society as a distinct social power with autonomous presence (creation of a new culture in music, fashion etc.) and displaying dynamism in the assertion of their social rights. The independence granted to Cyprus, which was mined from the very beginning, constituted the main focus of young activist mobilizations, along with struggles aiming at reforms in education, which were provisionally realized to a certain extent through the educational reform of 1964. The country reckoned on and was influenced by Europe - usually behind time - and by the current trends like never before. Thus, in a sense, the imposition of the military junta conflicted with the social and cultural occurrences.

===Greek military junta of 19671974===

The country descended into a prolonged political crisis, and elections were scheduled for late April 1967. On 21 April 1967 a group of right-wing colonels led by Colonel George Papadopoulos seized power in a coup d'tat establishing the Regime of the Colonels. Civil liberties were suppressed, special military courts were established, and political parties were dissolved. 

Several thousand suspected communists and political opponents were imprisoned or exiled to remote Greek islands. Alleged US support for the junta is claimed to be the cause of rising anti-Americanism in Greece during and following the junta's harsh rule. The junta's early years also saw a marked upturn in the economy, with increased foreign investment and large-scale infrastructure works. The junta was widely condemned abroad, but inside the country, discontent began to increase only after 1970, when the economy slowed down. 

Even the armed forces, the regime's foundation, were not immune: In May 1973, a planned coup by the Hellenic Navy was narrowly suppressed, but led to the mutiny of the HNS Velos, whose officers sought political asylum in Italy. In response, junta leader Papadopoulos attempted to steer the regime towards a controlled democratization, abolishing the monarchy and declaring himself President of the Republic.

==Transition to democracy (19732009)==
Greek territorial changes between 1821 and 1947, showing territories awarded to Greece in 1919 and those lost in 1923.

On 25 November 1973, following the bloody suppression of Athens Polytechnic uprising on the 17th, the hardliner Brigadier Dimitrios Ioannides overthrew Papadopoulos and tried to continue the dictatorship despite the popular unrest the uprising had triggered. Ioannides' attempt in July 1974 to overthrow Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, brought Greece to the brink of war with Turkey, which invaded Cyprus and occupied part of the island. Clogg, Richard. A Concise history of Greece. 

Senior Greek military officers then withdrew their support from the junta, which collapsed. Constantine Karamanlis returned from exile in France to establish a government of national unity until elections could be held. Karamanlis worked to defuse the risk of war with Turkey and also legalised the Communist Party, which had been illegal since 1947. His newly organized party, New Democracy (ND), won the elections held in November 1974 by a wide margin, and he became prime minister.

Following the 1974 referendum which resulted in the abolition of the monarchy, a new constitution was approved by parliament on 19 June 1975. Parliament elected Constantine Tsatsos as President of the Republic. In the parliamentary elections of 1977, New Democracy again won a majority of seats. In May 1980, Prime Minister Karamanlis was elected to succeed Tsatsos as President. George Rallis succeeded Karamanlis as Prime Minister.

On 1 January 1981, Greece became the tenth member of the European Community (now the European Union). EU members - Chronology - Ministre des Affaires trangres In parliamentary elections held on 18 October 1981, Greece elected its first socialist government when the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), led by Andreas Papandreou, won 172 of 300 seats. On 29 March 1985, after Prime Minister Papandreou declined to support President Karamanlis for a second term, Supreme Court Justice Christos Sartzetakis was elected president by the Greek parliament.

Greece had two rounds of parliamentary elections in 1989; both produced weak coalition governments with limited mandates. Party leaders withdrew their support in February 1990, and elections were held on 8 April. New Democracy, led by Constantine Mitsotakis, won 150 seats in that election and subsequently gained two others. However, a split between Mitsotakis and his first Foreign Minister, Antonis Samaras, in 1992, led to Samaras' dismissal and the eventual collapse of the ND government. In new elections in September 1993, Papandreou returned to power.

On 17 January 1996, following a protracted illness, Papandreou resigned and was replaced as Prime Minister by former Minister of Trade and Industry Costas Simitis. Within days, the new prime minister had to handle a major Greek-Turkish crisis over the Imia/Kardak islands. Simitis subsequently won re-election in the 1996 and 2000 elections. In 2004, Simitis retired and George Papandreou succeeded him as PASOK leader. PM Simitis resigns as PASOK president, initiates election of new party leader 

In the March 2004 elections, PASOK was defeated by New Democracy, led by Kostas Karamanlis, the nephew of the former President. The government called early elections in September 2007 (normally, elections would have been held in March 2008), and New Democracy again was the majority party in the Parliament. As a result of that defeat, PASOK undertook a party election for a new leader. In that contest, George Papandreou was reelected as the head of the socialist party in Greece. In the 2009 elections however, PASOK became the majority party in the Parliament and George Papandreou became Prime Minister of Greece. After PASOK lost its majority in the Parliament, ND and PASOK 
joined the smaller Popular Orthodox Rally in a grand coalition, pledging their parliamentary support for a government of national unity headed by former European Central Bank vice-president Lucas Papademos.

==Economic crisis of 2009-2012==

From late 2009, fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed among investors concerning Greece's ability to meet its debt obligations due to strong increase in government debt levels. This led to a crisis of confidence, indicated by a widening of bond yield spreads and risk insurance on credit default swaps compared to other countries, most importantly Germany. Downgrading of Greek government debt to junk bonds created alarm in financial markets. 

On 2 May 2010, the Eurozone countries and the International Monetary Fund agreed on a loan for Greece, conditional on the implementation of harsh austerity measures. In October 2011, Eurozone leaders also agreed on a proposal to write off 50% of Greek debt owed to private creditors, increasing the EFSF to about 1 trillion and requiring European banks to achieve 9% capitalization to reduce the risk of contagion to other countries. These austerity measures have proved extremely unpopular with the Greek public, precipitating demonstrations and civil unrest. 

There are widespread fears that a Greek default on its debt would have global repercussions, endangering the economies of many other countries in the European Union, threatening the stability of the European currency, the euro, and possibly plunging the world into another recession. It has been speculated that the crisis may force Greece to abandon the euro and bring back its former currency, the drachma.

===Coalition Government===

Following the May 2012 legislative election where the New Democracy party became the largest party in the Hellenic Parliament, Samaras, leader of ND, was asked by Greek President Karolos Papoulias to try to form a government. However, after a day of hard negotiations with the other parties in Parliament, Samaras officially announced he was giving up the mandate to form a government. The task passed to Alexis Tsipras, leader of the SYRIZA (the second largest party) who was also unable to form a government. After PASOK also failed to negotiate a successful agreement to form a government, emergency talks with the President ended with a new election being called while Panagiotis Pikrammenos was appointed as Prime Minister in a caretaker government.

Voters once again took to the polls in the widely-watched June 2012 election. New Democracy came out on top in a stronger position with 129 seats, compared to 108 in the May election. On 20 June 2012, Samaras successfully formed a coalition with PASOK (now lead by former Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos) and DIMAR. The new government would have a majority of 58, with SYRIZA, Independent Greeks (ANEL), Golden Dawn (XA) and the Communist Party (KKE) comprising the opposition. PASOK and DIMAR chose to take a limited role in Samaras' Cabinet, being represented by party officials and independent technocrats instead of MPs. 

==See also==

*Timeline of Greek history
*Timeline of modern Greek history

==References==

==Further reading==
* Colovas, Anthone C. A Quick History of Modern Greece (2007) excerpt and text search
* Gallant, Thomas W. Modern Greece (Brief Histories) (2001)
* Herzfeld, Michael. Ours Once More: Folklore, Ideology and the Making of Modern Greece (1986) excerpt and text search
* Keridis, Dimitris. Historical Dictionary of Modern Greece (2009) excerpt and text search
* Koliopoulos, John S., and Thanos M. Veremis. Modern Greece: A History since 1821 (2009) excerpt and text search
* Miller, James E. The United States and the Making of Modern Greece: History and Power, 1950-1974 (2008) excerpt and text search
* Woodhouse, C. M. Modern Greece: A Short History (2000) excerpt and text search

 

[[Heracles]]

Heracles ( ; , Hrakls, from Hra, "Hera", and kleos, "glory" Becking, Bob, et al.. Dictionary of deities and demons. ed. Toorn,Karel van der. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. 1999 ),
born Alcaeus 
(, Alkaios) or Alcides Bibliotheca ii. 4.  12 (, Alkeids), was a divine hero in Greek mythology, the son of Zeus and Alcmene, foster son of Amphitryon . By his adoptive descent through Ampitryon, Heracles receives the epithet Alcides, as "of the line of Alcaeus", father of Amphitryon. Amphitryon's own, mortal son was Iphicles. and great-grandson (and half-brother) of Perseus. He was the greatest of the Greek heroes, a paragon of masculinity, the ancestor of royal clans who claimed to be Heracleidae () and a champion of the Olympian order against chthonic monsters. In Rome and the modern West, he is known as Hercules, with whom the later Roman Emperors, in particular Commodus and Maximian, often identified themselves. The Romans adopted the Greek version of his life and works essentially unchanged, but added anecdotal detail of their own, some of it linking the hero with the geography of the Central Mediterranean. Details of his cult were adapted to Rome as well.

Extraordinary strength, courage, ingenuity, and sexual prowess with both males and females were among his characteristic attributes. Heracles used his wits on several occasions when his strength did not suffice, such as when laboring for the king Augeas of Elis, wrestling the giant Antaeus, or tricking Atlas into taking the sky back onto his shoulders. Together with Hermes he was the patron and protector of gymnasia and palaestrae. Pausanias, Guide to Greece, 4.32.1 His iconographic attributes are the lion skin and the club. These qualities did not prevent him from being regarded as a playful figure who used games to relax from his labors and played a great deal with children. Aelian, Varia Historia, 12.15 By conquering dangerous archaic forces he is said to have "made the world safe for mankind" and to be its benefactor. Aelian, Varia Historia, 5.3 Heracles was an extremely passionate and emotional individual, capable of doing both great deeds for his friends (such as wrestling with Thanatos on behalf of Prince Admetus, who had regaled Heracles with his hospitality, or restoring his friend Tyndareus to the throne of Sparta after he was overthrown) and being a terrible enemy who would wreak horrible vengeance on those who crossed him, as Augeas, Neleus and Laomedon all found out to their cost.

==Origin and character==
Heracles capturing the Cretan bull.
The Origin of the Milky Way by Jacopo Tintoretto

Many popular stories were told of his life, the most famous being The Twelve Labours of Heracles; Alexandrian poets of the Hellenistic age drew his mythology into a high poetic and tragic atmosphere. Burkert 1985, pp. 208-9 His figure, which initially drew on Near Eastern motifs such as the lion-fight, was known everywhere: his Etruscan equivalent was Hercle, a son of Tinia and Uni.

Heracles was the greatest of Hellenic chthonic heroes, but unlike other Greek heroes, no tomb was identified as his. Heracles was both hero and god, as Pindar says heroes theos; at the same festival sacrifice was made to him, first as a hero, with a chthonic libation, and then as a god, upon an altar: thus he embodies the closest Greek approach to a "demi-god". The core of the story of Heracles has been identified by Walter Burkert as originating in Neolithic hunter culture and traditions of shamanistic crossings into the netherworld. Burkert 1985, pp. 208-212. 

===Hero or god===
Heracles' role as a culture hero, whose death could be a subject of mythic telling (see below), was accepted into the Olympian Pantheon during Classical times. This created an awkwardness in the encounter with Odysseus in the episode of Odyssey XI, called the Nekuia, where Odysseus encounters Heracles in Hades:

:And next I caught a glimpse of powerful Heracles
:His ghost I mean: the man himself delights
:in the grand feasts of the deathless gods on high...
:Around him cries of the dead rang out like cries of birds
:scattering left and right in horror as on he came like night..." Robert Fagles' translation, 1996:269. 

Ancient critics were aware of the problem of the aside that interrupts the vivid and complete description, in which Heracles recognizes Odysseus and hails him, and modern critics find very good reasons for denying that the verses beginning, in Fagles' translation His ghost I mean... were part of the original composition: "once people knew of Heracles' admission to Olympus, they would not tolerate his presence in the underworld", remarks Friedrich Solmsen, noting that the interpolated verses represent a compromise between conflicting representations of Heracles.

It is also said that when Heracles died, he shed his mortal skin, which went down to the underworld, and he then went up to join the gods for being the greatest hero ever known.

===Christian chronology===
In Christian circles a Euhemerist reading of the widespread Heracles cult was attributed to a historical figure who had been offered cult status after his death. Thus Eusebius, Preparation of the Gospel (10.12), reported that Clement could offer historical dates for Hercules as a king in Argos: "from the reign of Hercules in Argos to the deification of Hercules himself and of Asclepius there are comprised thirty-eight years, according to Apollodorus the chronicler: and from that point to the deification of Castor and Pollux fifty-three years: and somewhere about this time was the capture of Troy."

Temple to Heracles in Agrigento

Readers with a literalist bent, following Clement's reasoning, have asserted from this remark that, since Heracles ruled over Tiryns in Argos at the same time that Eurystheus ruled over Mycenae, and since at about this time Linus was Heracles' teacher, one can conclude, based on Jerome's datein his universal history, his Chronicongiven to Linus' notoriety in teaching Heracles in 1264 BC, that Heracles' death and deification occurred 38 years later, in approximately 1226 BC.

===Cult===
The ancient Greeks celebrated the festival of the Heracleia, which commemorated the death of Heracles, on the second day of the month of Metageitnion (which would fall in late July or early August). What is believed to be an Egyptian Temple of Heracles in the Bahariya Oasis dates to 21 BC. A reassessment of Ptolemys descriptions of the island of Malta attempted to link the site at Ras ir-Raeb with a temple to Heracles, Ptol. iv. 3.  37 but the arguments are not conclusive. 

==Greek mythology==

===Birth and childhood===
Heracles strangling snakes (detail from an Attic red-figured stamnos, c. 480470 BCE)

A major factor in the well-known tragedies surrounding Heracles is the hatred that the goddess Hera, wife of Zeus, had for him. A full account of Heracles must render it clear why Heracles was so tormented by Hera, when there were many illegitimate offspring sired by Zeus. Heracles was the son of the affair Zeus had with the mortal woman Alcmene. Zeus made love to her after disguising himself as her husband, Amphitryon, home early from war (Amphitryon did return later the same night, and Alcmene became pregnant with his son at the same time, a case of heteropaternal superfecundation, where a woman carries twins sired by different fathers). Compare the two pairs of twins born to Leda and the "double" parentage of Theseus. Thus, Heracles' very existence proved at least one of Zeus' many illicit affairs, and Hera often conspired against Zeus' mortal offspring as revenge for her husband's infidelities. His twin mortal brother, son of Amphitryon, was Iphicles, father of Heracles' charioteer Iolaus.

On the night the twins Heracles and Iphicles were to be born, Hera, knowing of her husband Zeus' adultery, persuaded Zeus to swear an oath that the child born that night to a member of the House of Perseus would become High King. Hera did this knowing that while Heracles was to be born a descendant of Perseus, so too was Eurystheus. Once the oath was sworn, Hera hurried to Alcmene's dwelling and slowed the birth of the twins Heracles and Iphicles by forcing Ilithyia, goddess of childbirth, to sit crosslegged with her clothing tied in knots, thereby causing the twins to be trapped in the womb. Meanwhile, Hera caused Eurystheus to be born prematurely, making him High King in place of Heracles. She would have permanently delayed Heracles' birth had she not been fooled by Galanthis, Alcmene's servant, who lied to Ilithyia, saying that Alcmene had already delivered the baby. Upon hearing this, she jumped in surprise, loosing the knots and inadvertently allowing Alcmene to give birth to Heracles and Iphicles.

Heracles as a boy strangling a snake (marble, Roman artwork, 2nd century CE)

Fear of Hera's revenge led Alcmene to expose the infant Heracles, but he was taken up and brought to Hera by his half-sister Athena, who played an important role as protectress of heroes. Hera did not recognize Heracles and nursed him out of pity. Heracles suckled so strongly that he caused Hera pain, and she pushed him away. Her milk sprayed across the heavens and there formed the Milky Way. But with divine milk, Heracles had acquired supernatural powers. Athena brought the infant back to his mother, and he was subsequently raised by his parents.

The child was originally given the name Alcides by his parents; it was only later that he became known as Heracles. He was renamed Heracles in an unsuccessful attempt to mollify Hera. He and his twin were just eight months old when Hera sent two giant snakes into the children's chamber. Iphicles cried from fear, but his brother grabbed a snake in each hand and strangled them. He was found by his nurse playing with them on his cot as if they were toys. Astonished, Amphitryon sent for the seer Tiresias, who prophesied an unusual future for the boy, saying he would vanquish numerous monsters.

===Youth===
After killing his music tutor Linus with a lyre, he was sent to tend cattle on a mountain by his foster father Amphitryon. Here, according to an allegorical parable, "The Choice of Heracles", invented by the sophist Prodicus (c. 400 BC) and reported in Xenophon's Memorabilia 2.1.21-34, he was visited by two nymphsPleasure and Virtuewho offered him a choice between a pleasant and easy life or a severe but glorious life: he chose the latter. This was part of a pattern of "ethicizing" Heracles over the 5th century BC. Andrew Ford, Aristotle as Poet, Oxford, 2011, p. 208 n. 5, citing, in addition to Prodicus/Xenophon, Antisthenes, Herodorus (esp. FGrHist 31 F 14), and (in the 4th century) Plato's use of "Heracles as a figure for Socrates' life (and death?): Apology 22a, cf. Theaetetus 175a, Lysis 205c." 

Later in Thebes, Heracles married King Creon's daughter, Megara. In a fit of madness, induced by Hera, Heracles killed his children by Megara. After his madness had been cured with hellebore by Antikyreus, the founder of Antikyra, Pausanias  3.1, 36.5. Ptolemaeus, Geogr. Hyph.  184. 12. Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v. A he realized what he had done and fled to the Oracle of Delphi. Unbeknownst to him, the Oracle was guided by Hera. He was directed to serve King Eurystheus for ten years and perform any task Eurystheus required of him. Eurystheus decided to give Heracles ten labours, but after completing them, Heracles was cheated by Eurystheus when he added two more, resulting in the Twelve Labors of Heracles.

===Labours of Heracles===
The fight of Heracles and the Nemean lion is one of his most famous feats. (Side B from an black-figure Attic amphora, c. 540 BCE)
His 11th feat was to capture the apple of Hesperides (Gilded bronze, Roman artwork, 2nd century CE)

Driven mad by Hera, Heracles slew his own children. To expiate the crime, Heracles was required to carry out ten labors set by his archenemy, Eurystheus, who had become king in Heracles' place. If he succeeded, he would be purified of his sin and, as myth says, he would be granted immortality. Heracles accomplished these tasks, but Eurystheus did not accept the cleansing of the Augean stables because Heracles was going to accept pay for the labor. Neither did he accept the killing of the Lernaean Hydra as Heracles' nephew, Iolaus, had helped him burn the stumps of the heads. Eurysteus set two more tasks (fetching the Golden Apples of Hesperides and capturing Cerberus), which Heracles performed successfully, bringing the total number of tasks up to twelve.

Not all writers gave the labors in the same order. The Bibliotheca (2.5.1-2.5.12) gives the following order:
# Slay the Nemean Lion.
# Slay the nine-headed Lernaean Hydra.
# Capture the Golden Hind of Artemis.
# Capture the Erymanthian Boar.
# Clean the Augean stables in a single day.
# Slay the Stymphalian Birds.
# Capture the Cretan Bull.
# Steal the Mares of Diomedes.
# Obtain the girdle of Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons.
# Obtain the cattle of the monster Geryon.
# Steal the apples of the Hesperides (He had the help of Atlas to pick them after Hercules had slain Ladon).
# Capture and bring back Cerberus.

===Further adventures===
After completing these tasks, Heracles joined the Argonauts in a search for the Golden Fleece. He also fell in love with Princess Iole of Oechalia. King Eurytus of Oechalia promised his daughter, Iole, to whoever could beat his sons in an archery contest. Heracles won but Eurytus abandoned his promise. Heracles' advances were spurned by the king and his sons, except for one: Iole's brother Iphitus. Heracles killed the king and his sonsexcluding Iphitusand abducted Iole. Iphitus became Heracles' best friend. However, once again, Hera drove Heracles mad and he threw Iphitus over the city wall to his death. Once again, Heracles purified himself through three years of servitudethis time to Queen Omphale of Lydia.

===Omphale===

Omphale was a queen or princess of Lydia. As penalty for a murder, imposed by Xenoclea, the Delphic Oracle, Heracles was to serve as her slave for a year. He was forced to do women's work and to wear women's clothes, while she wore the skin of the Nemean Lion and carried his olive-wood club. After some time, Omphale freed Heracles and married him. Some sources mention a son born to them who is variously named. It was at that time that the cercopes, mischievous wood spirits, stole Heracles' weapons. He punished them by tying them to a stick with their faces pointing downward.

===Hylas===
While walking through the wilderness, Heracles was set upon by the Dryopes. In Apollonius of Rhodes' Argonautica it is recalled that Heracles had mercilessly slain their king, Theiodamas, over one of the latter's bulls, and made war upon the Dryopes "because they gave no heed to justice in their lives". Richard Hunter, translator, Jason and the Golden Fleece (Oxford:Clarendon Press), 1993, p 31f. After the death of their king, the Dryopes gave in and offered him Prince Hylas. He took the youth on as his weapons bearer and beloved. Years later, Heracles and Hylas joined the crew of the Argo. As Argonauts, they only participated in part of the journey. In Mysia, Hylas was kidnapped by the nymphs of a local spring. Heracles, heartbroken, searched for a long time but Hylas had fallen in love with the nymphs and never showed up again. In other versions, he simply drowned. Either way, the Argo set sail without them.

===Rescue of Prometheus===
Hesiod's Theogony and Aeschylus' Prometheus Unbound both tell that Heracles shot and killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus (which was his punishment by Zeus for stealing fire from the gods and giving it to mortals). Heracles freed the Titan from his chains and his torments. Prometheus then made predictions regarding further deeds of Heracles.

===Heracles' constellation===
On his way back to Mycenae from Iberia, having obtained the Cattle of Geryon as his tenth labour, Heracles came to Liguria in North-Western Italy where he engaged into battle with two giants, Albion and Bergion or Dercynus, sons of Poseidon. The opponents were strong; Hercules was in a difficult position so he prayed to his father Zeus for help. Under the aegis of Zeus, Heracles won the battle. It was this kneeling position of Heracles when he prayed to his father Zeus that gave the name Engonasin ("", derived from ), meaning "on his knees" or "the Kneeler",
to the constellation known as Heracles' constellation. The story, among others, is described by Dionysius of Halicarnassus. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, i. 41 

===Heracles' sack of Troy===
Before Homer's Trojan War, Heracles had made another expedition on Troy and sacked it. Previously, Poseidon had sent a sea monster to attack Troy. The story is related in several digressions in the Iliad (7.451-453, 20.145-148, 21.442-457) and is found in Apollodorus' Bibliotheke (2.5.9). This expedition became the theme of the Eastern pediment of the Temple of Aphaea. Laomedon planned on sacrificing his daughter Hesione to Poseidon in the hope of appeasing him. Heracles happened to arrive (along with Telamon and Oicles) and agreed to kill the monster if Laomedon would give him the horses received from Zeus as compensation for Zeus' kidnapping Ganymede. Laomedon agreed. Heracles killed the monster, but Laomedon went back on his word. Accordingly, in a later expedition, Heracles and his followers attacked Troy and sacked it. Then they slew all Laomedon's sons present there save Podarces, who was renamed Priam, who saved his own life by giving Heracles a golden veil Hesione had made. Telamon took Hesione as a war prize; they were married and had a son, Teucer.

===Other adventures===

* Heracles defeated the Bebryces (ruled by King Mygdon) and gave their land to Prince Lycus of Mysia, son of Dascylus.
* He killed the robber Termerus.
* Heracles visited Evander with Antor, who then stayed in Italy.
* Heracles killed King Amyntor of the Dolopes for not allowing him into his kingdom. He also killed King Emathion of Arabia.
* Heracles killed Lityerses after beating him in a contest of harvesting.
* Heracles killed Periclymenus at Pylos.
* Heracles killed Syleus for forcing strangers to hoe a vineyard.
* Heracles rivaled with Lepreus and eventually killed him.
* Heracles founded the city Tarentum (modern Taranto in Italy).
* Heracles learned music from Linus (and Eumolpus), but killed him after Linus corrected his mistakes. He learned how to wrestle from Autolycus. He killed the famous boxer Eryx of Sicily in a match.
* Heracles was an Argonaut. He killed Alastor and his brothers.
Heracles killing the giant Antaeus
* When Hippocoon overthrew his brother, Tyndareus, as King of Sparta, Heracles reinstated the rightful ruler and killed Hippocoon and his sons.
* Heracles killed Cycnus, the son of Ares. The expedition against Cycnus, in which Iolaus accompanied Heracles, is the ostensible theme of a short epic attributed to Hesiod, Shield of Heracles.
* Heracles killed the Giants Alcyoneus and Porphyrion.
* Heracles killed Antaeus the giant who was immortal while touching the earth, by picking him up and holding him in the air while strangling him.
* Heracles went to war with Augeias after he denied him a promised reward for clearing his stables. Augeias remained undefeated due to the skill of his two generals, the Molionides, and after Heracles fell ill, his army was badly beaten. Later, however, he was able to ambush and kill the Molionides, and thus march into Elis, sack it, and kill Augeias and his sons.
* Heracles visited the house of Admetus on the day Admetus' wife, Alcestis, had agreed to die in his place. By hiding beside the grave of Alcestis, Heracles was able to surprise Death when he came to collect her, and by squeezing him tight until he relented, was able to persuade Death to return Alcestis to her husband.
* Heracles challenged wine god Dionysus to a drinking contest and lost, resulting in his joining the Thiasus for a period.
* Heracles also appears in Aristophanes' The Frogs, in which Dionysus seeks out the hero to find a way to the underworld. Heracles is greatly amused by Dionysus' appearance and jokingly offers several ways to commit suicide before finally offering his knowledge of how to get to there.
* Heracles appears as the ancestral hero of Scythia in Herodotus' text. While Heracles is sleeping out in the wilderness, a half-woman, half-snake creature steals his horses. Heracles eventually finds the creature, but she refuses to return the horses until he has sex with her. After doing so, he takes back his horses, but before leaving, he hands over his belt and bow, and gives instructions as to which of their children should found a new nation in Scythia.

===Lovers===

====Women====

=====Marriages=====
The topos of Heracles suckling at Hera's breast was especially popular in Magna Graecia, here on a mid-4th-century Apulian painted vase; Etruscan mythology adopted this iconic image

During the course of his life, Heracles married four times. His first marriage was to Megara, whose children he murdered in a fit of madness. Apollodoros (Bibliotheke) recounts that Megara was unharmed and given in marriage to Iolaus, while in Euripides' version Heracles killed Megara, too.

His second wife was Omphale, the Lydian queen or princess to whom he was delivered as a slave.

His third marriage was to Deianira, for whom he had to fight the river god Achelous (upon Achelous' death, Heracles removed one of his horns and gave it to some nymphs who turned it into the cornucopia.) Soon after they wed, Heracles and Deianira had to cross a river, and a centaur named Nessus offered to help Deianira across but then attempted to rape her. Enraged, Heracles shot the centaur from the opposite shore with a poisoned arrow (tipped with the Lernaean Hydra's blood) and killed him. As he lay dying, Nessus plotted revenge, told Deianira to gather up his blood and spilled semen and, if she ever wanted to prevent Heracles from having affairs with other women, she should apply them to his vestments. Nessus knew that his blood had become tainted by the poisonous blood of the Hydra, and would burn through the skin of anyone it touched.

Later, when Deianira suspected that Heracles was fond of Iole, she soaked a shirt of his in the mixture, creating the poisoned shirt of Nessus. Heracles' servant, Lichas, brought him the shirt and he put it on. Instantly he was in agony, the cloth burning into him. As he tried to remove it, the flesh ripped from his bones. Heracles chose a voluntary death, asking that a pyre be built for him to end his suffering. After death, the gods transformed him into an immortal, or alternatively, the fire burned away the mortal part of the demigod, so that only the god remained. After his mortal parts had been incinerated, he could become a full god and join his father and the other Olympians on Mount Olympus. He then married Hebe, his fourth and last wife.

=====Affairs=====
Another episode of his female affairs that stands out was his stay at the palace of Thespius king of Thespiae, who wished him to kill the Lion of Cithaeron. As a reward, the king offered him the chance to make love to his daughters, all fifty of them, in one night. Heracles complied and they all became pregnant and all bore sons. This is sometimes referred to as his Thirteenth Labour. Many of the kings of ancient Greece traced their lines to one or another of these, notably the kings of Sparta and Macedon.

Yet another episode of his female affairs that stands out was when he carried away the oxen of Geryon, he also visited the country of the Scythians. Once while he was asleep there, his horses suddenly disappeared, and when he woke and wandered about in search of them, he came into the country of Hylaea. He there found the dracaena of Scythia (sometimes identified as Echidna) in a cave. When he asked whether she knew anything about his horses, she answered, that they were in her own possession, but that she would not give them up, unless he would consent to stay with her for a time. Heracles accepted the request, and became by her the father of Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythes. The last of them became king of the Scythians, according to his father's arrangement, because he was the only one among the three brothers that was able to manage the bow which Heracles had left behind, and to use his father's girdle. Herodotus, Histories IV. 8-10. 

====Men====
Heracles and Iolaus (Fountain mosaic from the Anzio Nymphaeum)
As symbol of masculinity and warriorship, Heracles also had a number of male lovers. Plutarch, in his Eroticos, maintains that Heracles' male lovers were beyond counting. Of these, the one most closely linked to Heracles is the Theban Iolaus. According to a myth thought to be of ancient origins, Iolaus was Heracles' charioteer and squire. Heracles in the end helped Iolaus find a wife. Plutarch reports that down to his own time, male couples would go to Iolaus's tomb in Thebes to swear an oath of loyalty to the hero and to each other. Plutarch, Erotikos, 761d.The tomb of Iolaus is also mentioned by Pindar. Pindar, Olympian Odes, 9.98-99. 

One of Heracles' male lovers, and one represented in ancient as well as modern art, is Hylas. Though it is of more recent vintage (dated to the 3rd century) than that with Iolaus, it had themes of mentoring in the ways of a warrior and help finding a wife in the end. However it should be noted that there is nothing whatever in Apollonius's account that suggests that Hylas was a sexual lover as opposed to a companion and servant. Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica, 1.1177-1357; Theocritus, Idyll 13. 

Another reputed male lover of Heracles is Elacatas, who was honored in Sparta with a sanctuary and yearly games, Elacatea. The myth of their love is an ancient one. Sosibius, in Hesychius of Alexandria's Lexicon 

Abdera's eponymous hero, Abderus, was another of Heracles' lovers. He was said to have been entrusted withand slain bythe carnivorous mares of Thracian Diomedes. Heracles founded the city of Abdera in Thrace in his memory, where he was honored with athletic games. Bibliotheca 2.5.8; Ptolemaeus Chennus, 147b, in Photius' Bibliotheca 

Another myth is that of Iphitus. Ptolemaeus Chennus, in Photius' Bibliotheca 

Another story is the one of his love for Nireus, who was "the most beautiful man who came beneath Ilion" (Iliad, 673). But Ptolemy adds that certain authors made Nireus out to be a son of Heracles. Ptolemaeus Chennus, 147b. 

Pausanias makes mention of Sostratus, a youth of Dyme, Achaea, as a lover of Heracles. Sostratus was said to have died young and to have been buried by Heracles outside the city. The tomb was still there in historical times, and the inhabitants of Dyme honored Sostratus as a hero. Pausanias, Description of Greece, 7. 17. 8 The youth seems to have also been referred to as Polystratus.

There is also a series of lovers who are either later inventions or purely literary conceits. Among these are Admetus, who assisted in the hunt for the Calydonian Boar; Plutarch, Erotikos, 761e. Adonis; Ptolemaeus Chennus Corythus; and Nestor, who was said to have been loved for his wisdom. His role as lover was perhaps to explain why he was the only son of Neleus to be spared by the hero. Ptolemaeus Chennus, 147e; Philostratus, Heroicus 696, per Sergent, 1986, p. 163. 

A scholiast on Argonautica lists the following male lovers of Heracles: "Hylas, Philoctetes, Diomus, Perithoas, and Phrix, after whom a city in Libya was named". Scholia on Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica, 1. 1207 Diomus is also mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium as the eponym of the deme Diomeia of the Attic phyle Aegeis: Heracles is said to have fallen in love with Diomus when he was received as guest by Diomus' father Collytus. Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Diomeia Perithoas and Phrix are otherwise unknown, and so is the version that suggests a sexual relationship between Heracles and Philoctetes.

===Children===

Heracles and his child Telephus. (Marble, Roman copy of the 1st or 2nd century CE)
All of Heracles' marriages and almost all of his heterosexual affairs resulted in births of a number of sons and at least four daughters.
One of the most prominent is Hyllus, the son of Heracles and Deianeira or Melite. The term Heracleidae, although it could refer to all of Heracles' children and further descendants, is most commonly used to indicate the descendants of Hyllus, in the context of their lasting struggle for return to Peloponnesus, out of where Hyllus and his brothers - the children of Heracles by Deianeira - were thought to have been expelled by Eurystheus.

The children of Heracles by Megara are collectively well known because of their ill fate, but there is some disagreement among sources as to their number and individual names. Apollodorus lists three, Therimachus, Creontiades and Deicoon; Apollodorus, Bibliotheca, 2. 4. 11 = 2. 7. 8 to these Hyginus Fabulae 162 adds Ophitus and, probably by mistake, Archelaus, who is otherwise known to have belonged to the Heracleidae, but to have lived several generations later. A scholiast on Pindar' s odes provides a list of seven completely different names: Anicetus, Chersibius, Mecistophonus, Menebrontes, Patrocles, Polydorus, Toxocleitus. Scholia on Pindar, Isthmian Ode 3 (4), 104 

The divine sons of Heracles and Hebe are Alexiares and Anicetus.

Other well-known children of Heracles include Telephus, king of Mysia (by Auge), and Tlepolemus, one of the Greek commanders in the Trojan War (by Astyoche).

There is also, in some versions, reference to an episode where Heracles met and impregnated a half-serpentine woman, known as Echidna; her children, known as the Dracontidae, were the ancestors of the House of Cadmus.

According to Herodotus, a line of 22 Kings of Lydia descended from Hercules and Omphale. The line was called Tylonids after his Lydian name.

====Children and consorts====

#Megara
##Therimachus
##Creontiades
##Ophitus
##Deicoon
#Omphale
##Agelaus
##Tyrsenus
#Deianira
##Hyllus
##Ctesippus
##Glenus
##Oneites
##Macaria
#Hebe
##Alexiares
##Anicetus
#Astydameia, daughter of Ormenius
##Ctesippus
#Astyoche, daughter of Phylas
## Tlepolemus
#Auge
##Telephus
#Autonoe, daughter of Piraeus / Iphinoe, daughter of Antaeus
##Palaemon
#Baletia, daughter of Baletus
##Brettus Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Brettos 
#Barge
##Bargasus Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Bargasa 
#Bolbe
##Olynthus
#Celtine
##Celtus
#Chalciope
##Thessalus
#Chania, nymph
## Gelon Servius on Virgil's Georgics 2. 115 
#The Scythian dracaena or Echidna
##Agathyrsus
##Gelonus
##Skythes
#Epicaste
## Thestalus
#Lavinia, daughter of Evander Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, 1. 43. 1 
## Pallas
# Malis, a slave of Omphale
## Acelus Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Akels 
#Meda
##Antiochus
# Melite (heroine)
# Melite (naiad)
## Hyllus (possibly)
#Myrto
##Eucleia
#Palantho of Hyperborea Solinus, De mirabilia mundi, 1. 15 
##Latinus 
#Parthenope, daughter of Stymphalus
##Everes
#Phialo
##Aechmagoras
#Psophis
##Echephron
##Promachus
#Pyrene
## none known
#Rhea, Italian priestess
##Aventinus Virgil, Aeneid, 7. 655 ff 
# Thebe (daughter of Adramys)
#Tinge, wife of Antaeus
##Sophax Plutarch, Life of Sertorius, 9. 4 
#50 daughters of Thespius
## 50 sons, see Thespius#Daughters and grandchildren
#Unnamed Celtic woman
##Galates Diodorus Siculus, Library of History, 5. 24. 2 
#Unnamed slave of Omphale
##Alcaeus / Cleodaeus
#Unnamed daughter of Syleus (Xenodoce?) So Conon, Narrationes, 17. In Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 2. 6. 3 a daughter of Syleus, Xenodoce, is killed by Heracles 
#Unknown consorts
##Agylleus Statius, Thebaid, 6. 837, 10. 249 
##Amathous Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Amathous 
##Azon Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Gaza 
##Chromis Statius, Thebaid, 6. 346 
## Cyrnus Servius on Virgil's Eclogue 9. 30 
##Dexamenus Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, 1. 50. 4 
##Leucites Hyginus, Fabulae, 162 
##Manto
## Pandaie
## Phaestus or Rhopalus In Stephanus of Byzantium s. v. Phaistos, Rhopalus is the son of Heracles and Phaestus his own son; in Pausanias, Description of Greece, 2. 6. 7, vice versa (Phaestus son, Rhopalus grandson) 

===Death===
Hercules killing Centaur Nessus (marble by Giambologna, Florence)

This is described in Ovid's Metamorphoses Book IX. Having wrestled and defeated Achelous, god of the Acheloos river, Heracles takes Deianira as his wife. Travelling to Tiryns, a centaur, Nessus, offers to help Deianira across a fast flowing river while Heracles swims it. However, Nessus is true to the archetype of the mischievous centaur and tries to steal Deianira away while Heracles is still in the water. Angry, Heracles shoots him with his arrows dipped in the poisonous blood of the Lernaean Hydra. Thinking of revenge, Nessus gives Deianira his blood-soaked tunic before he dies, telling her it will "excite the love of her husband". Ovid, Metamorphoses, IX l.132-3 

Several years later, rumor tells Deianira that she has a rival for the love of Heracles. Deianira, remembering Nessus' words, gives Heracles the bloodstained shirt. Lichas, the herald, delivers the shirt to Heracles. However, it is still covered in the Hydra's blood from Heracles' arrows, and this poisons him, tearing his skin and exposing his bones. Before he dies, Heracles throws Lichas into the sea, thinking he was the one who poisoned him (according to several versions, Lichas turns to stone, becoming a rock standing in the sea, named for him). Heracles then uproots several trees and builds a funeral pyre, which Poeas, father of Philoctetes, lights. As his body burns, only his immortal side is left. Through Zeus' apotheosis, Heracles rises to Olympus as he dies.

No one but Heracles' friend Philoctetes (Poeas in some versions) would light his funeral pyre (in an alternate version, it is Iolaus who lights the pyre). For this action, Philoctetes or Poeas received Heracles' bow and arrows, which were later needed by the Greeks to defeat Troy in the Trojan War.
Philoctetes confronted Paris and shot a poisoned arrow at him. The Hydra poison would subsequently lead to the death of Paris. The Trojan War, however, would continue until the Trojan Horse was used to defeat Troy.

According to Herodotus, Heracles lived 900 years before Herodotus' own time (c. 1300 BCE). Herodotus, Histories II.145 

==Hercules in Rome==

In Rome, Heracles was honored as Hercules, and had a number of distinctively Roman myths and practices associated with him under that name.

==Heracles in other cultures==
Hellenistic-era depiction of the Zoroastrian divinity Bahram as Hercules carved in 153 BC at Kermanshah, Iran.
The protector Vajrapani of the Buddha is another incarnation of Heracles (Gandhara, 1st century CE)

Via the Greco-Buddhist culture, Heraclean symbolism was transmitted to the far east. An example remains to this day in the Nio guardian deities in front of Japanese Buddhist temples. Herodotus connected Heracles both to Phoenician god Melqart and to the Egyptian god Shu. Also he was associated with Khonsu, another Egyptian god.

Temples dedicated to Heracles abounded all along the Mediterranean coastal countries. For example the temple of Heracles Monoikos (i.e. the lone dweller), built far from any nearby town upon a promontory in what is now the Cte d'Azur, gave its name to the area's more recent name, Monaco.

The gateway to the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean, where the southernmost tip of Spain and the northernmost of Morocco face each other, is, classically speaking, referred to as the Pillars of Hercules/Heracles, owing to the story that he set up two massive spires of stone to stabilise the area and ensure the safety of ships sailing between the two landmasses.

==Spoken word myths==
Bibliography of reconstruction: Homer, Odyssey, 12.072 (7th century BC); Theocritus, Idylls, 13 (350310 BC); Callimachus, Aetia (Causes), 24. Thiodamas the Dryopian, Fragments, 160. Hymn to Artemis (310250? BC); Apollonios Rhodios, Argonautika, I. 1175 - 1280 (c. 250 BC); Bibliotheca 1.9.19, 2.7.7 (140 BC); Sextus Propertius, Elegies, i.20.17ff (5015 BC); Ovid, Ibis, 488 (AD 818); Gaius Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica, I.110, III.535, 560, IV.1-57 (1st century); Hyginus, Fables, 14. Argonauts Assembled (1st century); Philostratus the Elder, Images, ii.24 Thiodamas (170245); First Vatican Mythographer, 49. Hercules et Hylas

==Ancestry Morford, M.P.O, Lenardon R.J.(2007)Classical Mythology. pp. 865 Oxford: Oxford University Press. ==

==See also==

; Other figures in Greek mythology punished by the gods include:
* Atlas
* Ixion
* Medusa
* Prometheus
* Sisyphus
* Tantalus
* The Danaides

; Figures resembling Heracles in other mythological traditions:
* Agilaz
* Beowulf
* Samson

==Notes==

==References==
* Heracles at Theoi.com Classical literature and art
* Timeless Myths  Heracles The life and adventure of Heracles, including his twelve labours.
* Heracles, Greek Mythology Link
* Heracles (in French)
* Vollmer: Herkules (1836, in German)
* Burkert, Walter, (1977) 1985. Greek Religion (Harvard University Press).
* 

==Further reading==
* Padilla, Mark W. (1998). "Herakles and Animals in the Origins of Comedy and Satyr Drama". In Le Bestiaire d'Hracls: IIIe Rencontre hraclenne, edited by Corinne Bonnet, Colette Jourdain-Annequin, and Vinciane Pirenne-Delforge, 217-30. Kernos Suppl. 7. Lige: Centre International d'Etude de la Religion Grecque Antique.
* Padilla, Mark W. (1998). "The Myths of Herakles in Ancient Greece: Survey and Profile". Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America.

==External links==

Heracles



[[Henry Rollins]]

Henry Rollins (born Henry Lawrence Garfield; February 13, 1961) is an American musician, writer, journalist, publisher, actor, radio host, spoken word artist, and activist. He is now hosting a radio show and doing speaking tours. 

After performing for the short-lived Washington D.C.-based band State of Alert in 1980, Rollins fronted the California hardcore punk band Black Flag from August 1981 until mid-1986. Following the band's breakup, Rollins established the record label and publishing company 2.13.61 to release his spoken word albums, as well as forming the Rollins Band, which toured with a number of lineups from 1987 until 2003, and during 2006.

Since Black Flag disbanded, Rollins has hosted numerous radio shows, such as Harmony in My Head on Indie 103, and television shows such as The Henry Rollins Show, MTV's 120 Minutes, and Jackass. He had a recurring dramatic role in the second season of Sons of Anarchy and has also had roles in several films. Rollins has also campaigned for various political causes in the United States, including promoting LGBT rights, World Hunger Relief, and an end to war in particular.

==Early life==
Rollins was born Henry Lawrence Garfield in Washington, D.C, the only child of Iris and Paul Garfield. The Los Angeles Times, The Angriest Man in Los Angeles : Rock Poet Henry Rollins Doesn't Drink, Smoke or Do Drugs--He Just Burns, June 14, 1987 When he was three years old, his parents divorced and he was raised by his mother in Glover Park, which was then an affluent neighborhood of Washington. J. Parker, Turned On: A Biography of Henry Rollins, 2000 

As a child and teenager, Rollins suffered from depression and low self-esteem. Azerrad, Michael. Band Could Be Your Life|Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes from the American Indie Underground, 19811991]. Little Brown and Company, 2001. ISBN 0-316-78753-1. p. 25 In the fourth grade, he was diagnosed with hyperactivity and took Ritalin for several years so that he could focus during school. He attended The Bullis School, then an all-male preparatory school in Potomac, Maryland. 

According to Rollins, the Bullis School helped him to develop a sense of discipline and a strong work ethic. It was at Bullis that he began writing. In 1987, Rollins said he had not seen his father since he was 18. 

==Music career==

===State of Alert===

After high school, Rollins attended American University in Washington D.C. for one semester, but dropped out in December 1979. He began working minimum-wage jobs, including a job as a courier for liver samples at the National Institutes of Health. Rollins developed an interest in punk rock after he and his friend Ian MacKaye procured a copy of The Ramones's eponymous debut album; he later described it as a "revelation." From 1979 to 1980, Rollins was working as a roadie for Washington bands, including Teen Idles. When the band's singer Nathan Strejcek failed to appear for practice sessions, Rollins convinced the Teen Idles to let him sing. Word of Rollins's ability spread around the punk rock scene in Washington; Bad Brains singer H.R. would sometimes get Rollins on stage to sing with him. Azerrad, 2001. p. 26 

In 1980, the Washington punk band The Extorts lost their frontman Lyle Preslar to Minor Threat. Rollins joined the rest of the band to form State of Alert, and became its frontman and vocalist. He put words to the band's five songs and wrote several more. S.O.A. recorded their sole EP, No Policy, and released it in 1981 on MacKaye's Dischord Records. S.O.A. disbanded after a total of a dozen concerts and one EP. Rollins had enjoyed being the band's frontman, and had earned a reputation for fighting in shows. He later said: "I was like nineteen and a young man all full of steam Loved to get in the dust-ups." By this time, Rollins had become the manager of the Georgetown Hagen-Dazs ice cream store; his steady employment had helped to finance the S.O.A. EP. Azerrad, 2001. p. 27 

===Black Flag===

In 1980, a friend gave Rollins and MacKaye a copy of Black Flag's Nervous Breakdown EP. Rollins soon became a fan of the band, exchanging letters with bassist Chuck Dukowski and later inviting the band to stay in his parents' home when Black Flag toured the East Coast in December 1980. Azzerad, 2001. p. 27-28 When Black Flag returned to the East Coast in 1981, Rollins attended as many of their concerts as he could. At an impromptu show in a New York bar, Black Flag's vocalist Dez Cadena allowed Rollins to sing "Clocked In", as Rollins had a five-hour drive back to Washington, D.C., to return to work after the performance. Azerrad, 2001. p. 28 

Unbeknownst to Rollins, Cadena wanted to switch to guitar, and the band was looking for a new vocalist. The band was impressed with Rollins' singing and stage demeanor, and the next day, after a semi-formal audition at Tu Casa Studio in NYC, they asked him to become their permanent vocalist. Despite some doubts, he accepted, in part because of MacKaye's encouragement. His high level of energy and intense personality suited the band's style, but Rollins' diverse tastes in music were a key factor in his being selected as singer; Black Flag's founder Greg Ginn was growing restless creatively and wanted a singer who was willing to move beyond simple, three-chord punk. Azerrad, 2001. p. 29 

The band's logo was created by artist Raymond Pettibon
After joining Black Flag in 1981, Rollins quit his job at Hagen-Dazs, sold his car, and moved to Los Angeles. Upon arriving in Los Angeles, Rollins got the Black Flag logo tattooed on his left biceps and chose the stage name of Rollins, a surname he and MacKaye had used as teenagers. Rollins played his first show with Black Flag on August 21, 1981 at Cuckoo's Nest in Costa Mesa, California. Rollins was in a different environment in Los Angeles; the police soon realized he was a member of Black Flag, and he was hassled as a result. Rollins later said: "That really scared me. It freaked me out that an adult would do that. My little eyes were opened big time." Azerrad, 2001. p. 31 

Before concerts, as the rest of the band tuned up, Rollins would stride about the stage dressed only in a pair of black shorts, grinding his teeth; to focus before the show, he would squeeze a pool ball. Azerrad, 2001. p. 34 His stage persona impressed several critics; after a 1982 show in Anacortes, Washington, Sub Pop critic Calvin Johnson wrote: "Henry was incredible. Pacing back and forth, lunging, lurching, growling; it was all real, the most intense emotional experiences I have ever seen." Azerrad, 2001. p. 38 

By 1983, Rollins' stage persona was increasingly alienating him from the rest of Black Flag. During a show in England, Rollins assaulted a member of the audience, who attacked Ginn; Ginn later scolded Rollins, calling him a "macho asshole." Azerrad, 2001. p. 39 A legal dispute with Unicorn Records held up further Black Flag releases until 1984, and Ginn was slowing the band's tempo down so that they would remain innovative. In August 1983, guitarist Dez Cadena had left the band; a stalemate lingered between Dukowski and Ginn, who wanted Dukowski to leave, before Ginn fired Dukowski outright. Azerrad, 2001. p. 41 1984's heavy metal music-influenced My War featured Rollins screaming and wailing throughout many of the songs; the band's members also grew their hair to confuse the band's hardcore punk audience. Azerrad, 2001. p. 47 

Black Flag's change in musical style and appearance alienated many of their original fans, who focused their displeasure on Rollins by punching him in the mouth, stabbing him with pens, or scratching him with their nails, among other methods. He often fought back, dragging audience members on stage and assaulting them. Rollins became increasingly alienated from the audience; in his tour diary, Rollins wrote "When they spit at me, when they grab at me, they aren't hurting me. When I push out and mangle the flesh of another, it's falling so short of what I really want to do to them." Azerrad, 2001. p. 46 During the Unicorn legal dispute, Rollins had started a weight-lifting program, and by their 1984 tours, he had become visibly well-built; journalist Michael Azerrad later commented that "his powerful physique was a metaphor for the impregnable emotional shield he was developing around himself." Rollins has since replied that "no, the training was just basically a way to push myself." 

===Rollins Band and solo releases===

Rollins performing with the Rollins Band in 1993
Before Black Flag disbanded in August 1986, Rollins had already toured as a solo spoken word artist. He released two solo records in 1987, Hot Animal Machine, a collaboration with guitarist Chris Haskett, and Drive by Shooting, recorded as "Henrietta Collins and the Wifebeating Childhaters"; Rollins also released his second spoken word album, Big Ugly Mouth in the same year. Along with Haskett, Rollins soon added Andrew Weiss and Sim Cain, both former members of Ginn's side-project Gone, and called the new group Rollins Band. The band toured relentlessly, and their 1987 debut album, Life Time, was quickly followed by the outtakes and live collection Do It. The band continued to tour throughout 1988; 1989 marked the release of another Rollins Band album, Hard Volume. Another live album, Turned On, and another spoken word release, Live at McCabe's, followed in 1990.

1991 saw the Rollins Band sign a distribution deal with Imago Records and appear at the Lollapalooza festival; both improved the band's presence. However, in December 1991, Rollins and his best friend Joe Cole were accosted by two armed robbers outside Rollins's home. Cole was murdered by a gunshot to the head, Rollins escaped without injury but police initially suspected him in the murder and detained him for ten hours. Although traumatized by Cole's death, as chronicled in his book Now Watch Him Die, Rollins continued to release new material; the spoken-word album Human Butt appeared in 1992 on his own record label, 2.13.61. The Rollins Band released The End of Silence, Rollins's first charting album. 

The following year, Rollins released a spoken-word double album, The Boxed Life. The Rollins Band embarked upon the End of Silence tour; bassist Weiss was fired towards its end and replaced by funk and jazz bassist Melvin Gibbs. According to critic Steve Huey, 1994 was Rollins's "breakout year". The Rollins Band appeared at Woodstock 94 and released Weight, which ranked on the Billboard Top 40. Rollins released in the Van|Get in the Van: On the Road with Black Flag], a double-disc set of him reading from his Black Flag tour diary of the same name; he won the Grammy for Best Spoken Word Recording as a result. Rollins was named 1994's "Man of the Year" by the American men's magazine Details and became a contributing columnist to the magazine. With the increased exposure, Rollins made several appearances on American music channels MTV and VH1 around this time, and made his Hollywood film debut in 1994 in The Chase playing a police officer. 

In 1995, the Rollins Band's record label, Imago Records, declared itself bankrupt. Rollins began focusing on his spoken word career. He released Everything, a recording of a chapter of his book Eye Scream with free jazz backing, in 1996. He continued to appear in various films, including Heat, Johnny Mnemonic and Lost Highway. The Rollins Band signed to Dreamworks Records in 1997 and soon released Come in and Burn, but it did not receive as much critical acclaim as their previous material. Rollins continued to release spoken-word book readings, releasing Black Coffee Blues in the same year. In 1998, Rollins released Think Tank, his first set of non-book-related spoken material in five years.

By 1998, Rollins felt that the relationship with his backing band had run its course, and the line-up disbanded. He had produced a Los Angeles hard rock band called Mother Superior, and invited them to form a new incarnation of the Rollins Band. Their first album, Get Some Go Again, was released two years later. The Rollins Band released several more albums, including 2001's Nice and 2003's . After 2003, the band became inactive as Rollins focused on radio and television work. During a 2006 appearance on Tom Green Live!, Rollins stated that he "may never do music again" a feeling which he reiterated in 2011 when talking to Trebuchet magazine. In an interview with Culture Brats, Henry admitted he had sworn off music for good  "... and I must say that I miss it every day. I just don't know honestly what I could do with it that's different." 

===Musical style===
As a vocalist, Rollins has adopted a number of styles through the years. Rollins was initially noted in the Washington, D.C. hardcore scene for what journalist Michael Azerrad described as a "compelling, raspy howl." With State of Alert, Rollins "spat out the lyrics like a bellicose auctioneer." He adopted a similar style after joining Black Flag in 1981. By their album Damaged, however, Black Flag began to incorporate a swing beat into their style. Rollins then abandoned his S.O.A. "bark" and adopted the band's swing. Azerrad, 2001. p. 32 Rollins later explained: "What I was doing kind of matched the vibe of the music. The music was intense and, well, I was as intense as you needed." Azerrad, 2001. p. 33 

In both incarnations of the Rollins Band, Rollins combined spoken word with his traditional vocal style in songs such as "Liar" (the song begins with a one-minute spoken diatribe by Rollins), as well as barking his way through songs (such as "Tearing" and "Starve") and employing the loud-quiet dynamic. Rolling Stone's Anthony DeCurtis names Rollins a "screeching hate machine" and his "hallmark" as "the sheets-of-sound assault". 

With the Rollins Band, his lyrics focused "almost exclusively on issues relating to personal integrity," according to critic Geoffrey Welchman. 

===As producer===
In the 1980s, Henry Rollins produced an album of acoustic songs for the famed convict Charles Manson titled Completion. The record was supposed to be released by SST Records, but the project was later canceled due to the label receiving death threats for working with Manson. Only five test presses of Completion were pressed, two of which remain in Rollins' possession. 

==Joe Cole==
Rollins and his best friend Joe Cole were involved in a shooting when they were assaulted by robbers in December 1991 outside their shared Venice Beach, California home where Cole was killed after being shot in the face while Rollins escaped. The murder remains unsolved. 

In a 1992 Los Angeles Times interview Rollins revealed he kept a plastic container full of soil soaked with the blood of Joe Cole. Rollins said "I dug up all the earth where his head fellhe was shot in the faceand I've got all the dirt here, and so Joe Cole's in the house. I say good morning to him every day. I got his phone, too, so I got a direct line to him. So that feels good." 

Rollins went on to include Cole's story in his spoken word performances. 

==Media work==

===Television===
As Rollins rose to prominence with the Rollins Band, he began to present and appear on television. These included Alternative Nation and MTV Sports in 1993 and 1994 respectively. 1995 saw Rollins appear on an episode of Unsolved Mysteries that explored the murder of his best friend Joe Cole and present State of the Union Undressed on Comedy Central. Rollins began to present and narrate VH1 Legends in 1996. Rollins, busy with the Rollins Band, did not present more programs until 2001, but made appearances on a number of other television shows, including Welcome to Paradox in 1998 in the episode "All Our Sins Forgotten", as a therapist that develops a device that can erase the bad memories of his patients. Rollins also voiced Mad Stan in Batman Beyond in 1999 and 2000. 

Rollins was a host of film review programme Henry's Film Corner on the Independent Film Channel, before presenting the weekly The Henry Rollins Show on the channel. The Henry Rollins Show is now being shown weekly on Film24 along with Henry Rollins Uncut. The show also lead to a promotional tour in Europe that led to Henry being dubbed a bad boy goodwill ambassador by a NY reviewer. 

2002 saw Rollins guest star on an episode of the sitcom The Drew Carey Show as a man whom Oswald would find on eBay and pay to come to his house and "kick his ass". He co-hosted the British television show Full Metal Challenge, in which teams built vehicles to compete in various driving and racing contests, from 20022003 on Channel 4 and TLC. He has made a number of cameo appearances in television series such as MTV's Jackass and an episode of Californication, where he played himself hosting a radio show. In 2006, Rollins appeared in a documentary series by VH1 and The Sundance Channel called The Drug Years. 

Rollins appears in FX's Sons of Anarchy's second season, which premiered in the fall of 2009 in the United States. Rollins plays A.J. Weston, a white-supremacist gang leader and new antagonist in the show's fictional town of Charming, California, who poses a deadly threat to the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club. In 2009, Rollins voiced "Trucker" in American Dad!'s fourth season (episode eight). Rollins voiced Benjamin Knox/Bonk in the 2000 animated film . 

In 2010, Rollins appeared as a guest judge on Season 2 episode 6 of RuPaul's Drag Race. 

In 2011, Rollins was interviewed in the National Geographic Explorer episode "Born to Rage", regarding his possible link to the MAO gene (warrior gene) and violent behavior. 

In 2012, Rollins hosted the National Geographic Wild series "Animal Underworld", investigating where the real boundaries lay in human-animal relationships. 

Rollins is currently doing voiceover work in a series of television commercials for Infiniti, the luxury automobile brand. 

On November 2, 2013, Rollins started hosting the show 10 Things You Don't Know About on the History Channel's H2. 

===Radio===
On May 19, 2004, Rollins began hosting a weekly radio show, Harmony in My Head, on Indie 103.1 radio in Los Angeles. The show aired every Monday evening, with Rollins playing music ranging from early rock and jump blues to hard rock, blues rock, folk rock, punk rock, heavy metal and rockabilly, and touching on hip hop, jazz, world music, reggae, classical music and more. Harmony in my Head often emphasizes B-sides, live bootlegs and other rarities, and nearly every episode has featured a song either by the Beastie Boys or British group The Fall.

Rollins put the show on a short hiatus to undertake a spoken-word tour in early 2005. Rollins posted playlists and commentary on-line; these lists were expanded with more information and published in book form as Fanatic! through 2.13.61 in November 2005. In late 2005, Rollins announced the show's return and began the first episode by playing the show's namesake Buzzcocks song. As of 2008, the show continues each week despite Rollins's constant touring with new pre-recorded shows between live broadcasts. In 2009 Indie 103.1 went off the air, although it continues to broadcast over the Internet.

In 2007, Rollins published Fanatic! Vol. 2 through 2.13.61. Fanatic! Vol. 3 was released in the fall of 2008. On February 18, 2009, KCRW announced that Rollins would be hosting a live show on Saturday nights starting March 7, 2009. In 2011 Rollins was interviewed on Episode 121 of American Public Media's podcast, "The Dinner Party Download", posted on November 3, 2011.

===Film===
Rollins began his film career appearing in several independent films featuring the band Black Flag. His film debut was in 1982's The Slog Movie, about the West Coast punk scene. An appearance in 1985's Black Flag Live followed. Rollins' first film appearance without Black Flag was the short film The Right Side of My Brain with Lydia Lunch in 1985. Following the band's breakup, Rollins did not appear in any films until 1994's The Chase. Rollins appeared in the 2007 direct-to-DVD sequel to Wrong Turn (2003), as a retired Marine Corps officer who hosts his own show which tests the contestants' will to survive. Rollins has also appeared in Punk: Attitude, a documentary on the punk scene, and in American Hardcore (2006). In 2012, Henry Rollins appeared in a short documentary entitled "Who Shot Rock and Roll" discussing the early punk scene in Los Angeles as well as photographs of himself in Black Flag taken by esteemed photographer Edward Colver. 

Some feature length movies Henry Rollins has appeared in include:
* Kiss Napoleon Goodbye (1990), with Lydia Lunch and Don Bajema
* The Chase (1994), with Charlie Sheen
* Johnny Mnemonic (1995), with Keanu Reeves, Ice-T and Dolph Lundgren
* Heat (1995), with Al Pacino, Robert De Niro and Val Kilmer
* Lost Highway (1997), with Bill Pullman and Patricia Arquette; directed by David Lynch
* Jack Frost (1998), with Michael Keaton
* (2000), with Kevin Conroy and Mark Hamill
* Morgan's Ferry (2001), with Billy Zane and Kelly McGillis
* Dogtown and Z-Boys (2001 documentary)
* Scenes of the Crime (2001), with Jeff Bridges
* The New Guy (2002), with Tommy Lee and DJ Qualls
* Jackass The Movie (2002) with Johnny Knoxville and Bam Margera
* Bad Boys II (2003) with Will Smith and Martin Lawrence
* Deathdealer: A Documentary (2004)
* Feast (2005), with Balthazar Getty and Navi Rawat
* Jackass Number Two (2006), with Preston Lacy, Steve-O and Chris Pontius
* The Alibi (2006)
* (2007)
* The Devil's Tomb (2009)
* H for Hunger (2009 documentary)
* William Shatner's Gonzo Ballet (2009 documentary)
* Universe Animated Original Movies#Green Lantern: Emerald Knights|Green Lantern: Emerald Knights] (2011) as Kilowog
* West of Memphis (2012 documentary)
* Downloaded (2013 documentary)
* He Never Died (2014) Currently in production. With Steven Ogg and Booboo Stewart 

===Books and audiobooks===
Rollins has written a variety of books, including Black Coffee Blues, Do I Come Here Often?, The First Five (a compilation of High Adventure in the Great Outdoors, Pissing in the Gene Pool, Bang!, Art to Choke Hearts, and One From None), See a Grown Man Cry, Now Watch Him Die, Smile, You're Traveling, Get in the Van, Eye Scream, Broken Summers, Roomanitarian, and Solipsist.

For the audiobook version of the 2006 novel World War Z Rollins voiced the character of T. Sean Collins, a mercenary hired to protect celebrities during a mass panic caused by an onslaught of the undead. Rollins' other audiobook recordings include 3:10 to Yuma and his own autobiographical book Get in the Van, for which he won a Grammy Award.

===Online journalism===
In September 2008, Rollins began contributing to the "Politics & Power" blog at the online version of Vanity Fair magazine. Since March 2009, his posts have appeared under their own sub-title, Straight Talk Espresso. His posts consistently direct harsh criticism at conservative politicians and pundits, although he does occasionally target those on the left. In August 2010, he began writing a music column for LA Weekly, an alternative newspaper in Los Angeles. In 2012, Rollins began publishing articles with The Huffington Post and alternative news website WordswithMeaning!. In the months leading up to the 2012 United States Presidential election, Rollins broadcast a YouTube series called "Capitalism 2012", in which he toured the capital cities of the US states, interviewing people about current issues.

===Spoken word===
Rollins also has toured doing spoken word performances which range from stand up comedy to more introspective commentaries on his childhood, such as the death of his friend, Joe Cole. He also speaks about experiences he's had with eccentric people. Rollins' spoken word style varies greatly, ranging from intense commentaries on society to playful, sometimes vulgar, anecdotes.

===Video games===
Rollins was a playable character in both and . Rollins is also the voice of Mace Griffin in .

==Campaigning and activism==
Rollins signing an autograph while on a United Service Organizations (USO) tour in Iraq in 2006.
Rollins has become an outspoken human rights activist, most vocally for gay rights. Rollins frequently speaks out on social justice on his spoken word tours and promotes equality, regardless of sexuality. He was the host of the WedRock benefit concert, which raised money for a pro-gay-marriage organization.

During the 2003 Iraq War, he started touring with the United Service Organizations to entertain troops overseas while remaining against the war, leading him to once cause a stir at a base in Kyrgyzstan when he told the crowd: "Your commander would never lie to you. That's the vice president's job." Rollins believes it is important that he performs to the troops so that they have multiple points of contact with the rest of the world, stating that "they can get really cut loose from planet earth." He has made 8 tours, including visits to bases in Djibouti, Kuwait, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan (twice), Egypt, Turkey, Qatar, Honduras, Japan, Korea and the United Arab Emirates. 

He has also been active in the campaign to free the "West Memphis Three"three young men who were believed by their supporters to have been wrongfully convicted of murder, and who have since been released from prison, but not exonerated. Rollins appears with Public Enemy frontman Chuck D on the Black Flag song "Rise Above" on the benefit album , the first time Rollins had performed Black Flag's material since 1986. 

Continuing his activism on behalf of US troops and veterans, Rollins joined Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America (IAVA) in 2008 to launch a public service advertisement campaign, CommunityofVeterans.org, which helps veterans coming home from war reintegrate into their communities. In April 2009, Rollins helped IAVA launch the second phase of the campaign which engages the friends and family of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans at SupportYourVet.org.

On December 3, 2009, Rollins wrote of his support for the victims of the Bhopal disaster in India, in an article for Vanity Fair 25 yearsto the dayafter the methyl isocyanate gas leak from the Union Carbide Corporation's pesticide factory exposed more than half a million local people to poisonous gas and resulted in the death of 17,000. He spent time in Bhopal with the people, to listen to their stories. In a later radio interview in February 2010 Rollins summed up his approach to activism, "This is where my anger takes me, to places like this, not into abuse but into proactive, clean movement." 

==Works==

===Work with State of Alert===
* No Policy (1981)
* three songs on the sampler Flex Your Head (1982)

===Work with Black Flag===
* Damaged (1981)
* My War (1984)
* Family Man (1984)
* Slip It In (1984)
* Loose Nut (1985)
* In My Head (1985)

===Studio albums (Solo)===
* Hot Animal Machine (1987)
* Drive by Shooting (1987)

===Work with Wartime (Weiss, Rollins)===
* Fast Food for Thought (1990)
* "Franklin's Tower" on the tribute album Stolen Roses: Songs of the Grateful Dead (2000)

===Studio albums with Rollins Band===
* Life Time (1987, re-release 1999)
* Do It (1987)
* Hard Volume (1989, re-release 1999)
* The End of Silence (1992, double-CD re-release 2002)
* Weight (1994)
* Come In and Burn (1997)
* Get Some Go Again (2000)
* Nice (2001)
* (2002)

===Spoken word===
* Short Walk on a Long Pier (1985)
* Big Ugly Mouth (1987)
* Sweatbox (1989)
* Live at McCabe's (1990)
* Human Butt (1992)
* The Boxed Life (1993)
* Think Tank (1998)
* Eric the Pilot (1999)
* A Rollins in the Wry (2001)
* Live at the Westbeth Theater (2001)
* Is Cheap Vol I|Talk Is Cheap: Volume 1] (2003)
* Is Cheap Vol II|Talk Is Cheap: Volume 2] (2003)
* Is Cheap Vol III|Talk Is Cheap: Volume 3] (2004)
* Is Cheap Vol IV|Talk Is Cheap: Volume 4] (2004)
* Provoked (2008)
* Spoken Word Guy (2010)
* Spoken Word Guy 2 (2010)

===Spoken word documentaries===
* Talking from the Box (1993)
* Henry Rollins Goes to London (1995)
* You Saw Me Up There (1998)
* Up for It (2001)
* Live at Luna Park (2004)
* Shock & Awe: The Tour (2005)
* Uncut from NYC (2007)
* Uncut from Israel (2007)
* San Francisco 1990 (2007)
* Live in the Conversation Pit (2008)

===Audio books===
* (1994)
* Everything (1996)
* Black Coffee Blues (1997)
* Nights Behind the Tree Line (2004)

===Guest appearances and collaborations===

 Song Artist Album Year 
 \"We Are 138\" Misfits Evilive 1982 
 \"Kick Out the Jams\" Bad Brains Pump Up the Volume Soundtrack 1990 
 \"Let There Be Rock\" Hard-Ons Released as a single 1991 
 \"Bottom\" Tool Undertow 1993 
 \"Wild America\" Iggy Pop American Caesar 1993 
 \"Sexual Military Dynamics\" Mike Watt Ball-Hog or Tugboat? 1995 
 \"Delicate Tendrils\" Les Claypool and the Holy Mackerel Highball with the Devil 1996 
 \"T-4 Strain\" Goldie 1997 
 \"War\" Bone Thugs-n-Harmony & Edwin Starr Small Soldiers 1998 
 \"Laughing Man (In the Devil Mask)\" Tony Iommi Iommi 2000 
 \"I Can't Get Behind That\" William Shatner Has Been 2004 
 All tracks The Flaming Lips The Flaming Lips and Stardeath and White Dwarfs with Henry Rollins and Peaches Doing the Dark Side of the Moon 2009 

===Essays===

* As We See It, an editorial essay in Stereophile magazine. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Azerrad, Michael. Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes from the American Indie Underground, 19811991. Little Brown and Company, 2001. ISBN 0-316-78753-1

==External links==

* 
* Interview with Henry Rollins on PMAKid.com
* Straight Talk Espresso, Rollins's blog at VanityFair.com
* 
* IFC Site for The Henry Rollins Show
* , Dan O'Mahony, "Point Nine Nine", November 7, 2011
* Henry Rollins, episode #14 of By The Way, In Conversation With Jeff Garlin on Earwolf, July 11, 2013
* "RuPaul Drives Henry Rollins" review of web series Rocker Magazine 2013



[[Hadron]]

In particle physics, a hadron (, hadrs, "stout, thick") is a composite particle made of quarks held together by the strong force (in a similar way as molecules are held together by the electromagnetic force).

Hadrons are categorized into two families: baryons (such as protons and neutrons, made of three quarks) and mesons (such as pions, made of one quark and one antiquark). A tetraquark state (an exotic meson), named the Z(4430) was discovered in 2014 by the LHCb collaboration. LHCb collaboration (2014): Observation of the resonant character of the Z(4430) state Other types of exotic hadrons may exist, such as pentaquarks (exotic baryons), but no current evidence conclusively suggests their existence. W.-M. Yao et al. (2006): Particle listings  &Theta;+ C. Amsler et al. (2008): Pentaquarks 

Of the hadrons, protons are stable, and neutrons bound within atomic nuclei are stable, whereas other hadrons are unstable under ordinary conditions; free neutrons decay with a half life of about 880 seconds. Experimentally, hadron physics is studied by colliding protons or nuclei of heavy elements such as lead, and detecting the debris in the produced particle showers.

==Etymology==
The term "hadron" was introduced by Lev B. Okun in a plenary talk at the 1962 International Conference on High Energy Physics. 
 In this talk he said:
Not withstanding the fact that this report deals with weak interactions, we shall frequently have to speak of strongly interacting particles. These particles pose not only numerous scientific problems, but also a terminological problem. The point is that "strongly interacting particles" is a very clumsy term which does not yield itself to the formation of an adjective. For this reason, to take but one instance, decays into strongly interacting particles are called non-leptonic. This definition is not exact because "non-leptonic" may also signify "photonic". In this report I shall call strongly interacting particles "hadrons", and the corresponding decays "hadronic" (the Greek  signifies "large", "massive", in contrast to  which means "small", "light"). I hope that this terminology will prove to be 

==Properties==
alt=A green and a magenta ("antigreen") arrow canceling out each other out white, representing a meson; a red, a green, and a blue arrow canceling out to white, representing a baryon; a yellow ("antiblue"), a magenta, and a cyan ("antired") arrow canceling out to white, representing an antibaryon.

According to the quark model, 
 the properties of hadrons are primarily determined by their so-called valence quarks. For example, a proton is composed of two up quarks (each with electric charge +, for a total of + together) and one down quark (with electric charge ). Adding these together yields the proton charge of +1. Although quarks also carry color charge, hadrons must have zero total color charge because of a phenomenon called color confinement. That is, hadrons must be "colorless" or "white". These are the simplest of the two ways: three quarks of different colors, or a quark of one color and an antiquark carrying the corresponding anticolor. Hadrons with the first arrangement are called baryons, and those with the second arrangement are mesons.

Hadrons, however, are not composed of just three or two quarks, because of the strength of the strong force. More accurately, strong force gluons have enough energy (E) to have resonances composed of massive (m) quarks (E > mc2) . Thus, virtual quarks and antiquarks, in a 1:1 ratio, form the majority of massive particles inside a hadron. The two or three quarks are the excess of quarks vs. antiquarks in hadrons, and vice versa in anti-hadrons. Because the virtual quarks are not stable wave packets (quanta), but irregular and transient phenomena, it is not meaningful to ask which quark is real and which virtual; only the excess is apparent from the outside. Massless virtual gluons compose the numerical majority of particles inside hadrons.

Like all subatomic particles, hadrons are assigned quantum numbers corresponding to the representations of the Poincar group: JPC(m), where J is the spin quantum number, P the intrinsic parity (or P-parity), and C, the charge conjugation (or C-parity), and the particle's mass, m. Note that the mass of a hadron has very little to do with the mass of its valence quarks; rather, due to massenergy equivalence, most of the mass comes from the large amount of energy associated with the strong interaction. Hadrons may also carry flavor quantum numbers such as isospin (or G parity), and strangeness. All quarks carry an additive, conserved quantum number called a baryon number (B), which is + for quarks and  for antiquarks. This means that baryons (groups of three quarks) have B = 1 whereas mesons have B = 0.

Hadrons have excited states known as resonances. Each ground state hadron may have several excited states; several hundreds of resonances have been observed in particle physics experiments. Resonances decay extremely quickly (within about 1024 seconds) via the strong nuclear force.

In other phases of matter the hadrons may disappear. For example, at very high temperature and high pressure, unless there are sufficiently many flavors of quarks, the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) predicts that quarks and gluons will no longer be confined within hadrons, "because the strength of the strong interaction diminishes with energy". This property, which is known as asymptotic freedom, has been experimentally confirmed in the energy range between 1 GeV (gigaelectronvolt) and 1 TeV (teraelectronvolt). 
 

All free hadrons except the proton (and antiproton) are unstable.

==Baryons==

All known baryons are made of three valence quarks, so they are fermions, i.e., they have odd half-integral spin, because they have an odd number of quarks. As quarks possess baryon number B = , baryons have baryon number B = 1. The best-known baryons are the proton and the neutron.

One can hypothesise baryons with further quark-antiquark pairs in addition to their three quarks. Hypothetical baryons with one extra quark-antiquark pair (5 quarks in all) are called pentaquarks. 
 Several pentaquark candidates were found in the early 2000s, but upon further review these states have now been established as nonexistent. 
 (This does not rule against pentaquarks in general, only the candidates put forward).

Each type of baryon has a corresponding antiparticle (antibaryon) in which quarks are replaced by their corresponding antiquarks. For example, just as a proton is made of two up-quarks and one down-quark, its corresponding antiparticle, the antiproton, is made of two up-antiquarks and one down-antiquark.

==Mesons==

Mesons are hadrons composed of a quark-antiquark pair. They are bosons, meaning they have integral spin, i.e., 0, 1, or 1, as they have an even number of quarks. They have baryon number B = 0. Examples of mesons commonly produced in particle physics experiments include pions and kaons. Pions also play a role in holding atomic nuclei together via the residual strong force.

In principle, mesons with more than one quark-antiquark pair may exist; a hypothetical meson with two pairs is called a tetraquark. Several tetraquark candidates were found in the 2000s, but their status is under debate. Mysterious Subatomic Particle May Represent Exotic New Form of Matter Several other hypothetical "exotic" mesons lie outside the quark model of classification. These include glueballs and hybrid mesons (mesons bound by excited gluons).

==See also==

* Hadronization, the formation of hadrons out of quarks and gluons
* Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
* List of particles
* Standard model
* Subatomic particles
* Hadron therapy, a.k.a. particle therapy

==References==

 



[[Heisuke Hironaka]]

 is a Japanese mathematician. He entered Kyoto University in 1949. After completing his undergraduate studies at Kyoto University, he received his Ph.D. in 1960 from Harvard while under the direction of Oscar Zariski. He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1970. 

He is celebrated for proving in 1964 that singularities of algebraic varieties admit resolutions in characteristic zero. This means that any algebraic variety can be replaced by (more precisely is birationally equivalent to) a similar variety which has no singularities. He also introduced Hironaka's example showing that a deformation of Khler manifolds need not be Khler.

Hironaka was for many years a Professor of mathematics at Harvard University (1968-1992) but currently lives in Japan. He held teaching positions at Brandeis University (1960-1963), Columbia University (1964) and Kyoto University (1975-1988). He was a president of Yamaguchi University (1996-2002). He has been active in raising funds for causes such as mathematical education.

== List of books available in English ==
* Formal functions and formal imbeddings / by Heisuke Hironaka and Hideyuki Matsumura (1967)
* On the characters and of singularities / by Heisuke Hironaka
* Introduction to the theory of infinitely near singular points / Heisuke Hironaka (1974)
* The theory of the maximal contact / Jos M. Aroca, Heisuke Hironaka and Jos L. Vicente (1975)
* Desingularization theorems / Jose M. Aroca, Heisuke Hironaka and Jose L. Vicente (1977)
* Geometric singularity theory / editors of the volume, Heisuke Hironaka, Stanisaw Janeczko (2004)

== References ==

== External links ==
* 
* 
* Jackson, Allyn; Interview with Heisuke Hironaka; Notices of the American Mathematical Society; vol. 52, no. 9 (October 2005).



[[House of Habsburg]]

The House of Habsburg (; ), also spelled Hapsburg, was one of the most important royal houses of Europe. The throne of the Holy Roman Empire was continuously occupied by the Habsburgs between 1438 and 1740. The house also produced kings of Bohemia, England, Germany, Hungary, Croatia, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, as well as rulers of several Dutch and Italian countries.

The House takes its name from Habsburg Castle, a fortress built in the 1020s in present-day Switzerland by Count Radbot of Klettgau, who chose to name his fortress Habsburg. His grandson, Otto II, was the first to take the fortress name as his own, adding "Count of Habsburg" to his title. The House of Habsburg gathered dynastic momentum through the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries.

By 1276, Count Radbot's seventh generation descendant, Rudolph of Habsburg, had moved the family's power base from Habsburg Castle to the Duchy of Austria. Rudolph had become King of Germany in 1273, and the dynasty of the House of Habsburg was truly entrenched in 1276 when Rudolph became ruler of Austria, which the Habsburgs ruled until 1918.

A series of dynastic marriages Paula Sutter Fichtner, "Dynastic Marriage in Sixteenth-Century Habsburg Diplomacy and Statecraft: An Interdisciplinary Approach," American Historical Review Vol. 81, No. 2 (April 1976), pp. 243-265 in JSTOR enabled the family to vastly expand its domains, to include Burgundy, Spain and her colonial empire, Bohemia, Hungary, and other territories into the inheritance. In the 16th century, the family separated into the senior Habsburg Spain and the junior Habsburg Monarchy branches, who settled their mutual claims in the Oate treaty.

The House of Habsburg became extinct in the 18th century. The senior branch ended upon the death of Charles II of Spain in 1700 and was replaced by the House of Bourbon. The remaining branch went extinct in the male line in 1740 with the death of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI and completely in 1780 with the death of his eldest daughter, Maria Theresa. It was succeeded by the Vaudemont branch of the House of Lorraine. The new successor house styled itself formally as House of Habsburg-Lorraine (German: Habsburg-Lothringen), although it was often referred to as simply the House of Habsburg.

==Principal roles==
Their principal roles were as:
* King of the Romans
* Holy Roman Emperors
* King of Germany
* Rulers of Austria (as Dukes, Archdukes after 1453)
* King of Bohemia (13061307, 14371439, 14531457, 15261918),
* Kings of Hungary and Croatia (15261918),
* Kings of Spain (15161700),
* King of Portugal (15811640),
* King of Galicia and Lodomeria (17721918), and
* Grand Prince of Transylvania (16901867).

Numerous other titles were attached to the crowns listed above.

==History==

===Counts of Habsburg===
The Habsburg dominions around 1200 in the area of modern day Switzerland are shown as , among the houses of , and 

The progenitor of the House of Habsburg may have been Guntram the Rich, a count in the Breisgau who lived in the 10th century. His grandson Radbot, Count of Habsburg founded the Habsburg Castle, after which the Habsburgs are named. The origins of the castle's name, located in what is now the Swiss canton of Aargau, are uncertain. Most people assume the name to be derived from the High German Habichtsburg (Hawk Castle), but some historians and linguists are convinced that the name comes from the Middle High German word "hab/hap" meaning ford, as there is a river with a ford nearby. The first documented use of the name by the dynasty itself has been traced to the year 1108. "Habsburger-Gedenkjahr im Aargau", Neue Zrcher Zeitung, (page 17) 23 May 2008. art-tv.ch Kanton Aargau 
The Habsburg Castle was the family seat in the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries.

The Habsburgs expanded their influence through arranged marriages and by gaining political privileges, especially countship rights in Zrichgau, Aargau and Thurgau. In the 13th century, the house aimed its marriage policy at families in Upper Alsace and Swabia. They were also able to gain high positions in the church hierarchy for their members. Territorially, they often profited from the extinction of other noble families such as the House of Kyburg. 

===Kings of the Romans===
By the second half of the 13th century, count Rudolph IV (12181291) had become one of the most influential territorial lords in the area between the Vosges Mountains and Lake Constance. Due to these impressive preconditions, on 1 October 1273 Rudolph was chosen as the King of the Romans and received the name Rudolph I of Germany. Heinz-Dieter Heimann: Die Habsburger. Dynastie und Kaiserreiche. ISBN 3-406-44754-6. 

In 1282, the Habsburgs gained the rulership of the Duchy of Austria, which they then held for over 600 years, until 1918. Through the forged Privilegium Maius document (1358/59), a special bond was created between the House and Austria. The document, forged at the behest of Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria (13391365), also attempted to introduce rules to preserve the unity of the family's Austrian lands. In the long term, this indeed succeeded, but Rudolph's descendants ignored the rule, leading to the separation of the Albertian and Leopoldian family lines in 1379. 

By marrying Elisabeth of Luxembourg, the daughter of Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund in 1437, Duke Albert V (13971439) became the ruler of Bohemia and Hungary, expanding the family's political horizons. The next year, Albert V was crowned as the King of the Romans as Albert II. After his early death in war with the Turks in 1439, and after the death of his son Ladislaus Postumus in 1457, the Habsburgs lost Bohemia and Hungary again. National kingdoms were established in these areas, and the Habsburgs were not able to restore their influence there for decades.

===Holy Roman Emperors===
Growth of the Habsburg Empire in Eastern Europe.

In 1440, Frederick III was chosen by the Electoral College to succeed Albert II as the king. After several Habsburg kings had attempted to gain the imperial throne over the years, success finally arrived on 19 March 1452, when Pope Nicholas V crowned Frederick III as the Holy Roman Emperor in a grand ceremony held in Rome. In Frederick III, the Pope found an important political ally with whose help he was able to counter the conciliar movement. 

While in Rome, Frederick III married Eleanor of Portugal, enabling him to build a network of connections with dynasties in the west and southeast of Europe. In contrast to Frederick, who was rather distant to his family, Eleanor had a great influence on the raising and education of Frederick's children, and therefore played an important role in the family's rise to prominence. After Frederick III's coronation, the Habsburgs were able to hold the imperial throne almost continuously for centuries, until 1806. 

As Emperor, Frederick III took a leading role inside the family and positioned himself as the judge over the family's internal conflicts, often making use of the privilegium maius. He was able to restore the unity of the house's Austrian lands, as the Albertinian line was now extinct. Territorial integrity was also strengthened by the extinction of the Tyrolean branch of the Leopoldian line in 1490/1496. Frederick's aim was to make Austria a united country, stretching from the Rhine to the Mur and Leitha. 

On the external front, one of Frederick's main achievements was the Siege of Neuss (147475), in which he forced Charles the Bold of Burgundy to give his daughter Mary of Burgundy as wife to Frederick's son Maximilian. The wedding, which took place on the evening of August 16, 1477, ultimately resulted in the Habsburgs acquiring control of the Low Countries. After Mary's early death in 1482, Maximilian attempted to secure the Burgundian heritance to one of his and Mary's children, Philip the Handsome. Charles VIII of France contested this, using both military and dynastic means, but the Burgundian succession was finally ruled in favour of Philip in the Treaty of Senlis in 1493. Erbe, Michael: Die Habsburger 1493-1918. Eine Dynastie im Reich und in Europa. W. Kohlhammer, 2000. ISBN 3-17-011866-8 

After the death of his father in 1493, Maximilian was proclaimed the new King of the Romans, receiving the name Maximilian I. Maximilian was initially unable to travel to Rome to receive the Imperial title from the Pope, due to opposition from Venice and from the French, who were occupying Milan, as well a refusal from the Pope due to enemy forces being present on his territory. In 1508, Maximilian proclaimed himself as the "chosen Emperor," and this was also recognized by the Pope due to changes in political alliances. This had a historical consequence in that, in the future, the Roman King would also automatically become Emperor, without needing the Pope's consent. In 1530 Emperor Charles V became the last person to be crowned as the Emperor by the Pope. 

A map of the dominion of the Habsburgs following the Battle of Mhlberg (1547) as depicted in The Cambridge Modern History Atlas (1912); Habsburg lands are shaded green, but do not include the lands of the Holy Roman Empire over which they presided, nor the vast Castilian holdings outside of Europe, and particularly in America.

Maximilian's rule (14931519) was a time of great expansion for the Habsburgs. In 1497, Maximilian's son, Philip the Handsome (also known as Phillip the Fair), married Joanna of Castile, also known as Joan the Mad, heiress of Castile, Aragon and most of Spain. Phillip and Joan had six children, the eldest of whom became Charles V and inherited the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon (including their colonies in America), Southern Italy, Austria and the Low Countries. Great Events from History, The Renaissance & Early Modern Era, Vol I, p. 112114, author-Clare Callaghan, ISBN 1-58765-214-5. 

The foundations for the later empire of Austria-Hungary were laid in 1515 by the means of a double wedding between Louis, only son of Vladislaus II, King of Hungary, and Maximilian's granddaughter Mary; and between her brother, Archduke Ferdinand and Vladislaus' daughter, Anna. The wedding was celebrated in grand style on 22 July 1515, and has been described by some historians as the First Congress of Vienna due to its significant implications for Europe's political landscape. As all the children were still minors, the wedding was formally completed in 1521. Vladislaus died on 13 March 1516, and Maximilian died on 12 January 1519, but his designs were ultimately successful: on Louis's death in 1526, Maximilian's grandson, Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor, became the King of Bohemia.

By the time of Charles V the "World Emperor" and his "empire on which the sun never sets", the Habsburg dynasty achieved, for the first and only time in their history, the position of a true world power.

===Division of the house: Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs===
The Habsburg Dominions in 1700, not showing their overseas empire, but showing the division between the Spanish and Austrian branch with their losses and gains.

After the April 21, 1521 assignment of the Austrian lands to Ferdinand I by his brother Emperor Charles V (also King Charles I of Spain) (15161556), the dynasty split into the junior branch of the Austrian Habsburgs and the senior branch of the Spanish Habsburgs. The Austrian Habsburgs held the title of Holy Roman Emperor after Charles' death in 1558, as well as the Habsburg Hereditary Lands and the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary.

The senior Spanish branch ruled over Spain, its Italian possessions and its colonial empire, the Netherlands, and, for a time (1580-1640), Portugal. Hungary was partly under Habsburg rule from 1526. For 150 years most of the country was occupied by the Ottoman Turks but these territories were re-conquered in 16831699.

In the secret Oate treaty, the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs settled their mutual claims. The Spanish Habsburgs died out in 1700 (prompting the War of the Spanish Succession), as did the last male of the Austrian Habsburg line in 1740 (prompting the War of the Austrian Succession), and finally the last female of the Habsburg male line in 1780.

===Extinction of the Spanish Habsburgs===
The Habsburgs sought to consolidate their power by the frequent use of consanguineous marriages, it's known their proverb that 'The best spouse for an Habsburg is another Habsburg', with a cumulatively deleterious effect on their gene pool. Marriages between first cousins, or between uncle and niece, were commonplace in the family. A study of 3,000 family members over 16 generations by the University of Santiago de Compostela suggests that inbreeding directly led to their extinction. The gene pool eventually became so small that the last of the Spanish line Charles II, who was severely disabled from birth, perhaps by genetic disorders, possessed a genome comparable to that of a child born to a brother and sister, as did his father, likely due to "remote inbreeding". 

===Extinction of the Austrian Habsburgs===
The Austrian branch went extinct in the male person in 1740 with the death of Charles VI and in the female person in 1780 with the death of his daughter Maria Theresa and was succeeded by the Vaudemont branch of the House of Lorraine in the person of her son Joseph II. The new successor house styled itself formally as House of Habsburg-Lorraine (German: Habsburg-Lothringen), although it was often referred to as simply the House of Habsburg. The heiress of the last Austrian Habsburgs Maria Theresa had married Francis Stephan, Duke of Lorraine Maria Theresa was originally engaged to Lopold Clment of Lorraine, older brother of Francis Stephan. (both of them were great-grandchildren of Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand III, but from different empresses), and their descendants carried on the Habsburg tradition from Vienna under the dynastic name Habsburg-Lorraine, although technically a new ruling house came into existence in the Austrian territories, the House of Lorraine (see Dukes of Lorraine family tree). It is thought that extensive intra-family marriages within both lines contributed to their extinctions.

===Habsburg-Lorraine===

 Austria-Hungary in 1915 
 300pxKingdoms and countries of Austria-Hungary:Cisleithania (Empire of Austria ): 1. Bohemia, 2. Bukovina, 3. Carinthia, 4. Carniola, 5. Dalmatia, 6. Galicia, 7. Kstenland, 8. Lower Austria, 9. Moravia, 10. Salzburg, 11. Silesia, 12. Styria, 13. Tirol, 14. Upper Austria, 15. Vorarlberg; Transleithania (Kingdom of Hungary ): 16. Hungary proper 17. Croatia-Slavonia; 18. Bosnia and Herzegovina (Austro-Hungarian condominium) 

On August 6, 1806 the Holy Roman Empire was dissolved under the French Emperor Napoleon I's reorganization of Germany. However, in anticipation of the loss of his title of Holy Roman Emperor, Francis II declared himself hereditary Emperor of Austria (as Francis I) on 11 August 1804, three months after Napoleon had declared himself Emperor of the French on 18 May 1804.

Emperor Francis I of Austria used the official full list of titles: "We, Francis the First, by the grace of God Emperor of Austria; King of Jerusalem, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Slavonia, Galicia and Lodomeria; Archduke of Austria; Duke of Lorraine, Salzburg, Wrzburg, Franconia, Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola; Grand Duke of Cracow; Grand Prince of Transylvania; Margrave of Moravia; Duke of Sandomir, Masovia, Lublin, Upper and Lower Silesia, Auschwitz and Zator, Teschen, and Friule; Prince of Berchtesgaden and Mergentheim; Princely Count of Habsburg, Gorizia, and Gradisca and of the Tyrol; and Margrave of Upper and Lower Lusatia and Istria".

The Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 created a personal union, whereby the House of Habsburg agreed to share power with the separate Hungarian government, dividing the territory of the former Austrian Empire between them. The Austrian and the Hungarian lands became independent entities enjoying equal status Microsoft Encarta: The height of the dual monarchy Under this arrangement, the Hungarians referred to their ruler as king and never emperor (see k. u. k.). This prevailed until the Habsburgs' deposition from both Austria and Hungary in 1918 following defeat in World War I.

On 11 November 1918, with his empire collapsing around him, the last Habsburg ruler, Charles I (who also reigned as Charles IV of Hungary) issued a proclamation recognizing Austria's right to determine the future of the state and renouncing any role in state affairs. Two days later, he issued a separate proclamation for Hungary. Even though he did not officially abdicate, this is considered the end of the Habsburg dynasty. In 1919, the new republican Austrian government subsequently passed a law banishing the Habsburgs from Austrian territory until they renounced all intentions of regaining the throne and accepted the status of private citizens. Charles made several attempts to regain the throne of Hungary, and in 1921 the Hungarian government passed a law which revoked Charles' rights and dethroned the Habsburgs.

The Habsburgs did not formally abandon all hope of returning to power until Otto von Habsburg, Emperor Charles' eldest son, renounced all claims to the throne.

The dynasty's motto, "Leave the waging of wars to others! But you, happy Austria, marry; for the realms which Mars awards to others, Venus transfers to you.", Spielvogel, Jackson J. Western Civilization: Comprehensive Volume. 5th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2003. 330. Print. indicates the knack of the Habsburgs to have members intermarry into other royal houses in order to build alliances and inherit territory. Empress Maria Theresa is recognized quite notably for it and is sometimes referred to as the "Great-Grandmother of Europe".

==Family tree==
This family tree only includes male scions of the direct House of Habsburg who survived to adulthood.

1000px

Similarly, this family tree only includes male scions of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine who survived to adulthood:

1000px

==Monarchs of the House of Habsburg== 
The Habsburg Empire was never composed of a single unified and unitary state as Bourbon France, Hohenzollern Germany, or Great Britain was. It was made up of an accretion of territories that owed their historic loyalty to the head of the house of Habsburg as hereditary lord. The Habsburgs had mostly married the heiresses of these territories, most famously of Spain and the Netherlands. They used their coats of arms then as a statement of their right to rule all these territories. As there were many territories, so their arms were complex and reflected the waxing and waning position of the Habsburgs within European power politics. It was not until the 19th century (see below Arms of Dominion of the Austro-Hungarian Empire) that the arms began to take on their own life as symbols of a state which may have an existence outside of the Habsburg dynasty. A complete listing of the arms can be found at the Habsburg Armory.

===Ancestors===

* Guntram the Rich (ca. 930985 / 990) Father of:
* Lanzelin of Altenburg (died 991). Besides Radbot, he had sons named Rudolph I, Wernher, and Landolf.

===Counts of Habsburg===
100px
Arms of the Counts of Habsburgs. The Habsburgs all but abandoned this for the arms of Austria. It only reappeared in their triarch family arms in 1805.

Before Rudolph rose to German king, the Habsburgs were Counts in what is today southwestern Germany and Switzerland.

* Radbot of Klettgau, built the Habsburg Castle (ca. 9851035). Besides Werner I, he had two other sons: Otto I, who would become Count of Sundgau in the Alsace, and Albrecht I.
* Werner I, Count of Habsburg (1025 / 10301096). Besides Otto II, there was another son, Albert II, who was reeve of Muri from 11111141 after the death of Otto II.
* Otto II of Habsburg; first to name himself as "of Habsburg" (died 1111) Father of:
* Werner II of Habsburg (around 1135; died 1167) Father of:
* Albrecht III of Habsburg (the Rich), died 1199. Under him, the Habsburg territories expanded to cover most of what is today the German-speaking part of Switzerland. Father of:
* Rudolph II of Habsburg (b. c. 1160, died 1232) Father of:
* Albrecht IV of Habsburg, (died 1239 / 1240); father of Rudolph IV of Habsburg, who would later become king Rudolph I of Germany. Between Albrecht IV and his brother Rudolph III, the Habsburg properties were split, with Albrecht keeping the Aargau and the western parts, the eastern parts going to Rudolph III. Albrecht IV was also a mutual ancestor of Sophia Chotek and of her husband Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria

===Dukes/Archdukes of Austria===
100px
The arms of Austria, originally belonging to the Babenburg dukes. They became all but synonmous with the Habsburgs, as the Habsburgs abandoned their own arms for these.

In the late Middle Ages, when the Habsburgs expanded their territories in the east, they often ruled as dukes of the Duchy of Austria which covered only what is today Lower Austria (Niedersterreich) and the eastern part of Upper Austria (Obersterreich). The Habsburg possessions also included the rest of what was then called Inner Austria (Innersterreich), i.e. the Duchy of Styria, and then expanded west to include the Duchy of Carinthia and Carniola in 1335 and the Count of Tirol in 1363. Their original scattered possessions in the southern Alsace, south-western Germany and Vorarlberg were collectively known as Further Austria.

The senior Habsburg dynast generally ruled Lower Austria from Vienna as archduke ("paramount duke") of Duchy of Austria. The Styrian lands had already been ruled in personal union by the Babenberg dukes of Austria since 1192 and were finally seized with the Austrian lands by the Habsburg king Rudolph I of Germany upon his victory in the 1278 Battle on the Marchfeld. In 1335 Rudolph's grandson Duke Albert II of Austria also received the Carinthian duchy with the adjacent March of Carniola at the hands of Emperor Louis the Bavarian as Imperial fiefs.

The Habsburg dukes gradually lost their homelands south of the Rhine and Lake Constance to the expanding Old Swiss Confederacy. Unless mentioned explicitly, the dukes of Austria also ruled over Further Austria until 1379, after that year, Further Austria was ruled by the Princely Count of Tyrol. Names in italics designate dukes who never actually ruled.

When Albert's son Duke Rudolf IV of Austria in 1365, his younger brothers Albert III and Leopold III quarelled about his heritage and in the Treaty of Neuberg of 1379 finally split the Habsburg territories: The Albertinian line would rule in the Archduchy of Austria proper (then sometimes referred to as "Lower Austria" (Niedersterreich), but comprising modern Lower Austria and most of Upper Austria), while the Leopoldian line ruled in the Styrian, Carinthian and Carniolan territories, subsumed under the denotation of "Inner Austria". At that time their share also comprised Tyrol and the original Habsburg possessions in Swabia, called Further Austria; sometimes both were collectively referred to as "Upper Austria" (Obersterreich) in that context, also not to be confused with the modern state of that name.

After the death of Leopold's eldest son William in 1406, the Leopoldinian line was further split among his brothers into the Inner Austrian territory under Ernest the Iron and a Tyrolean/Further Austrian line under Frederick IV. In 1457 Ernest's son Duke Frederick V of Inner Austria also gained the Austrian archduchy after his Albertine cousin Ladislaus the Posthumous had died without issue. 1490 saw the reunification of all Habsburg lines, when Archduke Sigismund of Further Austria and Tyrol resigned in favour of Frederick's son Maximilian I. In 1512, the Habsburg territories were incorporated into the Imperial Austrian Circle.

Archduke of Austria, was invented in the Privilegium Maius, a 14th-century forgery initiated by Duke Rudolf IV of Austria. Originally, it was meant to denote the "ruler" (thus "Arch-") of the duchy of Austria, usually from Vienna, in an effort to put the Habsburgs on a par with the Prince-electors, as Austria had been passed as hereditary prince-electors of the empire when the Golden Bull of 1356 assigned that title to the highest ranking Imperial princes. The Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV refused to recognise the title.

The archducal title was only officially recognized in 1453 by Emperor Frederick III. Emperor Frederick III himself used just "Duke of Austria", never Archduke, until his death in 1493. The title was first granted to Frederick's younger brother, Albert VI of Austria (d. 1463), who used it at least from 1458.

In 1477, Frederick III also granted the title archduke to his first cousin, Sigismund of Austria, ruler of Further Austria.
Frederick's son and heir, the future Emperor Maximilian I, started to use the title, but apparently only after the death of his wife Mary of Burgundy (d. 1482), as Archduke never appears in documents issued jointly by Maximilian and Mary as rulers in the Low Countries (where Maximilian is still titled "Duke of Austria"). The title appears first in documents issued under the joint rule of Maximilian and Philip (his under-age son) in the Low Countries.

Archduke was initially borne by those dynasts who ruled a Habsburg territory, i.e., only by males and their consorts, appanages being commonly distributed to cadets. But these "junior" archdukes did not thereby become independent hereditary rulers, since all territories remained vested in the Austrian crown. Occasionally a territory might be combined with a separate gubernatorial mandate ruled by an archducal cadet.

From the 16th century onward, archduke and its female form, archduchess, came to be used by all the members of the House of Habsburg (e.g., Queen Marie Antoinette of France was born Archduchess Maria Antonia of Austria.

* Rudolph II, son of Rudolph I, duke of Austria and Styria together with his brother 12821283, was dispossessed by his brother, who eventually would be murdered by one of Rudolph's sons.
* Albert I (Albrecht I), son of Rudolph I and brother of the above, duke from 12821308; was Holy Roman Emperor from 12981308. See also below.
* Rudolph III, oldest son of Albert I, designated duke of Austria and Styria 12981307
* Frederick the Handsome (Friedrich der Schne), brother of Rudolph III. Duke of Austria and Styria (with his brother Leopold I) from 13081330; officially co-regent of emperor Louis IV since 1325, but never ruled.
* Leopold I, brother of the above, duke of Austria and Styria from 13081326.
* Albert II (Albrecht II), brother of the above, duke of Further Austria from 13261358, duke of Austria and Styria 13301358, duke of Carinthia after 1335.
* Otto the Jolly (der Frhliche), brother of the above, duke of Austria and Styria 13301339 (together with his brother), duke of Carinthia after 1335.
* Rudolph IV the Founder (der Stifter), oldest son of Albert II. Duke of Austria and Styria 13581365, Duke of Tirol after 1363.

After the death of Rudolph IV, his brothers Albert III and Leopold III ruled the Habsburg possessions together from 1365 until 1379, when they split the territories in the Treaty of Neuberg, Albert keeping the Duchy of Austria and Leopold ruling over Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, the Windic March, Tirol, and Further Austria.

===Albertine line: Dukes of Austria===
75px

* Albert III (Albrecht III), duke of Austria until 1395, from 1386 (after the death of Leopold) until 1395 also ruled over the latter's possessions.
* Albert IV (Albrecht IV), duke of Austria 13951404, in conflict with Leopold IV.
* Albert V (Albrecht V), duke of Austria 14041439, Holy Roman Emperor from 14381439 as Albert II. See also below.
* Ladislaus Posthumus, son of the above, duke of Austria 14401457.

===Leopoldine line: Dukes of Styria, Carinthia, Tyrol===
75px
75px

* Leopold III, duke of Styria, Carinthia, Tyrol, and Further Austria until 1386, when he was killed in the Battle of Sempach.
* William (Wilhelm), son of the above, 13861406 duke in Inner Austria (Carinthia, Styria)
* Leopold IV, son of Leopold III, 1391 regent of Further Austria, 13951402 duke of Tyrol, after 1404 also duke of Austria, 14061411 duke of Inner Austria

====Leopoldine-Inner Austrian sub-line====
75px
:* Ernest the Iron (der Eiserne), 14061424 duke of Inner Austria, until 1411 together and competing with his brother Leopold IV.
:* Frederick V (Friedrich), son of Ernst, became emperor Frederick III in 1440. He was duke of Inner Austria from 1424 on. Guardian of Sigismund 14391446 and of Ladislaus Posthumus 14401452. See also below.
:* Albert VI (Albrecht VI), brother of the above, 14461463 regent of Further Austria, duke of Austria 14581463
:* Ernestine line of Saxon princes, ancestor of George I of Great Britain-descended from sister of Frederick III; also Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse King of Finland 1918

====Leopoldine-Tyrol sub-line====
75px
:* Frederick IV (Friedrich), brother of Ernst, 14021439 duke of Tyrol and Further Austria
:* Sigismund, also spelled Siegmund or Sigmund, 14391446 under the tutelage of the Frederick V above, then duke of Tyrol, and after the death of Albrecht VI in 1463 also duke of Further Austria.

===Reuniting of Habsburg possessions===
Sigismund had no children and adopted Maximilian I, son of duke Frederick V (emperor Frederick III). Under Maximilian, the possessions of the Habsburgs would be united again under one ruler, after he had re-conquered the Duchy of Austria after the death of Matthias Corvinus, who resided in Vienna and styled himself duke of Austria from 14851490.

====King of the Romans and Holy Roman Emperors prior to the reunion of the Habsburg possessions====
75px
*Rudolph I, emperor 12731291 (never crowned) 50px
*Albert I, emperor 12981308 (never crowned) 50px
*Albert II, emperor 14381439 (never crowned) -ancestor of Empress Catherine II of Russia 50px
*Frederick III, emperor 14401493 50px

====Kings of Hungary and Bohemia prior to the reunion of the Habsburg possessions====
75px
75px
* Albert, king of Hungary and Bohemia (14371439) 50px
* Ladislaus V Posthumus, king of Hungary (14441457) and Bohemia (14531457) 50px

===Holy Roman Emperors, Archdukes of Austria===
75px
75px

The title Archduke of Austria, the one most famously associated with the Habsburgs, was invented in the Privilegium Maius, a 14th-century forgery initiated by Duke Rudolf IV of Austria. Originally, it was meant to denote the ruler of the (thus 'Arch')duchy of Austria, in an effort to put that ruler on par with the Prince-electors, as Austria had been passed over in the Golden Bull of 1356, when the electorships had been assigned. Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV refused to recognize the title. Ladislaus the Posthumous, Duke of Austria, who died in 1457, was never in his lifetime authorized to use it, and accordingly, not he nor anyone in his branch of the dynasty ever used the title.

Duke Ernest the Iron and his descendants unilaterally assumed the title "archduke". This title was only officially recognized in 1453 by his son, Emperor Frederick III, when the Habsburgs had (permanently) gained control of the office of the Holy Roman Emperor. Emperor Frederick III himself used just Duke of Austria, never Archduke, until his death in 1493.

Frederick's son and heir, the future Emperor Maximilian I, started to use the title, but apparently only after the death of his wife Mary of Burgundy (died 1482) as the title never appears in documents of joint Maximilian and Mary rule in the Low Countries (where Maximilian is still titled Duke of Austria). The title appears first in documents of joint Maximilian and Philip (his under-age son) rule in the Low Countries. It only gained currency with Charles V and the descendants of his brother, the Emperor Ferdinand.

*Maximilian I, emperor 15081519 50px 50px 50px

*Charles V, emperor 15191556, his arms are explained in an article about them 50px 50px

=== Titular Dukes of Burgundy, Lords of the Netherlands ===
75px
75px

The reigning duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold, was the chief political opponent of Maximilian's father Frederick III. Charles controlled not only Burgundy (both dukedom and county), but the wealthy and powerful Netherlands, the real center of his power. Frederick was concerned about Burgundy's expansive tendencies on the western border of his Holy Roman Empire, and to forestall military conflict, he attempted to secure the marriage of Charles's only daughter, Mary of Burgundy, to his son Maximilian. After the Siege of Neuss (147475), he was successful. The wedding between Maximilian and Mary took place on the evening of 16 August 1477, after the death of Charles. Heinz-Dieter Heimann: Die Habsburger. Dynastie und Kaiserreiche. ISBN 3-406-44754-6. pp. 3845. Mary and the Habsburgs lost the Duchy of Burgundy to France, but managed to defend and hold onto the rest what became the 17 provinces of the Habsburg Netherlands. After Mary's death in 1482, Maximilian acted as regent for his son:

*Philip the Handsome (14821506) 50px

*Charles V (15061555) 50px 50px

*Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy, regent (15071515) and (15191530) 50px

*Mary of Hungary, dowager queen of Hungary, sister of Charles V, governor of the Netherlands, 15311555 50px 50px

*Margaret of Parma, illegitimate daughter of Charles V, Duchess of Parma, and mother of Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, governor 15591567 50px

*Don John of Austria, illegitimate son of Charles V, victor of Lepanto, governor of the Netherlands, 15761578 50px

*Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, son of Margaret of Parma, governor of the Netherlands, 15781592 50px

The Netherlands were frequently governed directly by a regent or governor-general, who was a collateral member of the Habsburgs. By the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 Charles V combined the Netherlands into one administrative unit, to be inherited by his son Philip II. Charles effectively united the Netherlands as one entity. The Habsburgs controlled the 17 Provinces of the Netherlands until the Dutch Revolt in the second half of the 16th century, when they lost the seven northern Protestant provinces. They held onto the southern Catholic part (roughly modern Belgium and Luxembourg) as the Spanish and Austrian Netherlands until they were conquered by French Revolutionary armies in 1795. The one exception to this was the period of (1601-1621), when shortly before Philip II died on 13 September 1598, he renounced his rights to the Netherlands in favor of his daughter Isabella and her fianc, Archduke Albert of Austria, a younger son of Emperor Maximilian II. The territories reverted to Spain on the death of Albert in 1621, as the couple had no surviving offspring, and Isabella acted as regent-governor until her death in 1633:

*the Archdukes Albert and Isabella, 1601-1621 75px 50px

===King of England===
*Philip II of Spain (Jure uxoris King, with Mary I of England 15541558)

=== Spanish Habsburgs: Kings of Spain, Kings of Portugal (15811640) ===

100px

Coat of arms of Spanish Habsburgs (15811621 Version) showing the shield as kings of Portugal. Portugal regained its independence in 1640, and when Spain acknowledged this in 1668, it was removed.

The Habsburg Kingdom(s) of Spain were more a personal union of possessions of the Habsburg king and dynast, who was King of Castile, Leon, Aragon, Valencia, sometime of Portugal, Naples and Sicily, Duke of Milan, and Lord of the Americas, as well as Duke of Brabant, Count of Flanders and Holland, Duke of Luxemburg (i.e. all the Habsburg Netherlands). A listing of a number of the titles can be seen here. The dynast (head of the Spanish Habsburgs, i.e. the King, showed this wide range of claims in his arms. There are many more variants of these arms in the Habsburg Armory, Spanish Section as well as coat of arms of the King of Spain, coat of arms of Spain, coat of arms of the Prince of Asturias, and coats of arms of Spanish Monarchs in Italy. The Spanish Habsburgs also kept up the Burgundian court tradition of the dynast being known by a "nickname" (e.g. the Bold, the Prudent, the Bewitched). 

*Philip I of Castile the Handsome, second son of Maximilian I, founded the Spanish Habsburgs in 1496 by marrying Joanna the Mad, daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella. Philip died in 1506, leaving the thrones of Castile and Aragon to be inherited and united into the throne of Spain by his son: 50px

*Charles I 15161556, aka Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor; divided the House into Austrian and Spanish lines The meanings of his arms are analyzed here. 50px 50px

*Philip II the Prudent 15561598, also Philip I of Portugal 15811598 and Philip I of England with his wife Mary I of England 15541558. The meanings of his arms are analyzed here. 50px. 50px

*Philip III the Pious, also Philip II of Portugal 15981621 50px

*Philip IV the Great 16211665, also Philip III of Portugal 16211640 50px

*Charles II the Bewitched ( "El Hechizado") 16651700 50px

The War of the Spanish Succession took place after the extinction of the Spanish Habsburg line, to determine the inheritance of Charles II.

Spanish branch's family tree with connections to Emperors' branch

=== Austrian Habsburgs: Holy Roman Emperors, Kings of Hungary and Bohemia, Archdukes of Austria ===
75px
75px
75px
75px

The main junior line of the house ruled the Duchy of Austria, as well as the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Kingdom of Hungary. The dynasty however was split up again in 1564 among the children of deceased Emperor Ferdinand I of Habsburg. The Inner Austrian line founded by Archduke Charles II prevailed again, when his son and successor as regent of Inner Austria (i.e. the Duchy of Styria, the Duchy of Carniola with March of Istria, the Duchy of Carinthia, the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca, and the Imperial City of Trieste, ruled from Graz) Ferdinand II in 1619 became Archduke of Austria and Holy Roman Emperor as well as King of Bohemia and Hungary in 1620. The Further Austrian/Tyrolean line of Ferdinand's brother Archduke Leopold V survived until the death of his son Sigismund Francis in 1665, whereafter their territories ultimately returned to common control with the other Austrian Habsburg lands. Inner Austrian stadtholders went on to rule until the days of Empress Maria Theresa in the 18th century.

*Ferdinand I, emperor 15561564 50px (Family Tree)
*Maximilian II, emperor 15641576 50px
*Rudolf II, emperor 15761612 50px
*Matthias, emperor 16121619 50px
*Ferdinand II, emperor 16191637 50px
*Ferdinand III, emperor 16371657 50px(Family Tree)
*Leopold I, emperor 16581705 50px
*Josef I, emperor 17051711 50px
*Charles VI, emperor 17111740 50px
*Maria Theresa of Austria, Habsburg heiress and wife of emperor Francis I Stephen, reigned as Archduchess of Austria and Queen of Hungary and Bohemia 17401780.

The War of the Austrian Succession took place after the extinction of the male line of the Austrian Habsburg line upon the death of Charles VI. The direct Habsburg line itself became totally extinct with the death of Maria Theresa of Austria, when it was followed by the House of Lorraine, styled of Habsburg-Lorraine.
Holy Roman Emperors and their families

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine, main line: Holy Roman Emperors, Kings of Hungary and Bohemia, Archdukes of Austria ===
75px
75px
75px
75px

*Francis I Stephen, emperor 17451765 50px (Family Tree)
*Joseph II, emperor 17651790 50px
*Leopold II, emperor 17901792 50px (Family Tree)
*Francis II, emperor 17921806 50px (Family Tree)
Queen Maria Christina of Austria of Spain, great-granddaughter of Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor above. Wife of Alfonso XII of Spain and mother of Alfonso XIII of the House of Bourbon. Alfonso XIII's wife Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg was descended from King George I of Great Britain from the Habsburg Leopold Line {above}.

The House of Habsburg-Lorraine retained Austria and attached possessions after the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire; see below.

A son of Leopold II was Archduke Rainer of Austria whose wife was from the House of Savoy; a daughter Adelaide, Queen of Sardina was the wife of King Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont, Savoy, and Sardinia and King of Italy. Their Children married into the Royal Houses of Bonaparte; Saxe-Coburg and Gotha {Bragana} {Portugal}; Savoy {Spain}; and the Dukedoms of Montferrat and Chablis.

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine, main line: Emperors of Austria ===
75px
75px

Small Coat of Arms of the Austrian Empire adopted by Francis I in 1804. On the center is the Small (personal) Coat of arms of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine adopted by Emperor Francis I. It shows (left to right) the arms of Habsburg, which had all but been abandoned in favor of Austria when the Habsburgs acquired Austria, the Arms of Austria, and the Arms of Lorraine.
*Francis I, Emperor of Austria 18041835: formerly Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor 50px 50px
(Family Tree)
*Ferdinand I, Emperor of Austria 18351848 50px
*Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austria 18481916. 50px
*Charles I, Emperor of Austria 19161918. He died in exile in 1922. His wife was of the House of Bourbon-Parma. 50px

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Grand dukes of Tuscany ===
75px
*Francis Stephen 17371765 (later Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor)

Francis Stephen assigned the grand duchy of Tuscany to his second son Peter Leopold, who in turn assigned it to his second son upon his accession as Holy Roman Emperor. Tuscany remained the domain of this cadet branch of the family until Italian unification.

*Peter Leopold 17651790 (later Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor)
*Ferdinand III 17901800, 18141824 (Family Tree)
*Leopold II 18241849, 18491859 50px
*Ferdinand IV 18591860

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Tuscany line, post monarchy ===
* Ferdinand IV 18601908
* Archduke Joseph Ferdinand, Prince of Tuscany 19081942
* Archduke Peter Ferdinand, Prince of Tuscany 19421948
* Archduke Gottfried, Prince of Tuscany 19481984
* Archduke Leopold Franz, Prince of Tuscany 19481993
* Archduke Sigismund, Grand Duke of Tuscany 1993present

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine (Austria-Este): Dukes of Modena ===
The duchy of Modena was assigned to a minor branch of the family by the Congress of Vienna. It was lost to Italian unification. The Dukes named their line the House of Austria-Este, as they were descended from the daughter of the last D'Este Duke of Modena.

*Francis IV 18141831, 18311846 (Family Tree)
*Francis V 18461848, 18491859

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Modena line, post monarchy ===
* Francis V (18591875) 50px
* Franz Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria-Este & Crown Prince of Austria-Hungary (18751914)50px
* Karl, Archduke of Austria-Este (19141917)
* Robert, Archduke of Austria-Este (19171996) 50px
* Lorenz, Archduke of Austria-Este (1996Present)

===House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Empress consort of France===
* Marie Louise of Austria 18101814

===House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Duchess of Parma===
The duchy of Parma was likewise assigned to a Habsburg, but did not stay in the House long before succumbing to Italian unification. It was granted to the second wife of Napoleon I of France, Maria Luisa Duchess of Parma, a daughter of the Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor, who was the mother of Napoleon II of France. Napoleon had divorced his wife Rose de Tascher de la Pagerie (better known to history as Josephine de Beauharnais) in her favour.

*Maria Luisa 18141847 (Family Tree)

=== House of Habsburg-Lorraine: Emperor of Mexico ===
Coat of Arms of the Mexican Empire adopted by Maximilian I in 1864
Maximilian, the adventurous second son of Archduke Franz Karl, was invited as part of Napoleon III's manipulations to take the throne of Mexico, becoming Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico. The conservative Mexican nobility, as well as the clergy, supported this Second Mexican Empire. His consort, Charlotte of Belgium, a daughter of King Leopold I of Belgium and a princess of the House of Saxe-Coburg Gotha, encouraged her husband's acceptance of the Mexican crown and accompanied him as Empress Carlota of Mexico. The adventure did not end well. Maximilian was shot in "Cerro de las Campanas" in 1867 by the republican forces of Benito Jurez.

*Maximilian I (18641867) (Family Tree)

==House of Habsburg-Lorraine, main line: Heads of the House of Habsburg (post-monarchy)==
Charles I was expelled from his domains after World War I and the empire was abolished.
Current personal arms of the head of the house of Habsburg, claiming only the personal title of Archduke

*Charles I (19181922) (Family Tree)
*Otto von Habsburg (1912-2011) 
*Zita of Bourbon-Parma, guardian, (19221930)
*Karl von Habsburg, (2007present)

see Line of succession to the Austro-Hungarian throne

==Burials==

== Kings of Hungary ==
The kingship of Hungary remained in the Habsburg family for centuries; but as the kingship was not strictly inherited (Hungary was an elective monarchy until 1687) and was sometimes used as a training ground for young Habsburgs, as "Palatine" of Hungary, the dates of rule do not always match those of the primary Habsburg possessions. Therefore, the kings of Hungary are listed separately.
75px
75px

===Albertine line: Kings of Hungary===
* Albert, king of Hungary 14371439
* Ladislaus V Posthumus, King of Hungary 14441457

===Austrian Habsburgs: Kings of Hungary===
* Ferdinand I, king of Hungary 15261564
* Maximilian I, king of Hungary 15631576
* Rudolf I, king of Hungary 15721608
* Matthias II, king of Hungary 16081619
* Ferdinand II, king of Hungary 16181637
* Ferdinand III, king of Hungary 16251657
* Ferdinand IV, king of Hungary 16471654
* Leopold I, king of Hungary 16551705
* Joseph I, king of Hungary 16871711
* Charles III, king of Hungary 17111740
* Maria Theresa, queen of Hungary 17411780

===House of Habsburg-Lorraine, main line: Kings of Hungary===
75px
* Joseph II, king of Hungary 17801790
* Leopold II, king of Hungary 17901792
* Francis, king of Hungary 17921835
* Ferdinand V, king of Hungary and Bohemia 18351848
* Francis Joseph I, king of Hungary 18671916
* Charles IV, king of Hungary 19161918

== Kings of Bohemia ==
90px
90px
The kingship of Bohemia was from 1306 a position elected by its nobles. As a result, it was not an automatically inherited position. Until rule of the Ferdinand I Habsburgs didn't gain hereditary accession to the throne and were shifted by other dynasties. Hence, the kings of Bohemia and their ruling dates are listed separately.

===Main line===
* Rudolph I, king of Bohemia 13061307

===Albertine line: Kings of Bohemia===
* Albert, king of Bohemia 14371439
* Ladislaus Posthumus, king of Bohemia 14531457

===Austrian Habsburgs: Kings of Bohemia===
* Ferdinand I, king of Bohemia 15261564
* Maximilian I, king of Bohemia 15631576
* Rudolph II, king of Bohemia 15721611
* Matthias, king of Bohemia 16111618
* Ferdinand II, king of Bohemia 16211637
* Ferdinand III, king of Bohemia 16251657
* Ferdinand IV, king of Bohemia 16471654
* Leopold I, king of Bohemia 16551705
* Joseph I, king of Bohemia 16871711
* Charles VI, king of Bohemia 17111740
* Maria Theresa, queen of Bohemia 17431780

===House of Habsburg-Lorraine, main line: Kings of Bohemia===
From the accession of Maria Theresa, the kingship of Bohemia became united with the Austrian possessions.

* Joseph II, king of Bohemia 17801790
* Leopold II, king of Bohemia 17901792
* Francis, king of Bohemia 17921835
* Ferdinand V, king of Bohemia 18351848
* Francis Joseph I, king of Bohemia 18481916
* Charles III, king of Bohemia 19161918

== Arms of Dominion of the Austro-Hungarian Empire ==
The arms of dominion began to take on a life of their own in the 19th century as the idea of the state as independent from the Habsburg dynasty took root. They are the national arms as borne by a sovereign in his capacity as head of state and represent the state as separate from the person of the monarch or his dynasty. That very idea had been, here to fore, foreign to the concept of the Habsburg state. The state had been the personal property of the Habsburg dynast. Since the states, territories, and nationalities represented were in many cases only united to the Austro-Hungarian Empire by their historic loyalty to the head of the house of Habsburg as hereditary lord, these full ("grand") arms of dominion of Austria-Hungary reflect the complex political infrastructure that was necessarily to accommodate the many different nationalities and groupings within the empire after the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867.

Shield of the Austrian part of the empire (18671915).
Enumeration

After 1867 the eastern part of the empire, also called Transleithania, was mostly under the domination of the Kingdom of Hungary. The shield integrated the arms of the kingdom of Hungary, with two angels and supporters and the crown of St. Stephen, along with the territories that were subject to it:

The Kingdom of Dalmatia, the Kingdom of Croatia, the Kingdom of Slavonia (conjoined with Croatia as the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia - formally known as the Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Slavonia, and Dalmatia, although the claim to Dalmatia was mostly de jure), the Great Principality of Transylvania, the Condominium of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1915-1918), the City of Fiume and its district (modern Rijeka), and in the center, the Kingdom of Hungary.

The western or Austrian part of the empire, Cisleithania, continued using the shield of the Empire in 1815 but with the seals of various member territories located around the central shield. Paradoxically, some of these coats of arms belonged to the territories that were part of the Hungarian part of the empire and shield. This shield, the most frequently used until 1915, was known as the middle shield. There was also the small shield, with just the personal arms of the Habsburgs, as used in 1815.

 I II III IV V 
 35px 55px 55px 45px 60px 
 Kingdom of Hungary Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria Archduchy of Austria Duchy of Salzburg Duchy of Styria 
 VI VII VIII 
 60px 60px 60px 60px 60px 
 Duchy of Tirol Duchy of Carinthia and Duchy of Carniola (Marshalled) Margraviate of Moravia and Duchy of Silesia (Marshalled) 
 IX X XI 
 45px 65px 60px 
 Great Principality of Transylvania Kingdom of Illyria Kingdom of Bohemia 

=== Version of 1915 ===
In 1915, in the middle of World War I, Austria-Hungary adopted a heraldic composition uniting the shield that was used in the Hungarian part, also known as the Lands of the Crown of St. Stephen, with a new version of the medium shield of the Austrian part as depicted above in the section on the main line of the Emperors of Austria.

Before 1915, the arms of the different territories of the Austrian part of the Empire (heraldry was added to some areas not shown in the previous version and to the left to the Hungarian part) appeared together in the shield positioned on the double-headed eagle coat of arms of the Austrian Empire as an inescutcheon. The eagle was inside a shield with a gold field. The latter shield was supported by two griffins and was topped by the Austrian Imperial Crown (previously these items were included only in the large shield). Then, shown in the center of both arms of dominion, as an inescutcheon to the inescutcheon, is the small shield, i.e. personal arms, of the Habsburgs. All this was surrounded by the collar Order of the Golden Fleece H. Strhl: Die neuen sterreichischen, ungarischen und gemeinsamen Wappen. Hrsg. auf Grund der mit d. allerhchsten Handschreiben vom 10. u. 11. Okt. 1915, bezw. 2. u. 5. Mrz 1916 erfolgten Einfhrung. Viena 1917. 

Middle Coat of arms of the Austrian part of the Empire in 1915. It shows as a center shield (inescutcheon) the personal arms of Habsburg-Lorraine over the arms of dominions of the Habsburg lands. It usually had the personal arms of Habsburg-Lorraine in the center.

In the heraldic composition of 1915, the shields of the two foci of the empire, Austria and Hungary, were brought together. The griffin supporter on the left was added for Austria and an angel on the right as a supporter for Hungary. The center featured the personal arms of the Habsburgs (Habsburg, Austria and Lorraine). This small shield was topped with a royal crown and surrounded by the collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece, below which was the Military Order of Maria Theresa, below which was the collars of the Orders of St. Stephen's and Leopold. At the bottom was the motto that read "AC INDIVISIBILITER INSEPARABILITER" ("indivisible and inseparable"). There were other simplified versions which did not have the supports depicted, and the simple shields of Austria and Hungary. These were the arms of the Empire of Austria with an inescutcheon of Austria, and the Arms of Hungary (with chequer of Croatia at the tip).

Middle Common Coat of Arms of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1915 showing most of the larger possessions of the Austrian Empire (left shield) and the Kingdom of Hungary (right shield). The personal arms of the Habsburg-Lorraines is in the center. The collection of territories that acknowledged the head of the Habsburgs as personal ruler shown by this representation put the Empire at a distinct disadvantage in comparison with the unified nation states that it shared the continent of Europe with.

 Austrian Lands 
 Shield Partition Territory 
 230px230px I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX Kingdom of Galicia and LodomeriaKingdom of BohemiaKingdom of DalmatiaDuchy of Upper and Lower SilesiaDuchy of SalzburgMargraviate of MoraviaCounty of TirolDuchy of BukovinaProvince of VorarlbergMargraviate of IstriaCounty of Gorizia (part of the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca) County of Gradisca (also part of the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca)Province of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Conjoined) Imperial Free City of TriesteArchduchy of Lower AustriaArchduchy of Upper AustriaDuchy of StyriaDuchy of CarniolaDuchy of CarinthiaArchduchy of Austria 

 Territories of the crown of St. Stephen 
 Shield Partition Territory 
 borderborder I II III IV V VI VII Kingdom of Dalmatia (Hungarian portion)Kingdom of CroatiaKingdom of SlavoniaGrand Principality of TransylvaniaProvince of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Conjoined)City of Fiume and its districtKingdom of Hungary 

 Personal Shield of they Dynasty 
 Shield Partition Significance 
 140px I II III Count of HabsburgArchduke of AustriaDuke of Lorraine 

=== Gallery ===

 260px 260px 240px 
 Arms of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (18671915) Arms of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (19151918) Small Arms of Austria (Cisleithania)(18051918) 
 160px 260px 250px 
 Simple Arms of Cisleithania (19151918) Personal Arms of the Emperor Franz Josef (18481916) Simple Arms of the Austrian and Hungarian parts of the empire. (19151918) 

==See also==
* A.E.I.O.U.
* Austria-Hungary
* Austrian Empire
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree
* Grand Duchy of Tuscany
* Habsburg family tree
* Habsburg Monarchy
* Habsburg Spain
* Kings of Germany family tree. The Habsburgs were the 8th dynasty to rule Germany and were related by marriage to all the others.
* Line of succession to the Tuscan Throne
* List of rulers of Austria
* List of rulers of Lorraine
* Royal intermarriage
* Mandibular prognathism ("Habsburg lip")
* Mayerling Incident
* OttomanHabsburg wars
* Thirty Years' War

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Brewer-Ward, Daniel A. The House of Habsburg: A Genealogy of the Descendants of Empress Maria Theresia. Clearfield, 1996.
* Crankshaw, Edward. The Fall of the House of Habsburg. Sphere Books Limited, London, 1970. (first published by Longmans in 1963)
* Evans, Robert J. W. The Making of the Habsburg Monarchy, 15501700: An Interpretation. Clarendon Press, 1979.
* McGuigan, Dorothy Gies. The Habsburgs. Doubleday, 1966.
* Palmer, Alan. Napolen and Marie Louise Ariel Mexico, 2003.
* Wandruszka, Adam. The House of Habsburg: Six Hundred Years of a European Dynasty. Doubleday, 1964 (Greenwood Press, 1975).

==External links==

* http://habsburg.yolasite.com/ The Habsburg Family Association
* "Erzherzog Dr. Otto von Habsburg" (Autorisierte Ehrenseite) in German
* Habsburg Biographies
* Habsburg History
* Habsburg Resource Centre on SurnameWeb
* http://www.ac.wwu.edu/~stephan/Rulers/hapsburg3.html
* Genealogical tree of the house of Habsburg (up until Maria Theresia)
* The Hapsburg Monarchy (Wickham Steed, 1913)) eLibrary Austria Project full text (ebook)
* 
* "Inbreeding caused demise of the Spanish Habsburg dynasty, new study reveals" (15 April 2009)
*Family tree of the Kings of the House of Habsburg

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

 



[[Hub]]

Hub, or Hubs may refer to:

==Wheels==

* Bicycle hub, the central part of a bicycle wheel
* Locking hubs, accessory on four-wheel drive vehicles
* Wheel hub assembly, an automotive part

==Buildings==
* Hetzel Union Building, former name for the HUB-Robeson Center, Penn State University, United States
* HUB Tower, Des Moines, Iowa
* Husky Union Building, University of Washington, United States

==Computing==
*Email hub, a computer system dedicated to relay e-mail messages
*Ethernet hub, a computer networking hardware device
*Hubs and authorities, a scheme used for ranking web pages
*Serial ATA port multiplier, sometimes called SATA hub  a device that allows multiple SATA devices to be connected to a single SATA host port.
*USB hub, allows many USB devices to be connected to a single USB port

==Fiction==
*Hub (comics), Marvel comics fictional character
*Hub (magazine), a UK-based online speculative fiction magazine
*Hubs (Transformers), fictional character
*The Hub (Torchwood), HQ of Torchwood III, UK fictional organization fighting aliens based in Cardiff

==Organizations==
*Hub Culture, a social network that merges virtual and physical places
*Hub Strategy, American advertising agency
* Harvard University Band
* Hebrew University Bible Project
* Hogeschool-Universiteit Brussel, previously known as European University College Brussels
* Humboldt University of Berlin
* Hub International, North American insurance brokerage listed on the New York Stock Exchange

==People==
*Hub (bassist), American musician
*Hub (artist), artist and illustrator of Okko magazine
*Hub Bechtol (19262004), American footballer
*Hub van Doorne (19001979), Dutch businessman
*Hub Kittle (19172004), American baseball player
*Hub Walker (19061982), American baseball player

==Places==
* Hub, California, unincorporated community in California, United States
*Hub, Mississippi
* Hub River, in Balochistan, Pakistan
* Hub Dam, in Balochistan, Pakistan
* Hub Tehsil, in Balochistan Province, Pakistan
* Hub, Balochistan, city in Hub District, Balochistan Province, Pakistan
* Hub City (disambiguation), the nickname of several cities

==Transport==
*Transport hub, where traffic is exchanged across several modes of transport
*Airline hub, an airport used as transfer point
*Reliever hub, secondary airline hub

==Other uses==
* Hunmanby railway station, England, which has the National Rail station code "HUB"
* Hub, one of several names for a male weasel
* Hub, in video games is a type of level that serves as direct access to all other levels
* Hubs, the athletic teams of Rochelle Township High School in Rochelle, Illinois.
* The Hub (TV channel)

==See also==
* The Hub (disambiguation)



[[House of Commons of the United Kingdom]]

The House of Commons is the lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which, like the House of Lords (the upper house), meets in the Palace of Westminster.

The Commons is an elected body consisting of 650 members known as members of parliament (MPs). Members are elected to represent constituencies by first-past-the-post and hold their seats until Parliament is dissolved.

A House of Commons of England evolved at some point in England during the 14th century, becoming the House of Commons of Great Britain after the political union with Scotland in 1707 and in the nineteenth century the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland after the political union with Ireland before assuming its current title after independence was given to the Irish Free State in 1922.

Under the Parliament Act 1911, the Lords' power to reject legislation was reduced to a delaying power. The Government is primarily responsible to the House of Commons and the prime minister stays in office only as long as he or she retains its support.

==Role==

===Relationship with the government===
Although it does not formally elect the prime minister, the position of the parties in the House of Commons is of over-riding importance. By convention, the prime minister is answerable to, and must maintain the support of, the House of Commons. Thus, whenever the office of prime minister falls vacant, the Sovereign appoints the person who has the support of the House, or who is most likely to command the support of the Housenormally the leader of the largest party in the Commons. (The leader of the second-largest party becomes the Leader of the Opposition.) Since 1963, by convention, the prime minister is always a member of the House of Commons, rather than the House of Lords.

The Lower House may indicate its lack of support for the Government by rejecting a Motion of confidence or by passing a Motion of no confidence. Confidence and no confidence motions are sometimes phrased explicitly, for instance: "That this House has no confidence in Her Majesty's Government." Many other motions were considered confidence issues, even though not explicitly phrased as such. In particular, important bills that form a part of the Government's agenda were formerly considered matters of confidence, as is the annual Budget. When a Government has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the prime minister is obliged to either resign, making way for another MP who can command confidence, or request the monarch to dissolve Parliament, thereby precipitating a general election.

Parliament normally sits for a maximum term of five years. Formerly, the prime minister was able to choose the timing of the dissolution of parliament up until this time had elapsed with the permission of the Monarch. However, since the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, terms are now a fixed five years, with only a vote of no-confidence or a two-thirds majority able to bring about an early general election.

A prime minister may resign even if he or she is not defeated at the polls (for example, for personal health reasons); in such a case, the premiership goes to whoever can command a majority in the House of Commons, in practice this is usually the new leader of the outgoing prime minister's party. Until 1965, the Conservative Party had no mechanism for electing a new leader and when Anthony Eden resigned as PM in 1957 without recommending a successor, the party was unable to nominate one. It fell to the Queen to appoint Harold Macmillan as the new prime minister, after taking the advice of ministers.

By convention, all ministers must be members of the House of Commons or House of Lords. A handful have been appointed who are outside Parliament but in most cases they subsequently entered Parliament either by means of a by-election or receiving a peerage. Since 1902, all prime ministers have been members of the Commons (the sole exception, the Earl of Home, disclaimed his peerage days after becoming prime minister, and was immediately elected to the House of Commons as Sir Alec Douglas-Home).

In modern times, a vast majority of ministers belong to the Commons rather than the Lords. Few major cabinet positions (except Lord Privy Seal, Lord Chancellor and Leader of the House of Lords) have been filled by a lord in recent times. Notable exceptions are Lord Carrington who served as Foreign Secretary from 1979 to 1982, and Lord Young who was appointed Employment Secretary in 1985. Lord Mandelson was appointed Secretary of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform in October 2008; he was also briefly neither a member of the Lords nor Commons in this capacity. The elected status of members of the Commons, as opposed to the unelected nature of members of the Lords, is seen to lend more legitimacy to ministers. The prime minister chooses the Ministers, and may decide to remove them at any time; the formal appointment or dismissal, however, is made by the Sovereign.

The House of Commons scrutinises the Government through "Question Time", during which members have the opportunity to ask questions of the prime minister and of other cabinet ministers. Prime minister's question time occurs once each week, normally for a half-hour each Wednesday. Questions must relate to the responding minister's official government activities, not to his or her activities as a party leader or as a private Member of Parliament. Customarily, members of the Government party and members of the Opposition alternate when asking questions. In addition to questions asked orally during Question Time, Members of Parliament may also make inquiries in writing.

In practice, the House of Commons' scrutiny of the Government is fairly weak. Since the first-past-the-post electoral system is employed, the governing party often enjoys a large majority in the Commons, and there is often little need to compromise with other parties. Modern British political parties are so tightly organised that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs. Also, many ruling party MPs are paid members of the government. Thus, during the 20th century, the Government has lost confidence issues only three timestwice in 1924, and once in 1979. However, the threat of rebellions by their own party's backbench MPs often forces Governments to make concessions (recently over top-up fees and foundation hospitals). Occasionally the Government is defeated by backbench rebellions (Terrorism Act 2006). However, the scrutiny provided by the Select Committees is more serious.

The House of Commons technically retains the power to impeach Ministers of the Crown (or any other subject, even if not a public officer) for their crimes. Impeachments are tried by the House of Lords, where a simple majority is necessary to convict. The power of impeachment, however, has fallen into disuse: the House of Commons exercises its checks on the Government through other means, such as No Confidence Motions; the last impeachment was that of Viscount Melville in 1806.

===Legislative functions===

Bills may be introduced in either house, though controversial bills normally originate in the House of Commons. The supremacy of the Commons in legislative matters is assured by the Parliament Acts, under which certain types of bills may be presented for the Royal Assent without the consent of the House of Lords. The Lords may not delay a money bill (a bill that, in the view of the Speaker of the House of Commons, solely concerns national taxation or public funds) for more than one month. Moreover, the Lords may not delay most other public bills for more than two parliamentary sessions, or one calendar year. These provisions, however, only apply to public bills that originate in the House of Commons. Moreover, a bill that seeks to extend a parliamentary term beyond five years requires the consent of the House of Lords.

By a custom that prevailed even before the Parliament Acts, only the House of Commons may originate bills concerning taxation or Supply. Furthermore, supply bills passed by the House of Commons are immune to amendments in the House of Lords. In addition, the House of Lords is barred from amending a bill so as to insert a taxation or supply-related provision, but the House of Commons often waives its privileges and allows the Lords to make amendments with financial implications. Under a separate convention, known as the Salisbury Convention, the House of Lords does not seek to oppose legislation promised in the Government's election manifesto. Hence, as the power of the House of Lords has been severely curtailed by statute and by practice, the House of Commons is clearly the most powerful branch of Parliament.

==History==

Today's Parliament of the United Kingdom largely descends, in practice, from the Parliament of England, although the 1706 Treaty of Union, and the Acts of Union that ratified the Treaty, created a new Parliament of Great Britain to replace the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland. This new parliament was, in effect, the continuation of the Parliament of England with the addition of 45 MPs and sixteen Peers to represent Scotland. Later still the Act of Union (1800) brought about the abolition of the Parliament of Ireland and enlarged the Commons at Westminster with 100 Irish members, creating the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

Although popularly considered to refer to the fact its members are "commoners", the actual name of the House of Commons comes from the fact it represented communities (communes). 

===Layout and design===

The current Commons' layout is influenced by the use of the original St. Stephen's Chapel in the Palace of Westminster. The rectangular shape is derived from the shape of the chapel. Benches were arranged using the configuration of the chapel's choir stalls whereby they were facing across from one another. This arrangement facilitated an adversarial atmosphere that is representative of the British parliamentary approach.

===19th century===
The House of Commons in the early 19th century by Augustus Pugin and Thomas Rowlandson.
The House of Commons experienced an important period of reform during the nineteenth century. Over the years, several anomalies had developed in borough representation. The constituency boundaries had not been changed since 1660, so many towns that were once important but had declined by the nineteenth century still retained their ancient right of electing two members.

The most notorious of these "rotten boroughs" were Old Sarum, which had only six voters for two MPs, and Dunwich which had been abandoned due to coastal erosion. At the same time, large cities such as Manchester received no separate representation (although their eligible residents were able to vote in the corresponding county seat). Also notable were the pocket boroughs, small constituencies controlled by wealthy landowners and aristocrats, whose "nominees" were invariably elected.

The Commons attempted to address these anomalies by passing a Reform Bill in 1831. At first, the House of Lords proved unwilling to pass the bill, but were forced to relent when the prime minister, Lord Grey, advised King William IV to flood the House of Lords by creating pro-Reform peers. To avoid this the Lords relented and passed the bill in 1832. The Reform Act 1832, also known as the "Great Reform Act," abolished the rotten boroughs, established uniform voting requirements for the boroughs, and granted representation to populous cities, but still retained many pocket boroughs.

In the ensuing years, the Commons grew more assertive, the influence of the House of Lords having been reduced by the Reform Bill Crisis, and the power of the patrons reduced. The Lords became more reluctant to reject bills that the Commons passed with large majorities, and it became an accepted political principle that the confidence of the House of Commons alone was necessary for a government to remain in office.

Many more reforms were introduced in the latter half of the nineteenth century. The Reform Act 1867 lowered property requirements for voting in the boroughs, reduced the representation of the less populous boroughs, and granted parliamentary seats to several growing industrial towns. The electorate was further expanded by the Representation of the People Act 1884, under which property qualifications in the counties were lowered. The Redistribution of Seats Act of the following year replaced almost all multi-member constituencies with single-member constituencies.

===20th century===
The old Chamber of the House of Commons built by Sir Charles Barry was destroyed by German bombs during the Second World War. The essential features of Barry's design were preserved when the Chamber was rebuilt.
In 1908, the Liberal Government under Asquith introduced a number of social welfare programmes, which, together with an expensive arms race, forced the Government to seek higher taxes. In 1909, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George, introduced the "People's Budget", which proposed a new tax targeting wealthy landowners. The unpopular measure, however, failed in the heavily Conservative House of Lordsand the government resigned.

The resulting general election returned a hung parliament, but Asquith remained prime minister with the support of the smaller parties. Asquith then proposed that the powers of the Lords be severely curtailed. After a further election in December 1910, the Asquith Government secured the passage of a bill to curtail the powers of the House of Lords after threatening to flood the House with 500 new Liberal peers to ensure the passage of the bill.

Thus, the Parliament Act 1911 came into effect, destroying the legislative equality of the two Houses of Parliament. The House of Lords was permitted only to delay most legislation, for a maximum of three parliamentary sessions or two calendar years (reduced to two sessions or one year by the Parliament Act 1949). Since the passage of these Acts, the House of Commons has become the dominant branch of Parliament, both in theory and in practice.

In 1918, women over 30 were given the right to vote, quickly followed by the passage of a law enabling women to be eligible for election as members of parliament at the younger age of 21. The only woman to be elected that year was an Irish Sinn Fin candidate, Constance Markievicz, who therefore became the first woman MP. However, due to Sinn Fin's policy of abstention from Westminster, she never took her seat. 

Since the 17th century, MPs had been unpaid. Most of the men elected to the Commons had private incomes, while a few relied on financial support from a wealthy patron. Early Labour MPs were often provided with a salary by a trade union, but this was declared illegal by a House of Lords judgment of 1909. Consequently a resolution was passed in the House of Commons in 1911 introducing salaries for MPs. Government ministers had always been paid.

===21st century===

====Expenses scandal====

In May and June 2009 revelations of MPs' expenses claims caused a major scandal and loss of confidence by the public in the integrity of MPs, as well as causing the forced resignation of the Speaker.

==Members and elections==

Since 1950 each Member of Parliament represents a single constituency. There remains a technical distinction between county constituencies and borough constituencies, but the only effect of this difference is the amount of money candidates are allowed to spend during campaigns. The boundaries of the constituencies are determined by four permanent and independent Boundary Commissions, one each for England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. The Commissions conduct general reviews of electoral boundaries once every 8 to 12 years, as well as a number of interim reviews. In drawing boundaries, they are required to take into account local government boundaries, but may deviate from this requirement to prevent great disparities in the populations of the various constituencies. The proposals of the Boundary Commissions are subject to parliamentary approval, but may not be amended. After the next general review of constituencies, the Boundary Commissions will be absorbed into the Electoral Commission, which was established in 2000. Currently the United Kingdom is divided into 650 constituencies, with 533 in England, 40 in Wales, 59 in Scotland, and 18 in Northern Ireland.

General elections occur whenever Parliament is dissolved by the Sovereign. The timing of the dissolution was normally chosen by the prime minister (see relationship with the Government above); however, as a result of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, Parliamentary terms are now fixed at five years, except in the event of the Commons passing a vote of no confidence or an "early election" motion, the latter having to be passed by two-thirds majority. 

Conventionally, all elections in the United Kingdom are held on a Thursday. The Electoral Commission is unsure where this convention arose, but dates it to 1931, with the suggestion that it was made to coincide with market day; this would ease voting for those who had to travel to the towns to cast their ballot. 

A candidate for a constituency must submit nomination papers signed by ten registered voters from that constituency, and pay a deposit of 500, which is refunded only if the candidate wins at least five per cent of the vote. The deposit seeks to discourage frivolous candidates. Each constituency returns one Member, using the first-past-the-post electoral system, under which the candidate with a plurality of votes wins. Minors (that is, anyone under the age of 18), members of the House of Lords, prisoners, and insane persons are not qualified to become Members of the House of Commons. To vote, one must be a resident of the United Kingdom as well as a citizen of the United Kingdom, of a British overseas territory, of the Republic of Ireland, or of a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. British citizens living abroad are allowed to vote for 15 years after moving from the United Kingdom. No person may vote in more than one constituency.

Once elected, Members of Parliament normally continue to serve until the next dissolution of Parliament. If a Member, however, dies or ceases to be qualified (see qualifications below), his or her seat falls vacant. It is also possible for the House of Commons to expel a Member, but this power is exercised only in cases of serious misconduct or criminal activity. In each case, a vacancy may be filled by a by-election in the appropriate constituency, with the same electoral system as in general elections.

The term "Member of Parliament" is normally used only to refer to Members of the House of Commons, even though the House of Lords is also a part of Parliament. Members of the House of Commons may use the post-nominal letters "MP". The annual salary of each Member is currently 63,291. Members may also receive additional salaries in right of other offices they hold (for instance, the Speakership). Most Members also claim between 100,000 and 150,000 for various office expenses (staff costs, postage, travelling, etc.) and, in the case of non-London Members, for the costs of maintaining a home in the capital.

===Qualifications===
Another picture of the old House of Commons chamber. Note the dark veneer on the wood, which was purposely made much brighter in the new chamber.
There are numerous qualifications that apply to members of parliament. Most importantly, one must be aged at least 18 (the limit was 21 until S.17 of the Electoral Administration Act 2006 came into force), and must be a citizen of the United Kingdom, of a British overseas territory, of the Republic of Ireland, or of a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations. These restrictions were introduced by the British Nationality Act 1981, but were previously far more stringent: under the Act of Settlement 1701, only natural-born subjects were qualified. Members of the House of Lords may not serve in the House of Commons, or even vote in parliamentary elections (just as the Queen does not vote); however, they are permitted to sit in the chamber during debates (unlike the Queen, who cannot enter the chamber).

A person may not sit in the Commons if he or she is the subject of a Bankruptcy Restrictions Order (applicable in England and Wales only), or if he or she is adjudged bankrupt (in Northern Ireland), or if his or her estate is sequestered (in Scotland). Also, MPs detained under the Mental Health Act for six months or more must vacate their seat. Under the Mental Health Act 1983, two specialists must report to the Speaker that a Member is suffering from mental illness before a seat can be declared vacant. There also exists a common law precedent from the 18th century that the "deaf and dumb" are ineligible to sit in the Lower House; this precedent, however, has not been tested in recent years. Jack Ashley continued to serve as an MP for 25 years after becoming profoundly deaf.

Anyone found guilty of high treason may not sit in Parliament until he or she has either completed the term of imprisonment, or received a full pardon from the Crown. Moreover, anyone serving a prison sentence of one year or more is ineligible. Finally, the Representation of the People Act 1983 disqualifies for ten years those found guilty of certain election-related offences. Several other disqualifications are codified in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975: holders of high judicial offices, civil servants, members of the regular armed forces, members of foreign legislatures (excluding the Republic of Ireland and Commonwealth countries), and holders of several Crown offices. Ministers, even though they are paid officers of the Crown, are not disqualified.

The rule that precludes certain Crown officers from serving in the House of Commons is used to circumvent a resolution adopted by the House of Commons in 1623, under which Members are not permitted to resign their seats. In practice, however, they always can. Should a Member wish to resign from the Commons, he or she may request appointment to one of two ceremonial Crown offices: that of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or that of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead. These offices are sinecures (that is, they involve no actual duties); they exist solely to permit the "resignation" of Members of the House of Commons. The Chancellor of the Exchequer is responsible for making the appointment, and, by convention, never refuses to do so when asked by a Member who desires to leave the House of Commons.

===Officers===
The Speaker presides over debates in the House of Commons, as depicted in the above print commemorating the destruction of the Commons Chamber by fire in 1834.
At the beginning of each new parliamentary term, the House of Commons elects one of its members as a presiding officer, known as the Speaker. If the incumbent Speaker seeks a new term, then the House may re-elect him or her merely by passing a motion; otherwise, a secret ballot is held. A Speaker-elect cannot take office until he or she has been approved by the Sovereign; the granting of the royal approbation, however, is a formality. The Speaker is assisted by three Deputy Speakers, the most senior of which holds the title of Chairman of Ways and Means. The two other Deputy Speakers are known as the First and Second Deputy Chairman of Ways and Means. These titles derive from the Committee of Ways and Means, a body over which the chairman once used to preside; even though the Committee was abolished in 1967, the traditional titles of the Deputy Speakers are still retained. The Speaker and the Deputy Speakers are always Members of the House of Commons.

Whilst presiding, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker wears ceremonial dress. The presiding officer may also wear a wig, but this tradition was abandoned by a former Speaker, Betty Boothroyd. Michael Martin, who succeeded the office also did not wear a wig whilst in the chamber. The current speaker, John Bercow, has chosen to wear a gown over a lounge suit, a decision which has sparked much debate and opposition. The Speaker or deputy presides from a chair at the front of the House. This chair was designed by Augustus Pugin who initially built a prototype of the chair at King Edward's School, Birmingham, the chair is called Sapientia, and is where the Chief master sits. The Speaker is also chairman of the House of Commons Commission, which oversees the running of the House, and he or she controls debates by calling on members to speak. If a member believes that a rule (or Standing Order) has been breached, he or she may raise a "point of order", on which the Speaker makes a ruling that is not subject to any appeal. The Speaker may discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the House. Thus, the Speaker is far more powerful than his Lords counterpart, the Lord Speaker, who has no disciplinary powers. Customarily, the Speaker and the deputies are non-partisan; they do not vote, or participate in the affairs of any political party. By convention, a Speaker seeking re-election to parliament is not opposed in his or her constituency by any of the major parties. The lack of partisanship continues even after the Speaker leaves the House of Commons.

The Clerk of the House is both the House's chief adviser on matters of procedure and chief executive of the House of Commons. He or she is a permanent official, not a Member of the House itself. The Clerk advises the Speaker on the rules and procedure of the House, signs orders and official communications, and signs and endorses bills. He or she chairs the Board of Management, which consists of the heads of the six departments of the House. The Clerk's deputy is known as the Clerk Assistant. Another officer of the House is the Serjeant-at-Arms, whose duties include the maintenance of law, order, and security on the House's premises. The Serjeant-at-Arms carries the ceremonial Mace, a symbol of the authority of the Crown and of the House of Commons, into the House each day in front of the Speaker, and the Mace is laid upon the Table of the House during sittings. The Librarian is head of the House of Commons Library, the House's research and information arm.

==Procedure==
:See also the stages of a bill section in Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom
Like the Lords, the Commons meets in the Palace of Westminster in London. The Commons chamber is small and modestly decorated in green, in contrast with the large, lavishly furnished red Lords chamber. There are benches on two sides of the chamber, divided by a centre aisle. This arrangement reflects the design of St Stephen's Chapel, which served as the home of the House of Commons until destroyed by fire in 1834. The Speaker's chair is at one end of the Chamber; in front of it is the Table of the House, on which the Mace rests. The Clerks sit at one end of the Table, close to the Speaker so that they may advise him or her on procedure when necessary. Members of the Government sit on the benches on the Speaker's right, whilst members of the Opposition occupy the benches on the Speaker's left. In front of each set of benches a red line is drawn on the carpet, which members are traditionally not allowed to cross during debates. It has been suggested that the distance between the lines in front of each set of benches is the length of two swords, thus stopping a member from attacking a member on the opposing side. However, the only person who is allowed to wear or carry a sword in the chamber is the Serjant-at-Arms. Government ministers and the leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet sit on the front rows, and are known as "frontbenchers". Other members of parliament, in contrast, are known as "backbenchers". Not all members of parliament can fit into the Chamber at the same time as it only has space to seat 427 of the 650 Members. Members who arrive late must stand near the entrance of the House if they wish to listen to debates. Sittings in the Chamber are held each day from Monday to Thursday, and also on some Fridays. During times of national emergency, the House may also sit at weekends.

Sittings of the House are open to the public, but the House may at any time vote to sit in private, which has occurred only twice since 1950. Traditionally, a Member who desired that the House sit privately could shout "I spy strangers" and a vote would automatically follow. In the past, when relations between the Commons and the Crown were less than cordial, this procedure was used whenever the House wanted to keep its debate private. More often, however, this device was used to delay and disrupt proceedings; as a result, it was abolished in 1998. Now, Members seeking that the House sit in private must make a formal motion to that effect. Public debates are broadcast on the radio, on television by BBC Parliament, and are recorded in Hansard.

Sessions of the House of Commons have sometimes been disrupted by angry protesters throwing objects into the Chamber from the galleriesitems thrown include leaflets, manure, flour by the group Fathers 4 Justice, and a canister of chlorobenzylidene malonitrile (tear gas). Even members have been known to disturb proceedings of the House. For instance, in 1976, Conservative MP Michael Heseltine seized and brandished the Mace of the House during a heated debate. However, perhaps the most famous disruption of the House of Commons was caused by King Charles I, who entered the Commons Chamber in 1642 with an armed force to arrest five members for high treason. This action was deemed a breach of the privilege of the House, and has given rise to the tradition that the monarch not set foot in the House of Commons.

Each year, the parliamentary session begins with the State Opening of Parliament, a ceremony in the Lords Chamber during which the Sovereign, in the presence of Members of both Houses, delivers an address outlining the Government's legislative agenda. The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod (a Lords official) is responsible for summoning the Commons to the Lords Chamber. When he arrives to deliver his summons, the doors of the Commons Chamber are traditionally slammed shut in his face, symbolising the right of the Lower House to debate without interference. He then knocks on the door three times with his Black Rod, and only then is granted admittance, where he informs the MPs that the Monarch awaits them, after which they proceed to the House of Lords for the Queen's Speech.

During debates, Members may speak only if called upon by the Speaker (or a Deputy Speaker, if the Speaker is not presiding). Traditionally, the presiding officer alternates between calling Members from the Government and Opposition. The Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, and other leaders from both sides are normally given priority. Formerly, all Privy Counsellors were also granted priority; however, the modernisation of Commons procedure in 1998 led to the abolition of this tradition.

Speeches are addressed to the presiding officer, using the words "Mr Speaker," "Madam Speaker," "Mr Deputy Speaker," or "Madam Deputy Speaker." Only the presiding officer may be directly addressed in debate; other Members must be referred to in the third person. Traditionally, Members do not refer to each other by name, but by constituency, using forms such as "the Honourable Member for ," or, in the case of Privy Counsellors, "the Right Honourable Member for ." Members of the same party refer to each other as "my (Right) Honourable friend". This may not always be the case during the actual oral delivery, when it might be difficult for a Member to remember another Member's exact constituency, but it is invariably followed in the transcript entered in the Hansard. The Speaker enforces the rules of the House and may warn and punish Members who deviate from them. Disregarding the Speaker's instructions is considered a breach of the rules of the House and may result in the suspension of the offender from the House. In the case of grave disorder, the Speaker may adjourn the House without taking a vote.

The Standing Orders of the House of Commons do not establish any formal time limits for debates. The Speaker may, however, order a Member who persists in making a tediously repetitive or irrelevant speech to stop speaking. The time set aside for debate on a particular motion is, however, often limited by informal agreements between the parties. Debate may also be restricted by the passage of "Allocation of Time Motions", which are more commonly known as "Guillotine Motions". Alternatively, the House may put an immediate end to debate by passing a motion to invoke Closure. The Speaker is allowed to deny the motion if he or she believes that it infringes upon the rights of the minority. Today, Bills are scheduled according to a Timetable Motion, which the whole House agrees in advance, negating the use of a guillotine.

When the debate concludes, or when the Closure is invoked, the motion in question is put to a vote. The House first votes by voice vote; the Speaker or Deputy Speaker puts the question, and Members respond either "Aye" (in favour of the motion) or "No" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote, but if his or her assessment is challenged by any Member or the voice vote is unclear, a recorded vote known as a division follows. The presiding officer, if he or she believes that the result of the voice vote is clear, may reject the challenge. When a division occurs, members enter one of two lobbies (the "Aye" lobby or the "No" lobby) on either side of the Chamber, where their names are recorded by clerks. A member who wishes to pointedly abstain from a vote may do so by entering both lobbies, casting one vote for and one against. At each lobby are two tellers (themselves Members of the House) who count the votes of the members.

Once the division concludes, the tellers provide the results to the presiding officer, who then announces them to the House. If there is an equality of votes, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker has a casting vote. Traditionally, this casting vote is exercised to allow further debate, if this is possible, or otherwise to avoid a decision being taken without a majority (e.g. voting No to a motion or the third reading of a bill). Ties rarely occurthe last one was in July 1993. The quorum of the House of Commons is 40 members for any vote, including the Speaker and four tellers. If fewer than 40 members have participated, the division is invalid.

Formerly, if a Member sought to raise a point of order during a division, suggesting that some of the rules governing parliamentary procedure are violated, he was required to wear a hat, thereby signalling that he was not engaging in debate. Collapsible top hats were kept in the Chamber just for this purpose. This custom was discontinued in 1998.

The outcome of most votes is largely known beforehand, since political parties normally instruct members on how to vote. A party normally entrusts some members of parliament, known as whips, with the task of ensuring that all party members vote as desired. Members of Parliament do not tend to vote against such instructions, since those who do so jeopardise promotion, or may be deselected as party candidates for future elections. Ministers, junior ministers and parliamentary private secretaries who vote against the whips' instructions usually resign. Thus, the independence of members of parliament tends to be low, although "backbench rebellions" by members discontent with their party's policies do occur. A member is also traditionally allowed some leeway if the particular interests of his constituency are adversely affected. In some circumstances, however, parties announce "free votes", allowing members to vote as they please. Votes relating to issues of conscience such as abortion and capital punishment are typically free votes.

Pairing is an arrangement where a Member from one party agrees with a Member of another party not to vote in a particular division, allowing both MPs the opportunity not to attend. 

A bisque is permission from the Whips given to a Member to miss a vote or debate in the House to attend to constituency business or other matters. 

==Committees==

The Parliament of the UK uses committees for a variety of purposes, e.g., for the review of bills. Committees consider bills in detail, and may make amendments. Bills of great constitutional importance, as well as some important financial measures, are usually sent to the "Committee of the Whole House", a body that includes all members of the Commons. Instead of the Speaker, the chairman or a Deputy Chairman of Ways and Means presides. The Committee meets in the House of Commons Chamber.

Most bills were until 2006 considered by Standing Committees, which consisted of between 16 and 50 members. The membership of each Standing Committee roughly reflected the strength of the parties in the House. The membership of Standing Committees changed constantly; new Members were assigned each time the committee considered a new bill. There was no formal limit on the number of Standing Committees, but usually only ten existed. Rarely, a bill was committed to a Special Standing Committee, which investigated and held hearings on the issues raised. In November 2006, Standing Committees were replaced by Public Bill Committees.

The House of Commons also has several Departmental Select Committees. The membership of these bodies, like that of the Standing Committees, reflects the strength of the parties. Each committee elects its own chairman. The primary function of a Departmental Select Committee is to scrutinise and investigate the activities of a particular government department. To fulfil these aims, it is permitted to hold hearings and collect evidence. Bills may be referred to Departmental Select Committees, but such a procedure is seldom used.

A separate type of Select Committee is the Domestic Committee. Domestic Committees oversee the administration of the House and the services provided to Members. Other committees of the House of Commons include Joint Committees (which also include members of the House of Lords), the Committee on Standards and Privileges (which considers questions of parliamentary privilege, as well as matters relating to the conduct of the members), and the Committee of Selection (which determines the membership of other committees).

==2010 election==

==Current composition==

==In film and television==
In 1986, the British television production company Granada Television created a near-full size replica of the post-1950 House of Commons debating chamber at its studios in Manchester for use in its adaptation of the Jeffrey Archer novel First Among Equals. The set was highly convincing, and was retained after the productionsince then, it has been used in nearly every British film and television production that has featured scenes set in the chamber. From 1988 until 1999 it was also one of the prominent attractions on the Granada Studios Tour, where visitors could watch actors performing mock political debates on the set. The major difference between the studio set and the real House of Commons Chamber is that the studio set has just four rows of seats on either side whereas the real Chamber has five.

In 2002, the set was purchased by the scriptwriter Paul Abbott so that it could be used in his BBC drama serial State of Play. Abbott, a former Granada Television staff writer, bought it personally as the set would otherwise have been destroyed and he feared it would take too long to get the necessary money from the BBC. Abbott kept the set in storage in Oxford. Abbott, Paul. Audio commentary on the DVD release of State of Play. BBC Worldwide. BBCDVD 1493. 

The post-1941 Commons Chamber was used in the film Ali G Indahouse, the political satire Restart by Komedy Kollective, about a British prime minister seeking re-election, and was mentioned in the Robin Williams stand-up special Robin Williams Live on Broadway in which he describes it as "like Congress, but with a two drink minimum". 
The pre-1941 Chamber was recreated in Shepperton Studios for the Ridley Scott/Richard Loncraine 2002 biographical film on Churchill, The Gathering Storm.

==See also==
* Adjournment debate
* Early day motion
* Father of the House
* House of Commons of Canada
* Introduction (British House of Commons)
* List of Stewards of the Chiltern Hundreds
* List of United Kingdom Parliament constituencies
* Parliamentary Archives
* Parliamentary Brief
* Records of members of parliament of the United Kingdom
* Salaries of Members of the United Kingdom Parliament
* Speaker Denison's rule

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Farnborough, T. E. May, 1st Baron. (1896). Constitutional History of England since the Accession of George the Third, 11th ed. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
* Mackenzie, K.R., "The English Parliament", (1950) Pelican Books.
* "Parliament" (1911). Encyclopdia Britannica, 11th ed. London: Cambridge University Press.
* Pollard, Albert F. (1926). The Evolution of Parliament, 2nd ed. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
* Porritt, Edward, and Annie G. Porritt. (1903). The Unreformed House of Commons: Parliamentary Representation before 1832. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Raphael, D. D., Donald Limon, and W. R. McKay. (2004). Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice, 23rd ed. London: Butterworths Tolley.

==External links==

* House of Commons official website
** The Parliamentary Archives
** Find Your MP
** Parliament Live TV (Silverlight is required to watch)
** Podcast tour of the Commons chamber with photos
* House of Commons from Democracy Live at BBC News
** Guide to the Commons
* 
;2010
* 2010 Intake  Educational/Social Breakdown (BBC Magazine)
* 2010 Intake  Occupational Background (Times Online)

 
United Kingdom
*



[[Hearts]]

Hearts is an "evasion-type" trick-taking playing card game for four players, although variations can accommodate 36 players. The game is also known as Black Lady, The Dirty, Dark Lady, Slippery Anne, Chase the Lady, Crubs, Black Queen and Black Maria, though any of these may refer to the similar but differently-scored game Black Lady. The game is a member of the Whist family of trick-taking games (which also includes Bridge and Spades), but the game is unique among Whist variants in that it is an evasion-type game; players avoid winning certain penalty cards in tricks, usually by avoiding winning tricks altogether.

==History==
The game of Hearts as currently known originated with a family of related games called Reversis, which became popular around 1750 in Spain. Hearts History on MindZine In this game, a penalty point was awarded for each trick won, plus additional points for capturing the Jack of Hearts or the Queen of Hearts. A similar game called "Four Jacks" centered around avoiding any trick containing a Jack, which were worth one penalty point, and the Jack of Spades worth two.

Over time, additional penalty cards were added to Reversis, and around 1850, the game gave way to a simple variant of Hearts, where each Heart was worth 1 point. The Queen of Spades (sometimes referred to as "Calamity Jane") was introduced in a variant called Black Maria which then became known as the standard Hearts game, and soon thereafter, the idea of "shooting the moon" was introduced to the game to add depth to the gameplay. In the 1920s, the Jack of Diamonds variation (ten positive points) was introduced, and some time later the scoring was reversed so that penalty points were expressed as positive instead of negative. Passing cards, breaking Hearts, and leading the Two of Clubs are more recent additions. 

The game has become popular in live play among grade school students in the United States, and has increased in popularity through Internet gaming sites. It also became known through the Microsoft version of the game packaged with most 1990s workstation versions of its popular Windows operating system, beginning in version 3.1.

==Method==
The overall objective is to be the player with the least amount of points by the end of the game.

===Dealing the cards===

13 cards are dealt to each player.
*When there are only three players, the 2 is removed from the deck before play commences, and each player receives 17 cards. In another alternative, a randomly chosen card is set aside face down at the beginning of play; this card goes to whoever takes the first Heart.
*When there are five players, the 2 is removed as well as the 2, and each player receives 10 cards. Alternatively, three Jokers (usually the two from one deck plus one from a similar deck) can be added, and each player receives 11. In another alternative, two randomly chosen cards are set aside face down at the beginning of play; these cards go to whoever takes the first heart.
* When there are six players, the jokers are inserted
* When there are more than six players two packs may be used, with 2s removed or jokers added to make an even number of cards per player. In the case where the same value card is played twice in a round, the second card beats the first. Jokers count as Hearts higher than the Ace, with a penalty value of -2.

===Passing cards===
The basic game of Hearts does not include card passing, but the most common variants do. Before each hand begins, each player chooses three cards, and passes them to another player. The main objectives of passing are to try to become "short" or "void" in a suit, and thus able to play off-suit when that suit is led; or to rid one's hand of "dangerous" cards that will likely force that player to take a trick containing penalty points, such as the Ace, King, or Queen of any suit (especially Spades and Hearts). There are many variations on passing; the most common (popularized by computer versions) rotates passing through four deals; on the first deal, players pass to the left, the second deal to the right, the third across the table. On the fourth deal no cards are passed; the cycle of four deals is then repeated.

Other variations on the passing rules include:
* Subsets of the four-deal passing sequence may occur, such as only passing in one direction, or passing alternately left and right.
* When playing with an odd number of players, passing across is not possible. With five players, the players may choose only two cards, and pass one each to the two players situated closest to the exact opposite side of the table. This system is called "star-passing" because the pattern of passing routes forms a five-point star.
* Alternatively, with an odd number of players, players choose three cards and discard them to a central pile. The Dealer then gathers, shuffles, and re-deals these cards. This method is known as a "center mixer."
* Passing the A, K and/or Q may be prohibited. 
* When there are more than four players, only two cards can be passed. 
* The Dealer chooses the number of cards to be passed and the direction of passing.

===The play of the game===
An example trick. South has led the J, and takes this trick (which includes a penalty Heart).

The game is played like most other trick-taking games. The first trick is led by the player to the left of the dealer. Each other player, in clockwise order, then plays a card from their hand. Players must "follow suit"; that is, play a card of the same suit as the lead card, if they are able. If they are not able to do so, they can play any card (an action known as "sloughing" or "discarding"), including a penalty Heart or the Queen of Spades. The trick and any penalty points it contains are won by the player who played the highest-value card of the suit that was led. That player then becomes the lead player for the next trick, and play continues until all players have exhausted their hands.

There are some common variants to this play:
*The player holding the 2 must lead it to begin the first trick. Kansil, p. 163 In variations with the 2 removed, play starts with the 3 Kansil, p. 164 
*No penalty card may be played on the first trick ("no bleeding on the first trick"). The chance of being dealt a hand composed entirely of standard penalty cards, and thus being forced to break this rule, is roughly 1 in 45 billion. This becomes more likely when other penalty cards are introduced as part of a variant.
*Hearts cannot be led until they have been "broken" (discarded on the lead of another suit), unless the player who must lead has nothing but Hearts remaining in hand. In some variations, any penalty card, including the Q, can break Hearts.
**In a sub-variation of the above, if a player's hand contains nothing but Hearts and other penalty cards, even if Hearts have not been broken, the player can lead a Heart. Hearts are of course broken by this play.
*If Jokers are used, rules must be defined concerning their play. Common conventions include:
** Two distinct Jokers are designated as the zero of Clubs and the zero of Diamonds, and behave just like ordinary Clubs and Diamonds.
** Non-distinct Jokers are valueless cards that cannot win tricks. They may be played at all times (except to lead tricks), or perhaps only when following suit is not possible.
** Jokers may also be considered as penalty cards. They may behave as normal penalty cards, or they might only score if played to a Heart trick.
** Jokers may be allowed to lead. If they are, the leading player calls a suit which must be followed, or the lead suit may be determined by the next card played.

===Scoring===
Each Heart taken in a trick scores one penalty point against the player winning the trick, and taking the Q costs 13 penalty points. There are thus 26 penalty points in each deal. The game usually ends when one player reaches or exceeds 100 points, or, in some variations, after a predetermined number of deals or period of time. In any of these cases, the winning player is the one with the fewest penalty points. 

It is also possible to score with chips. All players contribute one chip to a central pool of chips. The pool is divided equally among those players taking no penalty cards on a deal; if all players take penalty cards, the pool remains on the table and is added to the next pool. Once one player has won all available chips, or once another player has run out, the game ends.

====Scoring variants====

There are many scoring variants including:
*The 10 or J is a "bonus" card, subtracting 10 penalty points from the player who captures it. This is called the "Omnibus" variant. The bonus may or may not be allowed to "carry"; that is, the bonus may not be allowed to produce a hand score, and/or a running total, of less than zero for the player capturing it.
*There are several ways to reallocate the points in penalty cards. For example:
**Higher penalties may be assigned for the high hearts, e.g. J = 2 points, Q = 3 points, K = 4 points, and A = 5 points.
**2 = 2 points, 3 = 3 points, 4 = 4 points, etc.; the Jack, Queen, King, and Ace are worth 10 points each, and Q = 25 points. The penalty cards then total to 119, similar to Schwarze Katze.
**Same as above, but J = 11 points, Q = 12 points, K = 13 points, and A = 14 points; Q has no value. This variant is called "Pip Hearts." 
*Additional penalty cards may include A, K, and 10. The 7 is worth seven points in a variant called Hooligan Hearts. 
*Players reaching exactly 50 or 100 points at the end of a round may subtract 50 points from their scores.
*Players who takes no tricks in a deal may subtract five points from their scores.
*Before the first trick in a round, a player may predict that he or she will not take any Hearts on the upcoming hand. If the pledge is successful, 10 penalty points are deducted, but 10 points are added if it fails.

===Shooting the moon===

Shooting the moon, also known as getting control, capmangoe, or running, is a very common scoring variant. If one player takes all the penalty cards on one deal, that player's score remains unchanged while 26 penalty points are added to the scores of each of the other players. This is known as playing by "Old Moon" rules. In the "New Moon" rules, the player subtracts 26 points from his or her own score instead of adding 26 to the others. Attempting to shoot the moon is often a risky strategy, as failure to capture every single penalty card will result in the remaining penalty points (as many as 25) being added to one's score.

There are several sub-variations to these rules:
*A player who shoots the moon may have a choice between Old Moon or New Moon.
*A player who shoots the moon may be required use the Old Moon rules, unless doing so would end the game with the shooter losing (e.g., in a 100-point game, if the shooter has 90, another player 95, and the leader 63, adding on a moon would sink the shooter). In such a case, the player may use New Moon instead.
*A player who shoots the moon may only use New Moon after he or she, or perhaps another player, has reached a predetermined score.
*A player who takes all thirteen tricks, thus shooting the moon, may add 52 points to the other players' scores, subject to the other variations listed above. This is known as "shooting the sun" or "shooting the blue moon." 
*A player who takes all thirteen tricks may add 52 points to the player who passed to him or her at the beginning of the round, while the others each receive 26. This is known as the "Punishment Rule."
*A player who takes all thirteen tricks reverts their score from the entire game to 0. This is known as "Cleaning the Slate."
*A player who takes all of the penalty cards but fails to shoot the sun scores normally instead of shooting the moon.
*The first trick of a hand does not count for shooting the sun; only the following twelve tricks are required. This allows a player who holds the two of clubs to shoot the sun.

If a player receives 260 points (26 points every round) over 10 rounds, all other players may receive 260 points and the player finishes with a score of 0, or all other players receive 100 in a normal game. This variant is called "Shooting the Big Moon."

==Variations==

* "Booster Nines": If a nine is played, the trick is extended by one round. 
* "Complex Hearts": A variant by game designer Richard Garfield using the complex number system. Hearts are worth one point each, Q = 13i, J = -10, and 10 multiplies the score for the given hand by 2i. The first player to reach an absolute value of 100 is the loser.
* "Danger Hearts": Ten rounds are played using standard scoring, and each player has three lives. If a player receives 15 or more Points in a round, he or she loses a life. 
* "Cancellation Hearts": For 6 to 11 players, using two decks shuffled together. If exactly the same card is played twice in one trick, the cards "cancel" each other, and neither can win the trick. If two of such pairs appear in the same trick, the whole trick is canceled and the cards are given to the winner of the next trick.
* "Gong Zhu" or "Chinese Hearts" () (Pinyin  gng zh, literally "chase the pig"): Cards have negative values instead of positive penalties. 5 through 10 = -10, J = -20, Q = -30, K = -40, A = -50, Q = -100, J = +100, and 10 doubles the score for the round. 
* "Joker Hearts": One or more Jokers are added, which can be played any time (regardless if following suit is possible). They cannot win tricks or score any penalty points.
* "Likha": A Middle Eastern variant. The Q is referred to as the "likha." 10 is another penalty card, worth 10 points. Shooting the moon inflicts a 37-point penalty instead of an award.
* "Partnership Hearts": Players seated opposite each other form two-person teams. Team members combine their scores. A team that successfully shoots the moon causes the other to earn 52 penalty points.
* "Queens": All Queens are worth 13 points; the game ends when a player reaches 108. Hearts can be led at any time, and penalty cards can be played on the first trick. Shooting the moon inflicts the normal penalty instead of an award. The dealer of each round is the player who received the Q in the previous round.
* "Rickety Kate": Exactly the same as Hearts, minus shooting the moon, as named in Australia. 
*
* 
* "Royal Hearts": A game produced by Parker Brothers. The Q is worth 26 points instead of 13. Q doubles the point value of all Hearts taken by that player. Q is worth 10 points, and Q negates the Q's point value if both are captured by the same player.
* "Small Hearts": The 2s through 7s of each suit are taken out, forming a piquet pack. The 8 leads. Each Heart is worth one point, the Q is worth seven points, and J is optionally worth 5 points. Shooting the moon awards 14 points.

==References==



[[Hastings]]

Hastings is a town and borough in the county of East Sussex, within the historic county of Sussex, on the south coast of England. The town is located 24 mi east of the county town of Lewes and 53 mi south east of London, and has an estimated population of 86,900, which makes it the 66th largest settlement in the United Kingdom. 

In historical terms, Hastings can claim fame through its connection with the Norman conquest of England; and also because it became one of the medieval Cinque Ports. Hastings was, for centuries, an important fishing port; although nowadays less important, it still has the largest beach-based fishing fleet in England. The town became a watering place in the 1760s, and then, with the coming of the railway, a seaside resort.

The attraction of Hastings as a tourist destination continues; although the number of hotels has decreased, it caters for wider tastes, being home to internationally based cultural and sporting events, such as chess and running. It has set out to become "a modern European town" and seeks to attract commercial business in the many industrial sites round the borough.

==History==

===Early history===
The first mention of Hastings is found in the late 8th century in the form Hastingas. This is derived from the Old English tribal name Hstingas, meaning `the constituency/followers of Hsta'. Symeon of Durham records the victory of Offa in 771 over the Hestingorum gens, that is, "the people of the Hastings tribe.", Hastingleigh in Kent was named after that tribe. The place name Hstingaceaster is found in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle entry for 1050, Eilert Ekwall, The Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names, Oxford University Press, 1936. Mills, A. D. & Room, Adrian (2002) "A Dictionary of British Place-names", in: Patrick Hanks et al. The Oxford Names Companion, Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-860561-7, pp. 895-1264; p. 1061 and may be an alternative name for Hastings. However, the absence of any archaeological remains of or documentary evidence for a Roman fort at Hastings suggest that Hstingaceaster may refer to a different settlement, most likely that based on the Roman remains at Pevensey. Pamela Combes and Malcolm Lyne, "Hastings, Haestingaceaster and Haestingaport: a question of identity," Sussex Archaeological Collections, 133 (1995), 21324. ISSN 0143-8204 

Evidence of prehistoric settlements have been found at the town site: flint arrowheads and Bronze Age artefacts have been found; Iron Age forts have been excavated on both the East and West Hills. This suggests that the inhabitants moved early to the safety of the valley in between the forts. The settlement was already based on the port when the Romans arrived in Britain for the first time in 55 BC. At this time, they began to exploit the iron (Wealden rocks provide a plentiful supply of the ore), and shipped it out by boat. Iron was worked locally at Beauport Park, to the north of the town, which employed up to one thousand men and is considered to have been the third largest mine in the Roman Empire. 

With the departure of the Romans, the town suffered setbacks. The Beauport site had been abandoned; and natural and man-made attacks began. The Sussex coast has always suffered from occasional violent storms; with the additional hazard of longshore drift (the eastward movement of shingle along the coast), the coastline has been frequently changing. The original Roman port could now well be under the sea. 

Bulverhythe was probably a harbour used by Danish invaders, which suggests that -hythe or hithe means a port or small haven. 

===Kingdom of Haestingas===
From the 6th century AD until 771, the people of the area around modern-day Hastings, identified the territory as that of the Haestingas tribe and a kingdom separate from the surrounding kingdoms of Suth Saxe ("South Saxons", i.e. Sussex) and Kent. It worked to retain its separate cultural identity until the 11th century. The kingdom was probably a sub-kingdom, the object of a disputed overlordship by the two powerful neighbouring kingdoms: when King Wihtred of Kent settled a dispute with King Ine of Sussex & Wessex in 694, it is probable that he seceded the overlordship of Haestingas to Ine as part of the treaty. Kirby, Earliest English Kings, p. 124. 

In 771 King Offa of Mercia invaded Southern England, and over the next decade gradually seized control of Sussex and Kent. Symeon of Durham records a battle fought at an unidentified location near Hastings in 771, at which Offa defeated the Haestingas tribe, effectively ending its existence as a separate kingdom. By 790, Offa controlled Hastings effectively enough to confirm grants of land in Hastings to the Abbey of St Denis, in Paris. But, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for 1011 relates that Vikings overran "all Kent, Sussex, Surrey and Haestingas", indicating the town was still considered a separate 'county' or province to its neighbours 240 years after Offa's conquest. 

During the reign of Athelstan, he established a royal mint in Hastings in AD 928. 

===Medieval Hastings===
The start of the Norman Conquest was the Battle of Hastings, fought on 14 October 1066; although the battle itself took place 8 mi to the north at Senlac Hill, and William had landed on the coast between Hastings and Eastbourne at a site now known as Norman's Bay. It is thought that the Norman encampment was on the towns outskirts, where there was open ground; a new town was already being built in the valley to the east. That "New Burgh" was founded in 1069, and is mentioned in the Domesday Book as such. William defeated and killed Harold Godwinson, the last Saxon King of England, and destroyed his army; thus opening England to the Norman conquest.

William caused a castle to be built at Hastings probably using the earthworks of the existing Saxon castle.

Hastings was shown as a borough by the time of the Domesday Book (1086); it had also given its name to the Rape of Hastings, one of the six administrative divisions of Sussex. As a borough, Hastings had a corporation consisting of a "bailiff, jurats, and commonalty". By a Charter of Elizabeth I in 1589 the bailiff was replaced by a mayor.

===Hastings and the sea===
The Fish Market at Hastings Beach, Turner (1810)
Hastings town centre and the Memorial from an old postcard
George Street, Old town

By the end of the Saxon period, the port of Hastings had moved eastward near the present town centre in the Priory Stream valley, whose entrance was protected by the White Rock headland (since demolished). It was to be a short stay: Danish attacks and huge floods in 1011 and 1014 motivated the townspeople to relocate to the New Burgh.

In the Middle Ages Hastings became one of the Cinque Ports; Sandwich, Dover, and New Romney being the first, Hastings, and Hythe followed, all finally being joined by Rye and Winchelsea, at one point 42 towns were directly or indirectly affiliated to the group.

In the 13th century much of the town was washed away by the sea. During a naval campaign of 1339, and again in 1377, the town was raided and burnt by the French, and seems then to have gone into a decline. As a port, Hastings' days were finished.

Hastings had suffered over the years from the lack of a natural harbour, and there have been attempts to create a sheltered harbour. Attempts were made to build a stone harbour during the reign of Elizabeth I, but the foundations were destroyed by the sea in terrible storms. The last harbour project began in 1896, but this also failed when structural problems and rising costs
exhausted all the available funds. Today a fractured seawall is all that remains of what might have become a magnificent harbour. In 1897 the foundation stone was laid of a large concrete structure, but there was insufficient money to complete the work and the "Harbour arm" remains uncompleted. It was partially blown up to discourage possible use by German invasion forces during World War II. The fishing boats are still stored on and launched from the beach.

Hastings was now a small fishing settlement, but it was soon discovered that the new taxes on luxury goods could be made profitable by smuggling, and the town was ideally located for that. Near the castle ruins, on the West Hill, are "St Clement's Caves", partly natural, but mainly excavated by hand by the smugglers from the soft sandstone. Their trade was to come to an end with the period following the Napoleonic Wars, for the town became one of the most fashionable resorts in Britain, brought about by the so-called properties of seawater. Once this came about the expansion of the town took place, to the west, since there was little space left in the valley.

The double decker promenade that runs from Hastings Pier beyond Marine Court (seen in the distance), with a break at Warrior Square, was built in the 1930s by the borough engineer Sidney Little
It was at this time that the elegant Pelham Crescent and Wellington Square were built: other building followed. In the Crescent is the classical style church of St Mary in the Castle (its name recalling the old chapel in the castle above) now in use as an arts centre. The building of the crescent and the church necessitated further cutting away of the castle hill cliffs. Once that move away from the old town had begun, it led to the further expansion along the coast, eventually linking up with the new St Leonards.

Like many coastal towns, the population of Hastings grew significantly as a result of the construction of railway links and the fashionable growth of seaside holidays during the Victorian era. In 1801 its population was a mere 3,175; by 1831 it had reached over ten thousand; by 1891 it was almost sixty thousand, and the 2001 census reported over 85,000 inhabitants.

Between 1903 and 1919 Fred Judge FRPS photographed many of the towns events and disasters. These included storms, the first tram, visit of the Lord Mayor of London, Hastings Marathon Race and the pier fire of 1917. Many of these images were produced as picture postcards by the British Postcard manufacturer he founded now known as Judges Postcards.

In the 1930s the town underwent some rejuvenation. Seaside resorts were starting to go out of fashion: Hastings perhaps more than most. The town council set about a huge rebuilding project, among which the promenade was rebuilt; and an Olympic-size bathing pool was erected. The latter, regarded in its day as one of the best open-air swimming and diving complexes in Europe, later became a holiday camp before closing in 1986. It was demolished, but the area is still known by locals as "The Bathing Pool". Seaside History: the Bathing Pool at Hastings and St Leonards 

==Government==
Borough of Hastings, shown within East Sussex
Hastings Town Hall

Hastings returned two Members of Parliament from the 14th century until 1885 since when it has returned one. Since 1983 it has been part of the parliamentary constituency of Hastings and Rye; the current MP, since 2010, is Amber Rudd of the Conservative Party. Prior to 1983, the town was in an eponymous seat of its own.

Hastings, it is thought, was a Saxon town before the arrival of the Normans: the Domesday Book refers to a new Borough: as a borough, Hastings had a corporation consisting of a "bailiff, jurats, and commonalty". Its importance was such that it also gave its name to one of the six Rapes or administrative districts of Sussex.

By a Charter of Elizabeth I in 1589 the bailiff was replaced by a mayor, by which time the town's importance was dwindling. In the Georgian era, patronage of such seaside places (such as nearby Brighton) gave it a new lease of life so that, when the time came with the reform of English local government in 1888, Hastings became a County Borough, responsible for all its local services, independent of the surrounding county, then Sussex (East); less than one hundred years later, in 1974, that status was abolished.

Hastings Borough Council is now in the second tier of local government, below East Sussex County Council. The Labour Party has an overall control of the council with 23 seats, whilst the Conservative Party holds 9 seats. The Borough is divided into sixteen electoral wards; Ashdown, Baird, Braybrooke, Castle, Central St Leonards, Conquest, Gensing, Hollington, Maze Hill, Old Hastings, Ore, St Helens, Silverhill, Tressell, West St Leonards and Wishing Tree 

==Geography and climate==
The East Hill Cliff
East cliff at Hastings in east Sussex
Hastings is situated where the sandstone beds, at the heart of the Weald, known geologically as the Hastings Sands, meet the English Channel, forming tall cliffs to the east of the town. Hastings Old Town is in a sheltered valley between the East Hill and West Hill (on which the remains of the Castle stand). In Victorian times and later the town has spread westwards and northwards, and now forms a single urban centre with the more suburban area of St Leonards-on-Sea to the west. Roads from the Old Town valley lead towards the Victorian area of Clive Vale and the former village of Ore, from which "The Ridge", marking the effective boundary of Hastings, extends north-westwards towards Battle. Beyond Bulverhythe, the western end of Hastings is marked by low-lying land known as Glyne Gap, separating it from Bexhill-on-Sea.

The sandstone cliffs have been the subject of considerable erosion in relatively recent times: much of the Castle was lost to the sea before the present sea defences and promenade were built, and a number of cliff-top houses are in danger of disappearing around the nearby village of Fairlight.

The beach is mainly shingle, although wide areas of sand are uncovered at low tide. The town is generally built upon a series of low hills rising to 500 ft above sea level at "The Ridge" before falling back in the river valley further to the north.

There are three Sites of Special Scientific Interest within the borough; Marline Valley Woods, Combe Haven and Hastings Cliffs To Pett Beach. Marline Valley Woods lies within the Ashdown ward of Hastings. It is an ancient woodland of Pedunculate oakhornbeam which is uncommon nationally. Sussex Wildlife Trust own part of the site. Combe Haven is another site of biological interest, with alluvial meadows, and the largest reed bed in the county, providing habitat for breeding birds. It is in the West St Leonards ward, stretching into the parish of Crowhurst. The final SSSI, Hastings Cliffs to Pett Beach, is within the Ore ward of Hastings, extending into the neighbouring Fairlight and Pett parishes. The site runs along the coast and is of both biological and geological interest. The cliffs hold many fossils and the site has many habitats, including ancient woodland and shingle beaches. 

===Climate===

As with the rest of the British Isles and Southern England, Hastings experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. In terms of the local climate, Hastings is on the eastern edge of what is, on average, the sunniest part of the UK, the stretch of coast from the Isle of Wight to the Hastings area. Hastings, tied with Eastbourne, recorded the highest duration of Sunshine of any month anywhere in the United Kingdom - 384 hours - in 1911. Temperature extremes since 1960 at Hastings have ranged from 33.2 C in July 2006, down to -9.8 C in January 1987. The Kppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "climate classification#GROUP C: Mild Temperate/mesothermal climates|Cfb]" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate). Climate Summary for Hasting, UK (Weatherbase.com) 

===Neighbourhoods and areas===
Some of the areas and suburbs of Hastings are Ore Valley, St Leonards, Silverhill, West St Leonards, and Hollington. Ore, Silverhill and Hollington were once villages that have since become part of the Hastings conurbation area during rapid growth. The original part St Leonards was laid out in the early 19th century as a new town: a place of elegant houses designed for the well-off; it also included a central public garden, a hotel, an archery, assembly rooms and a church. Today's St Leonards has extended well beyond that original design, although the original town still exists within it. 

==Demography==
The population of the town in 2001 was 85,029, by 2009 the estimated population was 86,900. Hastings suffers at a disadvantage insofar as growth is concerned because of its restricted situation, lying as it does with the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty to the north. Redevelopment of the area is partly hampered by the split administration of the combined Hastings and Bexhill economic region between Hastings and Rother district councils. There is little space for further large-scale housing and employment growth within the designated boundaries of Hastings, and development on the outskirts is resisted by Rother council whose administrative area surrounds Hastings. Rother has a policy of urban expansion in the area immediately north of Bexhill, but this requires infrastructure improvements by central Governments which have been under discussion for decades. This situation has now become the subject of parliamentary consideration. House of Commons Select Committee: Stakeholders in Hastings 2006 

===Ethnicity===

 Ethnicity Count Percentage 
 White: British 80004 94.09 
 White: Irish 808 0.95 
 White: Other 1684 1.98 
 Mixed: White and Black Caribbean 320 0.38 
 Mixed: White and Black African 145 0.17 
 Mixed: White and Asian 361 0.42 
 Mixed: Other 268 0.32 
 Asian: Indian 317 0.37 
 Asian: Pakistani 57 0.07 
 Asian: Bangladeshi 112 0.13 
 Asian: Other 143 0.17 
 Black: Caribbean 184 0.22 
 Black: African 180 0.21 
 Black: Other 46 0.05 
 Chinese 180 0.21 
 Other 220 0.26 

Ethnicity in 2001 

==Economy==
Lacuna Place by Proctor and Matthews Architects, where the SAGA offices are based
Entrance to Kings Walk, Priory Meadow Shopping Centre
Until the development of tourism, fishing was Hastings' major industry. The fishing fleet, based at the Stade, remains Europe's largest beach-launched fishing fleet and has recently won accreditation for its sustainable methods. The fleet has been based on the same beach, below the cliffs at Hastings, for at least 400, possibly 600, years. Its longevity is attributed to the prolific fishing ground of Rye Bay nearby. Hastings fishing vessels are registered at Rye, and thus bear the letters "RX" (Rye,SusseX).

There are now various industrial estates that lie around the town, mostly on the outskirts, which include engineering, catering, motoring and construction; however, most of the jobs within the Borough are concentrated on health, public services, retail and education. 85% of the firms (in 2005) employed fewer than 10 people; as a consequence the unemployment rate was 3.3% (cf. East Sussex 1.7%). However, qualification levels are similar to the national average: 8.2% of the working-age population have no qualifications while 28% hold degree-level qualifications or higher, compared with 11% and 31% respectively across England.

===Shopping and retail===
Hastings main shopping centre is Priory Meadow Shopping Centre, which was built on the site of the old Central Recreation Ground which played host to some Sussex CCC first-class fixtures. The centre houses 56 stores and covers around 420,000 ft. Further retail areas in the town centre include Queens Road, Wellington Place and Robertson Street.

There are plans to expand the retail area in Hastings, which includes expanding Priory Meadow and creating more retail space as part of the Priory Quarter development. Priory was intended to have a second floor added to part of the retail area, which has not happened yet and so far only office space has been created as part of the Priory Quarter. Priory Meadow shops to grow Hastings Observer] 

===Regeneration===
In 2002 the Hastings and Bexhill task force, set up by the South East England Development Agency, was founded to regenerate the local economy, a 10 year programme being set up to tackle the local reliance in public sector employment. The regeneration scheme saw the construction of the University Centre Hastings, (now known as the University of Brighton in Hastings) the new Sussex Coast College campus and construction of the Priory Quarter, which still remains unfinished but now houses Saga offices, bringing 800 new jobs to the area. Hastings Regeneration SEEDA Sea Space finalises plans for next Priory Quarter development Sea Space 

==Culture and community==

===Hastings Detachment - Sussex ACF===
Hastings has an Army Cadet Force (ACF) Detachment) which is part of the Sussex ACF group. This detachment is based in the old Territorial Army Unit Building on Cinque Ports Way, and is affiliated to PWRR. 

===Events===
Hastings Borough Bonfire Society at the Old Town Carnival 2010
Throughout the year many annual events take place in Hastings, the largest of which being the May Day bank holiday weekend, which features a Jack-in-the-Green festival (revived since 1983), Hastings Traditional Jack-in-the-Green and the culmination of the Maydayruntens of thousands of motorcyclists having ridden the A21 to Hastings. The yearly carnival during Old Town Week takes place every August, which includes a week of events around Hastings Old Town, including a Seaboot race, bike race, street party and pram race. In September there is a month-long arts festival 'Coastal Currents' and a Seafood and Wine Festival. During Hastings Week held each year around 14 October the Hastings Bonfire Society Hastings Boroughs Bonfire Society stages a torchlight procession through the streets, with a beach bonfire and firework display.

Other smaller events include the Hastings Beer and Music Festival, held every July in Alexandra Park, the Hastings Musical Festival held every March in the White Rock Theatre and the Hastings International Chess Congress.

===Theatre and cinema===
There are two theatres in the town, the White Rock Theatre and the Stables Theatre. The White Rock theatre is the venue of the yearly pantomime and throughout the year hosts comedy, dance and music acts. The Stables stages more local productions and acts as an arts exhibition centre. The Phoenix Arts Centre, based at William Parker Sports College also stages local productions as well as shows put on by the school.

There is a small four screen Odeon cinema in the town, located opposite the town hall; however, there are plans to build a new multiplex cinema as part of the Priory Quarter development in the town centre. The town has an independent cinema called the Electric Palace located in the Old Town.

===Museums and art galleries===
Fishermen's Museum
There are four museums in Hastings; the Hastings Museum and Art Gallery, the Old Town Hall Museum, the Hastings Fishermen's Museum and the Shipwreck Museum. The first three mentioned are open for the whole year, the Shipwreck Museum is open only weekends during the winter, but daily for the rest of the year.

The Hastings Museum and Art gallery concentrates mostly on local history and contains exhibits on Grey Owl and John Logie Baird . It also features a Durbar Hall, donated by Lord Brassey; the hall contains displays focusing on the Indian subcontinent and the Brassey Family. The Old Town Hall concentrates on the history of the Old Town. The Fishermen's Museum, housed in the former fishermen's church, is dedicated to the fishing industry and maritime history of Hastings. The Shipwreck Museum displays artefacts from wrecks around the area.

The new Jerwood Gallery is located in the Stade area of Hastings Old Town and is the home for the Jerwood Collection of 20th and 21st century art and changing contemporary exhibition programme. The project is opposed by many locals who felt that a new art gallery would be better off being located elsewhere in the town. 

===Parks and open spaces===
There are many parks and open spaces located throughout the town, one of the most popular and largest being Alexandra Park opened in 1882 by the Prince and Princess of Wales. The park contains gardens, open spaces, woods, a bandstand, tennis courts and a cafe. Other open spaces include White Rock Gardens, West Marina Gardens, St Leonards Gardens, Gensing Gardens, Summerfields Woods, Linton Gardens, Hollington woods, Filsham Valley, Warrior Square, Castle Hill, St Helens Woods and Hastings Country Park.

==Landmarks==
Marine Court
Hastings Castle was built in 1070 by the Normans, four years after the Norman invasion. It is located on the West Hill, overlooking the town centre and is a Grade I listed building. Little remains of the castle apart from the arch left from the chapel, part of the walls and dungeons. The nearby St. Clements Caves are home to the Smugglers Adventure, which features interactive displays relating to the history of smuggling on the south coast of England.

Hastings Pier can be seen from any part of the seafront in the town, however it is currently closed following safety concerns from the council and then a serious fire burning down most of the buildings on the pier and causing further damage to the structure.

Many church buildings throughout the town are Grade II listed including; Church in the Wood, Ebenezer Particular Baptist Chapel, Fishermen's Museum and St Mary Magdalene's Church.

On the seafront at St Leonards is Marine Court, a 1937 block of flats in the Art Deco style that was originally called 'The Ship' due to its style being based on the ocean liner RMS Queen Mary. This block of flats can be seen up to 20 mi away on a clear day, from Holywell, in the Meads area of Eastbourne.

An important former landmark was "the Memorial", a clock tower commemorating Albert the Prince Consort which stood for many years at the traffic junction at the town centre, but was demolished following an arson attack in the 1970s.

==Transport==

===Road===
There are two major roads in Hastings: the A21 trunk road to London; and the A259 coastal road. Both are beset with traffic problems: although the London road, which has to contend with difficult terrain, has had several sections of widening over the past decades there are still many delays. Long-term plans for a much improved A259 eastwest route (including a Hastings bypass) were abandoned in the 1990s, but a new road to Bexhill-on-Sea is planned to relieve the congested coastal route. east Sussex County Council:Bexhill to Hastings link road Hastings is also linked to Battle via the A2100, the original London road. The A28 road connects Hastings to Ashford, Canterbury and the Isle of Thanet. The A27 road starts nearby at Pevensey.

The town is served by Stagecoach buses on routes that serve the town; and also extend to Bexhill, Eastbourne and Dover. National Express Coaches run service 023 to London.

===National Rail===
1914 Railway Junction Diagram of Hastings area lines and stations; the Bexhill West branch and the West Marina station have since closed.
Hastings has four rail links: two to London, one to Brighton and one to Ashford. Of the London lines, the shorter is the Hastings Line, the former South Eastern Railway (SER) route to Charing Cross via Battle and Tunbridge Wells, which opened in 1852; and the longer is the East Coastway Line, the former London, Brighton and South Coast Railway (LBSCR) route to Victoria via Bexhill, Eastbourne and Lewes. Trains to Brighton also use the East Coastway Line. The Marshlink Line runs via Rye to Ashford where a connection can be made with Eurostar services, and is unelectrified except for the Hastings-Ore segment.

A historic British Rail Class 201 "Thumper" can sometimes been seen (and heard) on historic runs to and from Hastings. Hastings Diesels This was a regular service from Hastings to Ashford and many locals have fond memories of hearing the trains rumble in and out of Hastings.

Hastings is served by two rail companies: Southeastern and Southern.
Southeastern services run along the Hastings Line, generally terminating at Hastings, with some peak services extending to Ore; the other lines are served by Southern, with services terminating at Ore or Ashford.

The town currently has four railway stations: from west to east they are West St Leonards station, St Leonards Warrior Square, Hastings, and Ore; this latter has been proposed to be renamed to Ore Valley. There is also one closed station and one proposed station in the area. West Marina station (on the LBSCR line) was very near West St Leonards (on the SER line) and was closed some years ago. A new station has been proposed at Glyne Gap in Bexhill, which would also serve residents from western Hastings. 

===Local Rail===
The East Hill Lift: one of the two funicular railways in Hastings
There are two funicular railways, known locally as the West Hill and East Hill Lifts respectively.

The Hastings Miniature Railway operates along the beach from Rock-a-Nore to Marine Parade, and has provided tourist transport since 1948. The railway was considerably restored and re-opened in 2010.

A local metro railway service from Bexhill to Ore has also been proposed. 

===Paths===
The Saxon Shore Way, (a long distance footpath, 163 mi in length from Gravesend, Kent traces the Kent and Sussex coast as it was in Roman times to Hastings. The National Cycle Network route NCR2 links Dover to St Austell along the south coast, and passes through Hastings.

===Historical transport systems===

====Turnpike====
Hastings became part of the Turnpike road system in 1837, when builder James Burton was building his new town of St Leonards. The route of the road is that taken by the A21 today.

====Trams and trolleybuses====
Map of the Hastings and District Electric Tramways
Hastings had a network of trams from 1905 to 1929. The trams ran as far as Bexhill, and were worked by overhead electric wires, except for the stretch along the seafront from Bo-Peep to the Memorial, which was initially worked by the Dolter stud contact system. The Dolter system was replaced by petrol electric trams in 1914, but overhead electrification was extended to this section in 1921. Trolleybuses rather than trams were used in the section that included the very narrow High Street, and the entire tram network was replaced by the Hastings trolleybus system in 19281929. Robert J Harley, Hastings Tramways. Middleton Press 1993. ISBN 1-873793-18-9. 

Maidstone and District bought the Hastings Tramway Company in 1935, but the trolleybuses still carried the "Hastings Tramways" logo until shortly before they were replaced by diesel buses in 1959, following the failure of the "Save our trolleys" campaign.

==Education==
Sussex Coast College during construction
Hastings has 18 primary schools, four secondary schools and one further education college.

The University of Brighton in Hastings offers higher education courses in a range of subjects and currently attracts over 800 students. The university's Hastings campus doubled in size in 2012, with the addition of the new Priory Square building designed by Proctor and Matthews Architects. University of Brighton, News. Brighton.ac.uk. Retrieved 09 October 2013 This is located in the town centre a short distance from the railway station and the main Sussex Coast College campus. Sussex Coast College, formerly called Hastings College, is the town's further education college; it is located at Station Plaza, next to the railway station.

The secondary schools in the town include ARK William Parker Academy, Hastings Academy, Helenswood Academy, and The St Leonards Academy. East Sussex County Council closed three mixed comprehensive schools: Filsham Valley, The Grove and Hillcrest, replacing them with two academy schools, The St Leonards Academy, and The Hastings Academy. The sponsors for the academies are University of Brighton (lead sponsor), British Telecom and East Sussex County Council itself. East Sussex County Council provisionally approved the closure of Hillcrest, The Grove and Filsham Valley. The academies were opened in September 2011.

==Religious buildings==

The most important buildings from the late medieval period are the two churches in the Old Town, St Clement's (probably built after 1377) and All Saints (early 15th century). Nairn, Ian, and Pevsner, Nikolaus, The Buildings of England: Sussex, Page 119. Penguin, 1965 
There is also a mosque, formerly "Mercatoria School" until purchased by the East Sussex Islamic Association. The former Ebenezer Particular Baptist Chapel in the Old Town dates from 1817 and is listed at Grade II. 

==Sport==
Hastings Half Marathon
Every year the Hastings Half Marathon is held in the town. The 13.1 mi (21.1 km) race first took place in 1984 and attracts entrants from all over the country, taking runners on a route encircling the town, starting and finishing by the West Marina Gardens in St Leonards.

Hastings United is the town's most senior football team, playing in the Premier Division of the Isthmian League. It was founded in 1894 and plays its home games at The Pilot Field, which ground used to be home to two other senior clubs; St Leonards and the original Hastings United which folded in 1985. There are football clubs in Hastings that compete in the East Sussex League, such as Hollington United, St Leonards Social and Rock-a-Nore, playing at local parks and recreation grounds about the town. United attracted sports media headlines, when in 2012 they made it to the third round of the FA Cup for the first time in their history, being the lowest ranked team left in the contest, before going out losing 4-1 to Middlesbrough.

The Central Recreation Ground was one of England's oldest, most scenic and most famous cricket grounds. The first match was played there in 1864 and the last in 1989, after which the site was redeveloped as a shopping centre. It was particularly popular with touring Australian sides who played 18 matches there. cricinfo website Hastings Priory is the town's largest cricket club, having 4 teams playing competitive, as well as a large junior section. The club's home is at Horntye Park, though it also makes use of the facilities at William Parker Sports College.

William Parker sees clubs using the school as their base, such as Hastings & Bexhill Rugby Club, Hastings Athletic Club and Hastings Priory Cricket Club 3rd and 4th teams. Other local teams include Cinque Ports Rugby Club which plays at Grove School, and South Saxons Hockey Club which plays on the astroturf pitch at Horntye Park.

Hastings Conqueror's are the town's only American Football Club. The club was founded in March 2013 by local resident Chris Chillingworth and currently trains at William Parker Sports College. The club made history in June 2013 when it became the UK's first Co-Operative run not-for-profit American Football club.

There are many bowling greens in the parks and gardens located about the town; the Hastings Open Bowls Tournament has been held annually in June since 1911 and attracts many entrants country-wide. Hastings Open Bowls Tournament 

Since 1920 Hastings has hosted the Hastings International Chess Congress. A testament to its importance is that every World Champion before Garry Kasparov except Bobby Fischer played at Hastings including Emanuel Lasker (1895), Jos Ral Capablanca (1919, 1929/30, 1930/1 and 1934/5), Alexander Alekhine (1922, 1925/6, 1933/4 and 1936/7), Max Euwe (1923/4, 1930/1, 1931/2, 1934/5, 1945/6 and 1949/50), Mikhail Tal (1963/4), Tigran Petrosian (1977/8), Boris Spassky (1965/6), and Anatoly Karpov (1971/2).

==Notable people==

==Filmography==
*Byzantium (2013)
*Is Anybody There? (2007)
*Foyle's War (TV, 2002 onwards)
*When I Was 12 (2001) 
*The Final Curtain (2000)
*Some Voices (2000)
*The Last of the Blonde Bombshells (2000)
*Grey Owl (1999)
*I Want You (1998)

==Twin towns==

Hastings is twinned with:
* Bthune, France 
* Oudenaarde, Belgium

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===

*
*
*
*
*
*Down the Line to Hastings Brian Jewell, The Baton Press ISBN 0-85936-223-X
*Robert J Harley, Hastings Tramways. Middleton Press 1993. ISBN 1-873793-18-9.
*Nairn, Ian, and Pevsner, Nikolaus, The Buildings of England: Sussex, Page 119. Penguin, 1965
*

==External links==

* Hastings Borough Council official website

 01



[[Human rights]]

Human rights are moral principles that set out certain standards of human behaviour, and are regularly protected as legal rights in national and international law. They are "commonly understood as inalienable fundamental rights to which a person is inherently entitled simply because she or he is a human being." Human rights are thus conceived as universal (applicable everywhere) and egalitarian (the same for everyone).
The doctrine of human rights has been highly influential within international law, global and regional institutions. Policies of states and in the activities of non-governmental organizations and have become a cornerstone of public policy around the world. The idea of human rights suggests, "if the public discourse of peacetime global society can be said to have a common moral language, it is that of human rights."
The strong claims made by the doctrine of human rights continue to provoke considerable skepticism and debates about the content, nature and justifications of human rights to this day. Indeed, the question of what is meant by a "right" is itself controversial and the subject of continued philosophical debate. 

Many of the basic ideas that animated the human rights movement developed in the aftermath of the Second World War and the atrocities of The Holocaust, culminating in the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Paris by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. The ancient world did not possess the concept of universal human rights. 
The true forerunner of human rights discourse was the concept of natural rights which appeared as part of the medieval Natural law tradition that became prominent during the Enlightenment with such philosophers as John Locke, Francis Hutcheson, and Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui, and featured prominently in the English Bill of Rights and the political discourse of the American Revolution and the French Revolution.

From this foundation, the modern human rights arguments emerged over the latter half of the twentieth century. 

==History of concept==

The Cyrus Cylinder is sometimes argued to be the world's first charter of human rights.

Although ideas of rights and liberty have existed in some form for much of human history, they do not resemble the modern conception of human rights. According to Jack Donnelly, in the ancient world, "traditional societies typically have had elaborate systems of duties... conceptions of justice, political legitimacy, and human flourishing that sought to realize human dignity, flourishing, or well-being entirely independent of human rights. These institutions and practices are alternative to, rather than different formulations of, human rights". The modern sense of human rights can be traced to Renaissance Europe and the Protestant Reformation, alongside the disappearance of the feudal authoritarianism and religious conservativism that dominated the Middle Ages. One theory is that human rights were developed during the early Modern period, alongside the European secularization of Judeo-Christian ethics. The most commonly held view is that concept of human rights evolved in the West, and that while earlier cultures had important ethical concepts, they generally lacked a concept of human rights. For example, McIntyre argues there is no word for "right" in any language before 1400. Medieval charters of liberty such as the English Magna Carta were not charters of human rights, rather they were the foundation Danny Danziger & John Gillingham, "1215: The Year of Magna Carta"(2004 paperback edition) p278 and constituted a form of limited political and legal agreement to address specific political circumstances, in the case of Magna Carta later being recognised in the course of early modern debates about rights. One of the oldest records of human rights is the statute of Kalisz (1264), giving privileges to the Jewish minority in the Kingdom of Poland such as protection from discrimination and hate speech. Isaac Lewin, The Jewish community in Poland, Philosophical Library, the University of Michigan, 1985 p.19 

=== 16th18th century ===

The earliest conceptualization of human rights is credited to ideas about natural rights emanating from natural law. In particular, the issue of universal rights was introduced by the examination of extending rights to indigenous peoples by Spanish clerics, such as Francisco de Vitoria and Bartolom de Las Casas. In the Valladolid debate, Juan Gins de Seplveda, who maintained an Aristotelian view of humanity as divided into classes of different worth, argued with Las Casas, who argued in favor of equal rights to freedom of slavery for all humans regardless of race or religion. 

17th-century English philosopher John Locke discussed natural rights in his work, identifying them as being "life, liberty, and estate (property)", and argued that such fundamental rights could not be surrendered in the social contract. In Britain in 1689, the English Bill of Rights (or "An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject and Settling the Succession of the Crown") and the Scottish Claim of Right each made illegal a range of oppressive governmental actions. Two major revolutions occurred during the 18th century, in the United States (1776) and in France (1789), leading to the adoption of the United States Declaration of Independence and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen respectively, both of which established certain legal rights. Additionally, the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776 encoded into law a number of fundamental civil rights and civil freedoms.

Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen approved by the National Assembly of France, August 26, 1789.

These were followed by developments in philosophy of human rights by philosophers such as Thomas Paine, John Stuart Mill and G.W.F. Hegel during the 18th and 19th centuries. The term human rights probably came into use some time between Paine's The Rights of Man and William Lloyd Garrison's 1831 writings in The Liberator, in which he stated that he was trying to enlist his readers in "the great cause of human rights". Although the term had been used by at least one author as early as 1742. 

=== 19th century ===

In the 19th century, human rights became a central concern over the issue of slavery. A number of reformers, such as William Wilberforce in Britain, worked towards the abolition of slavery. This was achieved in the British Empire by the Slave Trade Act 1807 and the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. In the United States, all the northern states had abolished the institution of slavery between 1777 and 1804, although southern states clung tightly to the "peculiar institution". Conflict and debates over the expansion of slavery to new territories constituted one of the reasons for the southern states' secession and the American Civil War. During the reconstruction period immediately following the war, several amendments to the United States Constitution were made. These included the 13th amendment, banning slavery, the 14th amendment, assuring full citizenship and civil rights to all people born in the United States, and the 15th amendment, guaranteeing African Americans the right to vote.

Many groups and movements have achieved profound social changes over the course of the 20th century in the name of human rights. In Europe and North America, labour unions brought about laws granting workers the right to strike, establishing minimum work conditions and forbidding or regulating child labor. The women's rights movement succeeded in gaining for many women the right to vote. National liberation movements in many countries succeeded in driving out colonial powers. One of the most influential was Mahatma Gandhi's movement to free his native India from British rule. Movements by long-oppressed racial and religious minorities succeeded in many parts of the world, among them the African American Civil Rights Movement, and more recent diverse identity politics movements, on behalf of women and minorities in the United States.

The establishment of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the 1864 Lieber Code and the first of the Geneva Conventions in 1864 laid the foundations of International humanitarian law, to be further developed following the two World Wars.

=== 20th century ===

The World Wars, and the huge losses of life and gross abuses of human rights that took place during them, were a driving force behind the development of modern human rights instruments. The League of Nations was established in 1919 at the negotiations over the Treaty of Versailles following the end of World War I. The League's goals included disarmament, preventing war through collective security, settling disputes between countries through negotiation and diplomacy, and improving global welfare. Enshrined in its charter was a mandate to promote many of the rights later included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

At the 1945 Yalta Conference, the Allied Powers agreed to create a new body to supplant the League's role; this was to be the United Nations. The United Nations has played an important role in international human-rights law since its creation. Following the World Wars, the United Nations and its members developed much of the discourse and the bodies of law that now make up international humanitarian law and international human rights law.

==Philosophy==

The philosophy of human rights attempts to examine the underlying basis of the concept of human rights and critically looks at its content and justification. Several theoretical approaches have been advanced to explain how and why human rights have become a part of social expectations.

One of the oldest Western philosophies of human rights is that they are a product of a natural law, stemming from different philosophical or religious grounds. Other theories hold that human rights codify moral behavior which is a human social product developed by a process of biological and social evolution (associated with Hume). Human rights are also described as a sociological pattern of rule setting (as in the sociological theory of law and the work of Weber). These approaches include the notion that individuals in a society accept rules from legitimate authority in exchange for security and economic advantage (as in Rawls)  a social contract. The two theories that dominate contemporary human rights discussion are the interest theory and the will theory. Interest theory argues that the principal function of human rights is to protect and promote certain essential human interests, while will theory attempts to establish the validity of human rights based on the unique human capacity for freedom. 

=== Criticism ===
The claims made by human rights to universality have led to criticism. Philosophers who have criticized the concept of human rights include Jeremy Bentham, Edmund Burke, Friedrich Nietzsche and Karl Marx. Political philosophy professor Charles Blattberg argues that discussion of human rights, being abstract, demotivates people from upholding the values that rights are meant to affirm. The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy gives particular attention to two types of criticisms: the one questioning universality of human rights and the one denying them objective ground. Andrew Fagan Philosophical criticisms of human rights Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Human Rights 2003-2005 Alain Pellet, an international law scholar, criticizes "human rightism" approach as denying the principle of sovereignty and claiming a special place for human rights among the branches of international law; Alain Pellet "Droits-de-lhommisme" et droit international 2000 Alain de Benoist questions human rights premises of human equality. Alain de Benoist Au-dela des droits de l'homme Krisis 2004; Religion of Human Rights, 1988 [http://www.velesova-sloboda.org/misc/benoist-die-religion-der-menschenrechte.html ] [http://www.velesova-sloboda.org/polit/benoist-religiya-prav-cheloveka.html ] David Kennedy had listed pragmatic worries and polemical charges concerning human rights in 2002 in Harvard Human Rights Journal. The International Human Rights Movement: Part of the Problem? Harvard Human Rights Journal / Vol. 15, Spring 2002 

==Classification==
Human rights can be classified and organized in a number of different ways. At an international level the most common categorisation of human rights has been to split them into civil and political rights, and economic, social and cultural rights.

Civil and political rights are enshrined in articles 3 to 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Economic, social and cultural rights are enshrined in articles 22 to 28 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).

===Indivisibility===
The UDHR included both economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights because it was based on the principle that the different rights could only successfully exist in combination:

This is held to be true because without civil and political rights the public cannot assert their economic, social and cultural rights. Similarly, without livelihoods and a working society, the public cannot assert or make use of civil or political rights (known as the full belly thesis).

The indivisibility and interdependence of all human rights has been confirmed by the 1993 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action:

This statement was again endorsed at the 2005 World Summit in New York (paragraph 121).

Although accepted by the signatories to the UDHR, most do not in practice give equal weight to the different types of rights. Some Western cultures have often given priority to civil and political rights, sometimes at the expense of economic and social rights such as the right to work, to education, health and housing. Similarly the ex Soviet bloc countries and Asian countries have tended to give priority to economic, social and cultural rights, but have often failed to provide civil and political rights.

===Categorization===
Opponents of the indivisibility of human rights argue that economic, social and cultural rights are fundamentally different from civil and political rights and require completely different approaches. Economic, social and cultural rights are argued to be:
* aspirations or goals, as opposed to real 'legal' rights
* ideologically divisive/political, meaning that there is no consensus on what should and shouldn't be provided as a right
* non-justiciable, meaning that their provision, or the breach of them, cannot be judged in a court of law
* positive, meaning that they require active provision of entitlements by the state (as opposed to the state being required only to prevent the breach of rights)
* progressive, meaning that they will take significant time to implement
* resource-intensive, meaning that they are expensive and difficult to provide
* socialist, as opposed to capitalist
* vague, meaning they cannot be quantitatively measured, and whether they are adequately provided or not is difficult to judge

Similarly civil and political rights are categorized as:
* capitalist
* cost-free
* immediate, meaning they can be immediately provided if the state decides to
* justiciable
* negative, meaning the state can protect them simply by taking no action
* non-ideological/non-political
* precise, meaning their provision is easy to judge and measure
* real 'legal' rights

Olivia Ball and Paul Gready argue that for both civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights, it is easy to find examples which do not fit into the above categorisation. Among several others, they highlight the fact that maintaining a judicial system, a fundamental requirement of the civil right to due process before the law and other rights relating to judicial process, is positive, resource-intensive, progressive and vague, while the social right to housing is precise, justiciable and can be a real 'legal' right. 

===Three generations===
Another categorization, offered by Karel Vasak, is that there are three generations of human rights: first-generation civil and political rights (right to life and political participation), second-generation economic, social and cultural rights (right to subsistence) and third-generation solidarity rights (right to peace, right to clean environment). Out of these generations, the third generation is the most debated and lacks both legal and political recognition. This categorisation is at odds with the indivisibility of rights, as it implicitly states that some rights can exist without others. Prioritisation of rights for pragmatic reasons is however a widely accepted necessity. Human rights expert Philip Alston argues:

He, and others, urge caution with prioritisation of rights:

Some human rights are said to be "inalienable rights". The term inalienable rights (or unalienable rights) refers to "a set of human rights that are fundamental, are not awarded by human power, and cannot be surrendered."

==International protection==

In the aftermath of the atrocities of World War II, there was increased concern for the social and legal protection of human rights as fundamental freedoms. The foundation of the United Nations and the provisions of the United Nations Charter provided a basis for a comprehensive system of international law and practise for the protection of human rights. Since then, international human rights law has been characterized by a linked system of conventions, treaties, organisations, and political bodies, rather than any single entity or set of laws. 

===United Nations Charter===

The provisions of the United Nations Charter provided a basis for the development of international human rights protection. The preamble of the charter provides that the members "reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the equal rights of men and women" and Article 1(3) of the United Nations charter states that one of the purposes of the UN is: "to achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". United Nations Charter Article 1(3). Article 55 provides that:

Of particular importance is Article 56 of the charter:"All Members pledge themselves to take joint and separate action in co-operation with the Organization for the achievement of the purposes set forth in Article 55." This is a binding treaty provision applicable to both the Organisation and its members and has been taken to constitute a legal obligation for the members of the United Nations. Overall, the references to human rights in the Charter are general and vague. The Charter does not contain specific legal rights, nor does it mandate any enforcement procedures to protect these rights. 
Despite this, the significance of the espousal of human rights within the UN charter must not be understated. The importance of human rights on the global stage can be traced to the importance of human rights within the United Nations framework and the UN Charter can be seen as the starting point for the development of a broad array of declarations, treaties, implementation and enforcement mechanisms, UN organs, committees and reports on the protection of human rights. The rights espoused in the UN charter would be codified and defined in the International Bill of Human Rights, composing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

===Universal Declaration of Human Rights===

"It is not a treaty...the future, it may well become the international Magna Carta." 
Eleanor Roosevelt with the Spanish text of the Universal Declaration in 1949.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948, partly in response to the atrocities of World War II. Although the UDHR was a non-binding resolution, it is now considered by some to have acquired the force of international customary law which may be invoked in appropriate circumstances by national and other judiciaries. Ball, Gready. 
The UDHR urges member nations to promote a number of human, civil, economic and social rights, asserting these rights as part of the "foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world." The declaration was the first international legal effort to limit the behaviour of states and press upon them duties to their citizens following the model of the rights-duty duality.

The UDHR was framed by members of the Human Rights Commission, with former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt as Chair, who began to discuss an International Bill of Rights in 1947. The members of the Commission did not immediately agree on the form of such a bill of rights, and whether, or how, it should be enforced. The Commission proceeded to frame the UDHR and accompanying treaties, but the UDHR quickly became the priority. 
Canadian law professor John Humphrey and French lawyer Ren Cassin were responsible for much of the cross-national research and the structure of the document respectively, where the articles of the declaration were interpretative of the general principle of the preamble. The document was structured by Cassin to include the basic principles of dignity, liberty, equality and brotherhood in the first two articles, followed successively by rights pertaining to individuals; rights of individuals in relation to each other and to groups; spiritual, public and political rights; and economic, social and cultural rights. The final three articles place, according to Cassin, rights in the context of limits, duties and the social and political order in which they are to be realized. 
Humphrey and Cassin intended the rights in the UDHR to be legally enforceable through some means, as is reflected in the third clause of the preamble: 

Some of the UDHR was researched and written by a committee of international experts on human rights, including representatives from all continents and all major religions, and drawing on consultation with leaders such as Mahatma Gandhi. Glendon (2001). 
The inclusion of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights was predicated on the assumption that all human rights are indivisible and that the different types of rights listed are inextricably linked. This principle was not then opposed by any member states (the declaration was adopted unanimously, Byelorussian SSR, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Ukrainian SSR, Union of South Africa, USSR, Yugoslavia.); however, this principle was later subject to significant challenges. 

The Universal Declaration was bifurcated into treaties, a Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and another on social, economic, and cultural rights, due to questions about the relevance and propriety of economic and social provisions in covenants on human rights. Both covenants begin with the right of people to self-determination and to sovereignty over their natural resources. Henkin, Louis. The International Bill of Rights: The Universal Declaration and the Covenants, in International Enforcement of Human Rights 69, Bernhardt and Jolowicz, eds, (1987). This debate over whether human rights are more fundamental than economic rights has continued to the present day.

The drafters of the Covenants initially intended only one instrument. The original drafts included only political and civil rights, but economic and social rights were also proposed. The disagreement over which rights were basic human rights resulted in there being two covenants. The debate was whether economic and social rights are aspirational, as contrasted with basic human rights which all people possess purely by being human, because economic and social rights depend on wealth and the availability of resources. In addition, which social and economic rights should be recognised depends on ideology or economic theories, in contrast to basic human rights, which are defined purely by the nature (mental and physical abilities) of human beings. It was debated whether economic rights were appropriate subjects for binding obligations and whether the lack of consensus over such rights would dilute the strength of political-civil rights. There was wide agreement and clear recognition that the means required to enforce or induce compliance with socio-economic undertakings were different from the means required for civil-political rights. Henkin, Louis. Introduction, The International Bill of Rights 910 (1981). 

This debate and the desire for the greatest number of signatories to human-rights law led to the two covenants. The Soviet bloc and a number of developing countries had argued for the inclusion of all rights in a so-called Unity Resolution. Both covenants allowed states to derogate some rights. Those in favor of a single treaty could not gain sufficient consensus. 

===International treaties===
In 1966, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) were adopted by the United Nations, between them making the rights contained in the UDHR binding on all states that have signed this treaty, creating human-rights law.

Since then numerous other treaties (pieces of legislation) have been offered at the international level. They are generally known as human rights instruments. Some of the most significant, referred to (with ICCPR and ICESCR) as "the seven core treaties", are:
* Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (adopted 1979, entry into force: 1981)
* Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) (adopted 1966, entry into force: 1969)
* Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (adopted 2006, entry into force: 2008)
* Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (adopted 1989, entry into force: 1989)
* United Nations Convention Against Torture (CAT) (adopted 1984, entry into force: 1984)
* International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (ICRMW or more often MWC) (adopted 1990, entry into force: 2003)

===Customary international law===

In addition to protection by international treaties, customary international law may protect some human rights, such as the prohibition of torture, genocide and slavery and the principle of non-discrimination. 

===International humanitarian law===

The Geneva Conventions came into being between 1864 and 1949 as a result of efforts by Henry Dunant, the founder of the International Committee of the Red Cross. The conventions safeguard the human rights of individuals involved in armed conflict, and build on the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the international community's first attempt to formalize the laws of war and war crimes in the nascent body of secular international law. The conventions were revised as a result of World War II and readopted by the international community in 1949.

===United Nations system===
Structure of the United Nations Human Rights Bodies and Mechanisms

Under the mandate of the UN charter, the and the multilateral UN human rights treaties, the United Nations (UN) as an intergovernmental body seeks to apply international jurisdiction for universal human-rights legislation. Within the UN machinery, human-rights issues are primarily the concern of the United Nations Security Council and the United Nations Human Rights Council, and there are numerous committees within the UN with responsibilities for safeguarding different human-rights treaties. The most senior body of the UN in the sphere of human rights is the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The United Nations has an international mandate to:

====Political bodies====

=====Security Council=====

The United Nations Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security and is the only body of the UN that can authorize the use of force. It has been criticised for failing to take action to prevent human rights abuses, including the Darfur crisis, the Srebrenica massacre and the Rwandan Genocide. Fred Grnfeld and Anke Huijboom, The failure to prevent genocide in Rwanda: the role of bystanders (2007) p. 199 For example, critics blamed the presence of non-democracies on the Security Council for its failure regarding. Lee Feinstein, Darfur and beyond: what is needed to prevent mass atrocities (2007) p. 46 

On April 28, 2006 the Security Council adopted resolution 1674 that reaffirmed the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity" and committed the Security Council to action to protect civilians in armed conflict. Security Council passes landmark resolution  world has responsibility to protect people from genocide Oxfam Press Release - April 28, 2006 

=====General Assembly=====
The UN General Assembly

The United Nations General Assembly, under Article 13 of the UN Charter, has the power to initiate studies and make recommendations on human rights issues. 
Under this provision, the general assembly passed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, and since then a wide variety of other human rights instruments. The assembly has several subsidiary organs that deal with specific human rights issues, such as the Special Committee on Decolonisation and the Special Commission against Apartheid (no longer operational). In addition the general assembly has set up a number of subsidiary organs that consider human rights issues in a number of high-profile contexts: such as the UN Council on Namibia, the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practises in the Occupied territories and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable rights of the Palestine People. 

=====Human Rights Council=====

The United Nations Human Rights Council, created at the 2005 World Summit to replace the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, has a mandate to investigate violations of human rights. 
The Human Rights Council is a subsidiary body of the General Assembly and reports directly to it. It ranks below the Security Council, which is the final authority for the interpretation of the United Nations Charter. UN Charter, Article 39 Forty-seven of the one hundred ninety-one member states sit on the council, elected by simple majority in a secret ballot of the United Nations General Assembly. Members serve a maximum of six years and may have their membership suspended for gross human rights abuses. The Council is based in Geneva, and meets three times a year; with additional meetings to respond to urgent situations. 

Independent experts (rapporteurs) are retained by the Council to investigate alleged human rights abuses and to provide the Council with reports.

The Human Rights Council may request that the Security Council take action when human rights violations occur. This action may be direct actions, may involve sanctions, and the Security Council may also refer cases to the International Criminal Court (ICC) even if the issue being referred is outside the normal jurisdiction of the ICC. The Security Council referred the human rights situation in Darfur in Sudan to the ICC despite the fact that Sudan has a functioning legal system 

====Treaty bodies====
In addition to the political bodies whose mandate flows from the UN charter, the UN has set up a number of treaty-based bodies, comprising committees of independent experts who monitor compliance with human rights standards and norms flowing from the core international human rights treaties. They are supported by and are created by the treaty that they monitor, With the exception of the CESCR, which was established under a resolution of the Economic and Social Council to carry out the monitoring functions originally assigned to that body under the Covenant, they are technically autonomous bodies, established by the treaties that they monitor and accountable to the state parties of those treaties - rather than subsidiary to the United Nations. Though in practise they are closely intertwined with the United Nations system and are supported by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) and the UN Center for Human Rights. 
* The Human Rights Committee promotes participation with the standards of the ICCPR. The eighteen members of the committee express opinions on member countries and make judgments on individual complaints against countries which have ratified an Optional Protocol to the treaty. The judgments, termed "views", are not legally binding.
* The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights monitors the ICESCR and makes general comments on ratifying countries performance. It will have the power to receive complaints against the countries that opted into the Optional Protocol once it has come into force. It is important to note that unlike the other treaty bodies, the economic committee is not an autonomous body responsible to the treaty parties, but directly responsible to the Economic and Social Council and ultimately to the General Assembly. This means that the Economic Committee faces particular difficulties at its disposal only relatively "weak" means of implementation in comparison to other treaty bodies. Particular difficulties noted by commentators include: perceived vagueness of the principles of the treaty, relative lack of legal texts and decisions, ambivalence of many states in addressing economic, social and cultural rights, comparatively few non-governmental organisations focused on the area and problems with obtaining relevant and precise information. 
* The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination monitors the CERD and conducts regular reviews of countries' performance. It can make judgments on complaints against member states allowing it, but these are not legally binding. It issues warnings to attempt to prevent serious contraventions of the convention.
* The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women monitors the CEDAW. It receives states' reports on their performance and comments on them, and can make judgments on complaints against countries which have opted into the 1999 Optional Protocol.
* The Committee Against Torture monitors the CAT and receives states' reports on their performance every four years and comments on them. Its subcommittee may visit and inspect countries which have opted into the Optional Protocol.
* The Committee on the Rights of the Child monitors the CRC and makes comments on reports submitted by states every five years. It does not have the power to receive complaints.
* The Committee on Migrant Workers was established in 2004 and monitors the ICRMW and makes comments on reports submitted by states every five years. It will have the power to receive complaints of specific violations only once ten member states allow it.
* The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was established in 2008 to monitor the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It has the power to receive complaints against the countries which have opted into the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Each treaty body receives secretariat support from the Human Rights Council and Treaties Division of Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights (OHCHR) in Geneva except CEDAW, which is supported by the Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW). CEDAW formerly held all its sessions at United Nations headquarters in New York but now frequently meets at the United Nations Office in Geneva; the other treaty bodies meet in Geneva. The Human Rights Committee usually holds its March session in New York City.

===Regional human rights regimes===

International human rights regimes are in several cases "nested" within more comprehensive and overlapping regional agreements. These regional regimes can be seen as relatively independently coherent human rights sub-regimes. Three principal regional human rights instruments can be identified; the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the American Convention on Human Rights (the Americas) and the European Convention on Human Rights. The European Convention on Human Rights has since 1950 defined and guaranteed human rights and fundamental freedoms in Europe. 
All 47 member states of the Council of Europe have signed the Convention and are therefore under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. 

==Non-governmental actors==

===Non-governmental organizations===

Visitors to an LGBT Pride event in Greece interact with members of a non-governmental human rights organization

International non-governmental human rights organizations such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, International Service for Human Rights and FIDH monitor what they see as human rights issues around the world and promote their views on the subject. Human rights organizations have been said to ""translate complex international issues into activities to be undertaken by concerned citizens in their own community". 
Human rights organizations frequently engage in lobbying and advocacy in an effort to convince the United Nations, supranational bodies and national governments to adopt their policies on human rights. Many human-rights organizations have observer status at the various UN bodies tasked with protecting human rights. A new (in 2009) nongovernmental human-rights conference is the Oslo Freedom Forum, a gathering described by The Economist as "on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum." The same article noted that human-rights advocates are more and more divided amongst themselves over how violations of human rights are to be defined, notably as regards the Middle East. 

There is criticism of human-rights organisations who use their status but allegedly move away from their stated goals. For example, Gerald M. Steinberg, an Israel-based academic, maintains that NGOs take advantage of a "halo effect" and are "given the status of impartial moral watchdogs" by governments and the media. 
Such critics claim that this may be seen at various governmental levels, including when human-rights groups testify before investigation committees. 

===Human rights defenders===

A human rights defender is someone who, individually or with others, acts to promote or protect human rights. Human rights defenders are those men and women who act peacefully for the promotion and protection of those rights.

===Corporations===
Multinational companies play an increasingly large role in the world, and have been responsible for numerous human rights abuses. 
Although the legal and moral environment surrounding the actions of governments is reasonably well developed, that surrounding multinational companies is both controversial and ill-defined. Multinational companies' primary responsibility is to their shareholders, not to those affected by their actions. Such companies may be larger than the economies of some of the states within which they operate, and can wield significant economic and political power. No international treaties exist to specifically cover the behavior of companies with regard to human rights, and national legislation is very variable. Jean Ziegler, Special Rapporteur of the UN Commission on Human Rights on the right to food stated in a report in 2003:

In August 2003 the Human Rights Commission's Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights produced draft Norms on the responsibilities of transnational corporations and other business enterprises with regard to human rights. 
These were considered by the Human Rights Commission in 2004, but have no binding status on corporations and are not monitored. 

==Violations==

Human rights violations occur when actions by state (or non-state) actors abuse, ignore, or deny basic human rights (including civil, political, cultural, social, and economic rights). Furthermore, violations of human rights can occur when any state or non-state actor breaches any part of the UDHR treaty or other international human rights or humanitarian law. In regard to human rights violations of United Nations laws, Article 39 of the United Nations Charter designates the UN Security Council (or an appointed authority) as the only tribunal that may determine UN human rights violations.

Human rights abuses are monitored by United Nations committees, national institutions and governments and by many independent non-governmental organizations, such as Amnesty International, International Federation of Human Rights, Human Rights Watch, World Organisation Against Torture, Freedom House, International Freedom of Expression Exchange and Anti-Slavery International. These organisations collect evidence and documentation of alleged human rights abuses and apply pressure to enforce human rights laws.

Wars of aggression, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including genocide, are breaches of International humanitarian law and represent the most serious of human rights violations.

In efforts to eliminate violations of human rights, building awareness and protesting inhumane treatment has often led to calls for action and sometimes improved conditions. The UN Security Council has interceded with peace keeping forces, and other states and treaties (NATO) have intervened in situations to protect human rights.

==Substantive rights==

===Right to life===

The right to life is the essential right that a human being has the right not to be killed by another human being. The concept of a right to life is central to debates on the issues of abortion, capital punishment, euthanasia, self defense and war. According to many human rights activists, the death penalty violates this right. 
The United Nations has called on states retaining the death penalty to establish a moratorium on capital punishment with a view to its abolition. United Nations resolution 62/149. States which do not do so face considerable moral and political pressure.

===Freedom from torture===

Throughout history, torture has been used as a method of political re-education, interrogation, punishment, and coercion. In addition to state-sponsored torture, individuals or groups may be motivated to inflict torture on others for similar reasons to those of a state; however, the motive for torture can also be for the sadistic gratification of the torturer, as in the Moors murders.

Torture is prohibited under international law and the domestic laws of most countries in the 21st century. It is considered to be a violation of human rights, and is declared to be unacceptable by Article 5 of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Signatories of the Third Geneva Convention and Fourth Geneva Convention officially agree not to torture prisoners in armed conflicts. Torture is also prohibited by the United Nations Convention Against Torture, which has been ratified by 147 states. 

National and international legal prohibitions on torture derive from a consensus that torture and similar ill-treatment are immoral, as well as impractical. 
Despite these international conventions, organizations that monitor abuses of human rights (e.g. Amnesty International, the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims) report widespread use condoned by states in many regions of the world. Amnesty International Report 2005 
Amnesty International estimates that at least 81 world governments currently practice torture, some of them openly. 

===Freedom from slavery===

Freedom from slavery is internationally recognized as a human right. Article 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states:

Despite this, the number of slaves today is higher than at any point in history, remaining as high as 12 million to 27 million, 
Most are debt slaves, largely in South Asia, who are under debt bondage incurred by lenders, sometimes even for generations. 
Human trafficking is primarily for prostituting women and children into sex industries. 

Groups such as the American Anti-Slavery Group, Anti-Slavery International, Free the Slaves, the Anti-Slavery Society, and the Norwegian Anti-Slavery Society continue to campaign to rid the world of slavery.

===Right to a fair trial===

The right to a fair trial has been defined in numerous regional and international human rights instruments. It is one of the most extensive human rights and all international human rights instruments enshrine it in more than one article. 
The right to a fair trial is one of the most litigated human rights and substantial case law has been established on the interpretation of this human right. 
Despite variations in wording and placement of the various fair trial rights, international human rights instrument define the right to a fair trial in broadly the same terms. 
The aim of the right is to ensure the proper administration of justice. As a minimum the right to fair trial includes the following fair trial rights in civil and criminal proceedings: 
* the right to be heard by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
* the right to a public hearing
* the right to be heard within a reasonable time
* the right to counsel
* the right to interpretation 

===Freedom of speech===

Freedom of speech is the freedom to speak freely without censorship. The term freedom of expression is sometimes used synonymously, but includes any act of seeking, receiving and imparting information or ideas, regardless of the medium used. In practice, the right to freedom of speech is not absolute in any country and the right is commonly subject to limitations, such as on libel, slander, obscenity, incitement to commit a crime, etc.
The right to freedom of expression is recognized as a human right under Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and recognized in international human rights law in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Article 19 of the ICCPR states that "veryone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference" and "everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice".

===Freedom of thought, conscience and religion===

Freedom of thought, conscience and religion are closely related rights that protect the freedom of an individual or community, in public or private, to think and freely hold conscientious beliefs and to manifest religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship, and observance; the concept is generally recognized also to include the freedom to change religion or not to follow any religion. 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 18. The freedom to leave or discontinue membership in a religion or religious groupin religious terms called "apostasy"is also a fundamental part of religious freedom, covered by Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 

Human rights groups such as Amnesty International organises campaigns to protect those arrested and or incarcerated as a prisoner of conscience because of their conscientious beliefs, particularly concerning intellectual, political and artistic freedom of expression and association. For example see Jan Brabec, Vclav Havel, Ivan Lamper, David Nemec, Petr Placak, Joska Skalnik et al. "Prisoners of Conscience". New York Review of Books. 1989; 36 (1) February 2. Accessed October 18, 2009. In legislation, a conscience clause is a provision in a statute that excuses a health professional from complying with the law (for example legalising surgical or pharmaceutical abortion) if it is incompatible with religious or conscientious beliefs. Katherine White. Crisis of Conscience: Reconciling Religious Health Care Providers' Beliefs and Patients' Rights. Stanford Law Review 1999; 51: 17031724. 

===Freedom of movement===

Freedom of movement asserts that a citizen of a state in which that citizen is present has the liberty to travel, reside in, and/or work in any part of the state where one pleases within the limits of respect for the liberty and rights of others, and to leave that state and return at any time.

===Rights debates===
Events and new possibilities can affect existing rights or require new ones. Advances of technology, medicine, and philosophy constantly challenge the status quo of human rights thinking.

====Right to keep and bear arms====

The right to keep and bear arms for defense is described in the philosophical and political writings of Aristotle, Cicero, John Locke, Machiavelli, the English Whigs and others. In countries with an English common law tradition, a long standing common law right to keep and bear arms has long been recognized, as pre-existing in common law, prior even to the existence of national constitutions. 

====Future generations====
In 1997 UNESCO adopted the Declaration on the Responsibilities of the Present Generation Towards the Future Generation. The Declaration opens with the words:

Article 1 of the declaration states "the present generations have the responsibility of ensuring that the needs and interests of present and future generations are fully safeguarded." The preamble to the declaration states that "at this point in history, the very existence of humankind and its environment are threatened" and the declaration covers a variety of issues including protection of the environment, the human genome, biodiversity, cultural heritage, peace, development, and education. The preamble recalls that the responsibilities of the present generations towards future generations has been referred to in various international instruments, including the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (UNESCO 1972), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio de Janeiro, 1992), the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (UN Conference on Environment and Development, 1992), the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (World Conference on Human Rights, 1993) and a number of UN General Assembly resolutions relating to the protection of the global climate for present and future generations adopted since 1990. 

====Sexual orientation and gender identity====

Sexual orientation and gender identity rights relate to the expression of sexual orientation and gender identity based on the right to respect for private life and the right not to be discriminated against on the ground of "other status" as defined in various human rights conventions, such as article 17 and 26 in the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and article 8 and article 14 in the European Convention on Human Rights.

As of 2011, homosexual behaviour is illegal in 76 countries and punishable by execution in seven countries. 
The criminalization of private, consensual, adult sexual relations, especially in countries where corporal or capital punishment is involved, is one of the primary concerns of LGBT human rights advocates. 

Other issues include: government recognition of same-sex relationships, LGBT adoption, sexual orientation and military service, immigration equality, anti-discrimination laws, hate crime laws regarding violence against LGBT people, sodomy laws, anti-lesbianism laws, and equal age of consent for same-sex activity. http://www.barackobama.com/pdf/lgbt.pdf 

A global charter for sexual orientation and gender identity rights has been proposed in the form of the 'Yogyakarta Principles', a set of 29 principles whose authors say they apply International Human Rights Law statutes and precedent to situations relevant to LGBT people's experience. 
The principles were presented at a United Nations event in New York on November 7, 2007, co-sponsored by Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.

The principles have been acknowledged with influencing the French proposed UN declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity, which focuses on ending violence, criminalization and capital punishment and does not include dialogue about same-sex marriage or right to start a family. 
The proposal was supported by 67 of the then 192 member countries of the United Nations, including all EU member states and the United States. An alternative statement opposing the proposal was initiated by Syria and signed by 57 member nations, including all 27 nations of the Arab League as well as Iran and North Korea. 

====Trade====
Although both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights emphasize the importance of a right to work, neither of these documents explicitly mention free trade as a mechanism for ensuring this fundamental right. And yet trade plays a key role in providing jobs. 

Some experts argue that trade is inherent to human nature and that when governments inhibit international trade they directly inhibit the right to work and the other indirect benefits, like the right to education, that increased work and investment help accrue. 
Others have argued that the ability to trade does not affect everyone equallyoften groups like the rural poor, indigenous groups and women are less likely to access the benefits of increased trade. 

On the other hand, others think that it is no longer primarily individuals but companies that trade, and therefore it cannot be guaranteed as a human right. Additionally, trying to fit too many concepts under the umbrella of what qualifies as a human right has the potential to dilute their importance. Finally, it is difficult to define a right to trade as either "fair" or "just" in that the current trade regime produces winners and losers but its reform is likely to produce (different) winners and losers. 

====Water====

The right to water has been recognized in a wide range of international documents, including treaties, declarations and other standards. For instance, the 1979 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) requires State parties to ensure to women the right to enjoy adequate living conditions, particularly in relation to water supply. The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) requires States parties to combat disease and malnutrition through the provision of adequate nutritious foods and clean drinking-water.

The most clear definition of the Human right to water has been issued by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. This treaty body interpreting legal obligations of State parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) issued in 2002 a non-binding interpretation affirming that access to water was a condition for the enjoyment of the right to an adequate standard of living and inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of health (see ICESCR Art.11 & 12) and therefore a human right:

On July 28, 2010, the United Nations General Assembly declared water and sanitation as human rights. Today all States have at least ratified one human rights convention which explicitly or implicitly recognizes the right, and they all have signed at least one political declaration recognizing this right.

====Reproductive rights====

Reproductive rights are rights relating to reproduction and reproductive health. 
The World Health Organisation defines reproductive rights as follows:

Reproductive rights were first established as a subset of human rights at the United Nations 1968 International Conference on Human Rights. The sixteenth article of the resulting Proclamation of Teheran states, "Parents have a basic human right to determine freely and responsibly the number and the spacing of their children." 

Reproductive rights may include some or all of the following rights: the right to legal or safe abortion, the right to control one's reproductive functions, the right to quality reproductive healthcare, and the right to education and access in order to make reproductive choices free from coercion, discrimination, and violence. 

Reproductive rights may also be understood to include education about contraception and sexually transmitted infections, and freedom from coerced sterilization and contraception, protection from gender-based practices such as female genital cutting (FGC) and male genital mutilation (MGM). 

====Information and communication technologies====

In October 2009, Finland's Ministry of Transport and Communications announced that every person in Finland would have the legal right to Internet access. 
Since July 2010, the government has legally obligated telecommunications companies to offer broadband Internet access to every permanent residence and office. The connection must be "reasonably priced" and have a downstream rate of at least 1 Mbit/s. 

In March 2010, the BBC, having commissioned an opinion poll, reported that "almost four in five people around the world believe that access to the internet is a fundamental right." 
The poll, conducted by the polling company GlobeScan for the BBC World Service, collated the answers of 27,973 adult citizens across 26 countries to find that 79% of adults either strongly agreed or somewhat agreed with the statement: "access to the internet should be a fundamental right of all people". 

==Relationship with other topics==

===The environment===
There are two basic conceptions of environmental human rights in the current human rights system. The first is that the right to a healthy or adequate environment is itself a human right (as seen in both Article 24 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and Article 11 of the San Salvador Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights). 
The second conception is the idea that environmental human rights can be derived from other human rights, usually  the right to life, the right to health, the right to private family life and the right to property (among many others). This second theory enjoys much more widespread use in human rights courts around the world, as those rights are contained in many human rights documents.

The onset of various environmental issues, especially climate change, has created potential conflicts between different human rights. Human rights ultimately require a working ecosystem and healthy environment, but the granting of certain rights to individuals may damage these. Such as the conflict between right to decide number of offspring and the common need for a healthy environment, as noted in the tragedy of the commons. Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons", Science, Vol. 162, No. 3859 (December 13, 1968), pp. 12431248. Also available here and here. 
In the area of environmental rights, the responsibilities of multinational corporations, so far relatively unaddressed by human rights legislation, is of paramount consideration.

Environmental rights revolve largely around the idea of a right to a livable environment both for the present and the future generations.

===National security===

With the exception of non-derogable human rights (international conventions class the right to life, the right to be free from slavery, the right to be free from torture and the right to be free from retroactive application of penal laws as non-derogable), the UN recognises that human rights can be limited or even pushed aside during times of national emergency  although

Rights that cannot be derogated for reasons of national security in any circumstances are known as peremptory norms or jus cogens. Such United Nations Charter obligations are binding on all states and cannot be modified by treaty.

Examples of national security being used to justify human rights violations include the Japanese American internment during World War II, 
Stalin's Great Purge, and the modern-day abuses of terror suspects rights by some countries, often in the name of the War on Terror. 

===Relativism and universalism===

Relativists argue that human rights must avoid pushing the values of a single culture at the expense of others. "The White Man's Burden" is seen as an example of the West using the spread of Western culture as a justification for colonization.
Universalists argue that some practices violate the norms of all human cultures. They point out that although Female genital mutilation is prevalent in Africa, no religion supports the practice, and the tradition is in violation of women's rights.

The UDHR enshrines universal rights that apply to all humans equally, whichever geographical location, state, race or culture they belong to. However, in academia there is a dispute between scholars that advocate moral relativism and scholars that advocate moral universalism. Relativists do not argue against human rights, but concede that human rights are social constructed and are shaped by cultural and environmental contexts. Universalists argue that human rights have always existed, and apply to all people regardless of culture, race, sex, or religion.

More specifically, proponents of cultural relativism argue for acceptance of different cultures, which may have practices conflicting with human rights. Relativists caution that universalism could be used as a form of cultural, economic or political imperialism. The White Man's Burden is used as an example of imperialism and the destruction of local cultures justified by the desire to spread Eurocentric values. "Eurocentrism". In Encyclopedia of the Developing World. Ed. Thomas M. Leonard, Taylor & Francis, 2006, ISBN 0-415-97662-6, p. 636. 
In particular, the concept of human rights is often claimed to be fundamentally rooted in a politically liberal outlook which, although generally accepted in Europe, Japan or North America, is not necessarily taken as standard elsewhere.

Opponents of relativism argue that some practices exist that violate the norms of all human cultures. A common example is female genital mutilation, which occurs in different cultures in Africa, Asia and South America . It is not mandated by any religion, but has become a tradition in many cultures. It is considered a violation of women's and girl's rights by much of the international community, and is outlawed in some countries.

The former Prime Ministers of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, and of Malaysia, Mahathir bin Mohamad both claimed in the 1990s that Asian values were significantly different from Western values and included a sense of loyalty and foregoing personal freedoms for the sake of social stability and prosperity, and therefore authoritarian government is more appropriate in Asia than democracy. Lee Kuan Yew argued that:

In response, critics have pointed out that cultural relativism could be used as a justification for authoritarianism. An example is in 1981, when the Iranian representative to the United Nations, Said Rajaie-Khorassani, articulated the position of his country regarding the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by saying that the UDHR was "a secular understanding of the Judeo-Christian tradition", which could not be implemented by Muslims without trespassing the Islamic law. Littman (1999) 
The Asian Values argument was criticized by Mahathir's former deputy:

and by Singapore's opposition leader Chee Soon Juan, who states that it is racist to assert that Asians do not want human rights. 

Defenders of moral universalism argue that relativistic arguments neglect the fact that modern human rights are new to all cultures, dating back no further than the UDHR in 1948. They argue that the UDHR was drafted by people from many different cultures and traditions, including a US Roman Catholic, a Chinese Confucian philosopher, a French zionist and a representative from the Arab League, amongst others, and drew upon advice from thinkers such as Mahatma Gandhi. Michael Ignatieff has argued that cultural relativism is almost exclusively an argument used by those who wield power in cultures which commit human rights abuses, and that those whose human rights are compromised are the powerless. 
This reflects the fact that the difficulty in judging universalism versus relativism lies in who is claiming to represent a particular culture.

Although the argument between universalism and relativism is far from complete, it is an academic discussion in that all international human rights instruments adhere to the principle that human rights are universally applicable. The 2005 World Summit reaffirmed the international community's adherence to this principle:

==See also==

* Children's rights
* Fundamental rights
* Human rights group
* Human rights literature
* Human Rights Watch
* International human rights law
* International human rights instruments
* List of human rights organisations
* Minority rights
* Public international law

==References==

==Bibliography==

===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Articles===
* 
* 
* 

===Online===
* 
* 

===Miscellaneous===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Abouharb, R. and D. Cingranelli (2007). "Human Rights and Structural Adjustment". New York: Cambridge University Press.
*Barzilai, G (2003), Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities. The University of Michigan Press, 2003. ISBN 0-47211315-1
* Barsh, R. (1993). Measuring Human Rights: Problems of Methodology and Purpose. Human Rights Quarterly 15: 87-121.
* Chauhan, O.P. (2004). Human Rights: Promotion and Protection. Anmol Publications PVT. LTD. ISBN 81-261-2119-X
* Forsythe, David P. (2000). Human Rights in International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. International Progress Organization. ISBN 3-900704-08-2
* Forsythe, Frederick P. (2009). Encyclopedia of Human Rights (New York: Oxford University Press)
* Ishay, M. (2004). The history of human rights: From ancient times to the globalization era. Los Angeles, California: University California Press.
* Landman, Todd (2006). Studying Human Rights. Oxford and London: Routledge ISBN 0-415-32605-2
* Robertson, Arthur Henry; Merrills, John Graham (1996). Human Rights in the World: An Introduction to the Study of the International Protection of Human Rights. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-4923-7.
* Gerald M. Steinberg, Anne Herzberg and Jordan Berman (2012). Best Practices for Human Rights and Humanitarian NGO Fact-Finding. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers / Brill ISBN 9789004218116
* Steiner, J. & Alston, Philip. (1996). International Human Rights in Context: Law, Politics, Morals. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-825427-X
* Shute, Stephen & Hurley, Susan (eds.). (1993). On Human Rights: The Oxford Amnesty Lectures. New York: BasicBooks. ISBN 0-465-05224-X

==External links==

* United Nations: Human Rights
* UN Practitioner's Portal on HRBA Programming UN centralised webportal on the Human Rights-Based Approach to Development Programming
* Simple Guide to the UN Treaty Bodies (International Service for Human Rights)
* Country Reports on Human Rights Practices U.S. Department of State.
* International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ)
* The International Institute of Human Rights
* IHRLaw.org International Human Rights Law  comprehensive online resources and news
* 

 

 



[[Hello world]]

#redirect Hello world program 

[[Hash table]]

A small phone book as a hash table

In computing, a hash table (also hash map) is a data structure used to implement an associative array, a structure that can map keys to values. A hash table uses a hash function to compute an index into an array of buckets or slots, from which the correct value can be found.

Ideally, the hash function will assign each key to a unique bucket, but this situation is rarely achievable in practice (usually some keys will hash to the same bucket). Instead, most hash table designs assume that hash collisionsdifferent keys that are assigned by the hash function to the same bucketwill occur and must be accommodated in some way.

In a well-dimensioned hash table, the average cost (number of instructions) for each lookup is independent of the number of elements stored in the table. Many hash table designs also allow arbitrary insertions and deletions of key-value pairs, at (amortized Charles E. Leiserson, Amortized Algorithms, Table Doubling, Potential Method Lecture 13, course MIT 6.046J/18.410J Introduction to AlgorithmsFall 2005
 ) constant average cost per operation. 
 
 

In many situations, hash tables turn out to be more efficient than search trees or any other table lookup structure. For this reason, they are widely used in many kinds of computer software, particularly for associative arrays, database indexing, caches, and sets.

==Hashing==

The idea of hashing is to distribute the entries (key/value pairs) across an array of buckets. Given a key, the algorithm computes an index that suggests where the entry can be found:

 index = f(key, array_size)

Often this is done in two steps:

 hash = hashfunc(key)
 index = hash % array_size

In this method, the hash is independent of the array size, and it is then reduced to an index (a number between 0 and array_size&nbsp;&nbsp;1) using the modulus operator (%).

In the case that the array size is a power of two, the remainder operation is reduced to masking, which improves speed, but can increase problems with a poor hash function.

===Choosing a good hash function===
A good hash function and implementation algorithm are essential for good hash table performance, but may be difficult to achieve.

A basic requirement is that the function should provide a uniform distribution of hash values. A non-uniform distribution increases the number of collisions and the cost of resolving them. Uniformity is sometimes difficult to ensure by design, but may be evaluated empirically using statistical tests, e.g. a Pearson's chi-squared test for discrete uniform distributions. 
 
 
 
 

The distribution needs to be uniform only for table sizes that occur in the application. In particular, if one uses dynamic resizing with exact doubling and halving of the table size s, then the hash function needs to be uniform only when s is a power of two. On the other hand, some hashing algorithms provide uniform hashes only when s is a prime number. Thomas Wang (1997), Prime Double Hash Table. Retrieved April 27, 2012 

For open addressing schemes, the hash function should also avoid clustering, the mapping of two or more keys to consecutive slots. Such clustering may cause the lookup cost to skyrocket, even if the load factor is low and collisions are infrequent. The popular multiplicative hash is claimed to have particularly poor clustering behavior. 

Cryptographic hash functions are believed to provide good hash functions for any table size s, either by modulo reduction or by bit masking. They may also be appropriate if there is a risk of malicious users trying to sabotage a network service by submitting requests designed to generate a large number of collisions in the server's hash tables. However, the risk of sabotage can also be avoided by cheaper methods (such as applying a secret salt to the data, or using a universal hash function).

===Perfect hash function===
If all keys are known ahead of time, a perfect hash function can be used to create a perfect hash table that has no collisions. If minimal perfect hashing is used, every location in the hash table can be used as well.

Perfect hashing allows for constant time lookups in the worst case. This is in contrast to most chaining and open addressing methods, where the time for lookup is low on average, but may be very large (proportional to the number of entries) for some sets of keys.

==Key statistics==
A critical statistic for a hash table is called the load factor. This is simply the number of entries divided by the number of buckets, that is, n/k where n is the number of entries and k is the number of buckets.

If the load factor is kept reasonable, the hash table should perform well, provided the hashing is good. If the load factor grows too large, the hash table will become slow, or it may fail to work (depending on the method used). The expected constant time property of a hash table assumes that the load factor is kept below some bound. For a fixed number of buckets, the time for a lookup grows with the number of entries and so does not achieve the desired constant time.

Second to that, one can examine the variance of number of entries per bucket. For example, two tables both have 1000 entries and 1000 buckets; one has exactly one entry in each bucket, the other has all entries in the same bucket. Clearly the hashing is not working in the second one.

A low load factor is not especially beneficial. As the load factor approaches 0, the proportion of unused areas in the hash table increases, but there is not necessarily any reduction in search cost. This results in wasted memory.

==Collision resolution==
Hash collisions are practically unavoidable when hashing a random subset of a large set of possible keys. For example, if 2,450 keys are hashed into a million buckets, even with a perfectly uniform random distribution, according to the birthday problem there is approximately a 95% chance of at least two of the keys being hashed to the same slot.

Therefore, most hash table implementations have some collision resolution strategy to handle such events. Some common strategies are described below. All these methods require that the keys (or pointers to them) are stored in the table, together with the associated values.

===Separate chaining===
Hash collision resolved by separate chaining.

In the method known as separate chaining, each bucket is independent, and has some sort of list of entries with the same index. The time for hash table operations is the time to find the bucket (which is constant) plus the time for the list operation. (The technique is also called open hashing or closed addressing.)

In a good hash table, each bucket has zero or one entries, and sometimes two or three, but rarely more than that. Therefore, structures that are efficient in time and space for these cases are preferred. Structures that are efficient for a fairly large number of entries are not needed or desirable. If these cases happen often, the hashing is not working well, and this needs to be fixed.

====Separate chaining with linked lists====
Chained hash tables with linked lists are popular because they require only basic data structures with simple algorithms, and can use simple hash functions that are unsuitable for other methods.

The cost of a table operation is that of scanning the entries of the selected bucket for the desired key. If the distribution of keys is sufficiently uniform, the average cost of a lookup depends only on the average number of keys per bucketthat is, on the load factor.

Chained hash tables remain effective even when the number of table entries n is much higher than the number of slots. Their performance degrades more gracefully (linearly) with the load factor. For example, a chained hash table with 1000 slots and 10,000 stored keys (load factor 10) is five to ten times slower than a 10,000-slot table (load factor 1); but still 1000 times faster than a plain sequential list, and possibly even faster than a balanced search tree.

For separate-chaining, the worst-case scenario is when all entries are inserted into the same bucket, in which case the hash table is ineffective and the cost is that of searching the bucket data structure. If the latter is a linear list, the lookup procedure may have to scan all its entries, so the worst-case cost is proportional to the number n of entries in the table.

The bucket chains are often implemented as ordered lists, sorted by the key field; this choice approximately halves the average cost of unsuccessful lookups, compared to an unordered list. However, if some keys are much more likely to come up than others, an unordered list with move-to-front heuristic may be more effective. More sophisticated data structures, such as balanced search trees, are worth considering only if the load factor is large (about 10 or more), or if the hash distribution is likely to be very non-uniform, or if one must guarantee good performance even in a worst-case scenario. However, using a larger table and/or a better hash function may be even more effective in those cases.

Chained hash tables also inherit the disadvantages of linked lists. When storing small keys and values, the space overhead of the next pointer in each entry record can be significant. An additional disadvantage is that traversing a linked list has poor cache performance, making the processor cache ineffective.

====Separate chaining with list head cells====

Hash collision by separate chaining with head records in the bucket array.

Some chaining implementations store the first record of each chain in the slot array itself. 
The number of pointer traversals is decreased by one for most cases. The purpose is to increase cache efficiency of hash table access.

The disadvantage is that an empty bucket takes the same space as a bucket with one entry. To save memory space, such hash tables often have about as many slots as stored entries, meaning that many slots have two or more entries.

====Separate chaining with other structures====
Instead of a list, one can use any other data structure that supports the required operations. For example, by using a self-balancing tree, the theoretical worst-case time of common hash table operations (insertion, deletion, lookup) can be brought down to O(log n) rather than O(n). However, this approach is only worth the trouble and extra memory cost if long delays must be avoided at all costs (e.g. in a real-time application), or if one must guard against many entries hashed to the same slot (e.g. if one expects extremely non-uniform distributions, or in the case of web sites or other publicly accessible services, which are vulnerable to malicious key distributions in requests).

The variant called array hash table uses a dynamic array to store all the entries that hash to the same slot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Each newly inserted entry gets appended to the end of the dynamic array that is assigned to the slot. The dynamic array is resized in an exact-fit manner, meaning it is grown only by as many bytes as needed. Alternative techniques such as growing the array by block sizes or pages were found to improve insertion performance, but at a cost in space. This variation makes more efficient use of CPU caching and the translation lookaside buffer (TLB), because slot entries are stored in sequential memory positions. It also dispenses with the next pointers that are required by linked lists, which saves space. Despite frequent array resizing, space overheads incurred by operating system such as memory fragmentation, were found to be small.

An elaboration on this approach is the so-called dynamic perfect hashing, Erik Demaine, Jeff Lind. 6.897: Advanced Data Structures. MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Spring 2003. http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.897/spring03/scribe_notes/L2/lecture2.pdf where a bucket that contains k entries is organized as a perfect hash table with k2 slots. While it uses more memory (n2 slots for n entries, in the worst case and n*k slots in the average case), this variant has guaranteed constant worst-case lookup time, and low amortized time for insertion.

===Open addressing===
Hash collision resolved by open addressing with linear probing (interval=1). Note that "Ted Baker" has a unique hash, but nevertheless collided with "Sandra Dee", that had previously collided with "John Smith".
In another strategy, called open addressing, all entry records are stored in the bucket array itself. When a new entry has to be inserted, the buckets are examined, starting with the hashed-to slot and proceeding in some probe sequence, until an unoccupied slot is found. When searching for an entry, the buckets are scanned in the same sequence, until either the target record is found, or an unused array slot is found, which indicates that there is no such key in the table. 
 
 The name "open addressing" refers to the fact that the location ("address") of the item is not determined by its hash value. (This method is also called closed hashing; it should not be confused with "open hashing" or "closed addressing" that usually mean separate chaining.)

Well-known probe sequences include:
* Linear probing, in which the interval between probes is fixed (usually 1)
* Quadratic probing, in which the interval between probes is increased by adding the successive outputs of a quadratic polynomial to the starting value given by the original hash computation
* Double hashing, in which the interval between probes is computed by another hash function

A drawback of all these open addressing schemes is that the number of stored entries cannot exceed the number of slots in the bucket array. In fact, even with good hash functions, their performance dramatically degrades when the load factor grows beyond 0.7 or so. Thus a more aggressive resize scheme is needed. Separate linking works correctly with any load factor, although performance is likely to be reasonable if it is kept below 2 or so. For many applications, these restrictions mandate the use of dynamic resizing, with its attendant costs.

Open addressing schemes also put more stringent requirements on the hash function: besides distributing the keys more uniformly over the buckets, the function must also minimize the clustering of hash values that are consecutive in the probe order. Using separate chaining, the only concern is that too many objects map to the same hash value; whether they are adjacent or nearby is completely irrelevant.

Open addressing only saves memory if the entries are small (less than four times the size of a pointer) and the load factor is not too small. If the load factor is close to zero (that is, there are far more buckets than stored entries), open addressing is wasteful even if each entry is just two words.

This graph compares the average number of cache misses required to look up elements in tables with chaining and linear probing. As the table passes the 80%-full mark, linear probing's performance drastically degrades.

Open addressing avoids the time overhead of allocating each new entry record, and can be implemented even in the absence of a memory allocator. It also avoids the extra indirection required to access the first entry of each bucket (that is, usually the only one). It also has better locality of reference, particularly with linear probing. With small record sizes, these factors can yield better performance than chaining, particularly for lookups. 
Hash tables with open addressing are also easier to serialize, because they do not use pointers.

On the other hand, normal open addressing is a poor choice for large elements, because these elements fill entire CPU cache lines (negating the cache advantage), and a large amount of space is wasted on large empty table slots. If the open addressing table only stores references to elements (external storage), it uses space comparable to chaining even for large records but loses its speed advantage.

Generally speaking, open addressing is better used for hash tables with small records that can be stored within the table (internal storage) and fit in a cache line. They are particularly suitable for elements of one word or less. If the table is expected to have a high load factor, the records are large, or the data is variable-sized, chained hash tables often perform as well or better.

Ultimately, used sensibly, any kind of hash table algorithm is usually fast enough; and the percentage of a calculation spent in hash table code is low. Memory usage is rarely considered excessive. Therefore, in most cases the differences between these algorithms are marginal, and other considerations typically come into play.

===Coalesced hashing===
A hybrid of chaining and open addressing, coalesced hashing links together chains of nodes within the table itself. Like open addressing, it achieves space usage and (somewhat diminished) cache advantages over chaining. Like chaining, it does not exhibit clustering effects; in fact, the table can be efficiently filled to a high density. Unlike chaining, it cannot have more elements than table slots.

===Cuckoo hashing===
Another alternative open-addressing solution is cuckoo hashing, which ensures constant lookup time in the worst case, and constant amortized time for insertions and deletions. It uses two or more hash functions, which means any key/value pair could be in two or more locations. For lookup, the first hash function is used; if the key/value is not found, then the second hash function is used, and so on. If a collision happens during insertion, then the key is re-hashed with the second hash function to map it to another bucket. If all hash functions are used and there is still a collision, then the key it collided with is removed to make space for the new key, and the old key is re-hashed with one of the other hash functions, which maps it to another bucket. If that location also results in a collision, then the process repeats until there is no collision or the process traverses all the buckets, at which point the table is resized. By combining multiple hash functions with multiple cells per bucket, very high space utilisation can be achieved.

===Robin Hood hashing===

One interesting variation on double-hashing collision resolution is Robin Hood hashing. 
 
 
 The idea is that a new key may displace a key already inserted, if its probe count is larger than that of the key at the current position. The net effect of this is that it reduces worst case search times in the table. This is similar to ordered hash tables except that the criterion for bumping a key does not depend on a direct relationship between the keys. Since both the worst case and the variation in the number of probes is reduced dramatically, an interesting variation is to probe the table starting at the expected successful probe value and then expand from that position in both directions. 
 
External Robin Hashing is an extension of this algorithm where the table is stored in an external file and each table position corresponds to a fixed-sized page or bucket with B records. 
 

===2-choice hashing===
2-choice hashing employs 2 different hash functions, h1(x) and h2(x), for the hash table. Both hash functions are used to compute two table locations. When an object is inserted in the table, then it is placed in the table location that contains fewer objects (with the default being the h1(x) table location if there is equality in bucket size). 2-choice hashing employs the principle of the power of two choices.

===Hopscotch hashing===
Another alternative open-addressing solution is hopscotch hashing, which combines the approaches of cuckoo hashing and linear probing, yet seems in general to avoid their limitations. In particular it works well even when the load factor grows beyond 0.9. The algorithm is well suited for implementing a resizable concurrent hash table.

The hopscotch hashing algorithm works by defining a neighborhood of buckets near the original hashed bucket, where a given entry is always found. Thus, search is limited to the number of entries in this neighborhood, which is logarithmic in the worst case, constant on average, and with proper alignment of the neighborhood typically requires one cache miss. When inserting an entry, one first attempts to add it to a bucket in the neighborhood. However, if all buckets in this neighborhood are occupied, the algorithm traverses buckets in sequence until an open slot (an unoccupied bucket) is found (as in linear probing). At that point, since the empty bucket is outside the neighborhood, items are repeatedly displaced in a sequence of hops. (This is similar to cuckoo hashing, but with the difference that in this case the empty slot is being moved into the neighborhood, instead of items being moved out with the hope of eventually finding an empty slot.) Each hop brings the open slot closer to the original neighborhood, without invalidating the neighborhood property of any of the buckets along the way. In the end, the open slot has been moved into the neighborhood, and the entry being inserted can be added to it.

==Dynamic resizing==
To keep the load factor under a certain limit, e.g. under 3/4, many table implementations expand the table when items are inserted. For example, in Java's HashMap class the default load factor threshold for table expansion is 0.75.

Since buckets are usually implemented on top of a dynamic array and any constant proportion for resizing greater than 1 will keep the load factor under the desired limit, the exact choice of the constant is determined by the same space-time tradeoff as for dynamic arrays.

Resizing is accompanied by a full or incremental table rehash whereby existing items are mapped to new bucket locations.

To limit the proportion of memory wasted due to empty buckets, some implementations also shrink the size of the tablefollowed by a rehashwhen items are deleted. From the point of space-time tradeoffs, this operation is similar to the deallocation in dynamic arrays.

===Resizing by copying all entries===
A common approach is to automatically trigger a complete resizing when the load factor exceeds some threshold rmax. Then a new larger table is allocated, all the entries of the old table are removed and inserted into this new table, and the old table is returned to the free storage pool. Symmetrically, when the load factor falls below a second threshold rmin, all entries are moved to a new smaller table.

If the table size increases or decreases by a fixed percentage at each expansion, the total cost of these resizings, amortized over all insert and delete operations, is still a constant, independent of the number of entries n and of the number m of operations performed.

For example, consider a table that was created with the minimum possible size and is doubled each time the load ratio exceeds some threshold. If m elements are inserted into that table, the total number of extra re-insertions that occur in all dynamic resizings of the table is at most m  1. In other words, dynamic resizing roughly doubles the cost of each insert or delete operation.

===Incremental resizing===
Some hash table implementations, notably in real-time systems, cannot pay the price of enlarging the hash table all at once, because it may interrupt time-critical operations. If one cannot avoid dynamic resizing, a solution is to perform the resizing gradually:
* During the resize, allocate the new hash table, but keep the old table unchanged.
* In each lookup or delete operation, check both tables.
* Perform insertion operations only in the new table.
* At each insertion also move r elements from the old table to the new table.
* When all elements are removed from the old table, deallocate it.
To ensure that the old table is completely copied over before the new table itself needs to be enlarged, it
is necessary to increase the size of the table by a factor of at least (r + 1)/r during resizing.

===Monotonic keys===
If it is known that key values will always increase (or decrease) monotonically, then a variation of consistent hashing can be achieved by keeping a list of the single most recent key value at each hash table resize operation. Upon lookup, keys that fall in the ranges defined by these list entries are directed to the appropriate hash functionand indeed hash tableboth of which can be different for each range. Since it is common to grow the overall number of entries by doubling, there will only be O(lg(N)) ranges to check, and binary search time for the redirection would be O(lg(lg(N))). As with consistent hashing, this approach guarantees that any key's hash, once issued, will never change, even when the hash table is later grown.

===Other solutions===
Linear hashing is a hash table algorithm that permits incremental hash table expansion. It is implemented using a single hash table, but with two possible look-up functions.

Another way to decrease the cost of table resizing is to choose a hash function in such a way that the hashes of most values do not change when the table is resized. This approach, called consistent hashing, is prevalent in disk-based and distributed hashes, where rehashing is prohibitively costly.

==Performance analysis==
In the simplest model, the hash function is completely unspecified and the table does not resize. For the best possible choice of hash function, a table of size k with open addressing has no collisions and holds up to k elements, with a single comparison for successful lookup, and a table of size k with chaining and n keys has the minimum max(0, n-k) collisions and O(1 + n/k) comparisons for lookup. For the worst choice of hash function, every insertion causes a collision, and hash tables degenerate to linear search, with (n) amortized comparisons per insertion and up to n comparisons for a successful lookup.

Adding rehashing to this model is straightforward. As in a dynamic array, geometric resizing by a factor of b implies that only n/b'i keys are inserted i or more times, so that the total number of insertions is bounded above by bn/(b-1), which is O(n). By using rehashing to maintain n < k, tables using both chaining and open addressing can have unlimited elements and perform successful lookup in a single comparison for the best choice of hash function.

In more realistic models, the hash function is a random variable over a probability distribution of hash functions, and performance is computed on average over the choice of hash function. When this distribution is uniform, the assumption is called "simple uniform hashing" and it can be shown that hashing with chaining requires (1 + n/k) comparisons on average for an unsuccessful lookup, and hashing with open addressing requires (1/(1 - n/k)). Doug Dunham. CS 4521 Lecture Notes. University of Minnesota Duluth. Theorems 11.2, 11.6. Last modified April 21, 2009. Both these bounds are constant, if we maintain n/k < c using table resizing, where c is a fixed constant less than 1.

==Features==

===Advantages===
The main advantage of hash tables over other table data structures is speed. This advantage is more apparent when the number of entries is large. Hash tables are particularly efficient when the maximum number of entries can be predicted in advance, so that the bucket array can be allocated once with the optimum size and never resized.

If the set of key-value pairs is fixed and known ahead of time (so insertions and deletions are not allowed), one may reduce the average lookup cost by a careful choice of the hash function, bucket table size, and internal data structures. In particular, one may be able to devise a hash function that is collision-free, or even perfect (see below). In this case the keys need not be stored in the table.

===Drawbacks===
Although operations on a hash table take constant time on average, the cost of a good hash function can be significantly higher than the inner loop of the lookup algorithm for a sequential list or search tree. Thus hash tables are not effective when the number of entries is very small. (However, in some cases the high cost of computing the hash function can be mitigated by saving the hash value together with the key.)

For certain string processing applications, such as spell-checking, hash tables may be less efficient than tries, finite automata, or Judy arrays. Also, if each key is represented by a small enough number of bits, then, instead of a hash table, one may use the key directly as the index into an array of values. Note that there are no collisions in this case.

The entries stored in a hash table can be enumerated efficiently (at constant cost per entry), but only in some pseudo-random order. Therefore, there is no efficient way to locate an entry whose key is nearest to a given key. Listing all n entries in some specific order generally requires a separate sorting step, whose cost is proportional to log(n) per entry. In comparison, ordered search trees have lookup and insertion cost proportional to log(n), but allow finding the nearest key at about the same cost, and ordered enumeration of all entries at constant cost per entry.

If the keys are not stored (because the hash function is collision-free), there may be no easy way to enumerate the keys that are present in the table at any given moment.

Although the average cost per operation is constant and fairly small, the cost of a single operation may be quite high. In particular, if the hash table uses dynamic resizing, an insertion or deletion operation may occasionally take time proportional to the number of entries. This may be a serious drawback in real-time or interactive applications.

Hash tables in general exhibit poor locality of referencethat is, the data to be accessed is distributed seemingly at random in memory. Because hash tables cause access patterns that jump around, this can trigger microprocessor cache misses that cause long delays. Compact data structures such as arrays searched with linear search may be faster, if the table is relatively small and keys are compact. The optimal performance point varies from system to system.

Hash tables become quite inefficient when there are many collisions. While extremely uneven hash distributions are extremely unlikely to arise by chance, a malicious adversary with knowledge of the hash function may be able to supply information to a hash that creates worst-case behavior by causing excessive collisions, resulting in very poor performance, e.g. a denial of service attack. Alexander Klink and Julian Wlde's Efficient Denial of Service Attacks on Web Application Platforms, December 28, 2011, 28th Chaos Communication Congress. Berlin, Germany. In critical applications, universal hashing can be used; a data structure with better worst-case guarantees may be preferable. Crosby and Wallach's Denial of Service via Algorithmic Complexity Attacks. 

==Uses==

===Associative arrays===
Hash tables are commonly used to implement many types of in-memory tables. They are used to implement associative arrays (arrays whose indices are arbitrary strings or other complicated objects), especially in interpreted programming languages like AWK, Perl, and PHP.

When storing a new item into a multimap and a hash collision occurs, the multimap unconditionally stores both items.

When storing a new item into a typical associative array and a hash collision occurs, but the actual keys themselves are different, the associative array likewise stores both items. However, if the key of the new item exactly matches the key of an old item, the associative array typically erases the old item and overwrites it with the new item, so every item in the table has a unique key.

===Database indexing===
Hash tables may also be used as disk-based data structures and database indices (such as in dbm) although B-trees are more popular in these applications.

===Caches===
Hash tables can be used to implement caches, auxiliary data tables that are used to speed up the access to data that is primarily stored in slower media. In this application, hash collisions can be handled by discarding one of the two colliding entriesusually erasing the old item that is currently stored in the table and overwriting it with the new item, so every item in the table has a unique hash value.

===Sets===
Besides recovering the entry that has a given key, many hash table implementations can also tell whether such an entry exists or not.

Those structures can therefore be used to implement a set data structure, which merely records whether a given key belongs to a specified set of keys. In this case, the structure can be simplified by eliminating all parts that have to do with the entry values. Hashing can be used to implement both static and dynamic sets.

===Object representation===
Several dynamic languages, such as Perl, Python, JavaScript, and Ruby, use hash tables to implement objects. In this representation, the keys are the names of the members and methods of the object, and the values are pointers to the corresponding member or method.

===Unique data representation===
Hash tables can be used by some programs to avoid creating multiple character strings with the same contents. For that purpose, all strings in use by the program are stored in a single string pool implemented as a hash table, which is checked whenever a new string has to be created. This technique was introduced in Lisp interpreters under the name hash consing, and can be used with many other kinds of data (expression trees in a symbolic algebra system, records in a database, files in a file system, binary decision diagrams, etc.)

===String interning===

==Implementations==

===In programming languages===
Many programming languages provide hash table functionality, either as built-in associative arrays or as standard library modules. In C++11, for example, the [[unordered map (C++)|unordered_map]] class provides hash tables for keys and values of arbitrary type.

In PHP 5, the Zend 2 engine uses one of the hash functions from Daniel J. Bernstein to generate the hash values used in managing the mappings of data pointers stored in a hash table. In the PHP source code, it is labelled as DJBX33A (Daniel J. Bernstein, Times 33 with Addition).

Python's built-in hash table implementation, in the form of the dict type, as well as Perl's hash type (%) are used internally to implement namespaces and therefore need to pay more attention to security, i.e. collision attacks.

In the .NET Framework, support for hash tables is provided via the non-generic Hashtable and generic Dictionary classes, which store key-value pairs, and the generic HashSet class, which stores only values.

===Independent packages===
* SparseHash (formerly Google SparseHash) An extremely memory-efficient hash_map implementation, with only 2 bits/entry of overhead. The SparseHash library has several C++ hash map implementations with different performance characteristics, including one that optimizes for memory use and another that optimizes for speed.
* SunriseDD An open source C library for hash table storage of arbitrary data objects with lock-free lookups, built-in reference counting and guaranteed order iteration. The library can participate in external reference counting systems or use its own built-in reference counting. It comes with a variety of hash functions and allows the use of runtime supplied hash functions via callback mechanism. Source code is well documented.
* uthash This is an easy-to-use hash table for C structures.

==History==
The idea of hashing arose independently in different places. In January 1953, H. P. Luhn wrote an internal IBM memorandum that used hashing with chaining. G. N. Amdahl, E. M. Boehme, N. Rochester, and Arthur Samuel implemented a program using hashing at about the same time. Open addressing with linear probing (relatively prime stepping) is credited to Amdahl, but Ershov (in Russia) had the same idea. 

==See also==
* RabinKarp string search algorithm
* Stable hashing
* Consistent hashing
* Extendible hashing
* Lazy deletion
* Pearson hashing

===Related data structures===
There are several data structures that use hash functions but cannot be considered special cases of hash tables:
* Bloom filter, memory efficient data-structure designed for constant-time approximate lookups; uses hash function(s) and can be seen as an approximate hash table.
* Distributed hash table (DHT), a resilient dynamic table spread over several nodes of a network.
* Hash array mapped trie, a trie structure, similar to the array mapped trie, but where each key is hashed first.

==References==

==Further reading==
*

*

==External links==

* A Hash Function for Hash Table Lookup by Bob Jenkins.
* Hash Tables by SparkNotesexplanation using C
* Hash functions by Paul Hsieh
* Design of Compact and Efficient Hash Tables for Java link not working
* Libhashish hash library
* NIST entry on hash tables
* Open addressing hash table removal algorithm from ICI programming language, ici_set_unassign in set.c (and other occurrences, with permission).
* A basic explanation of how the hash table works by Reliable Software
* Lecture on Hash Tables
* Hash-tables in Ctwo simple and clear examples of hash tables implementation in C with linear probing and chaining
* Open Data Structures - Chapter 5 - Hash Tables
* MIT's Introduction to Algorithms: Hashing 1 MIT OCW lecture Video
* MIT's Introduction to Algorithms: Hashing 2 MIT OCW lecture Video
* Java HashMap example
* How to sort a HashMap (Java) and keep the duplicate entries

*



[[Hello world program]]

A GUI "Hello World" program, written in Perl
CNC machining test in Perspex

A "Hello world" program is a computer program that outputs "Hello world" on a display device. Because it is typically one of the simplest programs possible in most programming languages, it is by tradition often used to illustrate to beginners the most basic syntax of a programming language. It is also used to verify that a language or system is operating correctly.

In a device that does not display text, a simple program to produce a signal, such as turning on an LED, is often substituted for "Hello world" as the introductory program.

==Purpose==
A "Hello World" program has become the traditional first program that many people learn. In general, it is simple enough so that people who have no experience with computer programming can easily understand it, especially with the guidance of a teacher or a written guide. Using this simple program as a basis, computer science principles or elements of a specific programming language can be explained to novice programmers. Experienced programmers learning new languages can also gain a lot of information about a given language's syntax and structure from a hello world program.

In addition, "Hello World" can be a useful sanity test to make sure that a language's compiler, development environment, and run-time environment are correctly installed. Configuring a complete programming toolchain from scratch to the point where even trivial programs can be compiled and run can involve substantial amounts of work. For this reason, a simple program is used first when testing a new tool chain.

A "Hello World" program running on Sony's PlayStation Portable as a proof of concept.
"Hello world" is also used by computer hackers as a proof of concept that arbitrary code can be executed through an exploit where the system designers did not intend code to be executedfor example, on Sony's PlayStation Portable. This is the first step in using homemade content ("home brew") on such a device.

==History==

While small test programs existed since the development of programmable computers, the tradition of using the phrase "Hello, world!" as a test message was influenced by an example program in the seminal book The C Programming Language. The example program from that book prints "hello,&nbsp;world" (without capital letters or exclamation mark), and was inherited from a 1974 Bell Laboratories internal memorandum by Brian Kernighan, Programming in C: A Tutorial, which contains the first known version:

 main()
 {
 printf("hello world");
 }

The C version was adapted from Kernighan's 1972 A Tutorial Introduction to the Language B, 
 where the first known version of the program is found in an example used to illustrate external variables:

 main(){
 extrn a,b,c;
 putchar(a); putchar(b); putchar(c); putchar('!*n');
 }

 a 'hell';
 b 'o w';
 c 'orld';

The program prints "hello&nbsp;world!" on the terminal, including a newline character. The phrase is divided into multiple variables because in B, a character constant is limited to four ASCII characters. The previous example in the tutorial printed "hi!" on the terminal, so the phrase "hello,&nbsp;world!" was originally introduced as a slightly longer greeting that required several character constants for its expression.

It is also claimed that "hello, world" originated instead with BCPL (1967). BCPL, Jargon File 

For modern languages, the hello world program tends to subtly grow in sophistication. For example, the Go programming language introduced a multilingual hello world program, A Tutorial for the Go Programming Language. The Go Programming Language. Retrieved July 26, 2011. Sun demonstrated a Java hello world based on scalable vector graphics, and the XL programming language features a spinning Earth hello world using 3D graphics. 

==Variations==
There are many variations on the punctuation and casing of the phrase. Variations include the presence or absence of the comma and exclamation mark, and the capitalization of the 'H', both the 'H' and the 'W', or neither. Some languages are forced to implement different forms, such as "HELLO WORLD!", on systems that support only capital letters, while many "hello world" programs in esoteric languages print out a slightly modified string. For example, the first non-trivial Malbolge program printed "HEllO WORld", this having been determined to be good enough.

There are variations in spirit, as well. Functional programming languages, like Lisp, ML and Haskell, tend to substitute a factorial program for Hello World, as functional programming emphasizes recursive techniques, whereas the original examples emphasize I/O, which violates the spirit of pure functional programming by producing side effects.

The Debian and Ubuntu Linux distributions provide the "hello world" program through the apt packaging system; this allows users to simply type "apt-get install hello" for the program to be installed, along with any software dependencies. While of itself useless, it serves as a sanity check and a simple example to newcomers of how to install a package. It is significantly more useful for developers, however, as it provides an example of how to create a .deb package, either traditionally or using debhelper, and the version of hello used, GNU hello, serves as an example of how to write a GNU program. List of Hello World Programs in 200 Programming Languages. Scriptol.com 

==Examples==

The Hello World program can be executed in many different programming languages, and in many different ways. The simplest ways are generally to just create a print line, or a String containing the words "Hello World!", however, one can use substrings and many other variations of programming in order to execute the Hello World program creation. Some languages such as Java may require several lines of code, while others such as Python or Ruby may need only a single statement.

In Io:

"Hello World!" println

In Java:

public class HelloWorld {
 public static void main(String [] args) {
 System.out.println("Hello World!");
 }
}

In JavaScript:

alert("Hello World!");

In PHP:

In Python:

print("Hello World!")

In Ruby:

puts "Hello World!"

In Assembly language:

%TITLE "HELLO.COM"
; 16-bit Com file.
; Written in TASM assembly.
; Written for the Intel 8086 processor, and should work on any x86 processor.

.Model Tiny

.Data
 Hello DB 0Dh, 0Ah, 'Hello, World!', 00h

.Code
.8086
 Org 100h

Start:
 Push ax
 Push bx
 Push si

 Lea si, HELLO
 Mov al, 

PRINT_MSG:
 Cmp al, 00h
 Jz DONE

 Mov ah, 0Eh
 Mov al, 
 Mov bh, 00h
 Int 10h

 Inc si

 Jmp short PRINT_MSG

Done:
 Mov ah, 00h
 Int 16h

 Pop si
 Pop bx
 Pop ax
 Int 20h

End Start
End PRINT_MSG
End Done
.End

Alternatively, if the screen does not have a textual output, a flash or blink of the device's light can be used as a different method, with the same meaning behind it. This is often used for Arduino devices, where pin 13 typically has a board-mounted LED fitted as standard.

== See also ==

*List of Hello world program examples
*"99 Bottles Of Beer" as used in computer science
*Foobar
*Just another Perl hacker
*List of basic computer science topics
*Trabb Pardo-Knuth algorithm
*At Wikibooks:
**Algorithm Implementation/Mathematics/Fibonacci Number Program
**Computer Programming/Hello world

==References==

== External links ==

*Hello World Examples Hello World examples in many different programming languages.
*Programming in C: A Tutorial by Brian Kernighan  internal Bell Labs memo, containing the above C program
*"Hello World" in four different ways  Worst possible to best possible
*Hello World collection with 400+ programs, including "Hello World" in 60+ human languages
*MSDN  "Hello Data" example database
*HelloWiki.org, a wiki based Hello World collection, with helpful comments and links for starting.
*The unsung heroes of IT: hello world a site celebrating 40 years of hello world



[[Heavy metal]]

Heavy metal may refer to:

*Heavy metal (chemistry), any metal or metalloid of environmental concern
*Heavy metal music, a musical genre
*Heavy Metal (magazine), an American fantasy magazine based on the French magazine Mtal Hurlant
**Heavy Metal (film), a 1981 animated film based on the magazine
**Heavy Metal 2000, a followup to the 1981 film

== Music ==
*"Heavy Metal (Takin' a Ride)", a 1981 song by Don Felder from the soundtrack of the 1981 movie Heavy Metal
*Heavy Metal Music (album), a 2013 album from Newsted
*"Heavy Metal" (Clap Your Hands Say Yeah song) (2005)
*"Heavy Metal", a 1981 song by Sammy Hagar from Standing Hampton
*"Heavy Metal: The Black and Silver", a 1981 song by Blue yster Cult from Fire of Unknown Origin
*"Heavy Metal", a 1985 song by Helloween from Walls of Jericho
*"Heavy Metal", a 1988 song by Judas Priest from Ram It Down

== Video games ==
*, a 2000 computer game by Gathering of Developers
*, a 2001 arcade game for Sega NAOMI and Dreamcast by Capcom
*HeavyMetal, a series of commercial software titles designed to complement Classic BattleTech

==Other uses==
*, a 2005 book about Operation Iraqi Freedom
*Heavy Metal (G.I. Joe), a character in the G.I. Joe universe
*Heavy Metal (Marvel Comics), a group of villains of the Marvel Universe
*Metal (Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles)|"Heavy Metal" (Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles)], a 2008 episode of Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles
*Heavy Metal (wrestler) (born 1970), Mexican professional wrestler
*Heavy Metal (cricket), an incident in a 1979 cricket match involving Dennis Lillee
*Heavy metal, the elements in the fuel that include fissile nuclides in calculating the burnup of nuclear fuel

== See also ==
*Metal (disambiguation)



[[Hebrew grammar]]

Hebrew grammar is the grammar of the Hebrew language.

==History of studies in Hebrew grammar==

The Masoretes in the 7th to 11th centuries laid the foundation for grammatical analysis of Hebrew. As early as the 9th century Judah ibn Kuraish discussed the relationship between Arabic and Hebrew. In the 10th century, Aaron ben Moses ben Asher refined the Tiberian vocalization, an extinct pronunciation of the Hebrew Bible.

The first treatises on Hebrew grammar appear in the High Middle Ages, in the context of Midrash (a method of interpreting and studying the Hebrew Bible). The Karaite tradition originated in Abbasid Baghdad around the 7th century. The Diqduq (10th century) is one of the earliest grammatical commentaries on the Hebrew Bible. G. Khan , J. B. Noah, The Early Karaite Tradition of Hebrew Grammatical Thought (2000) 

Solomon ibn Gabirol in the 11th century composed a versified Hebrew grammar, consisting of 400 verses divided into ten parts. In the 12th century, Ibn Barun compared the Hebrew language with Arabic in the Islamic grammatical tradition. Pinchas Wechter, Ibn Barn's Arabic Works on Hebrew Grammar and Lexicography (1964) 
11th to 12th century grammarians of the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain included Judah ben David Hayyuj, Jonah ibn Janah, Abraham ibn Ezra, Joseph Kimhi, Moses Kimhi and David Kimhi. Ibn Ezra gives a list of the oldest Hebrew grammarians in the introduction to his Moznayim (1140).
Roger Bacon was "a tolerable Hebrew scholar". Profiat Duran published an influential grammar in 1403.

Judah Messer Leon's 1454 grammar is a product of the Italian Renaissance. Hebrew grammars by Christian authors appeared during the Renaissance. Hieronymus Buclidius, a friend of Erasmus, gave more than 20,000 francs to establish a branch of Hebrew studies at Louvain in Flanders. Elijah Levita was called to the chair of Hebrew at the University of Paris. Cardinal Grimani and other dignitaries, both of the state and of the Church, studied Hebrew and the Cabala with Jewish teachers; even the warrior Guido Rangoni attempted the Hebrew language with the aid of Jacob Mantino (1526). Pico de la Mirandola (d. 1494) was the first to collect Hebrew manuscripts, and Reuchlin was the first to write a modern grammar of the Hebrew language (1506).
Conrad Gesner (d. 1565) was the first Christian to compile a catalogue of Hebrew books.
Paul Fagius and Elia Levita operated the first Hebrew printing office in the 1540s. Levita also compiled the first Hebrew-Yiddish dictionary.

Through the influence of Johannes Buxtorf (d. 1629) a serious attempt was made to understand the post-Biblical literature, and many of the most important works were translated into Latin. Gesenius' Hebrew Grammar appeared in 1813.

== Eras ==

The Hebrew language is subdivided by era, with significant differences apparent between the varieties. All varieties, from Biblical to Modern, use a typically Semitic templatic morphology with triconsonantal stems, though Mishnaic and Modern Hebrew have significant borrowed components of the lexicon that do not fit into this pattern. Verbal morphology has remained relatively unchanged, though Mishnaic and Modern Hebrew have lost some modal distinctions of Biblical Hebrew and created others through the use of auxiliary verbs. 

Significant syntactic changes have arisen in Modern Hebrew as a result of non-Semitic substrate influences. In particular:

* In Biblical Hebrew, possession is normally expressed with status constructus, a construction in which the possessed noun occurs in a phonologically reduced, "construct" form and is followed by the possessor noun in its normal, "absolute" form. Modern Hebrew tends to reserve this construction for phrases where the two components form a unified concept, whereas ordinary possession is more commonly expressed analytically with the preposition shel 'of' (etymologically consisting of the relativizer she- 'that' and the preposition le- 'to'). 
* Possession in pronouns is expressed with pronominal suffixes added to the noun. Modern Hebrew tends to reserve this for a limited number of nouns, but usually prefers to use the preposition shel, as in the previous case. 
* Biblical Hebrew often expresses a pronoun direct object by appending a pronominal suffix directly to the verb, as an alternative to appending it to the preposition that signals a definite direct object. The latter construction is the one generally used in Modern Hebrew. 
* The tenseaspect that is formed by prefixes could denote either the present (especially frequentative) or the future, as well as frequentative past in Biblical Hebrew (some scholars argue that it simply denoted imperfective aspect), while in modern Hebrew it is always future. The suffixed form denotes what is commonly translated as past in both cases, though some scholars argue that it denoted perfective aspect. 
* Biblical Hebrew employs the so-called waw consecutive construction, in which the conjunction "and" seemingly reverses the tense of a verb (though its exact meaning is a matter of debate). This is not typical of Modern Hebrew. 
* The default word order in Biblical Hebrew is VSO, while Modern Hebrew is SVO. 

However, most Biblical Hebrew constructions are still permissible in Modern Hebrew in formal, literary, archaic or poetic style.

==See also==
* Grammar and Orthography
** Biblical Hebrew grammar
** Modern Hebrew grammar
** Modern Hebrew verb conjugation
** Prefixes in Hebrew
** Suffixes in Hebrew
** Hebrew spelling
** Biblical Hebrew orthography
* Stages of Hebrew
** Biblical Hebrew  Attested from 10th century BCE to about 70 CE
** Mishnaic Hebrew  Post Temple Roman Era (1st through 4th Century CE)
** Modern Hebrew  Early 20th century CE to present
** Israelian Hebrew  Proposed dialect of Hebrew used by the Northern Israelite tribes
** Samaritan Hebrew  Form of Hebrew used by the Samaritans
* Pronunciation Variation
** Sephardi Hebrew pronunciation used by Jews of Spain and Portugal
** Mizrahi Hebrew used by Jews of the Middle East and North Africa
** Yemenite Hebrew pronunciation (Temani Hebrew) used by Jews of Yemen
** Ashkenazi Hebrew pronunciation used by Jews of Germany
** Modern Hebrew phonology
* Miscellaneous
** Yiddish language  a High-German language with Hebrew and Slavic influence, used by Ashkenazi Jews
** Ladino language  a Spanish language with Hebrew and Aramaic influence, used by Sephardi Jews

==References==
 

==Bibliography==
;Modern Hebrew
* 
* 
* 
;Biblical Hebrew
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
*Hebrew Verbs Conjugation Tool - Online Hebrew Verb Learning Tool (Hebrew/English)
*Glamour of the Grammar - Hebraist Dr. Joel M. Hoffman's biweekly column on Hebrew grammar
*Foundationstone  Online Hebrew Tutorial
*Hebrew is easy, by Babel
*Learning Hebrew, Young Israel (most of the links leading to language learning are now dead links)
*A Basic Introduction to Hebrew grammar
*History of the Ancient and Modern Hebrew Language, David Steinberg

 



[[Modern Hebrew phonology]]

This article is about the phonology of the Hebrew language based on the Israeli dialects. It deals with current phonology and phonetics as well as with historical developments thereof, including geographical variants.

Hebrew has been used primarily for liturgical, literary, and scholarly purposes for most of the past two millennia. As a consequence, its pronunciation has been strongly influenced by the vernacular of each individual Jewish community. In contrast to the varied development of these pronunciations is the relatively rapid development of modern Israeli Hebrew.

The two main pronunciations of Modern Israeli Hebrew are Oriental and Non-Oriental. Oriental Hebrew was chosen as the representative variant by the Academy of the Hebrew Language, but has declined in popularity.

== Consonants ==
Below are the consonants of modern General Israeli Hebrew. Some historically distinctive Hebrew phonemes have merged in modern Hebrew, such as historically distinctive (now all ), written respectively by the letters Tav (), () and (). The exact nature of the emphatic feature for emphatic consonants is a matter of debate; the most commonly suggested possibilities are pharyngealization (as in Arabic) and glottalization (as in the Ethiopian Semitic languages).
For these cases, the Academy of the Hebrew Language suggests two transliteration sets, a generic one, reflecting modern phonology, and a strict one, reflecting the orthographic distinctions, which are still in use, and the historical phonology. See transliteration rules set by the Academy of the Hebrew Language 

 Bilabial Labio-dental Alveolar Palato-alveolar Palatal Velar/Uvular Phary-ngeal Glottal 
 Nasal 
 Stop style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" width=25px style=\"border-right: 0;\" width=25px 
 Affricate style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" width=25px 
 Fricative style=\"border-right: 0;\" width=25px style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" width=25px style=\"border-right: 0;\" 
 Approximant 

===Historical notes===

# The consonants , as well as unitary , in initial position, and and in final position, were not present in Hebrew prior to modern Israeli Hebrew; however, they are widely common in loanwords and their derivatives (e.g.  , Physicist) and in slang (e.g.  , cubic metre).
# In old Hebrew the was emphatic (pharyngealized) . (Currently, the only community of Hebrew-speakers that expresses this in speech are Yemenite Jews and some other Mizrahim, whose Hebrew has preserved many distinctions lost by other communities under the influence of Yiddish and other European languages.) However, the emphasis led to several types of phonetic change that still exist.
# , a voiced uvular approximant, is the rhotic consonant for most speakers; however, in many dialects it occurs in free variation with (voiced uvular fricative) and/or (voiced uvular trill). The consonant was originally an alveolar trill but has changed due to the influence of European languages.
# The pharyngeal consonants ( and ) are articulated only by a portion of the population of Israel, mainly some Mizrahi Jews and Yemenite Jews. Common Modern Hebrew does not treat them as separate phonemes from and respectively, and these latter two predominate in articulation.
# Sounds that do not occur in Classical Hebrew are sometimes represented by a Hebrew letter followed by an apostrophe-like mark, . For example, /d/ is written as .

The pairs , , and , written respectively by the letters bet (), kaf () and pe () have historically been allophonic. In Modern Hebrew, however, all six sounds are phonemic, due to mergers involving formerly distinct sounds: ( merging with , merging with , merging with (which both have become ), loss of consonant gemination (which formerly distinguished the stop members of the pairs from the fricatives when intervocalic), and the introduction of syllable-initial through foreign borrowings (see Begadkefat).

In Israeli Hebrew, can occur in some foreign words, including names (e.g.  'Smith'); television shows (e.g.  'South Park'); and places (e.g.  'Portsmouth'), though it is not always pronounced as such and can be replaced by other sounds (e.g.  'Bluetooth' is commonly pronounced , as reflected in the spelling ).

===Example words===

IPA Letter Example IPA Letter Example 
 'interview' 'no' 
 'son' 'what' 
 'harp' 'miracle' 
 'also' 'end' 
 'giraffe' 'with' 
 'fuel' 'mouth' 
 
 'echo' 'baker' 
 'penguin' 'fleet' 
 'this ' 'passion' 
 'hot' 'head' 
 'day' 'year' 
 'all' 'beige' 
 'how' 'jackal' 
 'movement' 
 

# Assimilation.

===Consonant clusters===

In obstruent clusters, a voicing assimilation usually occurs as native Hebrew speakers tend to voice or devoice the first obstruent according to the second one.

Examples:

# ('to close'),  
# ('a right'),  
# ('a bill'),  
# ('a printer'),  
# ('security'),  

===Dropped consonants===

In casual fast speech, some Israelis may drop the glottal sounds when occurring between vowels (Laufer Asher, 2008, Chapters in Phonetics and in Phonetic Transcription, (The book is accompanied with a CD), Magnes, Jerusalem, 2008, chapter 6 & 7, pp. 78-93 (in Hebrew). Hence, "what's the time?" becomes or .

== Vowels ==
The vowel phonemes of Modern Israeli Hebrew. Based on 
The Hebrew word for vowels is (). The orthographic representations for these vowels are called Niqqud. Israeli Hebrew has 5 vowel phonemes.

Phoneme Example 
 'father' 
 'mother' 
 'man' 
 'light' 
 'red' (f) 

=== Shva ===

The Hebrew Niqqud sign "Shva" was traditionally classified as representing four grammatical entities: resting (nakh / ), moving (na / ), floating ( / ) and "bleating" or "bellowing" (ga'ya / ). In earlier forms of Hebrew, these entities were phonologically (and, in part, phonetically) distinguishable. However, the phonology of Modern Hebrew has produced two phonetic variants of Shva, either or mute, which no longer conform to the traditional classification, e.g. the (first) Shva Nach in the word (fem. you crumpled) is pronounced () instead of being mute, whereas the Shva Na in (time) is mute (). In general, in Modern Hebrew, some shvas are always pronounced (particularly, in prefixes like "in" or when following another shva in grammatical patterns, e.g. "you (f. sg.) will learn"), while the remaining shvas are pronounced only when not pronouncing them would violate a phonological constraint (for example, between two sounds that are identical or differ only in voicing, e.g. "I learned" not ; or when an impermissible initial cluster would result, e.g. or , where C stands for any consonant).

== Stress ==
Modern Hebrew, like Tiberian Hebrew, has stress: on the last syllable (milra) and on the penultimate syllable (the one preceding the last, milel). The former is more frequent. The stress has phonemic value, e.g. "", when pronounced , means "returned", whereas when pronounced it means "captured". However, Modern Hebrew, like Tiberian Hebrew, has also stressed words on the antepenult (milel demilel; e.g.   (Ex. 15:8)) or even further back ()
{see e.g. 
Laufer Asher (2008), Chapters in Phonetics and in Phonetic Transcription, (The book is accompanied with a CD), Magnes, Jerusalem, 2008, pp. 52-55 (in Hebrew).}

== Regional and historical variation ==

The following table contains the pronunciation of the Hebrew letters in reconstructed historical forms and dialects using the International Phonetic Alphabet. The apostrophe-looking symbol after some letters is not a yud but a geresh. It is used for loanwords with non-native Hebrew sounds and only in Israeli Hebrew. The dot in the middle of some of the letters, called a "dagesh kal", also modifies the sounds of the letters ,  and  in modern Hebrew (in earlier forms of Hebrew it used to modify also the sounds of the letters ,  and ; the "dagesh chazak"  orthographically indistinguishable from the "dagesh kal"  designates gemination, which today is realized only rarely  e.g. in biblical recitations or when using Arabic loanwords).
:

 Symbol Pronunciation 
 Israeli Ashkenazi Sephardi Yemenite Tiberian Reconstructed 
 Mishnaic Biblical 
  [ - ] 
  
  
  
  
  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
  
  
  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
  
  
  ? ? ? 
  ? ? ? 
 &rlm;(), (non-standard) issued by the Academy of the Hebrew Language states that both and be indistinguishably represented in Hebrew using the letter Vav. Sometimes the Vav is indeed doubled, however not to denote as opposed to but rather, when spelling without niqqud, to denote the phoneme at a non-initial and non-final position in the word, whereas a single Vav at a non-initial and non-final position in the word in spelling without niqqud denotes one of the phonemes or . To pronounce foreign words and loanwords containing the sound , Hebrew readers must therefore rely on former knowledge and context, see also pronunciation of Hebrew Vav. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
  
  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
  
  (1) (2) (3) 
  
  ? ? ? ? 
   
   
  
   
   
  
  , - ] [ - ] - ] 
  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
   
   
   (1) (2) (3) 
   N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
  , , (3) 
  ~ ~ ~ 
  
  
  
  
  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
 

# velarized or pharyngealized
# pharyngealized
# sometimes said to be ejective but more likely glottalized.

== Notes ==

== References ==
* History of the Ancient and Modern Hebrew Language, David Steinberg
* 



[[House of Hohenzollern]]

The House of Hohenzollern is a noble family and royal dynasty of electors, kings, and emperors of Brandenburg, Prussia, Germany, and Romania. It originated in the area around the town of Hechingen in Swabia during the 11th century. They took their name from their ancestral home, the Burg Hohenzollern castle near Hechingen.

The family uses the motto Nihil Sine Deo (). The family coat of arms, first adopted in 1192, began as a simple shield quarterly sable and argent. A century later, in 1317, Frederick IV, Burgrave of Nuremberg, added the head and shoulders of a hound as a crest. Later quartering reflected heiresses marriages into the family.

The family split into two branches, the Catholic Swabian branch and the Protestant Franconian branch, known also as the Kirschner line. The Swabian branch ruled the area of Hechingen until the revolution of 1848/49. The Franconian branch was more successful: members of the Franconian branch became Margrave of Brandenburg in 1415 and Duke of Prussia in 1525. Following the union of these two Franconian lines in 1618, the Kingdom of Prussia was created in 1701, eventually leading to the unification of Germany and the creation of the German Empire in 1871, with the Hohenzollerns as hereditary emperors and kings of Prussia.

Germany's defeat in World War I led to the German Revolution. The Hohenzollerns were overthrown and the Weimar Republic was established, thus bringing an end to the modern German monarchy.

Georg Friedrich, Prince of Prussia, is the current head of the House of Hohenzollern. On 27 August 2011, Georg Friedrich was married to Princess Sophie Johanna Maria of Isenburg. On 20 January 2013, Princess Sophie gave birth to twin sons, Carl Friedrich Franz Alexander and Louis Ferdinand Christian Albrecht, in Bremen. Carl Friedrich, the elder of the two, is the heir apparent. 

== Origins ==
One of the most prominent ruling houses in the history of Europe, the Hohenzollern Dynasty played a major role in the history of Germany from the late Middle Ages until the end of World War I. It takes its name from a castle in Swabia first mentioned as Zolorin or Zolre (the modern Hohenzollern, south of Tbingen, in the Land Baden-Wrttemberg). 

== Counts of Zollern (10611204) ==
Hohenzollern Castle, Swabia
100px
 
The oldest known mention of the Zollern was in 1061 by Berthold of Reichenau. It was a county, ruled by the counts of Zollern, whose descent has been attempted to be linked (without success) to the Burchardinger dynasty. 

* until 1061: Burkhard I
* before 1125: Frederick I
* between ca. 1125 and 1142: Frederick II, eldest son of Frederick I 
* between ca. 1143 and 1150-1155: Burkhard II, 2nd oldest son of Frederick I 
* between ca. 1150-1155 and 1160: Gotfried of Zimmern, 4th oldest son of Frederick I 
* before 1171  c. 1200: Frederick III/I (son of Frederick II, also Burgrave of Nuremberg)

Count Frederick III of Zollern was a loyal retainer of the Holy Roman Emperors Frederick Barbarossa and Henry VI, and around 1185 he married Sophia of Raabs, the daughter of Conrad II, Burgrave of Nuremberg.

After the death of Conrad II, often referred to as Kurt II who left no male heirs, Frederick III was granted the burgraviate of Nuremberg in 1192 as Burgrave Frederick I of Nuremberg-Zollern. Since then the family name has been Hohenzollern.

After Frederick's death, his sons partitioned the family lands between themselves:

* The older brother, Heraldry of the Royal Families of Europe, Ji Louda & Michael Maclagan, 1981, pp. 178-179. Frederick IV, received the county of Zollern and burgraviate of Nuremberg in 1200 from his father, thereby founding the Swabian branch of the House of Hohenzollerns. The Swabian line remained Catholic.

* The younger brother, Conrad III, received the burgraviate of Nuremberg from his older brother Frederick IV in 1218, thereby founding the Franconian branch of the House of Hohenzollern. The Franconian line later converted to Protestantism.

== Franconian branch ==
The cadet Franconian branch of the House of Hohenzollern was founded by Conrad I, Burgrave of Nuremberg (1186-1261).

Beginning in the 16th century, this branch of the family became Protestant and decided on expansion through marriage and the purchase of surrounding lands.

The family supported the Hohenstaufen and Habsburg rulers of the Holy Roman Empire during the 12th to 15th centuries, and they were rewarded with several territorial grants.

In the first phase, the family gradually added to their lands, at first with many small acquisitions in the Franconian and Bavarian regions of Germany:

* Ansbach in 1331
* Kulmbach in 1340

In the second phase, the family expanded their lands further with large acquisitions in the Brandenburg and Prussian regions of Germany and current Poland:

* Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1417
* Duchy of Prussia in 1618

These acquisitions eventually transformed the Hohenzollerns from a minor German princely family into one of the most important in Europe.

=== Burgraves of Nuremberg (11921427) ===
75px
Region of Nuremberg, Ansbach, Kulmbach and Bayreuth, (Franconia and Bavaria, Germany)
Frederick VI of Nuremberg, Margrave of Brandenburg

* 11921200/1204: Frederick I (also count of Zollern as Frederick III)
* 12041218: Frederick II (son of, also count of Zollern as Frederick IV)
* 12181261/1262: Conrad I/III (brother of, also count of Zollern)
* 12621297: Frederick III (son of)
* 12971300: John I (son of)
* 13001332: Frederick IV (brother of)
* 13321357: John II (son of)
* 13571398: Frederick V (son of)

At Frederick V's death on 21 January 1398, his lands were partitioned between his two sons:

* 13981420: John III/I (son of, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach)
* 14201427: Frederick VI/I/I, (brother of, also Elector of Brandenburg and Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach)

After John III/I's death on 11 June 1420, the two principalities were briefly reunited under Frederick VI/I/I. From 1412 Frederick VI became Margrave of Brandenburg as Frederick I and Elector of Brandenburg as Frederick I. From 1420, he became Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach. Upon his death on 21 September 1440, his territories were divided between his sons:

* John II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach
* Frederick II, Elector of Brandenburg
* Albert III, Elector of Brandenburg and Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach

From 1427 onwards the title of Burgrave of Nuremberg was absorbed into the titles of Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach and Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach.

File:Burg Nrnberg 03.jpg|Nuremberg Castle (The Emperor's castle, left, and the Burgrave's castle, right)
File:Cadolzburg-burg-wseite-gesamt-v-nw.jpg|Cadolzburg Castle (from 1260 seat of the Burgraves)

=== Margraves of Brandenburg-Ansbach (13981791) ===

75px

* 1398: Frederick I (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach)
* 1440: Albert I/I/III Achilles (son of, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach and Elector of Brandenburg)
* 1486: Frederick II/II (son of, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach)
* 1515: George I/I the Pious (son of, also Duke of Brandenburg-Jgerndorf)
* 1543: George Frederick I/I/I/I (son of, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach, Duke of Brandenburg-Jgerndorf and Regent of Prussia)
* 1603: Joachim Ernst
* 1625: Frederick III
* 1634: Albert II
* 1667: John Frederick
* 1686: Christian I Albrecht
* 1692: George Frederick II/II (later Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach)
* 1703: William Frederick (before 16861723)
* 1723: Charles William (17121757)
* 1757: Christian II Frederick (17571791) (son of, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach)

On 2 December 1791, Christian II Frederick sold the sovereignty of his principalities to king Frederick William II of Prussia.

File:Ansbach - 2013 Mattes (73).JPG|Residenz Ansbach 

=== Margraves of Brandenburg-Kulmbach (13981604), later Brandenburg-Bayreuth (16041791) ===

75px
75px

* 1397: John I
* 1420: Frederick I (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach)
* 1440: John II
* 1457: Albert I/I/III Achilles (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach and Elector of Brandenburg)
* 1486: Siegmund
* 1495: Frederick II/II (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach)
* 1515: Casimir
* 1527: Albert II Alcibiades
* 1553: George Frederick I/I/I/I (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, Duke of Brandenburg-Jgerndorf and Regent of Prussia)
* 1603: Christian I
* 1655: Christian II Ernst
* 1712: George I William
* 1726: George Frederick II/II (previously Margrave of Kulmbach)
* 1735: Frederick IV
* 1763: Frederick V Christian
* 1769: Christian II Frederick (until 1791, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach)

On 2 December 1791, Christian II Frederick sold the sovereignty of his principalities to king Frederick William II of Prussia.

From 1701 the title of Elector of Brandenburg was attached to the title of King in and of Prussia.

File:Plassenburg oben.jpg|Plassenburg Castle at Kulmbach
File:Neues schlo bayreuth.JPG|The New Castle at Bayreuth
File:Erlangen Schloss 006.JPG|Erlangen Castle 

=== Dukes of Jgerndorf (15231622) ===
80px
The Duchy of Jgerndorf (Krnov) was purchased in 1523.

* 15411543 : George I the Pious (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach)
* 15431603 : George Frederick I (also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach and Regent of Prussia)
* 16031606 : Joachim I (also Regent of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburg)
* 16061621 : Johann Georg of Hohenzollern

The duchy of Jgerndorf was confiscated by Ferdinand III of the Holy Roman Empire in 1622.

== Brandenburg-Prussian Branch ==
=== Margraves of Brandenburg (14151819) ===
Joachim I Nestor, Elector of Brandenburg 

* 1415-1440 Frederick I
* 1471-1486 Albrecht III Achilles
* 1486-1499 John Cicero
* 1499-1535 Joachim I Nestor
* 1535-1571 Joachim II Hector
* 1571-1598 John George
* 1598-1608 Joachim III Frederick
* 1608-1619 John Sigismund

=== Margraves of Brandenburg-Kstrin (15351571) ===
75px

The short-lived Margraviate of Brandenburg-Kstrin was set up, against the Hohenzollern house laws on succession, as a secundogeniture fief of the House of Hohenzollern, a typical German institution.

* 15351571: John the Wise, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kstrin (son of Joachim I Nestor, Elector of Brandenburg)

He died without issue. The Margraviate of Brandenburg-Kstrin was absorbed in 1571 into the Margraviate and Electorate of Brandenburg.

=== Margraves of Brandenburg-Schwedt (16881788) ===
75px
From 1688 onwards the Margraves of Brandenburg-Schwedt were a side branch of the House of Hohenzollern. Though recognised as a branch of the main dynasty the Margraviate of Brandenburg-Schwedt never constituted a principality with allodial rights of its own.

* 16881711 : Philip William, Prince in Prussia, Margrave of Brandenburg-Schwedt (son of Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg)
* 17311771 : Frederick William, Prince in Prussia, Margrave of Brandenburg-Schwedt (son of)
* 17711788 : Frederick Henry, Prince in Prussia, Margrave of Brandenburg Schwedt (brother of)

In 1788 the title was incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia.

=== Dukes of Prussia (15251701) ===
right
In 1525 the Duchy of Prussia was established as a fief of the King of Poland.

Ducal Prussia (red), shown within the Kingdom of Prussia (blue), within the German Empire (salmon), as at 1876

* 15251568: Albert I
* 15681618: Albert II Frederick co-inheritor (son of)
* 15681571: Joachim I/II Hector co-inheritor (also Elector of Brandenburg)
** 15781603: George Frederick I/I/I/I (Regent, also Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach and Duke of Brandenburg-Jgerndorf)
** 16031608: Joachim I/I/III Frederick (Regent, also Duke of Brandenburg-Jgerndorf and Elector of Brandenburg)
** 16081618: John I/III Sigismund (Regent, also Elector of Brandenburg)
* 16181619: John I/III Sigismund (Regent, also Elector of Brandenburg)
* 16191640: George William I/I (son of, also Elector of Brandenburg)
* 16401688: Frederick I/III William the Great Elector (son of, also Elector of Brandenburg)
* 16881701: Frederick II/IV/I (also Elector of Brandenburg and King in Prussia)

From 1701 the title of Duke of Prussia was attached to the title of King in and of Prussia.

=== Kings in Prussia (17011772) ===
right
Frederick I, King in Prussia
In 1701 the title of King in Prussia was granted, without the Duchy of Prussia being elevated to a Kingdom within the Holy Roman Empire. From 1701 onwards the titles of Duke of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburg were always attached to the title of King in Prussia.

* 17011713: Frederick I/II/IV (also Duke of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburg)
* 17131740: Frederick William I (son of)
* 17401786: Frederick II (son of, later also King of Prussia)

In 1772 the Duchy of Prussia was elevated to a kingdom.

File:Berlin Stadtschloss 1920er.jpg|City Palace, Berlin, Brandenburg
File:Knigsberg Castle courtyard.jpg|Knigsberg Castle, Prussia

=== Kings of Prussia (17721918) ===
left
The Kingdom of Prussia (blue), within the German lands (salmon), as at 1818. The borders of the newly established German Confederation are shown as thick lines.

In 1772 the title of King of Prussia was granted with the establishment of the Kingdom of Prussia. From 1772 onwards the titles of Duke of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburg were always attached to the title of King of Prussia.

* Frederick II (17401786) (son of, before King in Prussia)
* Frederick William II (17861797) (nephew of)
* Frederick William III (17971840) (son of)
* Frederick William IV (18401861) (son of)
* William I (18611888) (brother of)
* Frederick III (1888) (son of)
* William II (18881918) (son of)

In 1871 the Kingdom of Prussia was a constituting member of the German Empire.

=== German Emperors (18711918) ===
right
The Kingdom of Prussia (blue), within the German Empire (salmon), as at 1876

==== Reigning (18711918) ====
Wilhelm II., German Emperor
In 1871 the German Empire was proclaimed. With the accession of Wilhelm I to the newly established imperial German throne, the titles of King of Prussia, Duke of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburg were always attached to the title of German Emperor.

right
* 18711888: William I (also King of Prussia)
* 1888: Frederick III (son of, also King of Prussia)
* 18881918: William II (son of, also King of Prussia)

In 1918 the German empire was abolished and replaced by the Weimar Republic.

=== Line of succession (1918 to present) ===
Prince Georg Friedrich, head of the Prussian branch of the House of Hohenzollern
After the outbreak of the German Revolution in 1918, both Emperor Wilhelm II and the Crown Prince Wilhelm signed the document of abdication, with effect only for their own person. Despite the abolition of the German monarchy in 1918, the House of Hohenzollern never relinquished its claims to the thrones of Prussia and the German Empire. These claims are linked by the Constitution of the second German Empire: according to this, whoever was King of Prussia was also German Emperor. However, these claims are not recognised by the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Constitution of 1949 guarantees democracy and republicanism. 

In June 1926, a referendum on expropriating the formerly ruling princes of Germany without compensation failed and as a consequence, the financial situation of the Hohenzollern family improved considerably. A settlement between the state and the family made Cecilienhof property of the state but granted a right of residence to Crown Prince Wilhelm and his wife Cecilie. The family also kept the ownership of Monbijou Palace in Berlin, Oels Castle in Silesia, Rheinsberg Palace, Schwedt Palace and other property until 1945. The communist government of the Soviet occupation zone depropriated all landowners and industrialists, by which the House of Hohenzollern lost almost all of its fortune, leaving them only with a few company shares and Hohenzollern Castle in West Germany. The Polish government depropriated the Silesian property and the Dutch government seized Huis Doorn, the Emperor's exile seat. After the German reunification however, the family was legally able to claim their movable property back, namely art collections and parts of the interior of their former palaces. Negotiations on a return or compensation for these assets are not yet finished. 

 Name Titular reign Comments 
 William II 19181941 Exiled in the Netherlands until his death 
 Crown Prince William 19411951 
 Prince Louis Ferdinand 19511994 
 Prince Georg Friedrich since 1994 
 Prince Carl Friedrich heir presumptive 

The head of the house is the titular King of Prussia and German Emperor. He also bears a historical claim to the title of prince of Orange. Members of this line style themselves princes of Prussia.

Table of the House of Hohenzollern

=== Palaces of the Prussian Hohenzollern ===
Some important castles and palaces of the Prussian Hohenzollern were:

File:Berlin Stadtschloss Luftaufnahme.jpg|The Royal Palace in Berlin
File:Charlottenburg Hohenzollern 2.jpg|Charlottenburg Palace in Berlin
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 170-237, Potsdam, Stadtschloss vom Turm der Nikolaikirche.jpg|Stadtschloss, Potsdam
File:14 Neues Palais Sanssouci Potsdam Steffen Heilfort.JPG|New Palace (Potsdam)
File:Schloss-Sanssouci Abendsonne.jpg|Sanssouci in Potsdam
File:Marmorpalais.jpg|Marmorpalais, Potsdam
File:BabelsbergP1020137.jpg|Babelsberg Palace, Potsdam
File:Schloss Oranienburg - Jan 2013.jpg|Oranienburg Palace
File:Schloss Rheinsberg.jpg|Rheinsberg Palace
File:Wrocaw Kazimierza Wielkiego 35 sm.jpg|Wrocaw Palace, Silesia
File:3273viki Zamek w Olenicy. Foto Barbara Maliszewska.jpg|Oels Castle, Silesia
File:Koblenz im Buga-Jahr 2011 - Schloss Stolzenfels 01.jpg|Stolzenfels Castle on the Rhine

== Swabian Senior Branch ==
Combined coat of arms of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (1849).

The senior Swabian branch of the House of Hohenzollern was founded by Frederick II, Burgrave of Nuremberg.

Ruling the minor German principalities of Hechingen, Sigmaringen and Haigerloch, this branch of the family decided to remain Roman Catholic and from 1567 onwards split into the Hohenzollern-Hechingen, Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen and Hohenzollern-Haigerloch branches. The Romanian branch of this family became Orthodox, starting from Ferdinand's I children. When the last count of Hohenzollern, Charles I of Hohenzollern (15121579) died, the territory was to be divided up between his three sons:
* Eitel Frederick IV of Hohenzollern-Hechingen (15451605)
* Charles II of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (15471606)
* Christopher of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch (15521592)

They never expanded from these three Swabian principalities, which was one of the reasons they became relatively unimportant in German history for much of their existence. However, they kept royal lineage and married members of the great royal European houses.

In 1767 the principality of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch was incorporated into the other two principalities. In 1850, the princes of both Hohenzollern-Hechingen and Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen abdicated their thrones, and their principalities were incorporated as the Prussian province of Hohenzollern.

The last ruling Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, Karl Anton, would later serve as Minister-President of Prussia between 1858 and 1862.

The Hohenzollern-Hechingen finally became extinct in 1869. A descendent of this branch was Sophie Chotek, wife of Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria-Este.

File:Schloss Sigmaringen NW.jpg|Sigmaringen Castle
File:2011-07-17-hechingen-by-RalfR-006.jpg|Hechingen Castle
File:Schlosskirche Haigerloch 2010.JPG|Haigerloch Castle

However, a member of the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen family, Charles Eitel, second son of prince Karl Anton, was chosen to become prince of Romania as Charles I in 1866. In 1881 Charles I became the first king of the Romanians.

Charles' older brother, Leopold, was offered the Spanish throne after a revolt removed queen Isabella II in 1870. Although encouraged by Bismarck to accept it, Leopold backed down once France's Emperor, Napoleon III, stated his objection. Despite this, France still declared war, beginning the Franco-Prussian war.

Charles I had only a daughter who died very young, so Leopold's younger son Ferdinand I would succeed his uncle as king of the Romanians in 1914, and his descendants continued to rule in Romania until the end of the monarchy in 1947.

In modern times this branch has been represented only by the last king, Michael I of Romania, and his daughters. The descendants of Leopold's oldest son William continue to use the titles of prince or princess of Hohenzollern.

King Michael renounced his connection in 2011. "King Michael I broke ties with historical and dynastic House of Hohenzollern" in Adevarul - News Bucharest, 10 May 2011 

=== Counts of Hohenzollern (12041575) ===
right
Hohenzollern region, now in Wrttemberg, Germany (red color)

In 1204, the County of Hohenzollern was established out of the fusion of the County of Zollern and the Burgraviate of Nuremberg.

* 12041251/1255: Frederick IV, also Burgrave of Nuremberg as Frederick II until 1218

* 1251/12551289: Frederick V
* 12891298: Frederick VI
* 12981309: Frederick VII
* 13091333: Frederick VIII
* 13331377: Frederick IX
* 13771401: Frederick XI
* 14011426: Frederick XII
* 14261439: Eitel Frederick I
* 14391488: Jobst Nicholas I
* 14881512: Eitel Frederick II
* 15121525: Eitel Frederick III
* 15251575: Charles I

In 1575 the County of Hohenzollern was split in two Counties with allodial rights, Hohenzollern-Hechingen and Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.

=== Counts of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch (15671630 and 16811767) ===
75px

The County of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch was established in 1567 without allodial rights

* 15751601 : Christopher of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch
* 16011623 : John Christopher, Count of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch
* 16011630 : Charles, Count of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch

Between 1630 and 1681 the county was temporarily integrated into the principality of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.

* 16811702: Francis Anthony, Count of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch
* 17021750: Ferdinand Leopold, Count of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch
* 17501767: Francis Christopher Anton of Hohenzollern-Haigerloch

After the death of Francis Christopher Anton in 1767, the county of Hohenzollern-Haigenloch was definitively absorbed into the principality of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.

=== Counts, later Princes of Hohenzollern-Hechingen (157616231850) ===
right
right

The County of Hohenzollern-Hechingen was established in 1576 with allodial rights.

* Eitel Frederick IV (15761605)
* John George (16051623) (raised to Prince in 1623)
* Eitel Frederick V (16231661) (also count of Hohenzollern-Hechingen)
* Philip Christopher Frederick (16611671)
* Frederick William (16711735)
* Frederick Louis (17351750)
* Josef Friedrich Wilhelm (17501798)
* Hermann (17981810)
* Friedrich (18101838)
* Konstantin (18381850)

In 1850 the principality was sold to the Franconian branch of the family and incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia. The branch became extinct in dynastic line with Konstantin's death in 1869.

=== Counts, later Princes of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (157616231849) ===
right

The County of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was established in 1576 with allodial rights and a seat at Sigmaringen Castle.

* Karl II (15761606)
* John (16061638) (elevated to Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in 1623)
* Meinrad I (16381681)
* Maximilian I (16811689)
* Meinrad II (16891715)
* Joseph Frederick Ernest (17151769)
* Charles Frederick (17691785)
* Anton Aloys (17851831)
* Karl III (18311848)
* Karl Anton (18481849)

In 1850 the principality was sold to the Franconian branch of the family and incorporated into the kingdom of Prussia. Nevertheless, the family continued to use the princely title of Frsten von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen until 1869 and still use the title of Frsten von Hohenzollern.

=== House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen after 1849 ===
The princely House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen never relinquished their claims to the princely throne of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen or the royal throne of Romania. Because the last reigning king of the Romanians, Michael I, has no male issue, upon his death the claim will devolve to the head of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (or to the king's female line descendants, if one follows the amended Romanian house laws).
Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern

* 18491885: Karl Anton, Prince of Hohenzollern
* 18851905: Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern
* 19051927: Wilhelm, Prince of Hohenzollern
* 19271965: Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern
* 19652010 : Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen
* 2010 - current : Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern
* heir apparent: Alexander, Hereditary Prince of Hohenzollern

The head of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, Karl Friedrich, is styled His Serene Highness The Prince of Hohenzollern. His official seat is Sigmaringen Castle.

== Kings of the Romanians ==
right

=== Reigning (18661947) ===
The Principality of Romania was established in 1862, after the Ottoman vassal states of Wallachia and Moldavia had been united in 1859 under Alexandru Ioan Cuza as Prince of Romania in a personal union.

King Michael in 1947
He was deposed in 1866 by the Romanian parliament which then invited a German prince of the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen family, Charles, to become Prince of Romania under the name Prince Carol.

In 1881 the Principality of Romania was proclaimed a Kingdom. For dynastic reasons, Carol's grandchildren renounced Catholicism and were brought up in the Romanian Orthodox Church.

* 18661914: Charles I (titled as Prince until 1881)
* 19141927: Ferdinand
* 19271930: Michael
* 19301940: Charles II
* 19401947: Michael (again)

In 1947 the Kingdom of Romania was abolished and replaced with the People's Republic of Romania.

=== Succession (1947 until today) ===

Michael has retained his claim on the defunct Romanian throne. At present, the claim is not recognised by Romania, a republic. At 10 May 2011, Michael severed all of the dynastic and historical ties between the House of Romania and the House of Hohenzollern. 

== Coat of arms of the Hohenzollerns, Brandenburg, Prussia, and the German Empire ==
An article on the Coat of arms of Prussia can be found. The explanation of the shield can be found at Great Shield of the Kings of Prussia (German).

== See also ==
* Kings of Germany family tree. The Hohenzollerns were the 15th dynasty to rule Germany and were related by marriage to all the others.
* Coat of arms of Prussia
* Coat of arms of Germany
* House Order of Hohenzollern
* Heil dir im Siegerkranz
* Order of the Black Eagle and SUUM CUIQUE
* Order of the Red Eagle and SINCERE ET CONSTANTER
* Wilhelm-Orden
* Order of the Crown (Prussia) and GOTT MIT UNS
* Iron Cross
* Pele Castle

== References ==

== External links ==
*Official site of the imperial House of Germany and royal House of Prussia
*Official site of the princely House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen
*Official site of the royal house of Romania
*Genealogy of the Hohenzollern
*

|-

|-

|-

|-

*

[[Hang gliding]]

Hang glider just after launch

Hang gliding is an air sport in which a pilot flies a light and non-motorized foot-launch aircraft called a hang glider. Most modern hang gliders are made of an aluminium alloy or composite frame covered with synthetic sailcloth https://www.willswing.com/features/sailcloth.asp to form a wing. The pilot is ensconced in a harness suspended from the airframe, and exercises control by shifting body weight in opposition to a control frame, but other devices, including modern aircraft flight control systems, may be used.

In the sport's early days, pilots were restricted to gliding down small hills on low-performance hang gliders. However, modern technology gives pilots the ability to soar for hours, gain thousands of metres of altitude in thermal updrafts, perform aerobatics, and glide cross-country for hundreds of kilometres. The Fdration Aronautique Internationale and national airspace governing organizations control some regulatory aspects of hang gliding. Obtaining the safety benefits of being instructed is highly recommended. 

== History ==

Otto Lilienthal in flight

Most early glider designs did not ensure safe flight; the problem was that early flight pioneers did not sufficiently understand the underlying principles that made a bird's wing work. Starting in the 1880s technical and scientific advancements were made that led to the first truly practical gliders. Otto Lilienthal built controllable gliders in the 1890s, with which he could ridge soar. His rigorously documented work influenced later designers, making Lilienthal one of the most influential early aviation pioneers. His aircraft was controlled by weight shift and is similar to a modern hang glider.

Jan Lavezzari with a double sail glider
Hang gliding saw a stiffened flexible wing hang glider in 1904, when Jan Lavezzari flew a double lateen sail hang glider off Berck Beach, France. In 1910 in Breslau, the triangle control frame with hang glider pilot hung behind the triangle in a hang glider, was evident in a gliding club's activity. http://lh4.ggpht.com/_y21JroWG1xg/SG6MAf0c7KI/AAAAAAAAATk/CoCQ25QpLrM/1908StephanNitschCollection.jpg 1908 hang glider in Breslau territory with pilot hung by his left foot, a device used through 1900s (decade) up to today for natural bodily commute. The biplane hang glider was very widely publicized in public magazines with plans for building; The Octave Chanute Pages such biplane hang gliders were constructed and flown in several nations since Octave Chanute and his tailed biplane hang gliders were demonstrated. In April 1909, a how-to article by Carl S. Bates proved to be a seminal hang glider article that seemingly affected builders even of contemporary times, as several builders would have their first hang glider made by following the plan in his article. The Popular Mechanics Glider Volmer Jensen with a biplane hang glider in 1940 called VJ-11 allowed safe three-axis control of a foot-launched hang glider. VJ-11 Information Page. The history of the VJ-11 hang glider. 

1-B in Tow Flight - GPN-2000-000212.jpg|thumb|NASA's Paresev glider in flight with tow cable ]
On November 23, 1948, Francis Rogallo and Gertrude Rogallo applied for a kite patent Flexible kite for a fully flexible kited wing with approved claims for its stiffenings and gliding uses; the flexible wing or Rogallo wing, which in 1957 the American space agency NASA began testing in various flexible and semi-rigid configurations in order to use it as a recovery system for the Gemini space capsules. The various stiffening formats and the wing's simplicity of design and ease of construction, along with its capability of slow flight and its gentle landing characteristics, did not go unnoticed by hang glider enthusiasts. In 1960-1962 Barry Hill Palmer adapted the flexible wing concept to make foot-launched hang gliders with four different control arrangements. Carl S. Bates In 1963 Mike Burns adapted the flexible wing to build a towable kite-hang glider he called Skiplane. In 1963, John W. Dickenson adapted the flexible wing airfoil concept to make another water-ski kite glider; for this, the Fdration Aronautique Internationale vested Dickenson with the Hang Gliding Diploma (2006) for the invention of the "modern" hang glider. FAI Award: The FAI Hang Gliding Diploma Since then, the Rogallo wing has been the most used airfoil of hang gliders.

== Components ==

=== Hang Glider Sailcloth ===
There are basically two types of sail materials used in hang glider sails: Woven Polyester Fabrics, and Composite Laminated Fabrics made of some combination of polyester film and polyester fibers.

Woven polyester sailcloth is a very tight weave of small diameter polyester fibers that has been stabilized by the hot-press impregnation of a polyester resin. The resin impregnation is required to provide resistance to distortion and stretch. This resistance is important in maintaining the aerodynamic shape of the sail. Woven polyester provides the best combination of light weight and durability in a sail with the best overall handling qualities.

Laminated sail materials using polyester film achieve superior performance by using a lower stretch material that is better at maintaining sail shape but is still relatively light in weight. The disadvantages of polyester film fabrics is that the reduced elasticity under load generally results in stiffer and less responsive handling, and polyester laminated fabrics are generally not as durable or long lasting as the woven fabrics.

=== Triangle control frame ===
In most hang gliders, the control is and has been achieved using a horizontal bar held by the pilot, also known as 'triangle control frame' (TCF), 'control bar' or 'base bar'. This bar is usually pulled to allow for greater speed. Either end of the control bar is attached to an upright, where both extend and are connected to the main body of the glider. This creates the shape of a triangle or A-Frame. In many of these configurations additional wheels or other equipment can be suspended from the bottom bar or rod ends.

Images showing a triangle control frame on Otto Lilienthal's 1892 hang glider prove that the technology of such frames has existed since the early design of gliders, but he did not mention it in his patents. A TCF shows also in Octave Chanute's designs. It was a major part of the now common design of hang gliders by George A. Spratt from 1929. The most simple A-frame that is cable-stayed was demonstrated in a Breslau gliding club hang gliding meet in a battened wing hang glider in the year 1908; hang glider historian Stephan Nitsch has collected instances also of the U control frame used in the first decade of the 1900s; the U is variant of the A-frame.

== Training and safety ==
Learning to hang glide
Due to the poor safety record of early hang gliding pioneers, the sport has traditionally been considered unsafe. Advances in pilot training and glider construction have led to a much improved safety record. Modern hang gliders are very sturdy when constructed to HGMA, BHPA, DHV, or other certified standards using modern materials. Although lightweight they can be easily damaged, either through misuse or by continued operation in unsafe wind and weather conditions. All modern gliders have built-in dive recovery mechanisms such as luff lines in kingposted gliders, or "sprogs" in topless gliders.

Pilots fly in a harness which supports their body. Several different types of harnesses exist. Pod harnesses are put on like a jacket and the leg portion is behind the pilot during launch. Once in the air the feet are tucked into the bottom of the harness. They are zipped up in the air with a rope and unzipped before landing with a separate rope. A cocoon harness is slipped over the head and lies in front of the legs during launch. After getting into the air the feet are tucked into it and the back is left open. A knee hanger harness is also slipped over the head but the knee part is wrapped around the knees before launch and just pick up the pilots leg automatically after launch. A supine or suprone harness is a seated harness. The shoulder straps are put on before launch and after take off the pilot slides back into the seat and flies in a seated position.

Pilots carry a parachute enclosed in the harness. In case of serious problems the parachute is manually deployed and carries both pilot and glider down to earth. Pilots also wear helmets and generally carry other safety items such as knives (for cutting their parachute bridle after impact or cutting their harness lines and straps in case of a tree or water landing), light ropes (for lowering from trees to haul up tools or climbing ropes), radios (for communication with other pilots or ground crew), and first-aid equipment.

The accident rate from hang glider flying has been dramatically decreased by pilot training. Early hang glider pilots learned their sport through trial and error and gliders were sometimes home-built. Training programs have been developed for today's pilot with emphasis on flight within safe limits, as well as the discipline to cease flying when weather conditions are unfavorable, for example: excess wind or risk cloud suck.

In the UK there is one death per 116,000 flights, a risk comparable to running a marathon or playing football for a year. 

== Launch ==
Video of a foot-launching from a hill

Launch techniques include foot-launching from a hill, tow-launching from a ground-based tow system, aerotowing (behind a powered aircraft), powered harnesses, and being towed up by a boat. Modern winch tows typically utilize hydraulic systems designed to regulate line tension, this reduces scenarios for lock out as strong winds result in additional length of rope spooling out rather than direct tension on the tow line. Other more exotic launch techniques have also been used successfully, such as hot air balloon drops from very high altitude. When weather conditions are unsuitable to sustain a soaring flight, results in a top to bottom fight and referred to as "sled runs".

== Soaring flight and cross-country flying ==

Good gliding weather. Well formed cumulus clouds with darker bases suggest active thermals and light winds.

A glider in flight is continuously descending. To achieve an extended flight, the pilot must seek air currents rising faster than the sink rate of the glider. Selecting the sources of rising air currents is the skill that has to be mastered if the pilot wants to achieve flying long distances, known as cross-country (XC). Rising air masses derive from the following sources: 

;Thermals
:The most commonly used source of lift is created by the sun's energy heating the ground which in turn heats the air above it. This warm air rises in columns known as thermals. Soaring pilots quickly become aware of land features which can generate thermals and their trigger points downwind, because thermals have a surface tension with the ground and roll until hitting a trigger point. When the thermal lifts, the first indicator are the swooping birds feeding on the insects being carried aloft, or dust devils or a change in wind direction as the air is pulled in below the thermal. As the thermal climbs, bigger soaring birds indicate the thermal. The thermal rises until it either forms into a cumulus cloud or hits an inversion layer, which is where the surrounding air is becoming warmer with height, and stops the thermal developing into a cloud. Also, nearly every glider contains an instrument known as a variometer (a very sensitive vertical speed indicator) which shows visually (and often audibly) the presence of lift and sink. Having located a thermal, a glider pilot will circle within the area of rising air to gain height. In the case of a cloud street, thermals can line up with the wind, creating rows of thermals and sinking air. A pilot can use a cloud street to fly long straight-line distances by remaining in the row of rising air.

;Ridge lift
:Ridge lift occurs when the wind encounters a mountain, cliff or hill. The air is pushed up the windward face of the mountain, creating lift. The area of lift extending from the ridge is called the lift band. Providing the air is rising faster than the gliders sink rate, gliders can soar and climb in the rising air by flying within the lift band and at right angle to the ridge. Ridge soaring is also known as slope soaring.

;Mountain waves
:The third main type of lift used by glider pilots is the lee waves that occur near mountains. The obstruction to the airflow can generate standing waves with alternating areas of lift and sink. The top of each wave peak is often marked by lenticular cloud formations.

;Convergence
:Another form of lift results from the convergence of air masses, as with a sea-breeze front. More exotic forms of lift are the polar vortices which the Perlan Project hopes to use to soar to great altitudes. Perlan Project A rare phenomenon known as Morning Glory has also been used by glider pilots in Australia. A Guide to the Morning Glory 

== Performance ==
Hang glider launching from Mount Tamalpais
With each generation of materials and with the improvements in aerodynamics, the performance of hang gliders has increased. One measure of performance is the glide ratio. For example, a ratio of 12:1 means that in smooth air a glider can travel forward 12 metres while only losing 1 metre of altitude.

Some performance figures as of 2006:
*Topless gliders (no kingpost): glide ratio ~17:1, speed range ~30 to >145 km/h, best glide at ~45 to 60 km/h
*Rigid wings: glide ratio ~20:1, speed range ~ 35 to > 130 km/h, best glide at ~50 to 60 km/h.

;Ballast
:The extra weight provided by ballast is advantageous if the lift is likely to be strong. Although heavier gliders have a slight disadvantage when climbing in rising air, they achieve a higher speed at any given glide angle. This is an advantage in strong conditions when the gliders spend only little time climbing in thermals.

== Stability and equilibrium ==

High performance flexible wing hang glider. 2006
Because hang gliders are most often used for recreational flying, a premium is placed on gentle behaviour especially at the stall and natural pitch stability. The wing loading must be very low in order to allow the pilot to run fast enough to get above stall speed. Unlike a traditional aircraft with an extended fuselage and empennage for maintaining stability, hang gliders rely on the natural stability of their flexible wings to return to equilibrium in yaw and pitch. Roll stability is generally set to be near neutral. In calm air, a properly designed wing will maintain balanced trimmed flight with little pilot input. The flex wing pilot is suspended beneath the wing by a strap attached to his harness. The pilot lies prone (sometimes supine) within a large, triangular, metal control frame. Controlled flight is achieved by the pilot pushing and pulling on this control frame thus shifting his weight fore or aft, and right or left in coordinated maneuvers.

;Roll
:Most flexible wings are set up with near neutral roll due to sideslip (anhedral effect). In the roll axis, the pilot shifts his body mass using the wing control bar, applying a rolling moment directly to the wing. The flexible wing is built to flex differentially across the span in response to the pilot applied roll moment. For example, if the pilot shifts his weight to the right, the right wing trailing edge flexes up more than the left, allowing the right wing to drop and slow down.
;Yaw
:The yaw axis is stabilized through the sweep back of the wings. The swept planform, when yawed out of the relative wind, creates more lift on the advancing wing and also more drag, stabilizing the wing in yaw. If one wing advances ahead of the other, it presents more area to the wind and causes more drag on that side. This causes the advancing wing to go slower and to fall back. The wing is at equilibrium when the aircraft is traveling straight and both wings present the same amount of area to the wind.
;Pitch
:The pitch control response is direct and very efficient. It is partially stabilized by the sweep of the wings. The wing centre of gravity is close to the hang point and, at the trim speed, the wing will fly "hands off" and return to trim after being disturbed. The weight-shift control system only works when the wing is positively loaded (right side up). Positive pitching devices such as reflex lines or washout rods are employed to maintain a minimum safe amount of washout when the wing is unloaded or even negatively loaded (upside down). Flying faster than trim speed is accomplished by moving the pilot's weight forward in the control frame; flying slower by shifting the pilot's weight aft (pushing out).

Furthermore, the fact that the wing is designed to bend and flex, provides favourable dynamics analogous to a spring suspension. This provides a gentler flying experience than a similarly sized rigid-winged hang glider.

== Instruments ==
To maximize a pilot's understanding of how the hang glider is flying, most pilots carry instruments. The most basic being a variometer and altimeter&mdash;often combined. Some more advanced pilots also carry airspeed indicators and radios. When flying in competition or cross country, pilots often also carry maps and/or GPS units. Hang gliders do not have instrument panels as such, so all the instruments are mounted to the control frame of the glider or occasionally strapped to the pilot's forearm.

=== Variometer ===

Vario-altimeter (c. 1998)
Gliding pilots are able to sense the acceleration forces when they first hit a thermal, but have difficulty gauging constant motion. Thus it is difficult to detect the difference between constantly rising air and constantly sinking air. A variometer is a very sensitive vertical speed indicator. The variometer indicates climb rate or sink rate with audio signals (beeps) and/or a visual display. These units are generally electronic, vary in sophistication, and often include an altimeter and an airspeed indicator. More advanced units often incorporate a barograph for recording flight data and/or a built-in GPS. The main purpose of a variometer is in helping a pilot find and stay in the 'core' of a thermal to maximize height gain, and conversely indicating when he or she is in sinking air and needs to find rising air. Variometers are sometimes capable of electronic calculations to indicate the optimal speed to fly for given conditions. The MacCready theory answers the question on how fast a pilot should cruise between thermals, given the average lift the pilot expects in the next thermal climb and the amount of lift or sink he encounters in cruise mode. http://www.modelaircraft.org/museum/bio/MacCready.pdf Some electronic variometers make the calculations automatically, allowing for factors such as the glider's theoretical performance (glide ratio), altitude, hook in weight, and wind direction.

=== Radio ===

Aircraft radio

Pilots use 2-way radio for training purposes, for communicating with other pilots in the air, and with their ground crew when traveling on cross-country flights.

One type of radios used are PTT (push-to-talk) handheld transceivers, operating in VHF FM. Usually a microphone is incorporated in the helmet, and the PTT switch is either fixed to the outside of the helmet, or strapped to a finger. Operating a VHF band radio without an appropriate license is illegal in most countries that have regulated airwaves (including United States, Canada, Brazil, etc.), so additional informations must be obtained with the national or local Hang Gliding association.

As aircraft operating in airspace occupied by other aircraft, hang glider pilots also use the appropriate type of radio (i.e. the aircraft transceiver into Aero Mobile Service VHF band). It can, of course, be fitted with a PTT switch to a finger and speakers inside the helmet. The use of aircraft transceivers is subject to regulations specific to the use in the air such as frequencies restrictions, but has several advantages over FM (i.e. frequency modulated) radios used in other services. First is the great range it has (without repeaters) because of its amplitude modulation (i.e. AM). Second is the ability to contact, inform and be informed directly by other aircraft pilots of their intentions thereby improving collision avoidance and increasing safety. Third is to allow greater liberty regarding distance flights in regulated airspaces, in which the aircraft radio is normally a legal requirement. Fourth is the universal emergency frequency monitored by all other users and satellites and used in case of emergency or impending emergency.

=== GPS ===

GPS (global positioning system) can be interesting to view a GPS track of a flight when back on the ground, to analyze flying technique, and to assist flight performance in competitions and cross country flying, where restricted Airspace needs to be considered.

== Records ==

Records are sanctioned by the FAI. The world records (as of 2005) for "free distance" are held by Manfred Ruhmer, with 700.6 km in 2001; and Michael Barber, who flew a distance of 704 km on June 19, 2002 in Zapata, Texas. http://records.fai.org/hang_gliding/ Mike Barber needed to fly 1% further than Ruhmer's 700 km in order to break the official FAI record; Barber needed to fly only 3 more miles for a total of 708 km. Barber's flight remains the longest hang glider flight ever. On May 16th 2012 Stephen Collins and Tyler Careri broke the world record for "free distance" with 20,349 miles (2 and a half times around the Earth). 

Dustin Martin and Johnny Durand were purported to have broken the hang gliding record for distance on 3 July 2012, flying ca. 761 km, "with Dustin just pulling off the slightly longer straight-line flight." http://www.xcmag.com/2012/07/dustin-martin-and-jonny-durand-break-hang-gliding-world-record-in-zapata-4 

Supplementing the FAI record categories, is the altitude record for balloon-launched hang gliders:

 Altitude Location Pilot Date Reference 
 17,100' San Jose, California, USA December 22, 1974 Sarasota Journal, December 27, 1974. 
 31,600' Mojave Desert, California, USA November 21, 1976 Hang Gliding magazine, December 1978; 
 32,720' California City, California, USA September 9, 1978 Hang Gliding magazine, December 1978. 
 33,000' Edmonton, Alberta, Canada August 29, 1982 Edmonton Journal, August 30, 31, 1982;Kerry Bissell, an official observer of the Soaring Association of Canada: Its 33,000 feet. If the reading is taken at the top of the trace mark, the record is 11,400 meters 
 38,800' Wadi Rum, Jordan October 25, 1994 
 

== Competition ==

Competitions started with "flying as long as possible" and spot landings. With increasing performance, cross-country flying replaced them. Usually two to four waypoints have to be passed with a landing at a goal. In the late 1990s low-power GPS units were introduced and have completely replaced photographs of the goal. Every two years there is a world championship. The Rigid and Women's World Championship in 2006 was hosted by Quest Air in Florida. Big Spring, Texas hosted the 2007 World Championship. Hang gliding is also one of the competition categories in World Air Games organized by Fdration Aronautique Internationale (World Air Sports Federation - FAI), which maintains a chronology of the FAI World Hang Gliding Championships. Chronology of the FAI World Hang Gliding Championships 

=== Classes ===
Modern 'flexible wing' hang glider.
For competitive purposes, there are three classes of hang glider:
* Class 1 The flexible wing hang glider, having flight controlled by a wing whose shape changes by virtue of the shifted weight of the pilot. This is not a paraglider.
* Class 5 The rigid wing hang glider, having flight controlled by spoilers, typically on top of the wing. In both flexible and rigid wings the pilot hangs below the wing without any additional fairing.
* Class 2 (designated by the FAI as Sub-Class O-2) where the pilot is integrated into the wing by means of a fairing. These offer the best performance and are the most expensive.

In addition to typical launch configurations, a hang glider may be so constructed for alternative launching modes other than being foot launched; one practical avenue for this is for people who physically cannot foot-launch. Dan Buchanan 

== Aerobatics ==

Hang gliders are not certified for aerobatic flight. Pilots perform aerobatics at their own risk. There are three basic maneuvers in a hang glider, not counting a loop, which is actually a climbover with the same entry and exit heading. The following descriptions are excerpts from a nationally recognized rules book:

;Official maneuvers:
:A figure with a bank angle of more than 90 is a maneuver.

*Loop  a maneuver that starts in a wings level dive, climbs, without any rolling, to the apex where the glider is upside down, wings level (heading back where it came from), and then returning to the start altitude and heading, again without rolling, having completed an approximately circular path in the vertical plane.
*Spin  A spin is scored from the moment one wing stalls and the glider rotates noticeably into the spin. The entry heading is noted at this point. The glider must remain in the spin for at least 1/2 of a revolution to score any versatility spin points.
*Rollover  a maneuver where the apex heading is less than 90 left or right of the entry heading.
*Climb over  a maneuver where the apex heading is greater than 90 left or right of the entry heading.

== Comparison of gliders, hang gliders and paragliders ==
There can be confusion between gliders, hang gliders, and paragliders. Paragliders and hang gliders are both foot-launched glider aircraft and in both cases the pilot is suspended ("hangs") below the lift surface, but "hang glider" is the default term for those where the airframe contains rigid structures. The primary structure of paragliders is supple, consisting mainly of woven material.

== See also ==
*Microlift glider
*Nanolight
*Powered paraglider
*Kite types

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===
*
*
*



[[Hole]]

A hole is an opening.

Hole or holes may also refer to:

==Entertainment==
* Holes (novel), by Louis Sachar
** Holes (film), a 2003 theatrical adaptation of the novel
** Holes (play), a 1998 stage adaptation of the novel
* Plot hole, in writing
* Hole (Bottom episode), an episode of the British television sitcom Bottom

===Music===
* Hole (band), an alternative rock band formed by Courtney Love and Eric Erlandson in 1989
* Hole (Scraping Foetus Off the Wheel album), 1984
* Hole (Merzbow album), 1994
* Holes (album), a 2004 album by melpo mene
* Hole (EP), by 65daysofstatic
* "Holes" (Mercury Rev song), 1999 song by Mercury Rev from the album Deserter's Songs
* "Holes" (Passenger song), 2013 song by British singer-songwriter Passenger from his album All the Little Lights
* "Holes" (Pint Shot Riot song), from their EP Round One
* "Hole" (song), a song by Kelly Clarkson on the album My December

===Games and sport===
* Hole (association football)
* Hole set, a position in water polo
* A segment of a golf course
* A term in the game of poker
* A chess term

==Other==
* Hle, Norway, a borough and former municipality
* Hole, Norway
* Hole (surname)
* Black hole
* Blind hole
* Electron hole, a concept in physics and chemistry
* Fox hole or spider hole, in the military
* Lightening hole
* Manhole, an opening in the ground to access the sewer under a city
* Murder-hole
* Portable hole, a fictional device
* Porthole, a window on a ship's external hull
* Punchhole, a hole punched in paper
* Sound hole, on a musical instrument
** Tone hole
* Touch hole
* Whitewater hole, a feature found in some whitewater rapids
* Wormhole

==See also==
* 
* 
* The Hole (disambiguation)
* HOL (disambiguation)
* Whole (disambiguation)
* First law of holes



[[History of France]]

Stone tools indicate that early humans were present in France at least 1.8 million years ago. The first modern humans appeared in the area 40,000 years ago. The first written records for the history of France appear in the Iron Age. What is now France made up the bulk of the region known to the Romans as Gaul. Roman writers noted the presence of three main ethno-linguistic groups in the area: the Gauls, the Aquitani, and the Belgae. The Gauls, the largest and best attested group, were a Celtic people speaking what is known as the Gaulish language.

Over the course of the 1st millennium BC the Greeks, Romans, and Carthaginians established colonies on the Mediterranean coast and the offshore islands. The Roman Republic annexed southern Gaul as the province of Gallia Narbonensis in the late 2nd century BC, and Roman forces under Julius Caesar conquered the rest of Gaul in the Gallic Wars of 5851 BC. Afterwards a Gallo-Roman culture emerged and Gaul was increasingly integrated into the Roman Empire.

In the later stages of the Roman Empire, Gaul was subject to barbarian raids and migration, most importantly by the Germanic Franks. The Frankish king Clovis I united most of Gaul under his rule in the late 5th century, setting the stage for Frankish dominance in the region for hundreds of years. Frankish power reached its fullest extent under Charlemagne. The medieval Kingdom of France emerged from the western part of Charlemagne's Carolingian Empire, known as West Francia, and achieved increasing prominence under the rule of the House of Capet, founded by Hugh Capet in 987.

A succession crisis following the death of the last direct Capetian monarch in 1328 led to the series of conflicts known as the Hundred Years' War between the House of Valois and the House of Plantagenet. The war formally began in 1337 following Philip VI's attempt to seize the Duchy of Aquitaine from its hereditary holder, Edward III of England, the Plantagenet claimant to the French throne. Despite early Plantagenet victories, including the capture and ransom of John II of France, fortunes turned in favor of the Valois later in the war. Among the notable figures of the war was Joan of Arc, a French peasant girl who led French forces against the English, establishing herself as a national heroine. The war ended with a Valois victory in 1453.

Victory in the Hundred Years' War had the effect of strengthening French nationalism and vastly increasing the power and reach of the French monarchy. During the period known as the Ancien Rgime, France transformed into a centralized absolute monarchy. During the next centuries, France experienced the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation. At the height of the French Wars of Religion, France became embroiled in another succession crisis, as the last Valois king, Henry III, fought against rival factions the House of Bourbon and the House of Guise. Henry, King of Navarre, scion of the Bourbon family, would be victorious in the conflict and establish the French Bourbon dynasty. A burgeoning worldwide colonial empire was established in the 16th century. French political power reached a zenith under the rule of Louis XIV, "The Sun King", builder of Versailles Palace.

In the late 18th century the monarchy and associated institutions were overthrown in the French Revolution. The country was governed for a period as a Republic, until the French Empire was declared by Napoleon Bonaparte. Following Napoleon's defeat in the Napoleonic Wars France went through several further regime changes, being ruled as a monarchy, then briefly as a Second Republic, and then as a Second Empire, until a more lasting French Third Republic was established in 1870.

France was one of the Triple Entente powers in World War I, fighting alongside the United Kingdom, Russia, the United States and smaller allies against Germany and the Central Powers.

France was one of the Allied Powers in World War II, but was conquered by Nazi Germany in 1940. The Third Republic was dismantled, and most of the country was controlled directly by the Axis Powers, while the south was controlled by the collaborationist Vichy government. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established, but lasted less than a decade and a half. In the wake of the Algerian Crisis of 1958, the Fourth Republic collapsed and was succeeded by the Charles de Gaulle-led French Fifth Republic. Into the 1960s decolonization saw most of the French colonial empire become independent, while smaller parts were incorporated into the French state as overseas departments and collectivities. Since World War II France has been a permanent member in the UN Security Council and NATO. It played a central role in the unification process after 1945 that led to the European Union. Despite slow economic growth in recent years and issues of ethnic minorities, it remains a strong economic, cultural, military and political factor in the 21st century.

==Prehistory==

Cave painting in Lascaux
Stone tools discovered at Chilhac (1968) and Lzignan-la-Cbe in 2009 indicate that early humans were present in France at least 1.8 million years ago. 

Neanderthals were present in Europe from about 200,000 BC, but died out about 30,000 years ago, possibly out-competed by the modern humans during a period of cold weather. The earliest modern humans  Homo sapiens  entered Europe by 43,000 years ago (the Upper Palaeolithic). http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/03/science/fossil-teeth-put-humans-in-europe-earlier-than-thought.html?scp=1&sq=kents%20cavern&st=cse The cave paintings of Lascaux and Gargas (Gargas in the Hautes-Pyrnes) as well as the Carnac stones are remains of the local prehistoric activity.

==Ancient history==

===Greek colonies===

Massalia (modern Marseille) silver coin with Greek legend, a testimony to Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul, 5th1st century BC.

In 600 BC, Ionian Greeks from Phocaea founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille) on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, making it the oldest city of France. At the same time, some Celtic tribes penetrated the eastern parts (Germania superior) of the current territory of France, but this occupation spread in the rest of France only between the 5th and 3rd century BC. Carpentier et al 2000, p.29 

===Gaul===

Brennus and the sack of Rome as imagined in the 19th century
Covering large parts of modern-day France, Belgium, northwest Germany and northern Italy, Gaul was inhabited by many Celtic and Belgae tribes whom the Romans referred to as Gauls and who spoke the Gaulish language roughly between the Seine and the Garonne (Gallia Celtica). On the lower Garonne the people spoke Aquitanian, an archaic language related to Basque whereas a Belgian language was spoken north of Lutecia. The Celts founded cities such as Lutetia Parisiorum (Paris) and Burdigala (Bordeaux) while the Aquitanians founded Tolosa (Toulouse).

Long before any Roman settlements, Greek navigators settled in what would become Provence. The Phoceans founded important cities such as Massalia (Marseille) and Nikaia (Nice), bringing them in to conflict with the neighboring Celts and Ligurians. Some Phocean great navigators, such as Pytheas, were born in Marseille. The Celts themselves often fought with Aquitanians and Germans, and a Gaulish war band led by Brennus invaded Rome c. 393 or 388 BC following the Battle of the Allia.

However, the tribal society of the Gauls did not change fast enough for the centralized Roman state, who would learn to counter them. The Gaulish tribal confederacies were then defeated by the Romans in battles such as Sentinum and Telamon during the 3rd century BC. In the early 3rd century BC, the Belgae conquered the surrounding territories of the Somme in northern Gaul after a battle supposedly against the Armoricani near Ribemont-sur-Ancre and Gournay-sur-Aronde, where sanctuaries were found.

When Carthaginian commander Hannibal Barca fought the Romans, he recruited several Gaulish mercenaries who fought on his side at Cannae. It was this Gaulish participation that caused Provence to be annexed in 122 BC by the Roman Republic. Later, the Consul of Gaul  Julius Caesar  conquered all of Gaul. Despite Gaulish opposition led by Vercingetorix, the Overking of the Warriors, the Gauls succumbed to the Roman onslaught. The Gauls had some success at first at Gergovia, but were ultimately defeated at Alesia in 52 BC. The Romans founded cities such as Lugdunum (Lyon), Narbonensis (Narbonne) and allow in a correspondence between Lucius Munatius Plancus and Cicero to formalize the existence of Cularo (Grenoble). Ad Familiares, 10, 23 read on line lettre 876 

===Roman Gaul===

Vercingetorix surrenders to Julius Caesar after Alesia. Painting by Lionel-Nol Royer, 1899.
Gaul was divided into several different provinces. The Romans displaced populations to prevent local identities from becoming a threat to Roman control. Thus, many Celts were displaced in Aquitania or were enslaved and moved out of Gaul. There was a strong cultural evolution in Gaul under the Roman Empire, the most obvious one being the replacement of the Gaulish language by Vulgar Latin. It has been argued the similarities between the Gaulish and Latin languages favoured the transition. Gaul remained under Roman control for centuries and Celtic culture was then gradually replaced by Gallo-Roman culture.

The Gauls became better integrated with the Empire with the passage of time. For instance, generals Marcus Antonius Primus and Gnaeus Julius Agricola were both born in Gaul, as were emperors Claudius and Caracalla. Emperor Antoninus Pius also came from a Gaulish family. In the decade following Valerian's capture by the Persians in 260, Postumus established a short-lived Gallic Empire, which included the Iberian Peninsula and Britannia, in addition to Gaul itself. Germanic tribes, the Franks and the Alamanni, entered Gaul at this time. The Gallic Empire ended with Emperor Aurelian's victory at Chlons in 274.

A migration of Celts appeared in the 4th century in Armorica. They were led by the legendary king Conan Meriadoc and came from Britain. They spoke the now extinct British language, which evolved into the Breton, Cornish, and Welsh languages.

In 418 the Aquitanian province was given to the Goths in exchange for their support against the Vandals. Those same Goths had previously sacked Rome in 410 and established a capital in Toulouse.

Gaulish soldiers
The Roman Empire had difficulty responding to all the barbarian raids, and Flavius Atius had to use these tribes against each other in order to maintain some Roman control.
He first used the Huns against the Burgundians, and these mercenaries destroyed Worms, killed king Gunther, and pushed the Burgundians westward. The Burgundians were resettled by Atius near Lugdunum in 443. The Huns, united by Attila, became a greater threat, and Atius used the Visigoths against the Huns. The conflict climaxed in 451 at the Battle of Chlons, in which the Romans and Goths defeated Attila.

The Roman Empire was on the verge of collapsing. Aquitania was definitely abandoned to the Visigoths, who would soon conquer a significant part of southern Gaul as well as most of the Iberian Peninsula. The Burgundians claimed their own kingdom, and northern Gaul was practically abandoned to the Franks. Aside from the Germanic peoples, the Vascones entered Wasconia from the Pyrenees and the Bretons formed three kingdoms in Armorica: Domnonia, Cornouaille and Brorec. P. J. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians (2007) 

==Frankish kingdoms (486987)==

The Battle of Tours (732). This battle is often considered of macro-importance in European and Islamic history.
In 486, Clovis I, leader of the Salian Franks, defeated Syagrius at Soissons and subsequently united most of northern and central Gaul under his rule. Clovis then recorded a succession of victories against other Germanic tribes such as the Alamanni at Tolbiac. In 496, pagan Clovis adopted Catholicism. This gave him greater legitimacy and power over his Christian subjects and granted him clerical support against the Arian Visigoths. He defeated Alaric II at Vouill in 507 and annexed Aquitaine, and thus Toulouse, into his Frankish kingdom. Edward James, The Franks (1991) 

The Goths retired to Toledo in what would become Spain. Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian Dynasty but his kingdom would not survive his death in 511. Under Frankish inheritance traditions, all sons inherit part of the land, so four kingdoms emerged: centered on Paris, Orlans, Soissons, and Rheims. Over time, the borders and numbers of Frankish kingdoms were fluid and changed frequently. Also during this time, the Mayors of the Palace, originally the chief advisor to the kings, would become the real power in the Frankish lands; the Merovingian kings themselves would be reduced to little more than figureheads. 

By this time Muslim invaders had conquered Hispania and were threatening the Frankish kingdoms. Duke Odo the Great defeated a major invading force at Toulouse in 721 but failed to repel a raiding party in 732. The mayor of the palace, Charles Martel, defeated that raiding party at the Battle of Tours (although the battle took place between Tours and Poitiers) and earned respect and power within the Frankish Kingdom. The assumption of the crown in 751 by Pepin the Short (son of Charles Martel) established the Carolingian dynasty as the Kings of the Franks.

The coronation of Charlemagne
Carolingian power reached its fullest extent under Pepin's son, Charlemagne. In 771, Charlemagne reunited the Frankish domains after a further period of division, subsequently conquering the Lombards under Desiderius in what is now northern Italy (774), incorporating Bavaria (788) into his realm, defeating the Avars of the Danubian plain (796), advancing the frontier with Islamic Spain as far south as Barcelona (801), and subjugating Lower Saxony after a prolonged campaign (804).

In recognition of his successes and his political support for the Papacy, Charlemagne was crowned Emperor of the Romans, or Roman Emperor in the West, by Pope Leo III in 800. Charlemagne's son Louis the Pious (emperor 814840) kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not survive Louis I's death. Two of his sons  Charles the Bald and Louis the German  swore allegiance to each other against their brother  Lothair I  in the Oaths of Strasbourg, and the empire was divided among Louis's three sons (Treaty of Verdun, 843). After a last brief reunification (884887), the imperial title ceased to be held in the western realm, which was to form the basis of the future French kingdom. The eastern realm, which would become Germany, elected the Saxon dynasty of Henry the Fowler. Derek Wilson, Charlemagne (2007) 

Under the Carolingians, the kingdom was ravaged by Viking raiders. In this struggle some important figures such as Count Odo of Paris and his brother King Robert rose to fame and became kings. This emerging dynasty, whose members were called the Robertines, were the predecessors of the Capetian Dynasty. Led by Rollo, some Vikings had settled in Normandy and were granted the land, first as counts and then as dukes, by King Charles the Simple, in order to protect the land from other raiders. The people that emerged from the interactions between the new Viking aristocracy and the already mixed Franks and Gallo-Romans became known as the Normans. 

==State building into the Kingdom of France (9871453)==

===Kings during this period===
*Capetian Dynasty (House of Capet):
**Hugh Capet, 940-996
**Robert the Pious, 996-1027
**Henry I, 1027-1060
**Philip I, 10601108
**Louis VI the Fat, 11081137
**Louis VII the Young, 11371180
**Philip II Augustus, 11801223
**Louis VIII the Lion, 12231226
**Saint Louis IX, 12261270
**Philip III the Bold, 12701285
**Philip IV the Fair, 12851314
**Louis X the Quarreller, 13141316
**John I the Posthumous, five days in 1316
**Philip V the Tall, 13161322
**Charles IV the Fair, 13221328

*House of Valois:
**Philip VI of Valois, 13281350
**John II the Good, 13501364
**Charles V the Wise, 13641380
**Charles VI the Mad, 13801422
***English interlude (between Charles VI and VII):
****Henry V of England
****Henry VI of England and France
**Charles VII the Well Served, 14221461
**

===Strong princes===
France was a very decentralised state during the Middle Ages. The authority of the king was more religious than administrative. The 11th century in France marked the apogee of princely power at the expense of the king when states like Normandy, Flanders or Languedoc enjoyed a local authority comparable to kingdoms in all but name. The Capetians, as they were descended from the Robertians, were formerly powerful princes themselves who had successfully unseated the weak and unfortunate Carolingian kings. Georges Duby, France in the Middle Ages 9871460: From Hugh Capet to Joan of Arc (1993), 

The Carolingian kings had nothing more than a royal title when the Capetian kings added their principality to that title. The Capetians, in a way, held a dual status of King and Prince; as king they held the Crown of Charlemagne and as Count of Paris they held their personal fiefdom, best known as le-de-France. 

The fact that the Capetians held lands as both Prince and King gave them a complicated status. They were involved in the struggle for power within France as princes, but they also had a religious authority over Roman Catholicism in France as King. The Capetian kings treated other princes more as enemies and allies than as subordinates: their royal title was recognised yet frequently disrespected. Capetian authority was so weak in some remote places that bandits were the effective power. 

Some of the king's vassals would grow sufficiently powerful that they would become some of the strongest rulers of western Europe. The Normans, the Plantagenets, the Lusignans, the Hautevilles, the Ramnulfids, and the House of Toulouse successfully carved lands outside of France for themselves. The most important of these conquests for French history was the Norman Conquest of England by William the Conqueror, following the Battle of Hastings and immortalised in the Bayeux Tapestry, because it linked England to France through Normandy. Although the Normans were now both vassals of the French kings and their equals as kings of England, their zone of political activity remained centered in France. David Carpenter The Struggle for Mastery. The Penguin history of Britain 10661284 p. 91: "In the first place, after 1072 William was largely an absentee. Of the 170 months remaining of his reign he spent around 130 in France, returning to England only on four occasions. This was no passing phase. Absentee kings continued to spend at best half their time in England until the loss of Normandy in 1204... But this absenteeism solidified rather than sapped royal government since it engendered structures both to maintain peace and extract money on the king's absence, money which was above all needed across the channel". 

An important part of the French aristocracy also involved itself in the crusades, and French knights founded and ruled the Crusader states. An example of the legacy left in the Middle East by these nobles is the Krak des Chevaliers' enlargement by the Counts of Tripoli and Toulouse.

===Rise of the monarchy===
The monarchy overcame the powerful barons over ensuing centuries, and established absolute sovereignty over France in the 16th century. A number of factors contributed to the rise of the French monarchy. The dynasty established by Hugh Capet continued uninterrupted until 1328, and the laws of primogeniture ensured orderly successions of power. Secondly, the successors of Capet came to be recognised as members of an illustrious and ancient royal house and therefore socially superior to their politically and economically superior rivals. Thirdly, the Capetians had the support of the Church, which favoured a strong central government in France. This alliance with the Church was one of the great enduring legacies of the Capetians. The First Crusade was composed almost entirely of Frankish Princes. As time went on the power of the King was expanded by conquests, seizures and successful feudal political battles. 

The history of France starts with the election of Hugh Capet (940-996) by an assembly summoned in Reims in 987. Capet was previously "Duke of the Franks" and then became "King of the Franks" (Rex Francorum). Hugh's lands extended little beyond the Paris basin; his political unimportance weighed against the powerful barons who elected him. Many of the king's vassals (who included for a long time the kings of England) ruled over territories far greater than his own. He was recorded to be recognised king by the Gauls, Bretons, Danes, Aquitanians, Goths, Spanish and Gascons. William W. Kibler, ed. Medieval France: An Encyclopedia (1995) 

Count Borell of Barcelona called for Hugh's help against Islamic raids, but even if Hugh intended to help Borell, he was otherwise occupied in fighting Charles of Lorraine. The loss of other Spanish principalities then followed, as the Spanish marches grew more and more independent. Hugh Capet, the first Capetian king, is not a well documented figure, his greatest achievement being certainly to survive as king and defeating the Carolingian claimant, thus allowing him to establish what would become one of Europe's most powerful house of kings. 

A view of the remains of the Abbey of Cluny, a Benedictine monastery, was the centre of monastic life revival in the Middle Ages and marked an important step in the cultural rebirth following the Dark Ages. 
Hugh's son  Robert the Pious  was crowned King of the Franks before Capet's demise. Hugh Capet decided so in order to have his succession secured. Robert II, as King of the Franks, met Emperor Henry II in 1023 on the borderline. They agreed to end all claims over each other's realm, setting a new stage of Capetian and Ottonian relationships. Although a king weak in power, Robert II's efforts were considerable. His surviving charters imply he relied heavily on the Church to rule France, much like his father did. Although he lived with a mistress  Bertha of Burgundy  and was excommunicated because of this, he was regarded as a model of piety for monks (hence his nickname, Robert the Pious). The reign of Robert II was quite important because it involved the Peace and Truce of God (beginning in 989) and the Cluniac Reforms. 

Robert II crowned his son  Hugh Magnus  as King of the Franks at age 10 to secure the succession, but Hugh Magnus rebelled against his father and died fighting him in 1025.

The next King of the Franks was Robert II's next son, Henry I (reigned 1027-1060). Like Hugh Magnus, Henry was crowned as co-ruler with his father (1027), in the Capetian tradition, but he had little power or influence as junior king while his father still lived. Henry I was crowned after Robert's death in 1031, which is quite exceptional for a French king of the times. Henry I was one of the weakest kings of the Franks, and his reign saw the rise of some very powerful nobles such as William the Conqueror. Henry I's biggest source of concerns was his brother  Robert I of Burgundy  who was pushed by his mother to the conflict. Robert of Burgundy was made Duke of Burgundy by King Henry I and had to be satisfied with that title. From Henry I onward, the Dukes of Burgundy were relatives of the King of the Franks until the end of the Duchy proper.

Godefroy de Bouillon, a French knight, leader of the First Crusade and founder of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
King Philip I, named by his Kievan mother with a typically Eastern European name, was no more fortunate than his predecessor although the kingdom did enjoy a modest recovery during his extraordinarily long reign (10601108). His reign also saw the launch of the First Crusade to regain the Holy Land, which heavily involved his family although he personally did not support the expedition.

It is from Louis VI (reigned 11081137) onward that royal authority became more accepted. Louis VI was more a soldier and warmongering king than a scholar. The way the king raised money from his vassals made him quite unpopular; he was described as greedy and ambitious and that is corroborated by records of the time. His regular attacks on his vassals, although damaging the royal image, reinforced the royal power. From 1127 onward Louis had the assistance of a skilled religious statesman, Abbot Suger. The abbot was the son of a minor family of knights, but his political advice was extremely valuable to the king. Louis VI successfully defeated, both military and politically, many of the robber barons. Louis VI frequently summoned his vassals to the court, and those who did not show up often had their land possessions confiscated and military campaigns mounted against them. This drastic policy clearly imposed some royal authority on Paris and its surrounding areas. When Louis VI died in 1137, much progress had been made towards strengthening Capetian authority. 

Thanks to Abbot Suger's political advice, King Louis VII (junior king 11311137, senior king 11371180) enjoyed greater moral authority over France than his predecessors. Powerful vassals paid homage to the French king. Capetian France 9371328 p. 64: "Then, in 1151, Henry Plantagenet paid homage for the duchy to Louis VII in Paris, homage he repeated as king of England in 1156." Abbot Suger arranged the 1137 marriage between Louis VII and Eleanor of Aquitaine in Bordeaux, which made Louis VII Duke of Aquitaine and gave him considerable power. However, the couple disagreed over the burning of more than a thousand people in Vitry during the conflict against the Count of Champagne. Paul Frankl, Gothic Architecture (2001) 

King Louis VII was deeply horrified by the event and sought penitence by going to the Holy Land. He later involved the Kingdom of France in the Second Crusade but his relationship with Eleanor did not improve. The marriage was ultimately annulled by the pope under the pretext of consanguinity and Eleanor soon married the Duke of Normandy  Henry Fitzempress, who would become King of England as Henry II two years later. Louis VII was once a very powerful monarch and was now facing a much stronger vassal, who was his equal as King of England and his strongest prince as Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine.

Abbot Suger's vision of construction became what is now known as Gothic architecture. This style became standard for most European cathedrals built in the late Middle Ages. 

===The late Capetians (11651328)===
The late direct Capetian kings were considerably more powerful and influential than the earliest ones. While Philip I could hardly control his Parisian barons, Philip IV could dictate popes and emperors. The late Capetians, although they often ruled for a shorter time than their earlier peers, were often much more influential. This period also saw the rise of a complex system of international alliances and conflicts opposing, through dynasties, Kings of France and England and Holy Roman Emperor.

====Philip II Augustus====
The reign of Philip II Augustus (junior king 11791180, senior king 11801223) marked an important step in the history of French monarchy. His reign saw the French royal domain and influence greatly expanded. He set the context for the rise of power to much more powerful monarchs like Saint Louis and Philip the Fair.

Philip II victorious at Bouvines thus annexing Normandy and Anjou into his royal domains. This battle involved a complex set of alliances from three important states, the Kingdoms of France and England and the Holy Roman Empire.
Philip II spent an important part of his reign fighting the so-called Angevin Empire, which was probably the greatest threat to the King of France since the rise of the Capetian dynasty. During the first part of his reign Philip II tried using Henry II of England's son against him. He allied himself with the Duke of Aquitaine and son of Henry II  Richard Lionheart  and together they launched a decisive attack on Henry's castle and home of Chinon and removed him from power.

Richard replaced his father as King of England afterward. The two kings then went crusading during the Third Crusade; however, their alliance and friendship broke down during the crusade. The two men were once again at odds and fought each other in France until Richard was on the verge of totally defeating Philip II.

Adding to their battles in France, the Kings of France and England were trying to install their respective allies at the head of the Holy Roman Empire. If Philip II Augustus supported Philip of Swabia, member of the House of Hohenstaufen, then Richard Lionheart supported Otto IV, member of the House of Welf. Otto IV had the upper hand and became the Holy Roman Emperor at the expense of Philip of Swabia. The crown of France was saved by Richard's demise after a wound he received fighting his own vassals in Limousin.

John Lackland, Richard's successor, refused to come to the French court for a trial against the Lusignans and, as Louis VI had done often to his rebellious vassals, Philip II confiscated John's possessions in France. John's defeat was swift and his attempts to reconquer his French possession at the decisive Battle of Bouvines (1214) resulted in complete failure. Philip II had annexed Normandy and Anjou, plus capturing the Counts of Boulogne and Flanders, although Aquitaine and Gascony remained loyal to the Plantagenet King. In an additional aftermath of the Battle of Bouvines, John's ally Holy Roman Emperor Otto IV was overthrown by Frederick II, member of the House of Hohenstaufen and ally of Philip. Philip II of France was crucial in ordering Western European politics in both England and France.

Philip Augustus founded the Sorbonne and made Paris a city for scholars.

Prince Louis (the future Louis VIII, reigned 12231226) was involved in the subsequent English civil war as French and English (or rather Anglo-Norman) aristocracies were once one and were now split between allegiances. While the French kings were struggling against the Plantagenets, the Church called for the Albigensian Crusade. Southern France was then largely absorbed in the royal domains.

====Saint Louis (12261270)====
France became a truly centralised kingdom under Louis IX (reigned 12261270). Saint Louis has often been portrayed as a one-dimensional character, a flawless representant of the faith and an administrative reformer who cared for the governed ones. However, his reign was far from perfect for everyone: he made unsuccessful crusades, his expanding administrations raised opposition, and he burned Jewish books at the Pope's urging. His judgments were not often practical, although they seemed fair by the standards of the time. It appears Louis had a strong sense of justice and always wanted to judge people himself before applying any sentence. This was said about Louis and French clergy asking for excommunications of Louis' vassals: Capetian France p. 265. 

Saint Louis. He saw France's cultural expansion in the Western Christian world.

Louis IX was only twelve years old when he became King of France. His mother  Blanche of Castile  was the effective power as regent (although she did not formally use the title). Blanche's authority was strongly opposed by the French barons yet she maintained her position until Louis was old enough to rule by himself.

In 1229 the King had to struggle with a long lasting strike at the University of Paris. The Quartier Latin was strongly hit by these strikes.

The kingdom was vulnerable: war was still going on in the County of Toulouse, and the royal army was occupied fighting resistance in Languedoc. Count Raymond VII of Toulouse finally signed the Treaty of Paris in 1229, in which he retained much of his lands for life, but his daughter, married to Count Alfonso of Poitou, produced him no heir and so the County of Toulouse went to the King of France.

King Henry III of England had not yet recognized the Capetian overlordship over Aquitaine and still hoped to recover Normandy and Anjou and reform the Angevin Empire. He landed in 1230 at Saint-Malo with a massive force. Henry III's allies in Brittany and Normandy fell down because they did not dare fight their king, who led the counterstrike himself. This evolved into the Saintonge War (1242).

Ultimately, Henry III was defeated and had to recognise Louis IX's overlordship, although the King of France did not seize Aquitaine from Henry III. Louis IX was now the most important landowner of France, adding to his royal title. There were some opposition to his rule in Normandy, yet it proved remarkably easy to rule, especially compared to the County of Toulouse which had been brutally conquered. The Conseil du Roi, which would evolve into the Parlement, was founded in these times.

After his conflict with King Henry III of England, Louis established a cordial relation with the Plantagenet King. An amusing anecdote is about Henry III's attending the French Parlement, as Duke of Aquitaine; however, the King of England was always late because he liked to stop each time he met a priest to hear the mass, so Louis made sure no priest was on the way of Henry III. Henry III and Louis IX then started a long contest for who was the most faithful; this evolved to the point that none ever arrived on time to the Parlement, which was then allowed to debate in their absence. Capetian France p. 264. 

Saint Louis also supported new forms of art such as Gothic architecture; his Sainte-Chapelle became a very famous gothic building, and he is also credited for the Morgan Bible.

The Kingdom was involved in two crusades under Saint Louis: the Seventh Crusade and the Eighth Crusade. Both proved to be complete failures for the French King. He died in the Eighth Crusade and Philip III became king.

====Philip III and Philip IV (12701314)====
Philip III became king when Saint Louis died in 1270 during the Eighth Crusade. Philip III was called "the Bold" on the basis of his abilities in combat and on horseback, and not because of his character or ruling abilities. Philip III took part in another crusading disaster: the Aragonese Crusade, which cost him his life in 1285.

More administrative reforms were made by Philip IV, also called Philip the Fair (reigned 12851314). This king was responsible for the end of the Knights Templar, signed the Auld Alliance, and established the Parlement of Paris. Philip IV was so powerful that he could name popes and emperors, unlike the early Capetians. The papacy was moved to Avignon and all the contemporary popes were French, such as Philip IV's puppet Bertrand de Goth, Pope Clement V.

===The early Valois Kings and the Hundred Years' War (13281453)===
The capture of the French king John II at Poitiers in 1356.
The tensions between the Houses of Plantagenet and Capet climaxed during the so-called Hundred Years' War (actually several distinct wars over the period 1337 to 1453) when the Plantagenets claimed the throne of France from the Valois. This was also the time of the Black Death, as well as several civil wars. The French population suffered much from these wars. In 1420 by the Treaty of Troyes Henry V was made heir to Charles VI. Henry V failed to outlive Charles so it was Henry VI of England and France who consolidated the Dual-Monarchy of England and France.

It has been argued that the difficult conditions the French population suffered during the Hundred Years' War awakened French nationalism, a nationalism represented by Joan of Arc (14121431). Although this is debatable, the Hundred Years' War is remembered more as a Franco-English war than as a succession of feudal struggles. During this war, France evolved politically and militarily.

Although a Franco-Scottish army was successful at the Battle of Baug (1421), the humiliating defeats of Poitiers (1356) and Agincourt (1415) forced the French nobility to realise they could not stand just as armoured knights without an organised army. Charles VII (reigned 14221461) established the first French standing army, the Compagnies d'ordonnance, and defeated the Plantagenets once at Patay (1429) and again, using cannons, at Formigny (1450). The Battle of Castillon (1453) was regarded as the last engagement of this "war", yet Calais and the Channel Islands remained ruled by the Plantagenets.

==Early Modern France (14531789)==

===Kings during this period===
The Early Modern period in French history spans the following reigns, from 1461 to the Revolution, breaking in 1789:

*House of Valois
**Louis XI the Prudent, 14611483
**Charles VIII the Affable, 14831498
**Louis XII, 14981515
**Francis I, 15151547
**Henry II, 15471559
**Francis II, 15591560
**Charles IX, 15601574 (15601563 under regency of Catherine de' Medici)
**Henry III, 15741589

*House of Bourbon
**Henry IV the Great, 15891610
**the Regency of Marie de Medici, 16101617
**Louis XIII the Just and his minister Cardinal Richelieu, 16101643
**the Regency of Anne of Austria and her minister Cardinal Mazarin, 16431651
**Louis XIV the Sun King and his minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert, 16431715
**the Rgence, a period of regency under Philip II of Orlans, 17151723
**Louis XV the Beloved and his minister Cardinal Andr-Hercule de Fleury, 17151774
**Louis XVI, 17741792

===Life in the Early Modern period ===

====French identity====
France in the Ancien Rgime covered a territory of around 200000 sqmi. This land supported 13 million people in 1484 and 20 million people in 1700. France had the second largest population in Europe around 1700. Britain had 5 or 6 million, Spain had 8 million, and the Austrian Habsburgs had around 8 million. Russia was the most populated European country at the time. France's lead slowly faded after 1700, as other countries grew faster. Pierre Goubert, The Ancien Regime (1973) pp. 2-9. 

The sense of "being French" was uncommon in 1500, as people clung to their local identities. By 1600, however, people were starting to call themselves "bon franois." 

====Estates and power====
Political power was widely dispersed. The law courts ("Parlements") were powerful, especially that of France. However, the king had only about 10,000 officials in royal service  very few indeed for such a large country, and with very slow internal communications over an inadequate road system. Travel was usually faster by ocean ship or river boat. The different estates of the realm  the clergy, the nobility, and commoners  occasionally met together in the "Estates General", but in practice the Estates General had no power, for it could petition the king but could not pass laws.

The Catholic Church controlled about 40% of the wealth, tied up in long-term endowments that could be added to but not reduced. The king (not the pope) nominated bishops, but typically had to negotiate with noble families that had close ties to local monasteries and church establishments.

The nobility came second in terms of wealth, but there was no unity. Each noble had his own lands, his own network of regional connections, and his own military force. Frederick J. Baumgartner, France in the Sixteenth Century (1995) pp 4-7 

The cities had a quasi-independent status, and were largely controlled by the leading merchants and guilds. Paris was by far the largest city with 220,000 people in 1547 and a history of steady growth. Lyon and Rouen each had about 40,000 population, but Lyon had a powerful banking community and a vibrant culture. Bordeaux was next with only 20,000 population in 1500. 

Peasants made up the vast majority of population, who in many cases had well-established rights that the authorities had to respect. In 1484, about 97% of France's 13 million people lived in rural villages; in 1700, at least 80% of the 20 million people population were peasants.

In the 17th century peasants had ties to the market economy, provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The "stable" core of French society, town guildspeople and village labourers, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core required regular renewal. James B. Collins, "Geographic and Social Mobility in Early-modern France." Journal of Social History 1991 24(3): 563-577. Issn: 0022-4529 Fulltext: Ebsco. For the Annales interpretation see Pierre Goubert, The French Peasantry in the Seventeenth Century (1986) excerpt and text search 

Accepting the existence of these two societies, the constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy; and grossly exaggerated social stability. James B. Collins, "Geographic and Social Mobility in Early-Modern France," Journal of Social History (1991) 24#3 pp 563-577 in JSTOR For the Annales interpretation see Pierre Goubert, The French Peasantry in the Seventeenth Century (1986) excerpt and text search 

====Language====

Although most peasants in France spoke local dialects, an official language emerged in Paris and the French language became the preferred language of Europe's aristocracy. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (born in 1500) quipped, "I speak Spanish to God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse." 

Because of its international status, there was a desire to regulate the French language. Several reforms of the French language worked to make it more uniform. The Renaissance writer Franois Rabelais (b. 1494) helped to shape French as a literary language, Rabelais' French is characterised by the re-introduction of Greek and Latin words. Jacques Peletier du Mans (born 1517) was one of the scholars who reformed the French language. He improved Nicolas Chuquet's long scale system by adding names for intermediate numbers ("milliards" instead of "thousand million", etc.).

===Consolidation (15th and 16th centuries)===
Charles the Bold, the last Valois Duke of Burgundy. His death at the Battle of Nancy (1477) marked the division of his lands between the Kings of France and Habsburg Dynasty.
With the death in 1477 of Charles the Bold, France and the Habsburgs began a long process of dividing his rich Burgundian lands, leading to numerous wars. In 1532, Brittany was incorporated into the Kingdom of France.

France engaged in the long Italian Wars (14941559), which marked the beginning of early modern France. Francis I faced powerful foes, and he was captured at Pavia. The French monarchy then sought for allies and found one in the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman Admiral Barbarossa captured Nice in 1543 and handed it down to Francis I.

During the 16th century, the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs were the dominant power in Europe. The many domains of Charles V encircled France. The Spanish Tercio was used with great success against French knights. Finally, on 7 January 1558, the Duke of Guise seized Calais from the English.

===="Beautiful 16th century"====
Economic historians call the era from about 1475 to 1630 the "beautiful 16th century" because of the return of peace, prosperity and optimism across the nation, and the steady growth of population. Paris, for example, flourished as never before, as its population rose to 200,000 by 1550. In Toulouse the Renaissance of the 16th century brought wealth that transformed the architecture of the town, such as building of the great aristocratic houses. Pierre Goubert, The Course of French History (1988) pp. 127-34 

===French Wars of Religion (156298)===

Henry IV of France was the first French Bourbon king.
The Protestant Reformation, inspired in France mainly by John Calvin, began to challenge the legitimacy and rituals of the Catholic Church. It reached an elite audience. After 1630, came new wars and deep pessimism, because of the Protestant challenge, heresy persecutions by Catholic bishops, and civil war. 

The two Calvinist main strongholds were southwest France and Normandy, but even in these districts the Catholics were a majority. Renewed Catholic reaction  headed by the powerful Francis, Duke of Guise  led to a massacre of Huguenots at Vassy in 1562, starting the first of the French Wars of Religion, during which English, German, and Spanish forces intervened on the side of rival Protestant and Catholic forces.

King Henry II had died in 1559 in a jousting tournament, he was succeeded in turn by his three sons, each of which assumed the throne as minors or were weak, ineffectual rulers. In the power vacuum entered Henry's widow, Catherine de' Medici, who became a central figure in the early years of the Wars of Religion. At her instigation, thousands of Huguenots were murdered in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572.

The Wars of Religion culminated in the War of the Three Henrys (15841598),at the height of which bodyguards of the King Henry III assassinated Henry de Guise, leader of the Spanish-backed Catholic league. In revenge, a priest assassinated Henry III. This led to the ascension of the Huguenot Henry IV; in order to bring peace to a country beset by religious and succession wars, he converted to Catholicism. He issued the Edict of Nantes in 1598, which guaranteed religious liberties to the Protestants, thereby effectively ending the civil war. Mack P. Holt, The French Wars of Religion, 1562-1629 (2nd ed. 2005 The main provisions of the Edict of Nantes were as follows: a) Huguenots were allowed to hold religious services in certain towns in each province, b) They were allowed to control and fortify eight cities (including La Rochelle and Montauban), c) Special courts were established to try Huguenot offenders, d) Huguenots were to have equal civil rights with the Catholics. 

When in 1620 the Huguenots proclaimed a constitution for the 'Republic of the Reformed Churches of France', the chief minister Cardinal Richelieu (15851642) invoked the entire powers of the state to stop it. Religious conflicts therefore resumed under Louis XIII when Richelieu forced Protestants to disarm their army and fortresses. This conflict ended in the Siege of La Rochelle (16271628), in which Protestants and their English supporters were defeated. The following Peace of Alais (1629) confirmed religious freedom yet dismantled the Protestant military defences. 

In the face of persecution, Huguenots dispersed widely throughout Protestant kingdoms in Europe and America. Randy J. Sparks and Bertrand Van Ruymbeke, Memory and Identity: The Huguenots in France and the Atlantic Diaspora (2008) 

===Thirty Years' War (16181648)===

The religious conflicts that plagued France also ravaged the Habsburg-led Holy Roman Empire. The Thirty Years' War eroded the power of the Catholic Habsburgs. Although Cardinal Richelieu, the powerful chief minister of France, had previously mauled the Protestants, he joined this war on their side in 1636 because it was in the raison d'tat (national interest). Imperial Habsburg forces invaded France, ravaged Champagne, and nearly threatened Paris. Peter H. Wilson, Europes Tragedy: A History of the Thirty Years War (2009) 

Richelieu died in 1642 and was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin, while Louis XIII died one year later and was succeeded by Louis XIV. France was served by some very efficient commanders such as Louis II de Bourbon (Cond) and Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne (Turenne). The French forces won a decisive victory at Rocroi (1643), and the Spanish army was decimated; the Tercio was broken. The Truce of Ulm (1647) and the Peace of Westphalia (1648) brought an end to the war. 

Some challenges remained. France was hit by civil unrest known as the Fronde which in turn evolved into the Franco-Spanish War in 1653. Louis II de Bourbon joined the Spanish army this time, but suffered a severe defeat at Dunkirk (1658) by Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne. The terms for the peace inflicted upon the Spanish kingdoms in the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) were harsh, as France annexed Northern Catalonia. 

Amidst this turmoil, Ren Descartes sought answers to philosophical questions through the use of logic and reason and formulated what would be called Cartesian Dualism in 1641.

===Colonies (16th and 17th centuries)===

During the 16th century, the king began to claim North American territories and established several (unsuccessful) colonies. Christopher Hodson and Brett Rushforth, "Absolutely Atlantic: Colonialism and the Early Modern French State in Recent Historiography," History Compass, (January 2010) 8#1 pp 101-117, Jacques Cartier was one of the great explorers who ventured deep into American territories during the 16th century.

The early 17th century saw the first successful French settlements in the New World with the voyages of Samuel de Champlain. Allan Greer, "National, Transnational, and Hypernational Historiographies: New France Meets Early American History," Canadian Historical Review, (2010) 91#4 pp 695-724, in Project MUSE The largest settlement was New France, with the towns of Quebec City (1608) and Montreal (fur trading post in 1611, Roman Catholic mission established in 1639, and colony founded in 1642).

===Louis XIV (16431715)===

Louis XIV of France, the "Sun King".
Louis XIV, known as the "Sun King", reigned over France from 1643 until 1715 although his strongest period of personal rule did not begin until 1661 after the death of his Italian chief minister Cardinal Mazarin. Louis believed in the divine right of kings, which asserts that a monarch is above everyone except God, and is therefore not answerable to the will of his people, the aristocracy, or the Church. Louis continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralized state governed from Paris, sought to eliminate remnants of feudalism in France, and subjugated and weakened the aristocracy. By these means he consolidated a system of absolute monarchical rule in France that endured until the French Revolution. However, Louis XIV's long reign saw France involved in many wars that drained its treasury. Count Mikls Zrnyi,the Poet-Warlord 

His reign began during the Thirty Years' War and during the Franco-Spanish war. His military architect, Vauban, became famous for his pentagonal fortresses, and Jean-Baptiste Colbert supported the royal spending as much as possible. French dominated League of the Rhine fought against the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Saint Gotthard in 1664. The battle was won by the Christians, chiefly through the brave attack of 6,000 French troops led by La Feuillade and Coligny. 

France fought the War of Devolution against Spain in 1667. France's defeat of Spain and invasion of the Spanish Netherlands alarmed England and Sweden. With the Dutch Republic they formed the Triple Alliance to check Louis XIV's expansion. Louis II de Bourbon had captured Franche-Comt, but in face of an indefensible position, Louis XIV agreed to a peace at Aachen. Under its terms, Louis XIV did not annex Franche-Comt but did gain Lille. John B. Wolf, Louis XIV (1968), the standard scholarly biography online edition
 

Peace was fragile, and war broke out again between France and the Dutch Republic in the Franco-Dutch War (16721678). Louis XIV asked for the Dutch Republic to resume war against the Spanish Netherlands, but the republic refused. France attacked the Dutch Republic and was joined by England in this conflict. Through targeted inundations of polders by breaking dykes, the French invasion of the Dutch Republic was brought to a halt. The Dutch Admiral Michiel de Ruyter inflicted a few strategic defeats on the Anglo-French naval alliance and forced England to retire from the war in 1674. Because the Netherlands could not resist indefinitely, it agreed to peace in the Treaties of Nijmegen, according to which France would annex France-Comt and acquire further concessions in the Spanish Netherlands.

On 6 May 1682, the royal court moved to the lavish Palace of Versailles, which Louis XIV had greatly expanded. Over time, Louis XIV compelled many members of the nobility, especially the noble elite, to inhabit Versailles. He controlled the nobility with an elaborate system of pensions and privileges, and replaced their power with himself.

Peace did not last, and war between France and Spain again resumed. The War of the Reunions broke out (16831684), and again Spain, with its ally the Holy Roman Empire, was easily defeated. Meanwhile, in October 1685 Louis signed the Edict of Fontainebleau ordering the destruction of all Protestant churches and schools in France. Its immediate consequence was a large Protestant exodus from France. Over two million people died in two famines in 1693 and 1710. 

France would soon be involved in another war, the War of the Grand Alliance. This time the theatre was not only in Europe but also in North America. Although the war was long and difficult (it was also called the Nine Years' War), its results were inconclusive. The Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 confirmed French sovereignty over Alsace, yet rejected its claims to Luxembourg. Louis also had to evacuate Catalonia and the Palatinate. This peace was considered a truce by all sides, thus war was to start again. Wolf, Louis XIV (1968) 

In 1701 the War of the Spanish Succession began. The Bourbon Philip of Anjou was designated heir to the throne of Spain as Philip V. The Habsburg Emperor Leopold opposed a Bourbon succession, because the power that such a succession would bring to the Bourbon rulers of France would disturb the delicate balance of power in Europe. Therefore, he claimed the Spanish thrones for himself. England and the Dutch Republic joined Leopold against Louis XIV and Philip of Anjou. The allied forces were led by John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, and by Prince Eugene of Savoy. They inflicted a few resounding defeats on the French army; the Battle of Blenheim in 1704 was the first major land battle lost by France since its victory at Rocroi in 1643. Yet, the extremely bloody battles of Ramillies (1706) and Malplaquet (1709) proved to be Pyrrhic victories for the allies, as they had lost too many men to continue the war. Led by Villars, French forces recovered much of the lost ground in battles such as Denain (1712). Finally, a compromise was achieved with the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. Philip of Anjou was confirmed as Philip V, king of Spain; Emperor Leopold did not get the throne, but Philip V was barred from inheriting France. 

Louis XIV wanted to be remembered as a patron of the arts, like his ancestor Louis IX. He invited Jean-Baptiste Lully to establish the French opera, and a tumultuous friendship was established between Lully and playwright and actor Molire. Jules Hardouin Mansart became France's most important architect of the period, bringing the pinnacle of French Baroque architecture.

===Major changes in France, Europe, and North America (171883)===

The Battle of Fontenoy, 11 May 1745.
Louis XIV died in 1715 and was succeeded by his five-year-old great grandson who reigned as Louis XV until his death in 1774. In 1718, France was once again at war, as Philip II of Orlans's regency joined the War of the Quadruple Alliance against Spain. King Philip V of Spain had to withdraw from the conflict, confronted with the reality that Spain was no longer a great power of Europe. Under Cardinal Fleury's administration, peace was maintained as long as possible. Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, The Ancien Regime: A History of France 16101774 (1999) 

However, in 1733 another war broke in central Europe, this time about the Polish succession, and France joined the war against the Austrian Empire. This time there was no invasion of the Netherlands, and Britain remained neutral. As a consequence, Austria was left alone against a Franco-Spanish alliance and faced a military disaster. Peace was settled in the Treaty of Vienna (1738), according to which France would annex, through inheritance, the Duchy of Lorraine. 

Two years later, in 1740, war broke out over the Austrian succession, and France seized the opportunity to join the conflict. The war played out in North America and India as well as Europe, and inconclusive terms were agreed to in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748). Once again, no one regarded this as a peace, but rather as a mere truce. Prussia was then becoming a new threat, as it had gained substantial territory from Austria. This led to the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, in which the alliances seen during the previous war were mostly inverted. France was now allied to Austria and Russia, while Britain was now allied to Prussia. Daniel Marston, The Seven Years' War (2001) 

In the North American theatre, France was allied with various Native American peoples during the Seven Years' War and, despite a temporary success at the battles of the Great Meadows and Monongahela, French forces were defeated at the disastrous Battle of the Plains of Abraham in Quebec. In Europe, repeated French attempts to overwhelm Hanover failed. In 1762 Russia, France, and Austria were on the verge of crushing Prussia, when the Anglo-Prussian Alliance was saved by the Miracle of the House of Brandenburg. At sea, naval defeats against British fleets at Lagos and Quiberon Bay in 1759 and a crippling blockade forced France to keep its ships in port. Finally peace was concluded in the Treaty of Paris (1763), and France lost its North American empire. 

Britain's success in the Seven Years' War had allowed them to eclipse France as the leading colonial power. France sought revenge for this defeat, and under Choiseul France started to rebuild. In 1766 the French Kingdom annexed Lorraine and the following year bought Corsica from Genoa.

Lord Cornwallis surrenders at Yorktown to American and French allies.
Having lost its colonial empire, France saw a good opportunity for revenge against Britain in signing an alliance with the Americans in 1778, and sending an army and navy that turned the American Revolution into a world war. Spain, allied to France by the Family Compact, and the Dutch Republic also joined the war on the French side. Admiral de Grasse defeated a British fleet at Chesapeake Bay while Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau and Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette joined American forces in defeating the British at Yorktown. The war was concluded by the Treaty of Paris (1783); the United States became independent. The British Royal Navy scored a major victory over France in 1782 at the Battle of the Saintes and France finished the war with huge debts and the minor gain of the island of Tobago. Jonathan R. Dull, A Diplomatic History of American Revolution (1985) 

While the state expanded, new Enlightenment ideas flourished. Montesquieu proposed the separation of powers. Many other French philosophes (intellectuals) exerted philosophical influence on a continental scale, including Voltaire, Denis Diderot and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose essay The Social Contract, Or Principles of Political Right was a catalyst for governmental and societal reform throughout Europe. Diderot's great Encyclopdie reshaped the European world view. Daniel Roche, France in the Enlightenment (1998) ch 15 

Astronomy, chemistry, mathematics and technology flourished. French scientists such as Antoine Lavoisier worked to replace the archaic units of weights and measures by a coherent scientific system. Lavoisier also formulated the law of Conservation of mass and discovered oxygen and hydrogen. 

===The Enlightenment===

Cover of the Encyclopdie

The "Philosophes" were 18th-century French intellectuals who dominated the French Enlightenment and were influential across Europe. Their interests were diverse, with experts in scientific, literary, philosophical and sociological matters. The ultimate goal of the philosophers was human progress; by concentrating on social and material sciences, they believed that a rational society was the only logical outcome of a freethinking and reasoned populace. They also advocated Deism and religious tolerance. Many believed religion had been used as a source of conflict since time eternal, and that logical, rational thought was the way forward for mankind. Peter Hanns Reill and Ellen Judy Wilson, Encyclopdia of the Enlightenment(2nd ed. 2004) 

The philosopher Denis Diderot was Editor in Chief of the famous Enlightenment accomplishment, the 72,000 article Encyclopdie (17511772). It sparked a revolution in learning throughout the enlightened world. Arthur Wilson, Diderot, the Appeal to Posterity, 1759-1784 (1972) 

In the early part of the 18th century the movement was dominated by Voltaire and Montesquieu, but the movement grew in momentum as the century moved on. Overall the philosophers were inspired by the thoughts of Ren Descartes, the skepticism of the Libertins and the popularization of science by Bernard de Fontenelle. Sectarian dissensions within the church, the gradual weakening of the absolute monarch and the numerous wars of Louis XIV allowed their influence to spread. Between 1748 and 1751 the Philosophes reached their most influential period, as Montesquieu published Spirit of Laws (1748) and Jean Jacques Rousseau published Discourse on the Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences (1750).

The leader of the French Enlightenment and a writer of enormous influence across Europe, was Voltaire (16941778). His many books included poems and plays; works of satire (Candide ); books on history, science, and philosophy, including numerous (anonymous) contributions to the Encyclopdie; and an extensive correspondence. A witty, tireless antagonist to the alliance between the French state and the church, he was exiled from France on a number of occasions. In exile in England he came to appreciate British thought and he popularized Isaac Newton in Europe. Nicholas Cronk, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Voltaire (2009) 

==Revolution and Napoleon (17891815)==

===The French Revolution===

The Tennis Court Oath of 20 June 1789 was a pivotal event during the first days of the Revolution. It signified the first time that French citizens formally stood in opposition to Louis XVI.
The Storming of the Bastille, 14 July 1789.
The immediate trigger for the Revolution was Louis XVI's attempts to solve the government's worsening financial situation. Recent wars, such as support of the American Revolutionary War, compounded by the loss of the North American colonies, had effectively bankrupted the state. Several years of bad harvests and an inadequate transportation system had caused rising food prices, hunger, and malnutrition; the country was further destabilized by the lower classes' increased feeling that the royal court was isolated from, and indifferent to, their hardships.

In February 1787 his finance minister, Charles Alexandre de Calonne, convened an Assembly of Notables, a group of nobles, clergy, bourgeoisie, and bureaucrats selected in order to bypass the local parliaments. This group was asked to approve a new land tax that would, for the first time, include a tax on the property of nobles and clergy. The assembly did not approve the tax, instead demanding that Louis XVI call the Estates-General.

In August 1788 the King agreed to convene the Estates-General in May 1789. While the Third Estate demanded and was granted "double representation" so as to balance the First and Second Estate, voting was to occur "by orders"  votes of the Third Estate were to be weighted  effectively canceling double representation. This eventually led to the Third Estate breaking away from the Estates-General and, joined by members of the other estates, proclaiming the creation of the National Assembly, an assembly not of the Estates but of "the People."

In an attempt to keep control of the process and prevent the Assembly from convening, Louis XVI ordered the closure of the Salle des tats where the Assembly met. After finding the door to their chamber locked and guarded, the Assembly met nearby on a tennis court and pledged the Tennis Court Oath on 20 June 1789, binding them "never to separate, and to meet wherever circumstances demand, until the constitution of the kingdom is established and affirmed on solid foundations." They were joined by some sympathetic members of the Second and First estates. After the king fired his finance minister, Jacques Necker, for giving his support and guidance to the Third Estate, worries surfaced that the legitimacy of the newly formed National Assembly might be threatened by royalists.

Paris was soon in a state of anarchy. It was consumed with riots and widespread looting. Because the royal leadership essentially abandoned the city, the mobs soon had the support of the French Guard, including arms and trained soldiers. On 14 July 1789, the insurgents set their eyes on the large weapons and ammunition cache inside the Bastille fortress, which also served as a symbol of royal tyranny. Insurgents seized the Bastille prison, killing the governor and several of his guards.

The French now celebrate 14 July each year as a symbol of the shift away from the Ancien Rgime to a more modern, democratic state. Gilbert du Motier, a hero of the War of American Independence, took command of the National Guard, and the king was forced to recognize the Tricolour Cockade. Although peace was made, several nobles did not regard the new order as acceptable and emigrated in order to push the neighboring, aristocratic kingdoms to war against the new democratic regime. Because of this new period of instability, the state was struck for several weeks in July and August 1789 by the Great Fear, a period of violent class conflict.

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen was adopted by the National Assembly in August 1789 as a first step in their effort to write a constitution. Considered to be a precursor to modern international rights instruments and using the U.S. Declaration of Independence as a model, it defined a set of individual rights and collective rights of all of the estates as one. Influenced by the doctrine of natural rights, these rights were deemed universal and valid in all times and places, pertaining to human nature itself. The Assembly also replaced France's historic provinces with eighty-three departments, uniformly administered and approximately equal to one another in extent and population.

==== Abolition of feudalism ====
The signing of the August Decrees - in bas relief, Place de la Rpublique.

On 4 August 1789, the Assembly abolished feudalism, in what became known as the August Decrees, sweeping away both the seigneurial rights of the Second Estate (nobility) and the tithes gathered by the First Estate (clergy). In the course of a few hours, nobles, clergy, towns, provinces, companies, and cities lost their special privileges. The Assembly abolished the symbolic paraphernalia of the Ancien Rgime  armorial bearings, liveries, etc.  which alienated the more conservative nobles. Amidst these intrigues, the Assembly continued to work on developing a constitution.

A new judicial organization made all magistracies temporary and independent of the throne. The legislators abolished hereditary offices, except for the monarchy itself. Jury trials started for criminal cases. The King would have the unique power to propose war, with the legislature then deciding whether to declare war. The Assembly abolished all internal trade barriers and suppressed guilds, masterships, and workers' organizations. Consequently, an individual could only gain the right to practice a trade through the purchase of a license, and worker strikes became illegal.

The Revolution brought about a massive shifting of powers from the Roman Catholic Church to the state. Under the Ancien Rgime, the Church had been the largest landowner in the country. Legislation enacted in 1790 abolished the Church's authority to levy a tax on crops, cancelled special privileges for the clergy, and confiscated Church property. The Assembly essentially addressed the financial crisis in part by having the nation take over the property of the Church.

The republican government also enforced the Systme International d'Units (International System of Units), commissioned by Louis XVI, which became known as the Metric System. Charles-Augustin de Coulomb and Andr-Marie Ampre's works on electricity and electromagnetism were also recognised, and their units are integrated into the Metric System.

==== Royal family captured ====
An illustration of the Women's March on Versailles, 5 October 1789.

When a mob from Paris attacked the royal palace at Versailles in October 1789 seeking redress for their severe poverty, the royal family was forced to move to the Tuileries Palace in Paris. Later in June 1791, the royal family secretly fled Paris in disguise for Varennes near France's northeastern border in order to seek royalist support the king believed he could trust, but they were soon discovered en route. They were brought back to Paris, after which they were essentially kept under house-arrest at the Tuileries.

Factions within the Assembly began to clarify. The opposition to revolution sat on the right-hand side of the Assembly. The "Royalist democrats" or monarchiens inclined toward organizing France along lines similar to the British constitutional model. The "National Party", representing the centre or centre-left of the assembly, represented somewhat more extreme views. The increasingly middle-class National Guard under Lafayette also slowly emerged as a power in its own right.

With most of the Assembly still favoring a constitutional monarchy rather than a republic, the various groupings reached a compromise. Under the Constitution of 1791, France would function as a constitutional monarchy with Louis XVI as little more than a figurehead. The King had to share power with the elected Legislative Assembly, although he still retained his royal veto and the ability to select ministers. He had perforce to swear an oath to the constitution, and a decree declared that retracting the oath, heading an army for the purpose of making war upon the nation, or permitting anyone to do so in his name would amount to de facto abdication.

The Legislative Assembly first met on 1 October 1791 and degenerated into chaos less than a year later. The Legislative Assembly consisted of about 165 Feuillants (constitutional monarchists) on the right, about 330 Girondists (liberal republicans) in the center, a vocal group of Jacobins (radical revolutionaries) on the left, and about 250 deputies unaffiliated with any of those factions. Early on, the King vetoed legislation that threatened the migrs with death and that decreed that every non-juring clergyman must take within eight days the civic oath mandated by the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. Over the course of a year, disagreements like this would result in a constitutional crisis, leading the Revolution to higher levels.

On the foreign affairs front, in the Declaration of Pillnitz of August 1791, Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II, Count Charles of Artois, and King Frederick William II of Prussia made Louis XVI's cause their own. These noblemen also required the Assembly to be dissolved through threats of war, but, instead of cowing the French, it infuriated them. The borders were militarised as a consequence. Under the Constitution of 1791, the solution of a constitutional monarchy was adopted, and the king supported a war against Austria in order to increase his popularity, starting the long French Revolutionary Wars. On the night of the 10 August, the Jacobins, who had mainly opposed the war, suspended the monarchy. With the Prussian army entering France, more doubts were raised against the aristocracy, and these tensions climaxed during the September Massacres.

After the first great victory of the French revolutionary troops at the Battle of Valmy on 20 September 1792, the French First Republic was proclaimed the next day, on 21 September 1792. The new French Republican Calendar was then legally enforced.

==== Factionalism amongst revolutionaries ====
The National Convention was fractured into factions, the most dangerous of which became the Montagnards. The Montagnards and the Girondins were both originally Jacobins, a political club which was founded according to republican beliefs and whose members wanted a French democratic republic. The Jacobin Club, however, encountered political tension beginning in 1791 due to conflicting viewpoints in response to several revolutionary events and how to best achieve a democratic republic. David Andress, The Terror p. 381 Members of "The Mountain" (French: La Montagne) sided with the Parisian militants, also known as the sans-culottes, who aimed for a more repressive form of government that would institute a price maximum on essential consumer goods and would punish all traitors and enemies of the Republic. Censer, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity pp. 64,74 

Additionally, between war and political differences, the Montagnards believed these crises required emergency solutions. Hugh Gough, The Terror in the French Revolution p. 31 The Montagnards considered themselves the true patriots of the French Revolution. Andress, David. The Terror. p. 118 The Mountain had 302 members during its reign in 1793 and 1794, including committee members and deputies who voted with the faction. Patrick, Alison. "Political Divisions in the French National Convention 179293" p. 436 Most of its members came from the middle class and tended to represent the Parisian population. Palmer, R.R. Twelve Who Ruled. p. 26 Its leaders included Maximilien Robespierre, Jean-Paul Marat, and Georges Danton. Palmer, R.R. Twelve Who Ruled. p. 25 This party eventually gained overwhelming power in the Convention and governed France during the Reign of Terror.

Mass shootings at Nantes, War in the Vende, 1793.
Possibly the two most significant factors in the quarrel and consequential split between the Montagnards and the Girondins include the September Massacres and the trial of Louis XVI, both in 1792. The official fall of the monarchy came on 10 August 1792 after Louis XVI refused to rescind his veto of the National Assembly's constitution. The Mountain argued for immediate execution of the king by military court-martial, insisting that he was undermining the Revolution. Because a trial would require the "presumption of innocence," such a proceeding would contradict the mission of the National Convention. The Girondins, in contrast, agreed that the king was guilty of treason but argued for his clemency and favored the option of exile or popular referendum as his sentence. Censer, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, pp. 6466 However, the trial progressed and Louis XVI was executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793.

The second key factor in the split between the Montagnards and the Girondins was the September Massacres of 1792. Radical Parisians, members of the National Guard, and fdrs were angry with the poor progress in the war against Austria and Prussia and the forced enlistment of 30,000 volunteers. On 10 August, radicals went on a killing spree, slaughtering roughly 1,300 inmates in various Paris prisons, many of whom were simply common criminals, not the treasonous counterrevolutionaries condemned by the Mountain. Patrice Higonnet, Goodness Beyond Virtue p. 37 The Girondins did not tolerate the massacres, but neither the Montagnards of the Legislative Assembly nor the Paris Commune took any action to stop or condemn the killings. Members of the Girondins later accused Marat, Robespierre, and Danton as inciters of the massacres in an attempt to further their dictatorial power. Paul R. Hanson, The Jacobin Republic Under Fire p. 40-41 

==== Execution of Louis XVI ====
The Execution of Louis XVI on 21 January 1793 in what is now the Place de la Concorde, facing the empty pedestal where the statue of his grandfather, Louis XV, had stood.
When the Brunswick Manifesto of July 1792 once more threatened the French population with Austrian (Imperial) and Prussian attacks, Louis XVI was suspected of treason and taken along with his family from the Tuileries Palace in August 1792 by insurgents supported by a new revolutionary Paris Commune. The King and Queen ended up prisoners, and a rump session of the Legislative Assembly suspended the monarchy. Little more than a third of the deputies were present, almost all of them Jacobins. The King was later tried and convicted and, on 21 January 1793, was executed by the guillotine. Marie Antoinette, would follow him to the guillotine on 16 October.

What remained of a national government depended on the support of the insurrectionary Commune. When the Commune sent gangs into prisons to arbitrarily adjudicate and butcher 1400 victims, and then addressed a circular letter to the other cities of France, inviting them to follow this example, the Assembly could offer only feeble resistance. This situation persisted until a National Convention, charged with writing a new constitution, met on 20 September 1792 and became the new de facto government of France. The next day it abolished the monarchy and declared a republic.

Members of the Mountain went on to establish the Committee of Public Safety in April 1793 under Robespierre, which would be responsible for The Terror (5 September 1793  28 July 1794), the bloodiest and one of the most controversial phases of the French Revolution. The time between 1792 and 1794 was dominated by the ideology of the Mountain until the execution of Robespierre on 28 July 1794.

The war went badly. Prices rose, the sans-culottes (poor labourers and radical Jacobins) rioted, and counter-revolutionary activities began in some regions. This encouraged the Jacobins to seize power through a parliamentary coup, backed up by force effected by mobilising public support against the Girondist faction, and by utilising the mob power of the Parisian sans-culottes. An alliance of Jacobin and sans-culottes elements thus became the effective centre of the new government. Policy became considerably more radical.

==== The Reign of Terror ====
Starting in September 1793, a period known as the Reign of Terror ensued for approximately 12 months, the bloodiest and one of the most controversial phases of the French Revolution. The Committee of Public Safety, set up by the National Convention on 6 April 1793, formed the twelve-member de facto executive government of France. Under war conditions and with national survival seemingly at stake, the Montagnard Jacobins under Maximilien Robespierre centralized denunciations, trials, and executions. At least 18,000 people met their deaths under the guillotine or otherwise, after accusations of counter-revolutionary activities.

The execution of Robespierre, July 1794.
In 1794, Robespierre had ultra-radicals and moderate Jacobins executed. As a consequence of these actions, however, Robespierre's own popular support eroded markedly. On 27 July 1794, the Thermidorian Reaction led to the arrest and execution of Robespierre. The new government was predominantly made up of Girondists who had survived the Terror and, after taking power, they took revenge as well by banning the Jacobin Club and executing many of its former members  including Robespierre  in what was known as the White Terror.

After the stated aim of the National Convention to export revolution, the guillotining of Louis XVI of France, and the French opening of the Scheldt, a European military coalition was formed against France. Spain, Naples, Great Britain, and the Netherlands joined Austria and Prussia in The First Coalition (17921797), the first major concerted effort of multiple European powers to contain Revolutionary France. It took shape after the wars had already begun.

The Republican government in Paris was radicalised after a diplomatic coup from the Jacobins said it would be the Guerre Totale ("total war") and called for a Leve en masse (mass conscription of troops). Royalist invasion forces were defeated at Toulon in 1793, leaving the French republican forces in an offensive position and granting a young officer, Napoleon Bonaparte, a certain fame. Following their victory at Fleurus, the Republicans occupied Belgium and the Rhineland. An invasion of the Netherlands established the puppet Batavian Republic. Finally, a peace agreement was concluded between France, Spain, and Prussia in 1795 at Basel.

==== Directory ====
The Convention approved a new "Constitution of the Year III" on 17 August 1795; it was ratified by a national plebiscite and took effect on 26 September 1795. The new constitution created the Directory and the first bicameral legislature in French history. The parliament consisted of 500 representatives  le Conseil des Cinq-Cents (the Council of the Five Hundred)  and 250 senators  le Conseil des Anciens (the Council of Elders). Executive power went to five "directors", named annually by the Conseil des Anciens from a list submitted by le Conseil des Cinq-Cents. The nation desired rest and the healing of its many wounds. Those who wished to restore Louis XVIII and the Ancien Rgime and those who would have renewed the Reign of Terror were insignificant in number. The possibility of foreign interference had vanished with the failure of the First Coalition.

The four years of the Directory were a time of arbitrary government and chronic disquiet. The late atrocities had made confidence or goodwill between the parties impossible. As the majority of French people wanted to be rid of them, they could achieve their purpose only by extraordinary means. The Convention habitually disregarded the terms of the constitution, and, when the elections went against them, resorted to the sword. They resolved to prolong the war as the best expedient for prolonging their power. They were thus driven to rely upon the armies, which also desired war and were becoming increasingly less civic in temper.

The Directory lasted until 1799 when Napoleon staged a coup and installed The Consulate. The Consulate still operated within the First Republic. The Consulate was replaced by the First Empire, established by Napoleon in 1804. 

===The Napoleonic Era===

Napoleon on his Imperial throne, by Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres.
During the War of the First Coalition (17921797), the Directoire had replaced the National Convention. Five directors then ruled France. As Great Britain was still at war with France, a plan was made to take Egypt from the Ottoman Empire, a British ally. This was Napoleon's idea and the Directoire agreed to the plan in order to send the popular general away from the mainland. Napoleon defeated the Ottoman forces during the Battle of the Pyramids (21 July 1798) and sent hundreds of scientists and linguists out to thoroughly explore modern and ancient Egypt. Only a few weeks later the British fleet under Admiral Horatio Nelson unexpectedly destroyed the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile (13 August 1798). Napoleon planned to move into Syria but was defeated and he returned to France without his army, which surrendered. Paul Strathern, Napoleon in Egypt (2009) 

The Directoire was threatened by the Second Coalition (17981802). Royalists and their allies still dreamed of restoring the monarchy to power, while the Prussian and Austrian crowns did not accept their territorial losses during the previous war. In 1799 the Russian army expelled the French from Italy in battles such as Cassano, while the Austrian army defeated the French in Switzerland at Stockach and Zurich. Napoleon then seized power through a coup and established the Consulate in 1799. The Austrian army was defeated at the Battle of Marengo (1800) and again at the Battle of Hohenlinden (1800). George F. Nafziger, Historical Dictionary of the Napoleonic Era (2002) 

While at sea the French had some success at Boulogne but Nelson's Royal Navy destroyed an anchored Danish and Norwegian fleet at the Battle of Copenhagen (1801) because the Scandinavian kingdoms were against the British blockade of France. The Second Coalition was beaten and peace was settled in two distinct treaties: the Treaty of Lunville and the Treaty of Amiens. A brief interlude of peace ensued in 1802-3, during which Napoleon sold French Louisiana to the United States because it was indefensible. 

In 1801 Napoleon concluded a "Concordat" with Pope Pius VII that opened peaceful relations between church and state in France. The policies of the Revolution were reversed, except the Church did not get its lands back. Bishops and clergy were to receive state salaries, and the government would pay for the building and maintenance of churches. Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780-1804 (2000) p 324 Napoleon reorganized higher learning by dividing the Institut National into four (later five) academies.

Napolon at the Battle of Austerlitz, by Franois Grard
In 1804 Napoleon was titled Emperor by the senate, thus founding the First French Empire. Napoleon's rule was constitutional, and although autocratic, it was much more advanced than traditional European monarchies of the time. The proclamation of the French Empire was met by the Third Coalition. The French army was renamed La Grande Arme in 1805 and Napoleon used propaganda and nationalism to control the French population. The French army achieved a resounding victory at Ulm (1619 October 1805), where an entire Austrian army was captured. Robert P. Goetz, 1805: Austerlitz: Napoleon and the Destruction of the Third Coalition, (2005) 

A Franco-Spanish fleet was defeated at Trafalgar (21 October 1805) and all plans to invade Britain were then made impossible. Despite this naval defeat, it was on the ground that this war would be won; Napoleon inflicted on the Austrian and Russian Empires one of their greatest defeats at Austerlitz (also known as the "Battle of the Three Emperors" on 2 December 1805), destroying the Third Coalition. Peace was settled in the Treaty of Pressburg; the Austrian Empire lost the title of Holy Roman Emperor and the Confederation of the Rhine was created by Napoleon over former Austrian territories. 

==== Pan-European efforts to contain Napoleon====
Prussia joined Britain and Russia, thus forming the Fourth Coalition. Although the Coalition was joined by other allies, the French Empire was also not alone since it now had a complex network of allies and subject states. Largely outnumbered, the Prussian army was crushed at Jena-Auerstedt in 1806; Napoleon captured Berlin and went as far as Eastern Prussia. There the Russian Empire was defeated at the Battle of Friedland (14 June 1807). Peace was dictated in the Treaties of Tilsit, in which Russia had to join the Continental System, and Prussia handed half of its territories to France. The Duchy of Warsaw was formed over these territorial losses, and Polish troops entered the Grande Arme in significant numbers.

The height of the First Empire
Freed from his obligation in the east, Napoleon then went back to the west, as the French Empire was still at war with Britain. Only two countries remained neutral in the war: Sweden and Portugal, and Napoleon then looked toward the latter. In the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1807), a Franco-Spanish alliance against Portugal was sealed as Spain eyed Portuguese territories. French armies entered Spain in order to attack Portugal, but then seized Spanish fortresses and took over the kingdom by surprise. Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, was made King of Spain after Charles IV abdicated.

This occupation of the Iberian peninsula fueled local nationalism, and soon the Spanish and Portuguese fought the French using guerilla tactics, defeating the French forces at the Battle of Bailn (June and July 1808). Britain sent a short-lived ground support force to Portugal, and French forces evacuated Portugal as defined in the Convention of Sintra following the Allied victory at Vimeiro (21 August 1808). France only controlled Catalonia and Navarre and could have been definitely expelled from the Iberian peninsula had the Spanish armies attacked again, but the Spanish did not.

Another French attack was launched on Spain, led by Napoleon himself, and was described as "an avalanche of fire and steel." However, the French Empire was no longer regarded as invincible by European powers. In 1808 Austria formed the War of the Fifth Coalition in order to break down the French Empire. The Austrian Empire defeated the French at Aspern-Essling, yet was beaten at Wagram while the Polish allies defeated the Austrian Empire at Raszyn (April 1809). Although not as decisive as the previous Austrian defeats, the peace treaty in October 1809 stripped Austria of a large amount of territories, reducing it even more.

Napoleon Bonaparte retreating from Moscow, by Adolf Northern.
In 1812 war broke out with Russia, engaging Napoleon in the disastrous French invasion of Russia (1812). Napoleon assembled the largest army Europe had ever seen, including troops from all subject states, to invade Russia, which had just left the continental system and was gathering an army on the Polish frontier. Following an exhausting march and the bloody but inconclusive Battle of Borodino, near Moscow, the Grande Arme entered and captured Moscow, only to find it burning as part of the Russian scorched earth tactics.

Although there still were battles, such as Maloyaroslavets, the Napoleonic army left Russia in late 1812 annihilated, most of all by the Russian winter, exhaustion, and scorched earth warfare. On the Spanish front the French troops were defeated at Vitoria (June 1813) and then at the Battle of the Pyrenees (JulyAugust 1813). Since the Spanish guerrillas seemed to be uncontrollable, the French troops eventually evacuated Spain.

Since France had been defeated on these two fronts, states previously conquered and controlled by Napoleon saw a good opportunity to strike back. The Sixth Coalition was formed, and the German states of the Confederation of the Rhine switched sides, finally opposing Napoleon. Napoleon was largely defeated in the Battle of the Nations outside Leipzig in October 1813, and was overwhelmed by much larger armies during the Six Days Campaign (February 1814), although, the Six Days Campaign is often considered a tactical masterpiece because the allies suffered much higher casualties.

Napoleon abdicated on 6 April 1814, and was exiled to Elba. The conservative Congress of Vienna reversed the political changes that had occurred during the wars. Napoleon's attempted restoration, a period known as the Hundred Days, ended with his final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.

The monarchy was subsequently restored and Louis XVIII became king.

====Napoleon's impact on France====
Napoleon centralized power in Paris, with all the provinces governed by all-powerful prefects whom he selected. They were more powerful than royal intendants of the ancien rgime and had a long-term impact in unifying the nation, minimizing regional differences, and shifting all decisions to Paris. Pierre Goubert, The Course of French History (1991) ch 14 

Religion had been a major issue during the Revolution, and Napoleon resolved most of the outstanding problems. Thereby he moved the clergy and large numbers of devout Catholics from hostility to the government to support for him. The Catholic system was reestablished by the Concordat of 1801 (signed with Pope Pius VII), so that church life returned to normal; the church lands were not restored, but the Jesuits were allowed back in and the bitter fights between the government and Church ended. Protestant, Jews and atheists were tolerated. D. M. G. Sutherland, The French Revolution and Empire: The Quest for a Civic Order (2003) pp 329-33 

The French taxation system had collapsed in the 1780s. In the 1790s the government seized and sold church lands and lands of exiles aristocrats. Napoleon instituted a modern, efficient tax system that guaranteed a steady flow of revenues and made long-term financing possible. Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon: From Tilsit to Waterloo 1807-1815 (1969) pp 171-79 

Napoleon kept the system of conscription that had been created in the 1790s, so that every young man served in the army, which could be rapidly expanded even as it was based on a core of careerists and talented officers. Before the Revolution the aristocracy formed the officer corps. Now promotion was by merit and achievementevery private carried a marshal's baton, it was said. Sutherland, The French Revolution and Empire: The Quest for a Civic Order (2003) pp 336-72 

===== The Napoleonic Code =====
Of permanent importance was the Napoleonic Code created by eminent jurists under Napoleon's supervision. Praised for its Gallic clarity, it spread rapidly throughout Europe and the world in general, and marked the end of feudalism and the liberation of Jews where it took effect. Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (2003) The Code recognized the principles of civil liberty, equality before the law, and the secular character of the state. It discarded the old right of primogeniture (where only the eldest son inherited) and required that inheritances be divided equally among all the children. The court system was standardized; all judges were appointed by the national government in Paris. Goubert (1991) ch 14 

==Long 19th century, 18151914==

===Religion===
France remained basically Catholic. The 1872 census counted 36 million people, of whom 35.4 million were listed as Catholics, 600,000 as Protestants, 50,000 as Jews and 80,000 as freethinkers. The Revolution failed to destroy the Catholic Church, and Napoleon's concordat of 1801 restored its status. The return of the Bourbons in 1814 brought back many rich nobles and landowners who supported the Church, seeing it as a bastion of conservatism and monarchism. However the monasteries with their vast land holdings and political power were gone; much of the land had been sold to urban entrepreneurs who lacked historic connections to the land and the peasants. Robert Gildea, Children of the Revolution: The French, 1799-1914(2008) p 120 

Few new priests were trained in the 1790-1814 period, and many left the church. The result was that the number of parish clergy plunged from 60,000 in 1790 to 25,000 in 1815, many of them elderly. Entire regions, especially around Paris, were left with few priests. On the other hand some traditional regions held fast to the faith, led by local nobles and historic families. 

The comeback was very slow in the larger cities and industrial areas. With systematic missionary work and a new emphasis on liturgy and devotions to the Virgin Mary, plus support from Napoleon III, there was a comeback. In 1870 there were 56,500 priests, representing a much younger and more dynamic force in the villages and towns, with a thick network of schools, charities and lay organizations. Roger Price, A Social History of Nineteenth-Century France (1987) ch 7 Conservative Catholics held control of the national government, 1820-1830, but most often played secondary political roles or had to fight the assault from republicans, liberals, socialists and seculars. Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age. Vol. I: The 19th Century in Europe; Background and the Roman Catholic Phase (1958) pp 400-412 Theodore Zeldin, France, 1848-1945 (1977) vol 2 pp 983-1040 

===The Bourbon restoration: (18141830)===
Louis XVIII makes a return at the Htel de Ville de Paris on August 29th, 1814.

This period of time is called the Bourbon Restoration and was marked by conflicts between reactionary Ultra-royalists, who wanted to restore the pre-1789 system of absolute monarchy, and liberals, who wanted to strengthen constitutional monarchy. Louis XVIII was the younger brother of Louis XVI, and reigned from 1814 to 1824. On becoming king, Louis issued a constitution known as the Charter which preserved many of the liberties won during the French Revolution and provided for a parliament composed of an elected Chamber of Deputies and a Chamber of Peers that was nominated by the king. Albert Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 293. 

The right to vote in elections to the Chamber of Deputies was restricted to only the wealthiest men. Louis was succeeded in turn by a younger brother, Charles X, who reigned from 1824 to 1830. On 12 June 1830 Polignac, King Charles X's minister, exploited the weakness of the Algerian Dey by invading Algeria and establishing French rule in Algeria. The news of the fall of Algiers had barely reached Paris when a new revolution broke out and quickly resulted in a change of regime.

===July Monarchy (18301848)===
The taking of the Htel de Ville - the seat of Paris's government - during the July Revolution of 1830.

Protest against the absolute monarchy was in the air. The elections of deputies to 16 May 1830 had gone very badly for King Charles X. Gurard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 287. Charles X reacted by proroguing the Chamber of Deputies and sending them all packing. He then unilaterally changed the electoral laws in an attempt to create a new Chamber of Deputies more favorable to him, and muzzled the press. Opposition to the absolute monarchy was immediately expressed in the streets of Paris as suppressed deputies, gagged journalists, students from the University and many working men of Paris poured into the streets and erected barricades during the "three glorious days" (French Les Trois Glorieuses) of 2629 July 1830. Gurard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 291. 

Charles X was deposed and replaced by King Louis-Philippe in what is known as the July Revolution. The July Revolution is traditionally regarded as a rising of the bourgeoisie against the absolute monarchy of the Bourbons. Participants in the July Revolution included Marie Joseph Paul Ives Roch Gilbert du Motier, marquis de Lafayette. Working behind the scenes on behalf of the bourgeois propertied interests was Louis Adolphe Thiers. 

Thiers was perfectly willing to see changes made in the government so long as property was not harmed. Thiers wanted the "middle class accommodated" with the vote, realizing that the petty bourgeoisie (owners of small business ventures) supported property interests, in spite of their being ruined by the rise of the larger bourgeoisie. Lafayette believed the Orleanist constitutional monarchy was the safest course for the propertied interests and so Lafayette and Thiers became supporters of the Orleanist "Citizen King"--Louis-Philippe. Consequently, Louis-Philippe became "king by the grace of the barricades." 

Louis-Philippe's "July Monarchy" (18301848) was dominated by the haute bourgeoisie (high bourgeoisie) of bankers, financiers, industrialists and merchants.

During the reign of the July Monarchy, the Romantic Era was starting to bloom. Driven by the Romantic Era, an atmosphere of protest and revolt was all around in France. On 22 November 1831 in Lyon (the second largest city in France) the silk workers revolted and took over the town hall in protest of recent salary reductions and working conditions. This was one of the first instances of a workers revolt in the entire world. Gurard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 294. 

The revolt was vigorously put down by Casimir Perier. The Right was also unhappy with the July Monarchy. On 28 October 1836, Prince Louis-Napoleon, son of Napoleon's brother, Louis, King of Holland attempted to overthrow the July Monarchy in a coup d'tat. It failed, but in August 1840, Prince Louis Napoleon tried another coup at Boulogne with hired soldiers. It failed as well. Philip Guedalla, The Second Empire (1923) pp. 18-90, 120-26. 

Because of the constant threats to the throne, the July Monarchy began to rule with a stronger and stronger hand. Soon political meetings were outlawed. However, "banquets" were still legal and all through 1847, there was a nation-wide campaign of democracy and/or republican banquets. The climaxing banquet was scheduled for 22 February 1848 in Paris but the government banned it. In response citizens of all classes poured out onto the streets of Paris in a revolt against the July Monarchy. Demands were made for abdication of "Citizen King" Louis-Philippe and for establishment of a representative democracy in France. 

Representative classes in this revolt included the full range of French society from the industrial bourgeoisie (who had been excluded from the "finance aristocracy" that formed the major part of the bourgeoisie that supported the July Monarchy), the petty bourgeoisie and the workers. Louis-Philippe abdicated, and the French Second Republic was proclaimed. A Constituent Assembly was elected which was seated in Paris. Alphonse Marie Louis de Lamartine, who had been a leader of the moderate republicans in France during the 1840s became the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Provisional Government that was established by this Assembly. In reality Lamartine was the virtual head of government in 1848. Elizabeth Wormeley Latimer, France in the nineteenth century, 1830-1890 (1892) ch 7 pp 125-49 online 

===Second Republic (184852)===
Napoleon III, Emperor of the French.
Frustration among the laboring classes arose when the Constituent Assembly did not address the concerns of the workers. Strikes and worker demonstrations became more common as the workers gave vent to these frustrations. These demonstrations reached a climax when on 15 May 1848, workers from the secret societies broke out in armed uprising against the anti-labor and anti-democratic policies being pursued by the Constituent Assembly and the Provisional Government. Fearful of a total breakdown of law and order, the Provisional Government invited General Louis Eugene Cavaignac back from Algeria, in June 1848, to put down the worker's armed revolt. From June 1848 until December 1848 General Cavaignac became head of the executive of the Provisional Government. William Fortescue, France and 1848: the end of monarchy (2005) p. 130 

Louis Napoleon Bonaparte was elected president on 10 December 1848 by a landslide. His support came from a wide section of the French public. Various classes of French society voted for Louis Napoleon for very different and often contradictory reasons. Fortescue, France and 1848: the end of monarchy (2005) p. 135 Louis Napoleon, himself encouraged this contradiction by "being all things to all people." One of his major promises to the peasantry and other groups was that there would be no new taxes. T. A. B. Corley, Democratic Despot: A Life of Napoleon III (1961) pp. 74-77 

The new National Constituent Assembly was heavily composed of royalist sympathizers of both the Legitimist (Bourbon) wing and the Orleanist (Citizen King Louis Philippe) wing. Because of the ambiguity surrounding Louis Napoleon's political positions, his agenda as president was very much in doubt. For prime minister, he selected Odilon Barrot, an unobjectionable middle-road parliamentarian, who had led the "loyal opposition" under Louis Philippe. Other appointees represented various royalist factions. 

The Pope had been forced out of Rome as part of the Revolutions of 1848, and Louis Napoleon sent a 14,000 man expeditionary force of troops to the Papal State under General Nicolas Charles Victor Oudinot to restore him. In late April 1849, it was defeated and pushed back from Rome by Giuseppi Garibaldi's volunteer corps, then recovered and recaptured Rome. Gurard, France: A Modern History, p. 305. 

In June 1849, demonstrations against the government broke out and were suppressed. Leaders were arrested, including prominent politicians. The government banned several democratic and socialist newspapers in France; the editors were arrested. Karl Marx was at risk so he moved to London in August. 

The government sought ways to balance its budget and reduce its debts. Toward this end, Hippolyte Passy was appointed Finance Minister. When the Legislative Assembly met at the beginning of October 1849, Passy proposed an income tax to help balance the finances of France. The bourgeoisie, who would pay most of the tax, protested. The furor over the income tax caused the resignation of Barrot as prime minister, but a new wine tax also caused protests. 

The 1850 elections resulted in a conservative body. It passed the Falloux Laws, putting education into the hands of the Catholic clergy. It opened an era of cooperation between Church and state that lasted until the Jules Ferry laws reversed course in 1879. The Falloux Laws provided universal primary schooling in France and expanded opportunities for secondary schooling. In practice, the curricula were similar in Catholic and state schools. Catholic schools were especially useful in schooling for girls, which had long been neglected. Patrick J. Harrigan, "Church, State, and Education in France From the Falloux to the Ferry Laws: A Reassessment," Canadian Journal of History, (2001) 36#1 pp 51-83 Although a new electoral law was passed that respected the principle of universal (male) suffrage, the stricter residential requirement of the new law actually had the effect of disenfranchising 3,000,000 of 10,000,000 voters. Albert Gurard, France: A Modern History, pp. 305-306. 

===Second Empire, 1852-1871===
As 1851 opened, Louis Napoleon was not allowed by the Constitution of 1848 to seek re-election as President of France. Philip Guedalla, The Second Empire p. 203. Instead he proclaimed himself President for Life following a coup in December that was confirmed and accepted in a dubious referendum.

Napoleon III of France took the imperial title in 1852 and held it until his downfall in 1870. The era saw great industrialization, urbanization (including the massive rebuilding of Paris by Baron Haussmann) and economic growth.

Despite his promises in 1852 of a peaceful reign, the Emperor could not resist the temptations of glory in foreign affairs. He was visionary, mysterious and secretive; he had a poor staff, and kept running afoul of his domestic supporters. In the end he was incompetent as a diplomat. Theodore Zeldin, France, 1848-1945: Ambition, love and politics (1973) pp 558-60 Napoleon did have some successes: he strengthened French control over Algeria, established bases in Africa, began the takeover of Indochina, and opened trade with China. He facilitated a French company building the Suez Canal, which Britain could not stop. In Europe, however, Napoleon failed again and again. The Crimean war of 1854-1856 produced no gains. Napoleon had long been an admirer of Italy and wanted to see it unified, although that might create a rival power. He plotted with Cavour of the Italian kingdom of Piedmont to expel Austria and set up an Italian confederation of four new states headed by the Pope. Events in 1859 ran out of his control. Austria was quickly defeated, but instead of four new states a popular uprising united all of Italy under Piedmont. The Pope held onto Rome only because Napoleon sent troops to protect him. His reward was the County of Nice (which included the city of Nice and the rugged Alpine territory to its north and east) and the Duchy of Savoy. He angered Catholics when the Pope lost most of his domains. Napoleon then reversed himself and angered both the anticlerical liberals at home and his erstwhile Italian allies when he protected the Pope in Rome.

The British grew annoyed at Napoleon's humanitarian intervention in Syria in 1860-61. Napoleon lowered the tariffs, which helped in the long run but in the short run angered owners of large estates and the textile and iron industrialists, while leading worried workers to organize. Matters grew worse in the 1860s as Napoleon nearly blundered into war with the United States in 1862, while his takeover of Mexico in 1861-1867 was a total disaster. The puppet emperor he put on the Mexican throne was overthrown and executed. Finally in the end he went to war with the Germans in 1870 when it was too late to stop German unification. Napoleon had alienated everyone; after failing to obtain an alliance with Austria and Italy, France had no allies and was bitterly divided at home. It was disastrously defeated on the battlefield, losing Alsace and Lorraine. A.J.P. Taylor is blunt: "he ruined France as a great power." John B. Wolf, France: 1814-1919 (2nd ed. 1963) 302-348 A.J.P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe: 1848-1918 (1954) pp 171-227 A.J.P. Taylor, Europe: Grandeur and Decline 1967) p 64 for quote. 

====Foreign wars====
In 1854, The Second Empire joined the Crimean War, which saw France and Britain opposed to the Russian Empire, which was decisively defeated at Sevastopol in 1854-1855 and at Inkerman in 1854. In 1856 France joined the Second Opium War on the British side against China; a missionary's murder was used as a pretext to take interests in southwest Asia in the Treaty of Tientsin.

When France was negotiating with the Netherlands about purchasing Luxembourg in 1867, the Prussian Kingdom threatened the French government with war. This "Luxembourg Crisis" came as a shock to French diplomats as there previously was an agreement between the Prussian and French governments about Luxembourg. Napoleon III suffered stronger and stronger criticism from Republicans like Jules Favre, and his position seemed more fragile with the passage of time.

France was looking for more interests in Asia. The country interfered in Korea in 1866 taking, once again, missionaries' murders as a pretext. The French finally withdrew from the war with little gain but war's booty. The next year a French expedition to Japan was formed to help the Tokugawa shogunate to modernize its army. However, Tokugawa was defeated during the Boshin War at the Battle of Toba-Fushimi by large Imperial armies.

==== Franco-Prussian War (1870-71)====
Areas of France occupied after the Franco-Prussian War until war reparations were paid.

Rising tensions in 1869 about the possible candidacy of Prince Leopold von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen to the throne of Spain caused a rise in the scale of animosity between France and Germany. H. W. Koch, A History of Prussia (Dorset Press, New York, 1978) pp. 265266. Prince Leopold was a part of the Prussian royal family. He had been asked by the Spanish Cortes to accept the vacant throne of Spain. 

Such an event was more than France could possibly accept. Relations between France and Germany deteriorated, and finally the Franco-Prussian War (18701871) broke out. German nationalism united the German states, with the exception of Austria, against Napoleon III. The French Empire was defeated decisively at Metz and Sedan. Emperor Louis Napoleon III surrendered himself and 100,000 French troops to the German troops at Sedan on 12 September 1870. Gurard, p. 324. 

Two days later, on 4 September 1870, Leon Gambetta proclaimed a new republic in France. William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic (Simon & Schuster: New York, 1969) p. 36. Later, when Paris was encircled by German troops, Gambetta fled Paris by means of a hot air balloon and he became the virtual dictator of the war effort which was carried on from the rural provinces. Gurard, p. 325. Metz remained under siege until 27 October 1870, when 173,000 French troops there finally surrendered. Surrounded, Paris was forced to surrender on 28 January 1871. The Treaty of Frankfurt allowed the newly formed German Empire to annex the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine. Gurard, p. 326. 

===Modernisation and railways (1870 to 1914)===

The seemingly timeless world of the French peasantry swiftly changed from 1870 to 1914. French peasants had been poor and locked into old traditions until railroads, republican schools, and universal military conscription modernized rural France. The centralized government in Paris had the goal of creating a unified nation-state, so it required all students be taught standardized French. In the process, a new national identity was forged. Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 18901914 (1976). 

Railways became a national medium for the modernization of traditionalistic regions, and a leading advocate of this approach was the poet-politician Alphonse de Lamartine. In 1857 an army colonel hoped that railways might improve the lot of "populations two or three centuries behind their fellows" and eliminate "the savage instincts born of isolation and misery." Consequently, France built a centralized system that radiated from Paris (plus in the south some lines that cut east to west). This design was intended to achieve political and cultural goals rather than maximize efficiency. After some consolidation, six companies controlled monopolies of their regions, subject to close control by the government in terms of fares, finances, and even minute technical details. The central government department of Ponts et Chausses (bridges and roads) brought in British engineers, handled much of the construction work, provided engineering expertise and planning, land acquisition, and construction of permanent infrastructure such as the track bed, bridges and tunnels. It also subsidized militarily necessary lines along the German border. Private operating companies provided management, hired labor, laid the tracks, and built and operated stations. They purchased and maintained the rolling stock6,000 locomotives were in operation in 1880, which averaged 51,600 passengers a year or 21,200 tons of freight. Much of the equipment was imported from Britain and therefore did not stimulate machinery makers. Although starting the whole system at once was politically expedient, it delayed completion, and forced even more reliance on temporary experts brought in from Britain. Financing was also a problem. The solution was a narrow base of funding through the Rothschilds and the closed circles of the Bourse in Paris, so France did not develop the same kind of national stock exchange that flourished in London and New York. The system did help modernize the parts of rural France it reached, but it did not help create local industrial centers. Critics such as mile Zola complained that it never overcame the corruption of the political system, but rather contributed to it. The railways probably helped the industrial revolution in France by facilitating a national market for raw materials, wines, cheeses, and imported manufactured products. Yet the goals set by the French for their railway system were moralistic, political, and military rather than economic. As a result, the freight trains were shorter and less heavily loaded than those in such rapidly industrializing nations such as Britain, Belgium or Germany. Other infrastructure needs in rural France, such as better roads and canals, were neglected because of the expense of the railways, so it seems likely that there were net negative effects in areas not served by the trains. Patrick OBrien, Railways and the Economic Development of Western Europe, 18301914 (1983) 

===The Third Republic and the Belle Epoque: 18711914===

====Third Republic and the Paris Commune====
Following the defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War (18701871), German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck proposed harsh terms for peace  including the German occupation of the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine. A new French National Assembly was elected to consider the German terms for peace. Elected on 8 February 1871, this new National Assembly was composed of 650 deputies. 

Sitting in Bourdeaux, the French National Assembly established the Third Republic. However, 400 members of the new Assembly were monarchists. William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic Simon and Schuster: New York, 1969) p. 35. (Leon Gambetta was one of the "non-monarchist" Republicans that were elected to the new National Assembly from Paris. Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 326. ) On 16 February 1871 Adolphe Thiers was elected to be the chief executive of the new Republic. Because of the revolutionary unrest in Paris, the centre of the Thiers government was located at Versailles.

A barricade in the Paris Commune, 18 March 1871.
In late 1870 to early 1871, the workers of Paris rose up in premature and unsuccessful small-scale uprisings. The National Guard within Paris had become increasingly restive and defiant of the police, the army chief of staff, and even their own National Guard commanders. Thiers immediately recognized a revolutionary situation and, on 18 March 1871, sent regular army units to take control of artillery that belonged to the National Guard of Paris. Some soldiers of the regular army units fraternized with the rebels and the revolt escalated. Eugene Schulkind, ed. The Paris Commune 1871 pp. 2223. 

The barricades went up just as in 1830 and 1848. The Paris Commune was born. Once again the Hotel de Ville, or Town Hall, became the center of attention for the people in revolt; this time the Hotel de Ville became the seat of the revolutionary government. Other cities in France followed the example of the Paris Commune, as in Lyon, Marseille, and Toulouse. All of the Communes outside Paris were promptly crushed by the Thiers government. 

An election on 26 March 1871 in Paris produced a government based on the working class. Louis Auguste Blanqui was in prison but a majority of delegates were his followers, called "Blanquists." The minority comprised anarchists and followers of Pierre Joseph Proudhon (18091855); as anarchists, the "Proudhonists" were supporters of limited or no government and wanted the revolution to follow an ad hoc course with little or no planning. Analysis of arrests records indicate the typical communard was opposed to the military, the clerics, the rural aristocrats. He saw the bourgeoisie as the enemy.

After two months the French army moved in to retake Paris, with pitched battles fought in working-class neighbourhoods. Hundreds were executed in front of the Communards' Wall, while thousands of others were marched to Versailles for trials. The number killed during La Semaine Sanglante ("The Bloody Week" of 2128 May 1871) was perhaps 30,000, with as many as 50,000 later executed or imprisoned; 7,000 were exiled to New Caledonia; thousands more escaped to exile. The government won approval for its actions in a national referendum with 321,000 in favor and only 54,000 opposed. Patrick H. Hutton et al., eds. Historical Dictionary of the Third French Republic, 1870-1940 (Greenwood, 1986) p. 215. 

====Political battles====
The Republican government next had to confront counterrevolutionaries who rejected the legacy of the 1789 Revolution. Both the Legitimists (embodied in the person of Henri, Count of Chambord, grandson of Charles X) and the Orleanist royalists rejected republicanism, which they saw as an extension of modernity and atheism, breaking with France's traditions. This conflict became increasingly sharp in 1873, when Thiers himself was censured by the National Assembly as not being "sufficiently conservative" and resigned to make way for Marshal Patrice MacMahon as the new president. Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959), pp. 328329 Amidst the rumors of right-wing intrigue and/or coups by the Bonapartists or Bourbons in 1874, the National Assembly set about drawing up a new constitution that would be acceptable to all parties.

The new constitution provided for universal male suffrage and called for a bi-cameral legislature, consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. The initial republic was in effect led by pro-royalists, but republicans (the "Radicals") and Bonapartists scrambled for power. The first election under this new constitution  held in early 1876  resulted in a republican victory, with 363 republicans elected as opposed to 180 monarchists. However, 75 of the monarchists elected to the new Chamber of Deputies were Bonapartists. William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic p. 39. 

The "Bonapartist threat" of a coup d'tat was an ever-present danger in these early days of the Republic. Under the constitution, President MacMahon was required to pick a "premier" to actually lead the day-to-day affairs of the government. The most natural leader to pick following this republican victory at the polls would have been Leon Gambetta. However, the old Marshal was dead set against Gambetta and chose, instead, moderate Armand Dufaure. 

Dufaure tried to form a government but he was quickly overthrown. Next, Marshall MacMahon chose conservative Jules Simon. He was too conservative for the Chamber of Deputies and Simon was forced to resign on 16 May 1877, setting the stage for the "Crisis of the Sixteenth of May." 

The 16 May 1877 crisis eventually led to the resignation of royalist Marshal MacMahon in January 1879. During his life Henri, comte de Chambord, as the grandson of Charles X, had refused to abandon the fleur-de-lys and the white flag. Thus, Henri's own short-sightedness in this regard jeopardized the alliance between Legitimists (Bourbons) and Orleanists. Therefore, the monarchist cause remained divided and did not present as strong a threat to the Third Republic as might have been the case had they been unified. Because of this division, many remaining Orleanists rallied themselves to the Republic, behind Adolphe . The vast majority of the Legitimists abandoned the political arena or became marginalised. Still they remained a potent threat of trouble for the young Third Republic; Count Henri's death on 24 August 1883 removed a large threat to the Third Republic. Marshal MacMahon's successor as President of the Republic on 30 January 1879 was Jules Grevy. In January 1886, Georges Boulanger became Minister of War. Georges Clemanceau was instrumental in obtaining this appointment for Boulanger. This was the start of the Boulanger era and another time of threats. 

Following the death of Henri Count of Chabord, the Legitimist (Bourbon) party was limited within the political arena within France. Some of them founded Action Franaise in 1898, during the Dreyfus Affair; it became an influential movement throughout the 1930s, in particular among the conservative Catholic intellectuals.

The period from 1879 to 1899 saw power in the hands of moderate republicans and former "radicals" (around Lon Gambetta); these were called the "Opportunists".

====Foreign policy====
French foreign policy was based on a fear of Germanywhose larger size and fast-growing economy could not be matchedcombined with a revanchism that demanded the return of Alsace and Lorraine. At the same time, in the midst of the Scramble for Africa, French and British interest in Africa came into conflict. The most dangerous episode was the Fashoda Incident of 1898 when French troops tried to claim an area in the Southern Sudan, and a British force purporting to be acting in the interests of the Khedive of Egypt arrived. Under heavy pressure the French withdrew securing Anglo-Egyptian control over the area. The status quo was recognised by an agreement between the two states acknowledging British control over Egypt, while France became the dominant power in Morocco, but France suffered a humiliating defeat overall. D.W. Brogan, France under the Republic: The Development of Modern France (1870-1930) (1940) pp 321-26 

The Suez Canal, initially built by the French, became a joint British-French project in 1875, as both saw it as vital to maintaining their influence and empires in Asia. In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France. France's leading expansionist Jules Ferry was out of office, and the government allowed Britain to take effective control of Egypt. A.J.P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918 (1954) pp 286-92 

France had colonies in Asia and looked for alliances and found in Japan a possible ally. During his visit to France, Iwakura Tomomi asked for French assistance in reforming Japan. French military missions were sent to Japan in 18721880, in 18841889 and the last one much later in 19181919 to help modernize the Japanese army. Conflicts between the Chinese Emperor and the French Republic over Indochina climaxed during the Sino-French War (18841885). Admiral Courbet destroyed the Chinese fleet anchored at Foochow. The treaty ending the war, put France in a protectorate over northern and central Vietnam, which it divided into Tonkin and Annam. Frederic Wakeman, Jr., The Fall of Imperial China (Free Press: New York, 1975) pp. 189191. 

In an effort to isolate Germany, France went to great pains to woo Russia and Great Britain, first by means of the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894, then the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Great Britain, and finally the Anglo-Russian Entente in 1907, which became the Triple Entente. This alliance with Britain and Russia against Germany and Austria eventually led Russia and Britain to enter World War I as France's Allies. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918 (1954) pp 345, 403-26 

====Dreyfus Affair====
Distrust of Germany, faith in the army, and native French anti-semitism combined to make the Dreyfus Affair (the unjust trial and condemnation of a Jewish military officer for treason in 1894) a political scandal of the utmost gravity. For a decade, the nation was divided between "dreyfusards" and "anti-dreyfusards", and far-right Catholic agitators inflamed the situation even when proofs of Dreyfus's innocence came to light. The writer mile Zola published an impassioned editorial on the injustice, and was himself condemned by the government for libel. Dreyfus was finally pardoned in 1906. The upshot was a weakening of the conservative element in politics. Moderates were deeply divided over the Dreyfus Affair, and this allowed the Radicals to hold power from 1899 until World War I. During this period, crises like the threatened "Boulangist" coup d'tat (1889) showed the fragility of the republic. Piers Paul Read, The Dreyfus Affair: The Scandal That Tore France in Two (2012) 

The Eiffel Tower under construction in July 1888.

====Religion 1870-1940====
Throughout the lifetime of the Third Republic there were battles over the status of the Catholic Church. The French clergy and bishops were closely associated with the Monarchists and many of its hierarchy were from noble families. Republicans were based in the anticlerical middle class who saw the Church's alliance with the monarchists as a political threat to republicanism, and a threat to the modern spirit of progress. The Republicans detested the church for its political and class affiliations; for them, the church represented outmoded traditions, superstition and monarchism. Philippe Rigoulot, "Protestants and the French nation under the Third Republic: Between recognition and assimilation," National Identities, March 2009, Vol. 11 Issue 1, pp 4557 

The Republicans were strengthened by Protestant and Jewish support. Numerous laws were passed to weaken the Catholic Church. In 1879, priests were excluded from the administrative committees of hospitals and of boards of charity. In 1880, new measures were directed against the religious congregations. From 1880 to 1890 came the substitution of lay women for nuns in many hospitals. Napoleon's 1801 Concordat continued in operation but in 1881, the government cut off salaries to priests it disliked. 

The 1882 school laws of Republican Jules Ferry set up a national system of public schools that taught strict puritanincal morality but no religion. Barnett B. Singer, "Minoritarian Religion and the Creation of a Secular School System in France," Third Republic (1976) #2 pp 228-259 For a while privately funded Catholic schools were tolerated. Civil marriage became compulsory, divorce was introduced and chaplains were removed from the army. Patrick J. Harrigan, "Church, State, and Education in France From the Falloux to the Ferry Laws: A Reassessment," Canadian Journal of History, April 2001, 36#1 pp 5183 

When Leo XIII became pope in 1878 he tried to calm Church-State relations. In 1884 he told French bishops not to act in a hostile manner to the State. In 1892 he issued an encyclical advising French Catholics to rally to the Republic and defend the Church by participating in Republican politics. This attempt at improving the relationship failed. Frank Tallett and Nicholas Atkin, Religion, society, and politics in France since 1789 (1991) p. 152 

Deep-rooted suspicions remained on both sides and were inflamed by the Dreyfus Affair. Catholics were for the most part anti-dreyfusard. The Assumptionists published anti-Semitic and anti-republican articles in their journal La Croix. This infuriated Republican politicians, who were eager to take revenge. Often they worked in alliance with Masonic lodges. The Waldeck-Rousseau Ministry (18991902) and the Combes Ministry (190205) fought with the Vatican over the appointment of bishops. 

Chaplains were removed from naval and military hospitals (190304), and soldiers were ordered not to frequent Catholic clubs (1904). Combes as Prime Minister in 1902, was determined to thoroughly defeat Catholicism. He closed down all parochial schools in France. Then he had parliament reject authorisation of all religious orders. This meant that all fifty four orders were dissolved and about 20,000 members immediately left France, many for Spain. 

In 1905 the 1801 Concordat was abrogated; Church and State were separated. All Church property was confiscated. Public worship was given over to associations of Catholic laymen who controlled access to churches. In practise, Masses and rituals continued. The Church was badly hurt and lost half its priests. In the long run, however, it gained autonomyfor the State no longer had a voice in choosing bishops and Gallicanism was dead. Robert Gildea, Children of the Revolution: The French, 17991914 (2010) ch 12 

====The belle poque====
The end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century was the belle poque because of peace, prosperity and the cultural innovations of Monet, Bernhardt, and Debussy, and popular amusements  cabaret, can-can, the cinema, Charles Rearick, Pleasures of the Belle Epoque: Entertainment and Festivity in Turn-of-the-Century France (1988) new art forms such as Impressionism and Art Nouveau. Mary McAuliffe, Dawn of the Belle Epoque: The Paris of Monet, Zola, Bernhardt, Eiffel, Debussy, Clemenceau, and Their Friends (2011) 

In 1889 the Exposition Universelle showed off newly modernised Paris to the world, which could look over it all from atop the new Eiffel Tower. Meant to last only a few decades, the tower was never removed and became France's most iconic landmark. 

France was nevertheless a nation divided internally on notions of ideology, religion, class, regionalisms, and money. On the international front, France came repeatedly to the brink of war with the other imperial powers, such as the 1898 Fashoda Incident with Great Britain over East Africa.

==Since 1914==

===World War I===

A French bayonet charge in World War I
The 114th infantry in Paris, 14 July 1917.
Preoccupied with internal problems, France paid little attention to foreign policy in the 1911-14 period, although it did extend military service to three years from two over strong Socialist objections in 1913. The rapidly escalating Balkan crisis of 1914 caught France unawares, and it played only a small role in the coming of World War I. The Serbian crisis triggered a complex set of formal and secret military alliances between European states, causing most of the continent, including France, to be drawn into war within a few short weeks.

Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia in late July, triggering Russian mobilization. On 1 August both Germany and France ordered mobilization. Germany was much better prepared militarily than any of the other countries involved, including France.

Later on that day, the German Empire, as an ally of Austria, declared war on Russia. France was allied with Russia and so was ready to commit to war against the German Empire. On 3 August Germany declared war on France, going through Belgium. Britain entered the war on 4 August, and started sending in troops on 7 August.

Germany's plan was to quickly defeat the French. They captured Brussels by 20 August and soon had captured a large portion of northern France. The original plan was to continue southwest and attack Paris from the west. By early September they were within 40 miles of Paris, and the French government had relocated to Bordeaux. The Allies finally stopped the advance northeast of Paris at the Marne River (512 September 1914). 

The war now became a stalemate  the famous "Western Front" was fought largely in France and was characterized by very little movement despite extremely large and violent battles, often with new and more destructive military technology. On the Western Front the small improvised trenches of the first few months rapidly grew deeper and more complex, gradually becoming vast areas of interlocking defensive works. The land war quickly became dominated by the muddy, bloody stalemate of Trench warfare, a form of war in which both opposing armies had static lines of defense.

The war of movement quickly turned into a war of position. Neither side advanced much, but both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties. German and Allied armies produced essentially a matched pair of trench lines from the Swiss border in the south to the North Sea coast of Belgium.

The space between the opposing trenches was referred to as "no man's land" (for its lethal uncrossability) and varied in width depending on the battlefield; on the Western Front it was typically between 100 and 300 yards (90275 m), though sometimes much less. The common infantry soldier had four weapons to use in the trenches: the rifle, bayonet, shotgun, and hand grenade, but the only defense against machine guns and artillery was to stay low in the trenches. Trench warfare prevailed on the Western Front from September 1914 until March 1918. Famous battles in France include Battle of Verdun (spanning 10 months from 21 February to 18 December 1916), Battle of the Somme (1 July to 18 November 1916), and five separate conflicts called the Battle of Ypres (from 1914 to 1918).

Britain introduced the first tanks to the war, while Renault enhanced the concept by adding a turret. The use in large quantity of these light tanks by Jean-Baptiste Estienne can be considered a decisive evolution in World War I's strategies.

When Russia exited the war in 1917 due to revolution, the Central Powers controlled all of the Balkans and could now shift military efforts to the Western Front. The U.S. had entered the war also in 1917, so the Central Powers hoped victory could be achieved mostly prior to America's delivery of full military support. In March 1918 Germany launched the last major offensive on the Western Front. By May Germany had reached the Marne again, as in September 1914, and was again close to Paris. However, in the Second Battle of the Marne (15 July to 6 August 1918), the Allies were able to defend and then shift to offense due in part to German fatigue and the arrival of more Americans.

The Germans, out of reinforcements, were overwhelmed day after day and the high command saw it was hopeless. Austria and Turkey collapsed, and the Kaiser's government fell. Germany signed a surrender  "The Armistice"  that ended the fighting effective 11 November 1918, "the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month."

The Council of Four (from left to right): David Lloyd George, Vittorio Emanuele Orlando, Georges Clemenceau, and Woodrow Wilson in Versailles
Peace terms were imposed by the Big Four, meeting in Paris in 1919: David Lloyd George of Britain, Vittorio Orlando of Italy, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Woodrow Wilson of the United States. Clemenceau demanded the harshest terms and won most of them in the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. Germany was forced to admit its guilt for starting the war, and was permanently weakened militarily. Germany had to pay huge sums in war reparations to the Allies (who in turn had large loans from the U.S. to pay off). 

France regained Alsace-Lorraine and occupied the German industrial Saar Basin, a coal and steel region. The German African colonies were put under League of Nations mandates, and were administered by France and other victors. From the remains of the Ottoman Empire, France acquired the Mandate of Syria and the Mandate of Lebanon. French Marshal Ferdinand Foch wanted a peace that would never allow Germany to be a threat to France again, but after the Treaty of Versailles was signed he said, This is not a peace. It is an armistice for 20 years. 

The war was fought in large part on French soil, with 1.4 million French dead including civilians, and four times as many military casualties.

===Interwar years===
French cavalry entering Essen during the Occupation of the Ruhr.
France was part of the Allied force that occupied the Rhineland following the Armistice. Foch supported Poland in the Greater Poland Uprising and in the Polish-Soviet War and France also joined Spain during the Rif War. From 1925 until his death in 1932, Aristide Briand, as prime minister during five short intervals, directed French foreign policy, using his diplomatic skills and sense of timing to forge friendly relations with Weimar Germany as the basis of a genuine peace within the framework of the League of Nations. He realized France could neither contain the much larger Germany by itself nor secure effective support from Britain or the League. Eugen Weber, The Hollow Years: France in the 1930s (1996) p 125 

As a response to the failure of the Weimar Republic to pay reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr as a means of ensuring repayments from Germany.

In the 1920s, France established an elaborate system of border defences called the Maginot Line, designed to fight off any German attack. (Unfortunately, the Maginot Line did not extend into Belgium, where Germany attacked in 1940.) Military alliances were signed with weak powers in 19201921, called the "Little Entente".

The French economy fell into the doldrums during the worldwide Great Depression after 1929. Leon Blum, leading the Popular Front, brought together Socialists and Communists to become Prime Minister from 1936 to 1937; he was the first Jew to lead France. During the Spanish Civil War (19361939) he did not support the Spanish Republicans because of the French internal political context of complex alliances and risk of war with Germany and Italy.

Appeasement of Germany, in cooperation with Britain, was the policy after 1936, as France sought peace even in the face of Hitler's violations of the Versailles treaty and his escalating demands. douard Daladier refused to go to war against Germany and Italy without British support as Neville Chamberlain wanted to save peace at Munich in 1938. 

===World War II===

German soldiers on parade marching past the Arc de Triomphe

Germany's Invasion of Poland in 1939 finally caused France and Britain to declare war against Germany. But the Allies did not launch massive assaults and instead kept a defensive stance: this was called the Phoney War in Britain or Drle de guerre  the funny sort of war  in France. It did not prevent the German army from conquering Poland in a matter of weeks with its innovative Blitzkrieg tactics, also helped by the Soviet Union's attack on Poland.

When Germany had its hands free for an attack in the west, the Battle of France began in May 1940, and the same Blitzkrieg tactics proved just as devastating there. The Wehrmacht bypassed the Maginot Line by marching through the Ardennes forest. A second German force was sent into Belgium and the Netherlands to act as a diversion to this main thrust. In six weeks of savage fighting the French lost 90,000 men. Joel Blatt (ed), The French Defeat of 1940 (Oxford, 1998) 

Many civilians sought refuge by taking to the roads of France: some 2 million refugees from Belgium and Holland were joined by between 8 and 10 million French civilians, representing a quarter of the French population, all heading south and west. This movement may well have been the largest single movement of civilians in history prior to 1947.

Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June 1940, and the French leaders surrendered on 24 June 1940 after the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from Dunkirk. Nazi Germany occupied three-fifths of France's territory, leaving the rest in the southeast to the new Vichy government.

Vichy France was established on 10 July 1940 to govern the unoccupied part of France and its colonies. The Vichy Regime  led by Philippe Ptain, the aging war hero of the First World War  was originally intended to be a temporary, care-taker regime, to supervise French administration before the soon-expected defeat of Britain. Instead, it lasted four years. It was unique among the various collaborating regimes of wartime Europe in that it was established constitutionally, through the French parliament. Robert O. Paxton, Vichy France, Old Guard and New Order, New York, 1972 

The Vichy regime sought to collaborate with Germany, keeping peace in France to avoid further occupation although at the expense of personal freedom and individual safety. For example, 76,000 Jews would be deported during the German occupation, often with the help of the Vichy French authorities, and murdered in the Nazis' extermination camps. Robert O. Paxton, Vichy France, Old Guard and New Order (1972) There were also Frenchmen who joined the German SS and served in the Charlemagne Division. Yet despite extensive collaboration, the Vichy regime engaged a programme of arresting German intelligence agents in the unoccupied zone, with the purpose of preserving Vichy's sovereignty; Simon Kitson, Vichy et la Chasse aux Espions Nazis, Paris, Autrement, 2005; Simon Kitson, The Hunt for Nazi Spies (2007) around 2,000 were arrested and some were subsequently executed.

General Charles de Gaulle declared himself on Radio Londres to be the head of a rival government in exile, and gathered the Free French Forces around him, finding support in some French colonies and recognition from Britain and the USA. After the Attack on Mers-el-Kbir in 1940, where the British fleet destroyed a large part of the French navy, still under command of Vichy France, that killed about 1,100 sailors, there was nationwide indignation and a feeling of distrust in the French forces, leading to the events of the Battle of Dakar. Eventually, several important French ships such as the Richelieu and the Surcouf joined the Free French Forces. On the Eastern Front the USSR was lacking pilots and several French pilots joined the Soviet Union and fought the Luftwaffe in the Normandie-Niemen squadron.

The Allied invasion of Normandy, D-Day, 1944.
Within France proper, very few people organized themselves against the German Occupation in the summer of 1940. However, their numbers grew as the Vichy regime resorted to more strident policies in order to fulfill the enormous demands of the Nazis and the eventual decline of Nazi Germany became more obvious. Isolated opposers eventually formed a real movement: the Resistance. H. R. Kedward, In Search of the Maquis (Oxford, 1993) The most famous figure of the French resistance was Jean Moulin, sent in France by de Gaulle in order to link all resistance movements; he was captured and tortured by Klaus Barbie (the "butcher of Lyon"). Increasing repression culminated in the complete destruction and extermination of the village of Oradour-sur-Glane, at the height of the Battle of Normandy (June 1944).

In November 1942 Vichy France was finally occupied by German forces, because the war in North Africa was coming to an end; the Germans foresaw a threat in southern Europe by the allied forces. Vichy continued in existence but it was closely supervised by the Germans.

On 6 June 1944 the Allies landed in Normandy; on 15 August Allied forces landing in Provence included 260,000 men of the French First Army. All that summer, Allied forces fought their way through France. General Leclerc liberated Paris between 19 and 25 August 1944. The Alsace capital of Strasbourg was liberated by Leclerc's French troops on 23 November 1944. The French army recruited French Forces of the Interior (de Gaulle's formal name for resistance fighters) to continue the war until the final defeat of Germany; this army numbered 300,000 men by September 1944 and 370,000 by Spring 1945.

The Vichy regime flew to Germany when Paris was freed, and the interim Provisional Government of the French Republic was quickly put into place by the Free French. The gouvernement provisoire de la Rpublique franaise, or GPRF, operated under a tripartisme alliance of communists, socialists, and democratic republicans. The GPRF governed France only from 1944 to 1946, when it was replaced by the French Fourth Republic. However, it had a lasting impact on late-war and post-war France. Key legislative actions included declaration of the Vichy laws and acts as unconstitutional and therefore illegal, re-establishment of republican legality throughout metropolitan France, election of replacement local governments that had been suppressed by the Vichy regime, voting for women, and implementation of labour laws.

Germany surrendered effective 8 May 1945 with the German Instrument of Surrender, ending the European theater of World War II. General Leclerc later, along with the battleship Richelieu, represented France at Tokyo during the Japanese surrender, ending World War II completely.

===Cold War===

On 13 October 1946, a new constitution established the Fourth Republic. The Fourth Republic consisted of a parliamentary government controlled by a series of coalitions. During the next 16 years the French Colonial Empire would disintegrate.

Israel was established in 1948, and France was one of the fiercest supporters of the Jewish state, supplying it with extensive weaponry it used during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. The French Republic needed an alliance with Israel to secure the Suez Canal from potential threats in a context of decolonisation.

In Indochina the French government was facing the Viet Minh communist rebels and lost its Indochinese colonies during the First Indochina War in 1954 after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu. Vietnam was divided in two states while Cambodia and Laos were made independent. France left Indochina only to be replaced there by the United States, which would soon be engaged in the long Vietnam War.

==== Suez crisis (1956)====

In 1956 another crisis struck French colonies, this time in Egypt. The Suez Canal, having been built by the French government, belonged to the French Republic and was operated by the Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez. Great Britain had bought the Egyptian share from Isma'il Pasha and was the second largest owner of the canal before the crisis.

The Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal despite French and British opposition; he determined that a European response was unlikely. Great Britain and France attacked Egypt and built an alliance with Israel against Nasser. Israel attacked from the east, Britain from Cyprus and France from Algeria. Egypt, the most powerful Arab state of the time, was defeated in a mere few days.

The Suez crisis caused an outcry of indignation in the entire Arab world and Saudi Arabia set an embargo on oil on France and Britain. The US President Dwight D. Eisenhower forced a ceasefire when he threatened to sell all American Sterling Bond holdings and to crash the British economy. British forces retired from the conflict and Israel, having seized interests in the Sinai region, soon withdrew, leaving France alone in Egypt. Under strong political pressures, the French government ultimately evacuated its troops from Suez.

This was a major political defeat for France and the American threats during the war were received with indignation by the French popular opinion. This led directly, and was used as a point, to the French withdrawal from the integrated military command of NATO in 1966. Another consequence of this was the French loss of geopolitical interests in the region; this meant an alliance with Israel was no longer of any use for French diplomacy.

De Gaulle and Germany's Konrad Adenauer in 1961.
General de Gaulle was elected president in 1958 and made the French Force de Frappe, the nuclear power, a priority of the French Defence. France then adopted the dissuasion du faible au fort doctrine which meant a Soviet attack on France would only bring total destruction to both sides.

The May 1958 seizure of power in Algiers by French army units and French settlers opposed to concessions in the face of Arab nationalist insurrection led to the fall of the French government and a presidential invitation to de Gaulle to form an emergency government to forestall the threat of civil war. The new constitution of the French Fifth Republic, introduced on 5 October 1958, gave greater powers to the presidency. Algeria became independent in 1962.

In May 1968 students revolted, with a variety of demands including educational, labor and governmental reforms, sexual and artistic freedom, and the end of the Vietnam War. The student protest in unruly movements quickly joined with labor, and mass strikes erupted. De Gaulle responded by calling a legislative election for 23 June, in which his UDR party increased their vote, and the protests faded away during the summer.

===Post Cold War===

After the fall of the USSR and the end of the Cold War potential menaces to mainland France appeared considerably reduced. France began reducing its nuclear capacities and conscription was abolished in 2001. In 1990 France, led by Franois Mitterrand, joined the short successful Gulf War against Iraq; the French participation to this war was called the Opration Daguet. Philip Short, A Taste for Intrigue: The Multiple Lives of Franois Mitterrand (2014) 

Terrorism grew worse. In 1994 Air France Flight 8969 was hijacked by Islamic terrorists; they were captured. 

Conservative Jacques Chirac assumed office as president on 17 May 1995, after a campaign focused on the need to combat France's stubbornly high unemployment rate. While France continues to revere its rich history and independence, French leaders increasingly tie the future of France to the continued development of the European Union. In 1992 France ratified the Maastricht Treaty establishing the European Union. In 1999, the Euro was introduced to replace the French franc. Beyond membership in the European Union, France is also involved in many joint European projects such as Airbus, the Galileo positioning system and the Eurocorps.

The French have stood among the strongest supporters of NATO and EU policy in the Balkans to prevent genocide in Yugoslavia. French troops joined the 1999 NATO bombing of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. France has also been actively involved against international terrorism. In 2002 Alliance Base, an international Counterterrorist Intelligence Center, was secretly established in Paris. The same year France contributed to the toppling of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, but it strongly rejected the 2003 invasion of Iraq, even threatening to veto in central coners in the US proposed resolution.

Jacques Chirac was reelected in 2002, mainly because his socialist rival Lionel Jospin was removed from the runoff by the right wing candidate Jean-Marie Le Pen. France was struck by a long period of civil unrest in 2005 after the death of two Moslem teenagers.

Conservative Nicolas Sarkozy was elected and took office on 16 May 2007. The problem of high unemployment has yet to be resolved. In 2008, France was one of the first states to recognise Kosovo as an independent nation.

In 2012, Sarkozy ran for re-election but was defeated by Socialist Franois Hollande who advocated a growth policy in contrast to the austerity policy advocated by Germany's Angela Merkel as a way of tackling the European sovereign debt crisis. In 2014 Hollande stood with Merkel and US President Obama in imposing sanctions on Russia for its actions against Ukraine.

==See also==

*Economic history of France
*Foreign relations of France
*French colonial empire
*French judicial system in post-Napoleonic France
*History of Paris
*History of the European Union
*International relations (18141919)
*Kings of France family tree
*List of French monarchs
*List of Presidents of France
*List of Prime Ministers of France
*Military history of France
*Politics of France
*Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine
*Territorial evolution of France
*Timeline of French history

==Notes==

==Further reading==

===Surveys and reference===
*Fierro, Alfred. Historical Dictionary of Paris (1998) 392pp, an abridged translation of his Histoire et dictionnaire de Paris (1996), 1580pp
* Goubert, Pierre. The Course of French History (1991), standard French textbook excerpt and text search; also complete text online
* Haine, W. Scott. The History of France (2000), 280 pp. textbook. and text search; also online edition
* Jones, Colin, and Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The Cambridge Illustrated History of France (1999) excerpt and text search
* Jones, Colin. Paris: Biography of a City (2004), 592pp; comprehensive history by a leading British scholar excerpt and text search
* McMillan, James F. Twentieth-Century France: Politics and Society in France 1898-1991 (2009)
* Popkin, Jeremy D. A History of Modern France (2005), 384pp; textbook coverage from 1750s; excerpt and text search
* Price, Roger. A Concise History of France (1993) excerpt and text search
* Raymond, Gino. Historical Dictionary of France (2nd ed. 2008) 528pp

===Social, economic and cultural history===

* Aris, Philippe. Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life (1965)
* Beik, William. A Social and Cultural History of Early Modern France (2009) excerpt and text search
* Caron, Franois. An Economic History of Modern France (1979) online edition
* Charle, Christophe. A Social History of France in the 19th century (1994)
* Dormois, Jean-Pierre. The French Economy in the Twentieth Century (2004) excerpt and text search
* Dunham, Arthur L. The Industrial Revolution in France, 1815-1848 (1955) online edition
* Hewitt, Nicholas, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Modern French Culture (2003) excerpt and text search
* Heywood, Colin. The Development of the French Economy 1750-1914 (1995) excerpt and text search
* McMillan, James F. France and Women 1789-1914: Gender, Society and Politics (Routledge, 2000) 286 pp.
* McPhee, Peter. A Social History of France, 1789-1914 (2nd ed. 2004)

===Middle Ages===
* Duby, Georges. France in the Middle Ages 9871460: From Hugh Capet to Joan of Arc (1993), survey by a leader of the Annales School excerpt and text search
* Bloch, Marc. Feudal Society: Vol 1: The Growth and Ties of Dependence (1989); Feudal Society: Vol 2: Social Classes and Political Organisation(1989) excerpt and text search
* Bloch, Marc. French Rural History an Essay on Its Basic Characteristics (1972)
* Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. Montaillou: Cathars and Catholics in a French Village, 12941324 (1978) excerpt and text search
* Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. The Peasants of Languedoc (1966; English translation 1974) text search
* Potter, David. France in the Later Middle Ages 12001500, (2003) excerpt and text search

===Early Modern===
* Collins, James B. The state in early modern France (2nd ed. 2009) excerpt and text search
* Davis, Natalie Zemon. Society and culture in early modern France (1975)
*, historiography
* Holt, Mack P. Renaissance and Reformation France: 15001648 (2002) excerpt and text search
* Holt, Mack P., ed. Society and Institutions in Early Modern France (1991), articles by scholars
* Potter, David. A History of France, 14601560: The Emergence of a Nation-State (1995)

===Old Regime===
* Doyle, William. Old Regime France: 16481788 (2001) excerpt and text search
*Doyle, William, ed. The Oxford Handbook of the Ancien Rgime (2012) 656pp excerpt and text search; 32 topical chapters by experts
* Goubert, Pierre. Louis XIV and Twenty Million Frenchmen (1972), social history from Annales School
* Jones, Colin. The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (2002) excerpt and text search
* LeRoy Ladurie, Emmanuel. The Ancien Regime: A History of France 16101774 (1999), survey by leader of the Annales School excerpt and text search
* Lynn, John A. The Wars of Louis XIV, 16671714 (1999) excerpt and text search
* Roche, Daniel. France in the Enlightenment (1998), wide-ranging history 1700-1789 excerpt and text search
* Wolf, John B. Louis XIV (1968), the standard scholarly biography online edition

====Enlightenment====
* Baker, Keith Michael. Inventing the French Revolution: Essays on French Political Culture in the Eighteenth Century. 1990. excerpt and text search
* Blom, Philipp. Enlightening the World: Encyclopdie, the Book That Changed the Course of History. 2005. 416 pp. excerpt and text search
* Chisick, Harvey. Historical Dictionary of the Enlightenment. 2005. 512 pp
* Davidson, Ian. Voltaire. A Life (2010). ISBN 9781846682261
* Delon, Michel. Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment (2001) 1480pp
* Goodman, Dena. The Republic of Letters: A Cultural History of the French Enlightenment (1994) 338 pp online edition
* Hazard, Paul. European thought in the eighteenth century: From Montesquieu to Lessing (1965)
* Kaiser, Thomas E. "This Strange Offspring of Philosophie: Recent Historiographical Problems in Relating the Enlightenment to the French Revolution." French Historical Studies 15 (Spring 1988): 54962. in JSTOR
* Kors, Alan Charles. Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment (4 vol. 1990; 2nd ed. 2003), 1984pp excerpt and tyext search
* Roche, Daniel. France in the Enlightenment. 1998. 736 pp.
* Spencer, Samia I., ed. French Women and the Age of Enlightenment. 1984.
* Vovelle, Michel and Cochrane, Lydia G., eds. Enlightenment Portraits. 1997. 456 pp.
* Wilson, Arthur. Diderot. 1972.

===Revolution===
* Andress, David. French Society in Revolution, 17891799 (1999)
* Doyle, William. The Oxford History of the French Revolution (1989). online complete edition; also excerpt and text search
* Doyle, William. The French Revolution: A Very Short Introduction. (2001), 120pp; online edition
* Forrest, Alan. The French Revolution and the Poor (1981)
* Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. ed. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO: 3 vol 2006)
* Frey, Linda S. and Marsha L. Frey. The French Revolution. (2004) 190pp online edition
* Furet, Franois. The French Revolution, 17701814 (1996) excerpt and text search
* Furet, Franois and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989), 1120pp; long essays by scholars; conservative perspective; stress on history of ideas excerpt and online search from Amazon.com
*Hampson, Norman. Social History of the French Revolution (2006)
* Jones, Colin. The Longman Companion to the French Revolution (1989)
* Jones, Colin. The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (2002) excerpt and text search
*Jones, Peter. The Peasantry in the French Revolution (1988)
*Lefebvre, Georges. The French Revolution (1962)
*Lucas, Colin. ed., The Political Culture of the French Revolution (1988)
* Neely, Sylvia. A Concise History of the French Revolution (2008)
* Paxton, John. Companion to the French Revolution (1987), hundreds of short entries.
* Schwab, Gail M., and John R. Jeanneney, eds. The French Revolution of 1789 and Its Impact (1995) online edition
* Scott, Samuel F. and Barry Rothaus. Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution, 17891799 (2 vol 1984), short essays by scholars
* Schama, Simon. Citizens. A Chronicle of the French Revolution (1989), highly readable narrative by scholar excerpt and text search
* Sutherland, D.M.G. France 17891815. Revolution and Counter-Revolution (2nd ed. 2003, 430pp) excerpts and online search from Amazon.com

====Long term impact====
*Englund, Steven. "Church and state in France since the Revolution," Journal of Church & State (1992) 34#2 pp 32561
* Furet, Franois. Revolutionary France 1770-1880 (1995) excerpt and text search
* Gildea, Robert. The Past in French History (1994)
* Gildea, Robert. Children of the Revolution: The French, 1799-1814 (2008)
* Harison, Casey. "Teaching the French Revolution: Lessons and Imagery from Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Textbooks," History Teacher (2002) 35#2 pp 13762 in JSTOR
*O'Rourke, Kevin H. "The Worldwide Economic Impact of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1815," Journal of Global History (2006), 1#1 pp 123149.
* Palmer, Robert R. The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 17601800. (2 vol 1959), highly influential comparative history; vol 1 online
* Stromberg, Roland N. "Reevaluating the French Revolution," History Teacher (1986) 20#1 pp 87108. in JSTOR

===Napoleon===
* 
* Emsley, Clive. Napoleon 2003, succinct coverage of life, France and empire; little on warfare
* Englund, Steven. Napoleon: A Political Life. (2004). the best political biography excerpt and text search
* Fisher, Herbert. Napoleon (1913) old classic online edition free
* Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. ed. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO: 3 vol 2006)
* Grab, Alexander. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. (2003), maps; excellent synthesis
* Harold, J. Christopher. The Age of Napoleon (1963) popular history stressing empire and diplomacy
* Markham, Felix. Napoleon 1963. online edition
* McLynn, Frank. Napoleon: A Biography (2003) stress on military
*; evaluation of major books on Napoleon & his wars 
* Nafziger, George F. Historical Dictionary of the Napoleonic Era. 2002.
* Nicholls, David. Napoleon: A Biographical Companion. 1999.
* Thompson, J. M. Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), scholarly, well-balanced in topics, but pro-Britain
* Tulard, Jean. Napoleon: The Myth of the Saviour (1984)

===Restoration: 18151870===
* Agulhon, Maurice. The Republican Experiment, 18481852 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1983) excerpt and text search
* Charle, Christophe. A Social History of France in the Nineteenth Century (1994)
* Echard, William E. Historical Dictionary of the French Second Empire, 18521870 (1985) online edition
* Gildea, Robert. Children of the Revolution: The French, 1799-1914 (2008)

* Jardin, Andre, and Andre-Jean Tudesq. Restoration and Reaction 18151848 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988)
* Plessis, Alain. The Rise and Fall of the Second Empire, 18521871 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search
* Price, Roger. A Social History of Nineteenth-Century France (1987) 403pp. 403 pgs. online edition

===Third Republic: 18711940===
* Bernard, Philippe, and Henri Dubief. The Decline of the Third Republic, 19141938 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search
* Bury, J. P. T. France, 1814-1940 (2003) ch 9-16
* Kedward, Rod. France and the French: A Modern History (2007) pp 1245
* Lehning, James R.; To Be a Citizen: The Political Culture of the Early French Third Republic (2001) online edition
* McMillan, James F. Twentieth-Century France: Politics and Society in France 1898-1991 (1992)
* Mayeur, Jean-Marie, and Madeleine Rebirioux. The Third Republic from its Origins to the Great War, 18711914 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search
* Price, Roger. A Social History of Nineteenth-Century France (1987) 403pp. 403 pgs. complete text online at Questia
* Robb, Graham. The Discovery of France: A Historical Geography, from the Revolution to the First World War (2007)
* Sowerwine, Charles. France since 1870: Culture, Society and the Making of the Republic (2009) excerpt and text search
* Weber, Eugen. Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 18701914 (1976) excerpt and text search
*Zeldin, Theodore. France, 18481945 (2 vol. 1979), topical approach

====World War I====
* Greenhalgh, Elizabeth. Victory through Coalition: Britain and France during the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2005) 304pp
* Tucker, Spencer, ed. European Powers in the First World War: An Encyclopedia (1999)
* Winter, J. M. Capital Cities at War: Paris, London, Berlin, 19141919 (1999)

====Vichy (194044)====
* Azema, Jean-Pierre. From Munich to Liberation 19381944 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1985)
* Berthon, Simon. Allies at War: The Bitter Rivalry among Churchill, Roosevelt, and de Gaulle. (2001). 356 pp.
* Funk, Arthur Layton. Charles de Gaulle: The Crucial Years, 19431944 (1959) online edition
* Gildea, Robert. Marianne in Chains: Daily Life in the Heart of France During the German Occupation (2004) excerpt and text search
* Jackson, Julian. France: The Dark Years, 19401944 (2003) excerpt and text search
* Kersaudy, Francois. Churchill and De Gaulle (2nd ed 1990 482pp
* Lacouture, Jean. De Gaulle: The Rebel 18901944 (1984; English ed. 1991), 640pp; excerpt and text search
* Paxton, Robert O. Vichy France 2nd ed. (2001) excerpt and text search

===Fourth and Fifth Republics (1944 to present)===
* Berstein, Serge, and Peter Morris. The Republic of de Gaulle 19581969 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (2006) excerpt and text search
* Berstein, Serge, Jean-Pierre Rioux, and Christopher Woodall. The Pompidou Years, 19691974 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (2000) excerpt and text search
* Bourg, Julian ed. After the Deluge: New Perspectives on the Intellectual and Cultural History of Postwar France (2004) 426 pp. ISBN 978-0-7391-0792-8.
* Cerny, Philip G. The Politics of Grandeur: Ideological Aspects of de Gaulle's Foreign Policy. (1980). 319 pp.
* Hauss, Charles. Politics in Gaullist France: Coping with Chaos (1991) online edition
* Kedward, Rod. France and the French: A Modern History (2007) pp 310648
* Kolodziej, Edward A. French International Policy under de Gaulle and Pompidou: The Politics of Grandeur (1974) online edition
* Lacouture, Jean. De Gaulle: The Ruler 19451970 (1993)
* McMillan, James F. Twentieth-Century France: Politics and Society in France 1898-1991 (1992)
* Northcutt, Wayne. Historical Dictionary of the French Fourth and Fifth Republics, 19461991 (1992)
* Rioux, Jean-Pierre, and Godfrey Rogers. The Fourth Republic, 19441958 (1989) (The Cambridge History of Modern France)
* Sowerwine, Charles. France since 1870: Culture, Society and the Making of the Republic (2009) excerpt and text search
* Williams, Charles. The Last Great Frenchman: A Life of General De Gaulle (1997) excerpt and text search
* Williams, Philip M. and Martin Harrison. De Gaulle's Republic (1965) online edition

===Historiography===
* Gildea, Robert. The Past in French History (1996)
* Nora, Pierre, ed. Realms of Memory: Rethinking the French Past (3 vol, 1996), essays by scholars; excerpt and text search; vol 2 excerpts; vol 3 excerpts
* Pinkney, David H. "Two Thousand Years of Paris," Journal of Modern History (1951) 23#3 pp. 262264 in JSTOR
* Offen, Karen. "French Women's History: Retrospect (17891940) and Prospect," French Historical Studies (2003) 26#4 pp 757+
* Revel, Jacques, and Lynn Hunt, eds. Histories: French Constructions of the Past (1995). 654pp, 64 essays; emphasis on Annales School
* Symes, Carol. "The Middle Ages between Nationalism and Colonialism," French Historical Studies (Winter 2011) 34#1 pp 3746
* Thbaud, Franoise. "Writing Women's and Gender History in France: A National Narrative?" Journal of Women's History (2007) 19#1 pp. 167172 in Project Muse

===Primary sources===
* , complete text online

==External links==

*H-France free daily email discussions and book reviews; oriented to faculty & graduate students since 1995
*History of France by French Ministry of Foreign Affairs
*History of France, from Prehistory to Nowadays (in French + English translation)
*History of France, from Middle Ages to the 19th century 
*History of France: Primary Documents (English interface)
*Simon Kitson's Vichy webpage
*"Becoming France," David Bell, The New Republic, 1 April 2009 (in English)
*France history facts (in English)

*



[[Halloween]]

Halloween or Hallowe'en (; a contraction of "All Hallows' Evening") also known as All Hallows' Eve, or All Saints' Eve, is a yearly celebration observed in a number of countries on 31 October, the eve of the Western Christian feast of All Hallows' Day. It initiates the triduum of Hallowtide, the time in the liturgical year dedicated to remembering the dead, including saints (hallows), martyrs, and all the faithful departed believers. Don't Know Much About Mythology: Everything You Need to Know About the Greatest Stories in Human History but Never Learned (Davis), HarperCollins, page 231 

According to many academic scholars, All Hallows' Eve is a Christianized feast initially influenced by Celtic harvest festivals, "Halloween." History.com. Retrieved 24 October 2013. with possible pagan roots, particularly the Gaelic Samhain. Other academic scholars maintain that it originated independently of Samhain and has solely Christian roots. 

Typical festive Halloween activities include trick-or-treating (or the related "guising"), attending costume parties, decorating, carving pumpkins into jack-o'-lanterns, lighting bonfires, apple bobbing, visiting haunted house attractions, playing pranks, telling scary stories, and watching horror films. In many parts of the world, the Christian religious observances of All Hallows' Eve, including attending church services and lighting candles on the graves of the dead, remain popular, although in other locations, these solemn customs are less pronounced in favour of a more secularized celebration. Because many Western Christian denominations encourage, although no longer require, abstinence from meat on All Hallows' Eve, All Hallows' Eve (Diana Swift), Anglican Journal the tradition of eating certain vegetarian foods for this vigil day developed, including the consumption of apples, colcannon, cider, potato pancakes, and soul cakes. Santino, p.85 Ordinary Time: October 31st Thursday of the Thirtieth Week of Ordinary Time; All Hallows' Eve (Jennifer Gregory Miller), Catholic Culture 

==Etymology==
The word Halloween or Hallowe'en dates to about 1745 and is of Christian origin. The A to Z of Anglicanism (Colin Buchanan), Scarecrow Press, page 8 The word "Halloween" means "hallowed evening" or "holy evening". The American Desk Encyclopedia (Steve Luck), Oxford University Press, page 365 It comes from a Scottish term for All Hallows' Eve (the evening before All Hallows' Day). In Scots, the word "eve" is even, and this is contracted to e'en or een. Over time, (All) Hallow(s) Eve(n) evolved into Halloween. Although the phrase "All Hallows'" is found in Old English (ealra hlgena mssedg, all saints mass-day), "All Hallows' Eve" is itself not seen until 1556. 

==History==

===Gaelic and Welsh influence===
An early 20th-century Irish Hallowe'en mask displayed at the Museum of Country Life.
Today's Halloween customs are thought to have been influenced by folk customs and beliefs from the Celtic-speaking countries, some of which have pagan roots, and others which may be rooted in Celtic Christianity. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). "Samhain and the Celtic Origins of Halloween". Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 1121. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. Anglo-Saxon Spirituality: Selected Writings (Robert Boenig), Paulist Press, page 7 Indeed, Jack Santino, an academic folklorist, writes that "the sacred and the religious are a fundamental context for understanding Halloween in Northern Ireland, but there as throughout Ireland an uneasy truce exists between customs and beliefs associated with Christianity and those associated with religions that were Irish before Christianity arrived". Santino, Jack. The Hallowed Eve: Dimensions of Culture in a Calendar Festival of Northern Ireland. University Press of Kentucky, p.95 Historian Nicholas Rogers, exploring the origins of Halloween, notes that while "some folklorists have detected its origins in the Roman feast of Pomona, the goddess of fruits and seeds, or in the festival of the dead called Parentalia, it is more typically linked to the Celtic festival of Samhain", which comes from the Old Irish for "summer's end". Samhain (pronounced or ) was the first and most important of the four quarter days in the medieval Gaelic calendar and was celebrated in Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man. A Pocket Guide To Superstitions Of The British Isles (Publisher: Penguin Books Ltd; Reprint edition: 4 November 2004) ISBN 0-14-051549-6 All Hallows' Eve BBC. Retrieved 31 October 2011. It was held on or about 31 October  1 November and kindred festivals were held at the same time of year by the Brittonic Celts; for example Calan Gaeaf (in Wales), Kalan Gwav (in Cornwall) and Kalan Goav (in Brittany). Samhain and Calan Gaeaf are mentioned in some of the earliest Irish and Welsh literature. The names have been used by historians to refer to Celtic Halloween customs up until the 19th century, Hutton, Ronald. The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain. Oxford University Press, 1996. pp.365-369 and are still the Gaelic and Welsh names for Halloween.

Samhain/Calan Gaeaf marked the end of the harvest season and beginning of winter or the 'darker half' of the year. Monaghan, Patricia. The Encyclopedia of Celtic Mythology and Folklore. Infobase Publishing, 2004. p.407 Hutton, p.361 Like Beltane/Calan Mai, it was seen as a liminal time, when the spirits or fairies (the Aos S) could more easily come into our world and were particularly active. Monaghan, p.41 O'Halpin, Andy. Ireland: An Oxford Archaeological Guide. Oxford University Press, 2006. p.236 Most scholars see the Aos S as "degraded versions of ancient gods whose power remained active in the people's minds even after they had been officially replaced by later religious beliefs". The Aos S were both respected and feared, with individuals often invoking the protection of God when approaching their dwellings. Monaghan, p.167 Santino, p.105 At Samhain, it was believed that the Aos S needed to be propitiated to ensure that the people and their livestock survived the winter. Offerings of food and drink, or portions of the crops, were left for the Aos S. MacLeod, Sharon. Celtic Myth and Religion. McFarland, 2011. p.61 Danaher, Kevin (1972). The Year in Ireland: Irish Calendar Customs. p.200 Evans-Wentz, Walter (1911). The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries. p.44. McNeill, F. Marian (1961). The Silver Bough, Volume 3. p.34. The souls of the dead were also said to revisit their homes. "Halloween". Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2009. Credo Reference. Web. 21 September 2012. Places were set at the dinner table or by the fire to welcome them. McNeill, The Silver Bough, Volume 3, pp.11-46 The belief that the souls of the dead return home on one night or day of the year seems to have ancient origins and is found in many cultures throughout the world. Miles, Clement A. (1912). Christmas in Ritual and Tradition. Chapter 7: All Hallow Tide to Martinmas. In 19th century Ireland, "candles would be lit and prayers formally offered for the souls of the dead. After this the eating, drinking, and games would begin". Hutton, p.379 Throughout the Gaelic and Welsh regions, the household festivities included rituals and games intended to divine one's future, especially regarding death and marriage. Hutton, p.380 Nuts and apples were often used in these divination rituals. Special bonfires were lit and there were rituals involving them. Their flames, smoke and ashes were deemed to have protective and cleansing powers, and were also used for divination. It is suggested that the fires were a kind of imitative or sympathetic magic  they mimicked the Sun, helping the "powers of growth" and holding back the decay and darkness of winter. Frazer, James George (1922). Golden Bough|The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion]. Chapter 63, Part 1: On the Fire-festivals in general. MacCulloch, John Arnott (1911). The Religion of the Ancient Celts. Chapter 18: Festivals. Christian minister Eddie J. Smith suggests that the bonfires were also used to scare witches of "their awaiting punishment in hell". Reverend Dr. Eddie J. Smith. Halloween, Hallowed Is Thy Name: How to Scripturally and Theologically Justify Christian Halloween Haunted Houses and Other Evangelistic Events for Christian Fellowship, Fun, and Prophet. WestBow Press, 2012. p.29 

Snap-Apple Night, painted by Daniel Maclise in 1833, shows people feasting and playing divination games on Halloween in Ireland.

In modern Ireland, Scotland, Mann and Wales, the festival included mumming and guising, Hutton, pp.379-383 the latter of which goes back at least as far as the 16th century. McNeill, F. Marian. Hallowe'en: its origin, rites and ceremonies in the Scottish tradition. Albyn Press, 1970. pp.2931 This involved people going house-to-house in costume (or in disguise), usually reciting verses or songs in exchange for food. It may have come from the Christian custom of souling (see below) or it may have a Gaelic folk origin, with the costumes being a means of imitating, or disguising oneself from, the Aos S. In Scotland, youths went house-to-house on 31 October with masked, painted or blackened faces, often threatening to do mischief if they were not welcomed. F. Marian McNeill suggests the ancient festival included people in costume representing the spirits, and that faces were marked (or blackened) with ashes taken from the sacred bonfire. In parts of Wales, men went about dressed as fearsome beings called gwrachod. In the late 19th and early 20th century, young people in Glamorgan and Orkney dressed as the opposite gender. In parts of southern Ireland, the guisers included a hobby horse. A man dressed as a Lir Bhn (white mare) led youths house-to-house reciting versessome of which had pagan overtonesin exchange for food. If the household donated food it could expect good fortune from the 'Muck Olla'; not doing so would bring misfortune. MacLeod, Sharon. Celtic Myth and Religion. McFarland, 2011. pp.61, 175 Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, Volume 2. 1855. pp.308-309 Elsewhere in Europe, mumming and hobby horses were part of other yearly festivals. However, in the Celtic-speaking regions they were "particularly appropriate to a night upon which supernatural beings were said to be abroad and could be imitated or warded off by human wanderers". As early as the 18th century, "imitating malignant spirits" led to playing pranks in Ireland and the Scottish Highlands. Wearing costumes at Halloween spread to England in the 20th century, as did the custom of playing pranks. The "traditional illumination for guisers or pranksters abroad on the night in some places was provided by turnips or mangel wurzels, hollowed out to act as lanterns and often carved with grotesque faces to represent spirits or goblins". These were common in parts of Ireland and the Scottish Highlands in 19th century, as well as in Somerset (see Punkie Night). In the 20th century they spread to other parts of England and became generally known as jack-o'-lanterns. 

===Christian influence===

Today's Halloween customs are also thought to have been influenced by Christian dogma and practices derived from it. Halloween falls on the evening before the Christian holy days of All Hallows' Day (also known as All Saints, Hallowmas or Hallowtide) on 1 November and All Souls' Day on 2 November, thus giving the holiday on 31 October the full name of All Hallows' Eve (meaning the evening before All Hallows' Day). Rogers, Nicholas (2002). Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 22, 27. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. Since the time of the primitive Church, New Proclamation Commentary on Feasts, Holy Days, and Other Celebrations (Bill Doggett, Gordon W. Lathrop), Fortress Press, page 92 major feasts in the Christian Church (such as Christmas, Easter and Pentecost) had vigils which began the night before, as did the feast of All Hallows'. Hallowe'en, A Christian Name with Blended Christian & Folk Traditions (Thomas L. Weitzel), Evangelical Lutheran Church in America These three days are collectively referred to as Hallowtide and are a time for honoring the saints and praying for the recently departed souls who have yet to reach Heaven. All Saints was introduced in the year 609, but was originally celebrated on 13 May. Hutton, p.364 In 835, it was switched to 1 November (the same date as Samhain) at the behest of Pope Gregory IV. Some suggest this was due to Celtic influence, while others suggest it was a Germanic idea. It is also suggested that the change was made on the "practical grounds that Rome in summer could not accommodate the great number of pilgrims who flocked to it", and perhaps because of public health considerations regarding Roman Fever  a disease that claimed a number of lives during the sultry summers of the region. Butler's Saint for the Day (Paul Burns), Liturgical Press, page 516 

By the end of the 12th century they had become holy days of obligation across Europe and involved such traditions as ringing church bells for the souls in purgatory. In addition, "it was customary for criers dressed in black to parade the streets, ringing a bell of mournful sound and calling on all good Christians to remember the poor souls." The World Review - Volume 4, University of Minnesota, page 255 "Souling", the custom of baking and sharing soul cakes for all christened souls, has been suggested as the origin of trick-or-treating. The custom dates back at least as far as the 15th century Hutton, pp.374375 and was found in parts of England, Belgium, Germany, Austria and Italy. Groups of poor people, often children, would go door-to-door during Hallowtide, collecting soul cakes as a means of praying for souls in purgatory. Shakespeare mentions the practice in his comedy The Two Gentlemen of Verona (1593). The Two Gentlemen of Verona Act 2, Scene 1. The custom of wearing costumes has been explicated by Prince Sorie Conteh, who wrote: "It was traditionally believed that the souls of the departed wandered the earth until All Saints' Day, and All Hallows' Eve provided one last chance for the dead to gain vengeance on their enemies before moving to the next world. In order to avoid being recognised by any soul that might be seeking such vengeance, people would don masks or costumes to disguise their identities". In the Middle Ages, churches displayed the relics of martyred saints and those parishes that were too poor to have relics let parishioners dress up as the saints instead, Youth Spirit 2: Program Ideas for Youth Groups (Cheryl Perry), Wood Lake Publishing Inc., page 20 a practice that some Christians continue in Halloween celebrations today. "Eve of All Saints", Using Common Worship: Times and Seasons - All Saints to Candlemas (David Kennedy), Church House Publishing, page 42 Academic folklorist Kingsley Palmer, in addition to others, has suggested that the carved jack-o'-lantern, a popular symbol of Halloween, originally represented the souls of the dead. Oral folk-tales of Wessex (Kingsley Palmer), David & Charles, page 88 Rogers, p.57 On Halloween, in medieval Europe, "fires lit to guide these souls on their way and deflect them from haunting honest Christian folk." Medieval Celebrations (Daniel Diehl, Mark Donnelly), Stackpole Books, page 17 In addition, households in Austria, England, Ireland often had "candles burning in every room to guide the souls back to visit their earthly homes". These were known as soul lights. Think, Volume 20, International Business Machines Corp., page 15 Santino, p.95 Encyclopedia of Observances, Holidays and Celebrations, MobileReference Many Christians in continental Europe, especially in France, acknowledged "a belief that once a year, on Hallowe'en, the dead of the churchyards rose for one wild, hideous carnival," known as the danse macabre, which has been commonly depicted in church decoration, especially on the walls of cathedrals, monasteries, and cemeteries. Descriptive Analyses of Piano Works (Edward Baxter Perry), Theodore Presser Company, page 276 Christopher Allmand and Rosamond McKitterick write in The New Cambridge Medieval History that "Christians were moved by the sight of the Infant Jesus playing on his mother's knee; their hearts were touched by the Piet; and patron saints reassured them by their presence. But, all the while, the danse macabre urged them not to forget the end of all earthly things." The New Cambridge Medieval History: Volume 7, C.1415-c.1500 (Christopher Allmand, Rosamond McKitterick), Cambridge University Press, page 210 This danse macabre, which was enacted by "Christian village children celebrated the vigil of All Saints" in the 16th Century, has been suggested as the predecessor of modern day costume parties on this same day. The Origins of Halloween (Damira Pon, Patrick Thomas), State University of Albany First Cut: A Season in the Human Anatomy Lab (Albert Howard Carter), Macmillan Publishers, page 211 

In parts of Britain, these customs came under attack during the Reformation as some Protestants berated purgatory as a "popish" doctrine incompatible with the notion of predestination. Thus, for some Nonconformist Protestants, the theology of All Hallows Eve was redefined; without the doctrine of purgatory, "the returning souls cannot be journeying from Purgatory on their way to Heaven, as Catholics frequently believe and assert. Instead, the so-called ghosts are thought to be in actuality evil spirits. As such they are threatening." Other Protestants maintained belief in an intermediate state, known as Hades (Bosom of Abraham), The Episcopal Church, its teaching and worship (Latta Griswold), E.S. Gorham, page 110 and continued to observe the original customs, especially candlelit processions and the ringing of church bells in memory of the dead. With regard to the evil spirits, on Halloween, "barns and homes were blessed to protect people and livestock from the effect of witches, who were believed to accompany the malignant spirits as they traveled the earth." In the 19th century, in some rural parts of England, families gathered on hills on the night of All Hallows' Eve. One held a bunch of burning straw on a pitchfork while the rest knelt around him in a circle, praying for the souls of relatives and friends until the flames went out. This was known as teen'lay, derived either from the Old English tendan (meaning to kindle) or a word related to Old Irish tenlach (meaning hearth). Hutton, Ronald. The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain. Oxford University Press, 1996. page 373. Note, however, that this custom was a survival of ancient pagan practice, and was not recognized or encouraged by the Church of England. The rising popularity of Guy Fawkes Night (5 November) from 1605 onward, saw many Halloween traditions appropriated by that holiday instead, and Halloween's popularity waned in Britain, with the noteworthy exception of Scotland. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 3738. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. There and in Ireland, they had been celebrating Samhain and Halloween since at least the early Middle Ages, and the Scottish kirk took a more pragmatic approach to Halloween, seeing it as important to the life cycle and rites of passage of communities and thus ensuring its survival in the country. 

In France, some Christian families, on the night of All Hallows' Eve, prayed beside the graves of their loved ones, setting down dishes full of milk for them. On Halloween, in Italy, some families left a large meal out for ghosts of their passed relatives, before they departed for church services. Trick or Treat: A History of Halloween (Lisa Morton), Reaktion Books, Page 129 In Spain, on this night, special pastries are baked, known as bones of the holy (Spanish: Huesos de Santo) and put them on the graves of the churchyard, a practice that continues to this day. The Halloween Encyclopedia (Lisa Morton), McFarland, page 9 

===Spread to North America===
Lesley Bannatyne and Cindy Ott both write that Anglican colonists in the South and Catholic colonists in Maryland recognized All Hallows Eve in their church calendars, Pumpkin: The Curious History of an American Icon (Cindy Ott), University of Washington Press, page 42 Halloween: An American Holiday, an American History (Lesley Pratt Bannatyne), Pelican Publishing, page 45 although the Puritans of New England maintained strong opposition to the holiday, in addition to other traditional celebrations of the established Church, including Christmas. Encyclopaedia Londinensis, or, Universal dictionary of arts, sciences, and literature, Volume 21 (John Wilkes), R. G. Gunnell and Co., page 544 Mass Irish and Scottish immigration during the 19th century increased the holidays celebration in the United States. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 4950. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. "In Cajun areas, a nocturnal Mass was said in cemeteries on Halloween night. Candles that had been blessed were placed on graves, and families sometimes spent the entire night at the graveside." Confined to the immigrant communities during the mid-19th century, it was gradually assimilated into mainstream society and by the first decade of the 20th century it was being celebrated coast to coast by people of all social, racial and religious backgrounds. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, p. 74. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. 

==Symbols==
At Halloween, yards and public spaces may be decorated with traditionally macabre symbols including witches, skeletons, cobwebs, and headstones

Development of artifacts and symbols associated with Halloween formed over time. Jack-o'-lanterns are traditionally carried by guisers on All Hallows' Eve in order to frighten evil spirits. Rogers, p.57 The Encyclopedia of Witches, Witchcraft and Wicca, Infobase Publishing, page 183 There is a popular Irish Christian folktale associated with the jack-o'-lantern, Dante's "Commedia" and the Poetics of Christian Catabasis (Lee Foust), ProQuest, page 15 which in lore, is said to represent a "soul who has been denied entry into both heaven and hell": The Guinness Encyclopedia of Ghosts and Spirits (Rosemary Guiley), Guinness World Records Limited, page 178 
 In Ireland and Scotland, the turnip has traditionally been carved during Halloween, The Oxford companion to American food and drink p.269. Oxford University Press, 2007. Retrieved 17 February 2011 but immigrants to North America used the native pumpkin, which is both much softer and much larger  making it easier to carve than a turnip. Subsequently, the mass marketing of various size pumpkins in autumn, in both the corporate and local markets, has made pumpkins universally available for this purpose. The American tradition of carving pumpkins is recorded in 1837 Nathaniel Hawthorne, "The Great Carbuncle," in Twice-Told Tales, 1837: Hide it great carbuncle under thy cloak, say'st thou? Why, it will gleam through the holes, and make thee look like a jack-o'-lantern! and was originally associated with harvest time in general, not becoming specifically associated with Halloween until the mid-to-late 19th century. As late as 1900, an article on Thanksgiving entertaining recommended a lit jack-o'-lantern as part of the festivities. "The Day We Celebrate: Thanksgiving Treated Gastronomically and Socially," The New York Times, 24 November 1895, p. 27. "Odd Ornaments for Table," The New York Times, 21 October 1900, p. 12. 

The modern imagery of Halloween comes from many sources, including Christian eschatology, national customs, works of Gothic and horror literature (such as the novels Frankenstein and Dracula) and classic horror films (such as Frankenstein and The Mummy). The Rhetoric of Vision: Essays on Charles Williams (Charles Adolph Huttar, Peter J. Schakel), Bucknell University Press, page 155 Rogers, Nicholas (2002). "Halloween Goes to Hollywood". Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 103124. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. Imagery of the skull, a reference to Golgotha, in the Christian tradition, serves as "a reminder of death and the transitory quality of human life" and is consequently found in memento mori and vanitas compositions; A Handbook of Symbols in Christian Art (Gertrude Grace Sill), Simon and Schuster, page 64 skulls have therefore been commonplace in Halloween, which touches on this theme. In flagrante collecto (Marilynn Gelfman Karp), Abrams, page 299 Traditionally, the back walls of churches are "decorated with a depiction of the Last Judgment, complete with graves opening and the dead rising, with a heaven filled with angels and a hell filled with devils," a motif that has permeated the observance of this triduum. School Year, Church Year (Peter Mazar), Liturgy Training Publications, page 115 One of the earliest works on the subject of Halloween is from Scottish poet John Mayne, who, in 1780, made note of pranks at Halloween; "What fearfu' pranks ensue!", as well as the supernatural associated with the night, "Bogies" (ghosts), influencing Robert Burns' "Halloween" (1785). Thomas Crawford Burns: a study of the poems and songs Stanford University Press, 1960 Elements of the autumn season, such as pumpkins, corn husks and scarecrows, are also prevalent. Homes are often decorated with these types of symbols around Halloween. Halloween imagery includes themes of death, evil, and mythical monsters. Simpson, Jacqueline "All Saints' Day" in Encyclopedia of Death and Dying, Howarth, G. and Leeman, O. (2001)London Routledge ISBN 0-415-18825-3, p.14 "Halloween is closely associated in folklore with death and the supernatural". Black, orange, and sometimes purple are Halloween's traditional colors.

==Trick-or-treating and guising==

Trick-or-treaters in Sweden

Trick-or-treating is a customary celebration for children on Halloween. Children go in costume from house to house, asking for treats such as candy or sometimes money, with the question, "Trick or treat?" The word "trick" refers to "threat" to perform mischief on the homeowners or their property if no treat is given. The practice is said to have roots in the medieval practice of mumming, which is closely related to souling (discussed above). Faces Around the World: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the Human Face (Margo DeMello), ABC-CLIO, page 225 John Pymm writes that "many of the feast days associated with the presentation of mumming plays were celebrated by the Christian Church." A Student's Guide to A2 Performance Studies for the OCR Specification (John Pymm), Rhinegold Publishing Ltd, page 28 These feast days included All Hallows' Eve, Christmas, Twelfth Night and Shrove Tuesday. Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art, Volume 1 (Thomas Green), ABC-CLIO page 566 Interacting communities: studies on some aspects of migration and urban ethnology (Zsuzsa Szarvas), Hungarian Ethnographic Society, page 314 Mumming, practised in Germany, Scandinavia and other parts of Europe, The Oxford Encyclopedia of British Literature (David Scott Kastan), Oxford University Press, page 47 involved masked persons in fancy dress who "paraded the streets and entered houses to dance or play dice in silence." Their "basic narrative framework is the story of St. George and the Seven Champions of Christendom." "Mumming Play", Encyclopaedia Britannica 

In Scotland and Ireland, guising  children disguised in costume going from door to door for food or coins  is a traditional Halloween custom, and is recorded in Scotland at Halloween in 1895 where masqueraders in disguise carrying lanterns made out of scooped out turnips, visit homes to be rewarded with cakes, fruit and money. The practice of guising at Halloween in North America is first recorded in 1911, where a newspaper in Kingston, Ontario reported children going "guising" around the neighborhood. Rogers, Nicholas. (2002) "Coming Over:Halloween in North America". Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night. p.76. Oxford University Press, 2002, ISBN 0-19-514691-3 
Souling was a Christian practice carried out in many English towns on Halloween and Christmas
American historian and author Ruth Edna Kelley of Massachusetts wrote the first book length history of Halloween in the US; The Book of Hallowe'en (1919), and references souling in the chapter "Hallowe'en in America":

The taste in Hallowe'en festivities now is to study old traditions, and hold a Scotch party, using Burns' poem Hallowe'en as a guide; or to go a-souling as the English used. In short, no custom that was once honored at Hallowe'en is out of fashion now. Ruth Edna Kelley, The Book of Hallowe'en, Boston: Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Co., 1919, chapter 15, p.127. "Hallowe'en in America." 

In her book, Kelley touches on customs that arrived from across the Atlantic; "Americans have fostered them, and are making this an occasion something like what it must have been in its best days overseas. All Halloween customs in the United States are borrowed directly or adapted from those of other countries". While the first reference to "guising" in North America occurs in 1911, another reference to ritual begging on Halloween appears, place unknown, in 1915, with a third reference in Chicago in 1920. Theo. E. Wright, "A Halloween Story," St. Nicholas, October 1915, p. 1144. Mae McGuire Telford, "What Shall We Do Halloween?" Ladies Home Journal, October 1920, p. 135. 
An automobile trunk at a trunk-or-treat event at St. John Lutheran Church and Early Learning Center in Darien, Illinois
The earliest known use in print of the term "trick or treat" appears in 1927, from Blackie, Alberta, Canada:Hallowe'en provided an opportunity for real strenuous fun. No real damage was done except to the temper of some who had to hunt for wagon wheels, gates, wagons, barrels, etc., much of which decorated the front street. The youthful tormentors were at back door and front demanding edible plunder by the word trick or treat to which the inmates gladly responded and sent the robbers away rejoicing. "'Trick or Treat' Is Demand," Herald (Lethbridge, Alberta), November 4, 1927, p. 5, dateline Blackie, Alberta, Nov. 3. 

The thousands of Halloween postcards produced between the turn of the 20th century and the 1920s commonly show children but not trick-or-treating. For examples, see the websites Postcard & Greeting Card Museum: Halloween Gallery, Antique Hallowe'en Postcards, Vintage Halloween Postcards, and Morticia's Morgue Antique Halloween Postcards. The editor of a collection of over 3,000 vintage Halloween postcards writes, "There are cards which mention the custom trick-or-treating or show children in costumes at the doors, but as far as we can tell they were printed later than the 1920s and more than likely even the 1930s. Tricksters of various sorts are shown on the early postcards, but not the means of appeasing them". E-mail from Louise and Gary Carpentier, 29 May 2007, editors of Halloween Postcards Catalog (CD-ROM), G & L Postcards. Trick-or-treating does not seem to have become a widespread practice until the 1930s, with the first U.S. appearances of the term in 1934, "Halloween Pranks Keep Police on Hop," Oregon Journal (Portland, Oregon), 1 November 1934:Other young goblins and ghosts, employing modern shakedown methods, successfully worked the "trick or treat" system in all parts of the city. "The Gangsters of Tomorrow", The Helena Independent (Helena, Montana), 2 November 1934, p. 4:Pretty Boy John Doe rang the door bells and his gang waited his signal. It was his plan to proceed cautiously at first and give a citizen every opportunity to comply with his demands before pulling any rough stuff. "Madam, we are here for the usual purpose, 'trick or treat.'" This is the old demand of the little people who go out to have some innocent fun. Many women have some apples, cookies or doughnuts for them, but they call rather early and the "treat" is given out gladly. The Chicago Tribune also mentioned door-to-door begging in Aurora, Illinois on Halloween in 1934, although not by the term "trick-or-treating." "Front Views and Profiles" (column), Chicago Tribune, 3 November 1934, p. 17. and the first use in a national publication occurring in 1939. Doris Hudson Moss, "A Victim of the Window-Soaping Brigade?" The American Home, November 1939, p. 48. Moss was a California-based writer. 

A popular variant of trick-or-treating, known as trunk-or-treating (or Halloween tailgaiting), occurs when "children are offered treats from the trunks of cars parked in a church parking lot," or sometimes, a school parking lot. Bluff Park (Heather Jones Skaggs), Arcadia Publishing, page 117 In a trunk-or-treat event, the trunk (boot) of each automobile is decorated with a certain theme, "Trunk-or-Treat", The Chicago Tribune such as those of children's literature, movies, scripture, and job roles. Suggested Themes for Trunks for Trunk or Treat (Dail R. Faircloth), First Baptist Church of Royal Palm Beach Because the traditional style of trick-or-treating was made impossible after Hurricane Katrina, trunk-or-treating provided comfort to those whose homes were devastated. Culture After the Hurricanes: Rhetoric and Reinvention on the Gulf Coast (M. B. Hackler), University Press of Mississippi, page 177 Trunk-or-treating has grown in popularity due to its perception as being more safe than going door to door, a point that resonates well with parents, as well as the fact that it "solves the rural conundrum in which homes built a half-mile apart". "Trunk or Treat focuses on fun, children's safety", Desert Valley Times "Trunk or Treat! Halloween Tailgating Grows" (Fernanda Santos), The New York Times 

===Costumes===

A costume party in 1890.
Halloween costumes are traditionally modeled after supernatural figures such as vampires, monsters, ghosts, skeletons, witches, and devils. Over time, in the United States the costume selection extended to include popular characters from fiction, celebrities, and generic archetypes such as ninjas and princesses. 

Dressing up in costumes and going "guising" was prevalent in Ireland and Scotland at Halloween by the late 19th century. Costuming became popular for Halloween parties in the US in the early 20th century, as often for adults as for children. The first mass-produced Halloween costumes appeared in stores in the 1930s when trick-or-treating was becoming popular in the United States.

Rev. Dr. Eddie J. Smith, in his book Halloween, Hallowed Be Thy Name, offers a religious perspective to the wearing of costumes on All Hallows' Eve, suggesting that by dressing up as creatures "who at one time caused us to fear and tremble", people are able to poke fun at Satan "whose kingdom has been plundered by our Saviour." Images of skeletons and the dead are traditional decorations used as memento mori. School Year, Church Year (Peter Mazar), Liturgy Training Publications, page 114 Memento Mori, Museum of Art and Archaeology, University of Missouri 

===UNICEF===

"Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF" is a fundraising program to support UNICEF, a United Nations Programme that provides humanitarian aid to children in developing countries. Started as a local event in a Northeast Philadelphia neighborhood in 1950 and expanded nationally in 1952, the program involves the distribution of small boxes by schools (or in modern times, corporate sponsors like Hallmark, at their licensed stores) to trick-or-treaters, in which they can solicit small-change donations from the houses they visit. It is estimated that children have collected more than $118 million for UNICEF since its inception. In Canada, in 2006, UNICEF decided to discontinue their Halloween collection boxes, citing safety and administrative concerns; after consultation with schools, they instead redesigned the program. 

==Games and other activities==
In this 1904 Halloween greeting card, divination is depicted: the young woman looking into a mirror in a darkened room hopes to catch a glimpse of her future husband.

There are several games traditionally associated with Halloween parties. One common game is dunking or apple bobbing, which may be called "dooking" in Scotland "Apple dookers make record attempt", BBC News, 2 October 2008 in which apples float in a tub or a large basin of water and the participants must use their teeth to remove an apple from the basin. The practice is thought by some to have derived from the Roman practices in celebration of Pomona. A variant of dunking involves kneeling on a chair, holding a fork between the teeth and trying to drive the fork into an apple. Another common game involves hanging up treacle or syrup-coated scones by strings; these must be eaten without using hands while they remain attached to the string, an activity that inevitably leads to a very sticky face.

Some games traditionally played at Halloween are forms of divination. In All Hallows' Eve celebrations during the Middle Ages, these activities historically occurred only in rural areas of medieval Europe and were only done by a "rare few" as these were considered to be "deadly serious" practices. A traditional Scottish form of divining one's future spouse is to carve an apple in one long strip, then toss the peel over one's shoulder. The peel is believed to land in the shape of the first letter of the future spouse's name. McNeill, F. Marian (1961, 1990) The Silver Bough, Vol. 3. William MacLellan, Glasgow ISBN 0-948474-04-1 pp.1146 Unmarried women were told that if they sat in a darkened room and gazed into a mirror on Halloween night, the face of their future husband would appear in the mirror. However, if they were destined to die before marriage, a skull would appear. The custom was widespread enough to be commemorated on greeting cards from the late 19th century and early 20th century.
A common custom includes picking and purchasing pumpkins from patches
Another game/superstition that was enjoyed in the early 1900s involved walnut shells. People would write fortunes in milk on white paper. After drying, the paper was folded and placed in walnut shells. When the shell was warmed, milk would turn brown therefore the writing would appear on what looked like blank paper. Folks would also play fortune teller. In order to play this game, symbols were cut out of paper and placed on a platter. Someone would enter a dark room and was ordered to put her hand on a piece of ice then lay it on a platter. Her "fortune" would stick to the hand. Paper symbols included: dollar sign-wealth, button-bachelorhood, thimble-spinsterhood, clothespin- poverty, rice-wedding, umbrella- journey, caldron-trouble, 4-leaf clover- good luck, penny-fortune, ring-early marriage, and key-fame. Green Bay Press Gazette, 27 October 1916 

The telling of ghost stories and viewing of horror films are common fixtures of Halloween parties. Episodes of television series and Hallowe'en-themed specials (with the specials usually aimed at children) are commonly aired on or before Halloween, while new horror films are often released theatrically before Halloween to take advantage of the atmosphere.

==Haunted attractions==
Humorous tombstones in front of a house in California

Haunted attractions are entertainment venues designed to thrill and scare patrons. Most attractions are seasonal Halloween businesses. Origins of these paid scare venues are difficult to pinpoint, but it is generally accepted that they were first commonly used by the Junior Chamber International (Jaycees) for fundraising. They include haunted houses, corn mazes, and hayrides, and the level of sophistication of the effects has risen as the industry has grown. Haunted attractions in the United States bring in an estimate $300500 million each year, and draw some 400,000 customers, although press sources writing in 2005 speculated that the industry had reached its peak at that time. This maturing and growth within the industry has led to technically more advanced special effects and costuming, comparable with that of Hollywood films. 

==Food==
Pumpkins for sale during Halloween
Because in the Northern Hemisphere Halloween comes in the wake of the yearly apple harvest, candy apples (known as toffee apples outside North America), caramel or taffy apples are common Halloween treats made by rolling whole apples in a sticky sugar syrup, sometimes followed by rolling them in nuts.

At one time, candy apples were commonly given to trick-or-treating children, but the practice rapidly waned in the wake of widespread rumors that some individuals were embedding items like pins and razor blades in the apples in the United States. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). "Razor in the Apple: Struggle for Safe and Sane Halloween, c. 19201990," Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, pp. 78102. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8. While there is evidence of such incidents, relative to the degree of reporting of such cases, actual cases involving malicious acts are extremely rare and have never resulted in serious injury. Nonetheless, many parents assumed that such heinous practices were rampant because of the mass media. At the peak of the hysteria, some hospitals offered free X-rays of children's Halloween hauls in order to find evidence of tampering. Virtually all of the few known candy poisoning incidents involved parents who poisoned their own children's candy. 

One custom that persists in modern-day Ireland is the baking (or more often nowadays, the purchase) of a barmbrack (), which is a light fruitcake, into which a plain ring, a coin and other charms are placed before baking. It is said that those who get a ring will find their true love in the ensuing year. This is similar to the tradition of king cake at the festival of Epiphany.

A candy apple

List of foods associated with Halloween:
* Barmbrack (Ireland)
* Bonfire toffee (Great Britain)
* Candy apples/toffee apples (Great Britain and Ireland)
* Candy apples, Candy corn, candy pumpkins (North America)
* Monkey nuts (peanuts in their shells) (Scotland and Ireland)
* Caramel apples
* Caramel corn
* Colcannon (Ireland; see below)
* Novelty candy shaped like skulls, pumpkins, bats, worms, etc.
* Pumpkin, pumpkin pie, pumpkin bread
* Roasted pumpkin seeds
* Roasted sweet corn
* Soul cakes

==Religious observances==
The Vigil of All Hallows' is being celebrated at an Episcopal Christian church on Hallowe'en.
On Hallowe'en (All Hallows' Eve), in Poland, believers are taught to pray out loud as they walk through the forests in order that the souls of the dead might find comfort; in Spain, Christian priests toll their church bells in order to remind their congregants to remember the dead on All Hallows' Eve. In Ireland, and among immigrants in Canada, a custom includes the Christian practice of abstinence, keeping All Hallows' Eve "as a meatless day with pancakes or Callcannon" being served instead. Feasting and Fasting: Canada's Heritage Celebrations (Dorothy Duncan), Dundurn, page 249 In Mexico, on "All Hallows Eve, the children make a children's altar to invite the angelitos (spirits of dead children) to come back for a visit." Latina and Latino Voices in Literature (Frances Ann Day), Greenwood Publishing Group, page 72 The Christian Church traditionally observed Hallowe'en through a vigil "when worshippers would prepare themselves with prayers and fasting prior to the feast day itself." This church service is known as the Vigil of All Hallows or the Vigil of All Saints; an initiative known as Night of Light seeks to further spread the Vigil of All Hallows throughout Christendom. After the service, "suitable festivities and entertainments" often follow, as well as a visit to the graveyard or cemetery, where flowers and candles are often placed in preparation for All Hallows' Day. In Finland, because so many people visit the cemeteries on All Hallows' Eve to light votive candles there, they "are known as valomeri, or seas of light." Teens in Finland (Jason Skog), Capstone, page 61 

===Perspectives===

====Christianity====
Halloween Scripture Candy with gospel tract
Christian attitudes towards Halloween are diverse. In the Anglican Church, some dioceses have chosen to emphasize the Christian traditions associated with All Hallow's Eve. Some of these practises include praying, fasting and attending worship services. 

Votive candles in the Halloween section of Wal-Mart
Other Protestant Christians also celebrate All Hallows' Eve as Reformation Day, a day to remember the Protestant Reformation, alongside All Hallow's Eve or independently from it. This is because Martin Luther nailed his Ninety-Five Theses to All Saints' Church in Wittenberg on All Hallows' Eve, because hundreds of visitors would come to the church during the celebration of Hallowtide. Halloween, Hallowed Is Thy Name (Smith), page 29 Often, "Harvest Festivals" or "Reformation Festivals" are held on All Hallows' Eve, in which children dress up as Bible characters or Reformers. In addition to distributing candy to children who are trick-or-treating on Hallowe'en, many Christians also provide gospel tracts to them. One organization, the American Tract Society, stated that around 3 million gospel tracts are ordered from them alone for Hallowe'en celebrations. Halloween tracts serve as tool to spread gospel to children (Curry), Baptist Press Others order Halloween-themed Scripture Candy to pass out to children on this day. 
Belizean children dressed up as Biblical figures and Christian saints
Some Christians feel concerned about the modern celebration of Halloween because they feel it trivializes  or celebrates  paganism, the occult, or other practices and cultural phenomena deemed incompatible with their beliefs. Halloween: What's a Christian to Do? (1998) by Steve Russo. Father Gabriele Amorth, an exorcist in Rome, has said, "if English and American children like to dress up as witches and devils on one night of the year that is not a problem. If it is just a game, there is no harm in that." Gyles Brandreth, "The Devil is gaining ground" Sunday Telegraph (London), 11 March 2000. In more recent years, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston has organized a "Saint Fest" on Halloween. Similarly, many contemporary Protestant churches view Halloween as a fun event for children, holding events in their churches where children and their parents can dress up, play games, and get candy for free. Many Christians ascribe no negative significance to Halloween, treating it as a fun event devoted to "imaginary spooks" and handing out candy. To these Christians, Halloween holds no threat to the spiritual lives of children: being taught about death and mortality, and the ways of the Celtic ancestors actually being a valuable life lesson and a part of many of their parishioners' heritage. 

In the Roman Catholic Church, Halloween's Christian connection is cited, and Halloween celebrations are common in Catholic parochial schools throughout North America and in Ireland. "Halloween's Christian Roots" AmericanCatholic.org. Retrieved on 24 October 2007. Many fundamentalist and evangelical churches use "Hell houses", themed pamphlets, or comic-style tracts such as those created by Jack T. Chick in order to make use of Halloween's popularity as an opportunity for evangelism. Some consider Halloween to be completely incompatible with the Christian faith due to its putative origins in the Festival of the Dead celebration. Indeed, even though Eastern Orthodox Christians observe All Hallows' Day on the First Sunday after Pentecost, the Eastern Orthodox Church recommends the observance of Vespers and/or a Paraklesis on the Western observance of All Hallows' Eve, out of the pastoral need to provide an alternative to popular celebrations. Do Orthodox Christians Observe Halloween? by Saint Spyridon Greek Orthodox Church 

====Other religions====
The reaction of non-Christian religions towards Halloween has often been mixed, ranging from stern disapproval to the allowance of participation in it. According to Alfred J. Kolatch in the Second Jewish Book of Why, in Judaism, Halloween is not permitted by Jewish Halakha because it violates 18|Leviticus 18:3] which forbids Jews from partaking in gentile customs. Many Jews observe Yizkor, which is equivalent to the observance of Hallowtide in Christianity, as prayers are said for both "martyrs and for one's own family." The Jewish Life Cycle: rites of passage from biblical to modern times (Ivan G. Marcus), University of Washington Press, page 232 Nevertheless many American Jews celebrate Halloween, disconnected from its Christian origins. Reform Rabbi Jeffrey Goldwasser has said that There is no religious reason why contemporary Jews should not celebrate Halloween" while Orthodox Rabbi Michael Broyde has argued against Jews observing the holiday. Sheikh Idris Palmer, author of A Brief Illustrated Guide to Understanding Islam , has argued that Muslims should not participate in Halloween, stating that "participation in it is similar to one commemorating Christmas or Easter, or congratulating the Christians upon their prostration to the crucifix". On Halloween (Idris Palmer), Fataawaa Javed Memon, a Muslim writer, has disagreed, saying that his "daughter dressing up like a British telephone booth will not destroy her faith". Why Can't Muslims Enjoy Halloween? (Javed Memon), Patheos Most Hindus do not observe All Hallows' Eve, instead remembering the dead in the festival of Pitru Paksha, during which Hindus pay homage to and perform a ceremony "to keep the souls of their ancestors at rest." Halloween in India? (Lauren Stengele), Vision Nationals The celebration of the Hindu festival Diwali sometimes conflicts with the date of Halloween; but some Hindus choose to participate in the popular customs of Halloween. Trick or Treat? Not quite sure. (Vineet Chander), Beliefnet Other Hindus, such as Soumya Dasgupta, have opposed the celebration on the grounds that Western holidays like Halloween have "begun to adversely affect our indigenous festivals." "Should Indians Celebrate Foreign Festivals Like Halloween?" (Soumya Dasgupta), The Wall Street Journal Neopagans do not observe Halloween, but instead observe Samhain on 1 November, although some neopagan individuals choose to participate in cultural Halloween festivities, opining the idea that one can observe both "the solemnity of Samhain in addition to the fun of Halloween." Other neopagans are opposed to the celebration of Halloween, believing that it "trivializes Samhain", Should Pagans Celebrate Halloween? (Wicasta Lovelace), Pagan Centric and "avoid Halloween, because of the interruptions from trick or treaters." Halloween, From a Wiccan/Neopagan perspective (B.A. Robinson), Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance The Manitoban writes that "Wiccans dont officially celebrate Halloween, despite the fact that Oct. 31 will still have a star beside it in any good Wiccans day planner. Starting at sundown, Wiccans celebrate a holiday known as Samhain. Samhain actually comes from old Celtic traditions and is not exclusive to Neopagan religions like Wicca. While the traditions of this holiday originate in Celtic countries, modern day Wiccans dont try to historically replicate Samhain celebrations. Some traditional Samhain rituals are still practised but at its core, the holiday is simply a time to celebrate darkness and the dead  a possible reason why Samhain is often confused with Halloween celebrations." 

==Around the world==
A Halloween display in Saitama, Japan

The traditions and importance of Halloween vary greatly among countries that observe it. In Scotland and Ireland, traditional Halloween customs include children dressing up in costume going "guising", holding parties, while other practices in Ireland include lighting bonfires, and having firework displays. Halloween fire calls 'every 90 seconds' UTV News Retrieved 22 November 2010 In Brittany children would set candles in skulls in graveyards. Mass transatlantic immigration in the 19th century popularized Halloween in North America, and celebration in the United States and Canada has had a significant impact on how the event is observed in other nations. This larger North American influence, particularly in iconic and commercial elements, has extended to places such as South America, Australia, New Zealand, (most) continental Europe, Japan, and other parts of East Asia. Rogers, Nicholas (2002). Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, p.164. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516896-8 In the Philippines, on the night of Halloween, Filipinos return to their hometowns and purchase candles and flowers, How do Filipinos Celebrate the Halloween? (Emie), Hubpages in preparation for the following All Saints Day and All Souls Day (Araw ng Patay) on 1 November. 

==See also==

* Devil's Night
* Ghost Festival
* List of fiction works about Halloween
* List of films set around Halloween
* List of Halloween television specials
* Martinisingen
* Mischief night
* Walpurgis Night

==References==

==Further reading==

* Diane C. Arkins, Halloween: Romantic Art and Customs of Yesteryear, Pelican Publishing Company (2000). 96 pages. ISBN 1-56554-712-8
* Diane C. Arkins, Halloween Merrymaking: An Illustrated Celebration Of Fun, Food, And Frolics From Halloweens Past, Pelican Publishing Company (2004). 112 pages. ISBN 1-58980-113-X
* Lesley Bannatyne, Halloween: An American Holiday, An American History, Facts on File (1990, Pelican Publishing Company, 1998). 180 pages. ISBN 1-56554-346-7
* Lesley Bannatyne, A Halloween Reader. Stories, Poems and Plays from Halloweens Past, Pelican Publishing Company (2004). 272 pages. ISBN 1-58980-176-8
* Phyllis Galembo, Dressed for Thrills: 100 Years of Halloween Costumes and Masquerade, Harry N. Abrams, Inc. (2002). 128 pages. ISBN 0-8109-3291-1
* Editha Hrandner (ed.), Halloween in der Steiermark und anderswo, Volkskunde (Mnster in Westfalen), LIT Verlag Mnster (2005). 308 pages. ISBN 3-8258-8889-4
* Lisa Morton, The Halloween Encyclopedia, McFarland & Company (2003). 240 pages. ISBN 0-7864-1524-X
* Nicholas Rogers, Halloween: From Pagan Ritual to Party Night, Oxford University Press, USA (2002). ISBN 0-19-514691-3
* Jack Santino (ed.), Halloween and Other Festivals of Death and Life, University of Tennessee Press (1994). 280 pages. ISBN 0-87049-813-4
* David J. Skal, Death Makes a Holiday: A Cultural History of Halloween, Bloomsbury USA (2003). 224 pages. ISBN 1-58234-305-5
* James Tipper, Gods of The Nowhere: A Novel of Halloween, Waxlight Press (2013). 294 pages. ISBN 978-0988243316

==External links==

* 
* "A brief history of Halloween" by the BBC
* "The History of Halloween" by the History Channel
*Halloween History by Celebrating Holidays
* Service for All Hallows' Eve - Liturgy Resource
* An All Hallows' Eve Vigil by Duke University 

 
 



[[Hayling Island]]

Hayling Island is an island off the south coast of England, in the borough of Havant in the county of Hampshire.

==History==
Photograph of Hayling Island between Selsey Bill and Portsea Island from the air from the west (north to the left)
An iron-age shrine in the north of Hayling Island was later developed into a Roman temple in the first century BC and was first recorded in Richard Scott's Topographical and Historical Account of Hayling Island published in 1826. The site was excavated between 1897 and 1907 and again from 1976 to 1978. Remains are no longer visible and are buried beneath cultivated farmland. 

Salt production was an industry on the island from the 11th century (the Domesday Book records a saltpan on the island for this purpose) until the late 19th century.

Construction of Northwode Chapel by the monks of Jumiges, Normandy, began in about 1140 and this became the present St Peter's Church and now the oldest surviving church on the Island. It has been claimed that St Peter's three bells, cast in about 1350, have one of the oldest peals in England. St Mary's Church is a standard design of the churches of its era, but upon close examination the walls have been constructed from a mortar of local shells and beach pebbles. The ancient yew tree in the churchyard is believed to be the oldest yew in the country, with a girth of some nine metres. Although estimates as to its age vary, they range from over a thousand to nearly two thousand years old. St. Mary's Church Hayling Council website. Retrieved 2010-03-14 

The grave of Princess Yourievsky (1878-1959) who was a member of the ill-fated Russian Royal family and who lived in North Hayling for many years, may be found in St. Peter's churchyard; Church booklet - Guide to St Peter's Church North Hayling 2003. and the grave of Scotsman George Glas Sandeman, nephew of the founder of Sandeman Port and second head of that company, Sandeman Archive description AIM25 Archives website. Retrieved 2012-04-20 PORT AND SHERRY Originally published by George G Sandeman & Co (1955), now hosted on Ancestry.com. Retrieved 2012-04-20 is prominently featured in the north-east part of St. Mary's graveyard. St. Mary's Church Hayling Anglican Churches website. Retrieved 2012-04-20 

The island was the location of a mock invasion during the military Exercise Fabius in May 1944, rehearsing the preparations for D-Day. Southampton and D-Day, Ingrid Peckham. Southampton City Council Oral History, 1994. ISBN 1-872649-04-1 

In 1982, British courts recognised prior art by Peter Chilvers, who as a young boy on Hayling Island assembled his first board combined with a sail, in 1958. It incorporated all the elements of the modern windsurfer. The courts found that later innovations were "merely an obvious extension" and upheld the defendant's claim based on film footage. This court case set a significant precedent for patent law in the United Kingdom, in terms of Inventive step and non-obviousness. The case, Chilvers, Hayling, and a replica of Chilvers' original board were featured on an episode of the BBC's The One Show in 2009. The One Show 7pm BBC1 Friday 5 June! WindWise.net; Simon Bornhoft's WindWise. Retrieved 2010-06-20. 

On October 20, 2013, at least one hundred properties on the island were damaged when it was hit by a tornado. No injuries were reported. 

==Geography==
Hayling Island is a true island, completely surrounded by sea. Looking at its north to south orientation, it is shaped like an inverted T, about 6.5 km long and 6.5 kilometres wide. A road bridge connects its northern end to the mainland of England at Langstone. A small passenger ferry connects it to the neighbouring island of Portsea where the city of Portsmouth is located. To the west is Langstone Harbour and to the east is Chichester Harbour.

The natural beach at Hayling was predominantly sandy but in recent years it has been mechanically topped with shingle dredged from the bed of the Solent in an effort to reduce beach erosion and reduce the potential to flood low lying land. At low tide, the East Winner sandbank is visible, extending a mile out to sea. The coastline in this area has substantially changed since Roman times: it is believed much land has been lost from the coasts of Hayling and Selsey by erosion and subsequent flooding.

==Climate==

As with the rest of the British Isles and Southern England, Hayling Island experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. Temperatures have never fallen into double figures below freezing, illustrating the relative warmth of the Island - comparable to the far South West of England. Temperature extremes between 1960 & 2010 have ranged from -9.4 C during January 1963, up to 32.1 C during June 1976. 

==Sport and leisure==

Hayling Island has a non-League football club, Hayling United F.C., which plays at The Hayling College.

Although largely residential, Hayling is also a holiday, windsurfing and sailing centre, the site where windsurfing was invented.

In summer 2010, the Hayling Island Sailing Club hosted the 2010 World Laser Standard Senior and Junior Championships (27 August-5 September). The Senior championship was won by Australian Tom Slingsby, whilst Dane Thorbjoern Schierup won the Junior competition.. Today it is a home to many different types of sailing, including a growing Fireball fleet.

The Island also boasts one of the few active Real Tennis courts in the UK. Founded in 1911, Seacourt Tennis club is one of only a handful in the UK where it is possible to play every recognised racquet sport. The racquets court itself was opened by Sir Colin Cowdrey.

Seacourt Tennis Club also hosts a weekly fencing club featuring all ages, levels and weapons.

Hayling Golf Club has been voted in the top 100 golf courses in the UK. A traditional links course, although relatively short by modern standards, the strong prevailing south-westerly winds, fast greens, gorse bushes and traditional deep links bunkers make this a stern test for any golfer.

A funfair (Funland Funland Funfair ) situated at Beachlands, is open year round, as is the East Hayling Light Railway which runs from the funfair to Eastoke corner.

The 5 mi Hayling Billy Trail is a former light rail right-of-way which has been converted to one of many footpaths on the island. Coastal Path - Billy Trail. Visitor Guides; Hayling Island Community Online. Retrieved 2010-06-20. The Ordnance Survey Explorer 120 map covers the area Ordnance Survey Explorer 120 map. Ordnance Survey National Mapping Agency, 2009. Retrieved 2010-06-20. and the local tourist information office supplies leaflets of local interest walks. Tourist Information Office Beachlands Havant Tourist Information Office. Retrieved 2010-06-20. 

The Station Theatre hosts a variety of plays staged by the Hayling Island Amateur Dramatics Society, Hayling Musical Society, musical events and films throughout the year. Events diary. Hayling Island Station Theatre. Retrieved 2010-06-20. Current Production. Hayling Musical Society. 
Hayling Island was also the birthplace and home of actress Stephanie Lawrence who starred in many West End musical shows, she was for many years close friends with Windsurfing inventor Peter Chilvers also from Hayling.
The island supports several churches of different denominations including 3 Anglican churches; St Peter's at Northney, St Mary's at Gable Head and the more recently built St Andrew's in South Hayling.

Local hotels, holiday centres, bed and breakfast accommodation, holiday homes and caravans for rent, all support this year-round tourist resort.

==Transport==
Beaches at Hayling Island
Station Theatre, West Town, Hayling Island
Hayling ferry links Portsmouth and Hayling Island. The Ferry is busy in the summer if the weather is good, bringing tourists and cyclists to Hayling. Hayling Ferry History hayling.co.uk. In the winter, there is a significant reduction of use, and the ferry service to and from Portsea Island is subsidised by the local authorities. This leaves the ferry under constant threat of closure due to limited resources.

Apart from the ferry the only public connection between Hayling Island and the mainland is a single carriageway road linking Northney to Langstone, Havant. In summer in particular this road can become very congested rendering the journey between the bridge and South Hayling (the most populated area) anything from 30 minutes to an hour. A proposed Millennium project to create a new shared pedestrian and cycle bridge was unsuccessful. Hayling Billy Project history. Havant Borough Council website. Retrieved 2010-06-20. 

Until 1963 when the line was closed, Terrier steam locomotives pulled carriages along the 5 mi Hayling Billy Line from Havant Station on the mainland to a station which was located at the northern end of Staunton Avenue, passing through Langstone where there was a Halt. "The Book of Hayling Island and Langstone - More than a Millennium". Rogers,Peter: Tiverton, Halsgrove Press, 2000. ISBN 1-84114-078-3 The only remaining railway building, a goods shed, has now been converted into a theatre which is run by HIADS. Hayling Island Amateur Dramatic Society Official website. Retrieved 2010-06-20. 

A tourist attraction  the East Hayling Light Railway  is a gauge railway that runs for just over 1 mi from Beachlands Station to Eastoke Corner with aspirations to extend the route to Ferry Point within the next few years.

The nearest railway station to Hayling Island is Havant, just onto the mainland off Hayling Island. Alternatively, Portsmouth and Southsea is another railway station, used for connections to Bristol (Temple Meads) and Cardiff.

==Notable people==
*Princess Catherine Yurievskaya, the youngest daughter of Alexander II of Russia, lived on Hayling Island for many years and was buried at St Peter's church in 1959.
*William Thomas Stead, notable political and social campaigner and journalist, had a home on Hayling Island - Hollybush House. He was one of those who perished on the 'Titanic'
*Nevil Shute (Nevil Shute Norway), the Ealing-born aeronautical engineer and novelist lived at Pond Head on Hayling Island during World War II. His most famous novels were 'A Town Like Alice' and 'On the Beach'. 
*Gary Mehigan, British-born chef and judge on Masterchef Australia, was born and raised on Hayling Island.

==Hayling oysterbeds==
Oysters have been fished on the Hayling oysterbeds, at the northwest corner of the island, as long ago as Roman times, documented in town records since 1615. The oysters were actively farmed between as early as 1819 until the 1970s. West Hayling Local Nature Reserve Havant Borough Council website. Retrieved 2010-03-14. Oysters became a delicacy that was exported throughout the country under the classification of Emsworth Oysters. Large complexes consisting of several pens separated by a series of bund walls and sluice gates were built to contain the oysters at varying stages of growth. Although large sections of the walls have since collapsed into the harbour, much of shape and scale of the beds can still be seen today.

In 1996, the oyster beds on the north west coast of Hayling Island were restored by the Havant Borough Council, creating a wildlife haven which has become an important seabird breeding site. The Design Council awarded this project 'Millennium Product' status for the renovation.

==Paris To Hayling Charity Cycle Ride==
The island is the home of the Hayling Charity Cycle Ride. http://www.hayling-cycle-ride.org.uk This event, run entirely by local unpaid volunteers, was started in 1986 and has been run every year since. Up to 2013, over 1,350,000 has been collected for more than 500 good causes. Entrants have come from 15 different countries on five continents. Now in its 29th year, and after two years going to Holland, the event is returning in 2014 to its original destination: Paris.

== Population ==
In the mid to late twentieth century, Hayling Island's population was known to double during the Summer months, due to a large influx of holiday makers and the associated tourism employees to accommodate. As domestic holidays have declined and Hayling's prominence as a traditional English seaside resort have followed in parallel, the population only swells by approximately 20%-25% (English Tourist Board estimate, 2001).

 Population Date 
 ~300 1086 (Domesday Book) 
 578 1801 (census) 
 >1,600 1901 
 >5,500 1950 
 16,887 2001 (census, usually resident population) 

== List of settlements ==
*Mengham
*Northney
*Eastoke
*West Town
*Sinah
*Sandy Point
*South Hayling
*Gable Head
*Ferry Point
*Mill Rythe
*Tournerbury
*Stoke
*Tye

==Places of interest==
*Hayling Island Sailing Club, Sandy Point (AKA Black Point)
*Northney Marina
*Sparkes Yacht Harbour
*Hayling Billy Trail
*East Hayling Light Railway
*Station Theatre
*Ham Field
*Seacourt Tennis Club
*St. Mary's Church, Gable Head
*St. Peter's Church, Northney
*The Kench, near Ferry Point
*The RNLI Lifeboat station at Sandy Point
*The Hayling Ferry
*Funland

==References==



[[HahnBanach theorem]]

In mathematics, the HahnBanach Theorem is a central tool in functional analysis. It allows the extension of bounded linear functionals defined on a subspace of some vector space to the whole space, and it also shows that there are "enough" continuous linear functionals defined on every normed vector space to make the study of the dual space "interesting". Another version of HahnBanach theorem is known as HahnBanach separation theorem or the separating hyperplane theorem, and has numerous uses in convex geometry. It is named for Hans Hahn and Stefan Banach who proved this theorem independently in the late 1920s, although a special case for the space Cb of continuous functions on an interval was proved earlier (in 1912) by Eduard Helly, and a general extension theorem from which the Hahn&ndash;Banach theorem can be derived was proved in 1923 by Marcel Riesz. See M. Riesz extension theorem. According to , the argument was known to Riesz already in 1918. 

== Formulation ==
The most general formulation of the theorem needs some preparation. Given a real vector space , a function f : V  R is called sublinear if 

* homogeneity|Positive Homogeneity:] f(x)  f(x) for all   R+, x  V,
* function|Subadditivity:] f(x + y)  f(x) + f(y) for all x, y  V.

Every seminorm on (in particular, every norm on ) is sublinear. Other sublinear functions can be useful as well, especially Minkowski functionals of convex sets.

HahnBanach Theorem . If p : V  R is a sublinear function, and  : U  R is a linear functional on a linear subspace U  V which is dominated by on , i.e.

: 

then there exists a linear extension  : V  R of to the whole space , i.e., there exists a linear functional such that

:
:

HahnBanach Theorem (Alternate Version). Set K R or C and let be a K-vector space with a seminorm p : V  R. If  : U  K is a K-linear functional on a K-linear subspace of which is dominated by on in absolute value, 

: 

then there exists a linear extension  : V  K of to the whole space , i.e., there exists a K-linear functional such that

:
:

In the complex case of the alternate version, the C-linearity assumptions demand, in addition to the assumptions for the real case, that for every vector x  U, we have ix  U and (ix) i(x). 

The extension is in general not uniquely specified by and the proof gives no explicit method as to how to find . The usual proof for the case of an infinite dimensional space uses Zorn's lemma or, equivalently, the axiom of choice. It is now known (see section 4.0) that the ultrafilter lemma, which is slightly weaker than the axiom of choice, is actually strong enough.

It is possible to relax slightly the sublinearity condition on , requiring only that (Reed and Simon, 1980):

:

This reveals the intimate connection between the HahnBanach theorem and convexity.

The Mizar project has completely formalized and automatically checked the proof of the HahnBanach theorem in the HAHNBAN file.

== Important Consequences ==
The theorem has several important consequences, some of which are also sometimes called "HahnBanach theorem":
* If is a normed vector space with linear subspace (not necessarily closed) and if  : U  K is continuous and linear, then there exists an extension  : V  K of which is also continuous and linear and which has the same norm as (see Banach space for a discussion of the norm of a linear map). In other words, in the category of normed vector spaces, the space K is an injective object.
* If is a normed vector space with linear subspace (not necessarily closed) and if is an element of not in the closure of , then there exists a continuous linear map  : V  K with (x) 0 for all in , (z) 1, and  dist(z, U)1.
* In particular, if is a normed vector space and if is any element of , then there exists a continuous linear map  : V  K with (z) z and   1. This implies that the natural injection from a normed space into its double dual V is isometric.

== HahnBanach Separation Theorem ==
Another version of HahnBanach theorem is known as the HahnBanach separation theorem. Gabriel Nagy, Real Analysis lecture notes It has numerous uses in convex geometry, optimization theory, and economics. The separation theorem is derived from the original form of the theorem.

Theorem. Set K R or C and let be a topological vector space over K. If A, B are convex, non-empty disjoint subsets of , then:
*If is open, then there exists a continuous linear map  : V  K and t  R such that Re((a)) < t  Re((b)) for all a  A, b  B.
*If is locally convex, is compact, and closed, then there exists a continuous linear map  : V  K and s, t  R such that Re((a)) < t < s < Re((b)) for all a  A, b  B.

== Geometric HahnBanach theorem ==
One form of Hahn-Banach theorem is known as the Geometric Hahn-Banach Theorem, or Mazur's Theorem. Luenberger, David G. (1969), Optimization by vector space methods, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0471-18117-X 

Theorem. Let be a convex set having a nonempty interior in a real normed linear vector space . Suppose is a linear variety in containing no interior points of . Then there is a closed hyperplane in containing but containing no interior points of ; i.e., there is an element x*  X* and a constant such that c for all v  V and < c for all k  int(K).

This can be generalized to an arbitrary topological vector space, which need not be localy convex or even Hausdorff, as: Treves, p. 184 

Theorem. Let be a vector subspace of the topological vector space . Suppose is a non-empty convex open subset of with K  M . Then there is a closed hyperplane in containing with K  N .

== Relation to Axiom of Choice ==
As mentioned earlier, the axiom of choice implies the HahnBanach theorem. The converse is not true. One way to see that is by noting that the ultrafilter lemma (or equivalently, the Boolean prime ideal theorem), which is strictly weaker than the axiom of choice, can be used to show the HahnBanach theorem, although the converse is not the case. 

The HahnBanach theorem is equivalent to the following: 

:(): On every Boolean algebra there exists a "probability charge", that is: a nonconstant finitely additive map from into 1.

(The Boolean prime ideal theorem is easily seen to be equivalent to the statement that there are always probability charges which take only the values 0 and 1.) 

In ZF, one can show that the HahnBanach theorem is enough to derive the existence of a non-Lebesgue measurable set. Moreover, the HahnBanach theorem implies the Banach-Tarski paradox. 

For separable Banach spaces, D. K. Brown and S. G. Simpson proved that the HahnBanach theorem follows from WKL0, a weak subsystem of second-order arithmetic that takes Knig's Lemma as an axiom. In fact, they prove that under a weak set of assumptions, the two are equivalent, an example of Reverse mathematics. Source of citation. Simpson, Stephen G. (2009), Subsystems of second order arithmetic, Perspectives in Logic (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-88439-6, MR2517689 

==Consequences==
===Topological Vector Spaces===
If is a topological vector space, not necessarily Hausdorff or locally convex, then there exists a non-zero continuous linear form if and only if contains a non-empty, convex, open set such that U  X. Schaefer 1999, p. 47 So if the continuous dual space of X, X*, is non-trivial then by considering with the weak topology induced by X*, X becomes a locally convex topological vector space with a non-trivial topology that is weaker than original topology on . If in addition, X* separates points on (which means that for each x  X there is a linear functional in X* that's non-zero on ) then with this weak topology becomes Hausdorff. This sometimes allows some results from locally convex topological vector spaces to be applied to non-Hausdorff and non-locally convex spaces.

===The dual space Cb*===
We have the following consequence of the HahnBanach theorem.

Proposition. Let  < a < b < . Then, F  Cb* if and only if there exists a (complex) measure  : b  R of bounded variation such that
: 
for all u  Cb. In addition, F V(), where V() denotes the total variation of .

== See also ==
* M. Riesz extension theorem
* Separating axis theorem

==Notes==
 

==References==
* 
* Lawrence Narici and Edward Beckenstein, "The HahnBanach Theorem: The Life and Times", Topology and its Applications, Volume 77 (1997), 193211. 
* Lothar M Schmitt, An Equivariant Version of the Hahn-Banach Theorem, Houston J. of Math. 18 (1992), 429-447
* Michael Reed and Barry Simon, Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics, Vol. 1, Functional Analysis, Section III.3. Academic Press, San Diego, 1980. ISBN 0-12-585050-6.
* 
* Terence Tao, The HahnBanach theorem, Mengers theorem, and Hellys theorem 
* 
* Gerd Wittstock, Ein operatorwertiger Hahn-Banach Satz, J. of Functional Analysis 40 (1981), 127150
* Eberhard Zeidler, Applied Functional Analysis: main principles and their applications, Springer, 1995.



[[Hampshire]]

 Hampshire 
 The flag of Hampshire Flag of Hampshire County Council 
 Hampshire within England 
 Geography 
 Status Ceremonial and (smaller) non-metropolitan county 
 Region: South East England 
 Area- Total- Admin. council- Admin. area Ranked 9th3,769 km (1,455 sq mi) Ranked 7th3,679 km (1,420 sq mi) 
 Admin HQ: Winchester 
 County Flower: Tudor Rose 
 ISO 3166-2]: GB-HAM 
 ONS code: 24 
 NUTS 3: UKJ33 
 Demographics 
 Population- Total ()- Density- Admin. council- Admin. pop. Ranked PD/km2Ranked 
 Ethnicity: 96.7% White1.3% S. Asian 0.8% Mixed 1.2% Other 
 Politics 
 Hampshire County Councilhttp://www.hampshire.gov.uk 
 Executive 
 Members of Parliament * James Arbuthnot (C) * Steve Brine (C) * John Denham (L) * Caroline Dinenage (C) * Mike Hancock (LD) * Damian Hinds (C) * Mark Hoban (C) * George Hollingbery (C) * Gerald Howarth (C) * Julian Lewis (C) * Maria Miller (C) * Penny Mordaunt (C) * Caroline Nokes (C) * Desmond Swayne (C) * Mike Thornton (LD) * Alan Whitehead (L) * David Willetts (C) * Sir George Young (C) 
 Districts 
 #Gosport #Fareham #Winchester #Havant #East Hampshire #Hart #Rushmoor #Basingstoke and Deane #Test Valley #Eastleigh #New Forest #Southampton (Unitary) #Portsmouth (Unitary) 

Hampshire (, or variants; abbreviated Hants) is a county on the southern coast of England in the United Kingdom. The county town of Hampshire is Winchester, the former capital city of England. Hampshire is the most populous ceremonial county in the United Kingdom excluding the metropolitan counties with almost half of the county's population living within the South Hampshire conurbation which includes the cities of Southampton and Portsmouth. Hampshire is notable for housing the birthplaces of the Royal Navy, British Army, and Royal Air Force. The ceremonial county is bordered by Dorset to the west, Wiltshire to the north-west, Berkshire to the north, Surrey to the north-east, and West Sussex to the east. The southern boundary is the coastline of the English Channel and the Solent, facing the Isle of Wight.

Hampshire is the largest county in South East England and the third largest shire county in the United Kingdom despite losing more land than any other English county during the Local Government Act 1972 boundary changes. At its greatest size in 1889, Hampshire was the fifth largest county in England. It now has an overall area of 3700 km2, [http://www.itisholdings.com/downloadfile.asp?id=72 ] and measures approximately 86 km eastwest and 76 km northsouth. 

Hampshire's tourist attractions include many seaside resorts, the motor museum at Beaulieu, and national parks in both the New Forest and the South Downs (covering some 45% of the county). Hampshire has a long maritime history and two of England's largest ports, Portsmouth and Southampton, lie on its coast. The county is famed as home of such writers as Jane Austen and Charles Dickens, as well as the birthplace of engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel.

==Etymology==
Hampshire takes its name from the settlement that is now the city of Southampton. Southampton was known in Old English as Hamtun, roughly meaning "village-town", so its surrounding area or scr became known as Hamtunscr. The old name was recorded in the Domesday book as Hantescire, and it is from this misspelling that the modern abbreviation "Hants" derives. From 1889 until 1959, the administrative county was named the County of Southampton. 

==History==

===Prehistory until the Norman Conquest===

Humans have probably existed in Hampshire on and off for perhaps as much as 700,000 years. The region is believed to have been continuously occupied since the end of the last Ice Age approximately 12,000 BP. Oppenheimer, S, 2006, The Origins of the British At this time Britain was still attached to the European continent and was predominantly covered with deciduous woodland. The first inhabitants came overland from Europe; these were anatomically and behaviourally modern humans, Mesolithic hunter-gatherers. Over several thousand years, the climate got progressively warmer, and sea levels rose; the English Channel, which started out as a river, was a major inlet by 8000 BCE, although Britain was still connected to Europe by a land bridge across the North Sea until 6500 BCE. Gaffney, V, Fitch, S, and Smith, D, 2009, Europe's Lost World: The rediscovery of Doggerland Notable sites from this period include Bouldnor Cliff.

Agriculture had arrived in southern Britain by 4000 BCE, and with it a neolithic culture. Some deforestation took place in this period, although it is during the Bronze Age, beginning in 2200 BCE, that this became more widespread and systematic. Pryor, F, 2003, Britain BC Hampshire has few monuments to show from these early periods, although nearby Stonehenge was built in several phases at some time between 3100 BCE and 2200 BCE. In the very late Bronze Age, fortified hilltop settlements known as hillforts began to appear in large numbers in many parts of Britain including Hampshire, and these became more and more important in the early and middle Iron Age; Cunliffe, B, 2008, Iron Age Communities in Britain, fourth edition many of these are still visible in the landscape today and can be visited, notably Danebury Rings, the subject of a major study by archaeologist Barry Cunliffe. It is maintained that by this period the people of Britain predominantly spoke a Celtic language, and their culture shared much in common with the Celts described by classical writers. Cunliffe, B, 1997, The Ancient Celts 

Hillforts largely declined in importance in the second half of the second century BCE, with many being abandoned. It was probably around this period that the first recorded invasion of Britain took place, as southern Britain was largely conquered by warrior-elites from Belgic tribes of northeastern Gaul - whether these two events are linked to the decline of hillforts is unknown. By the Roman conquest, the oppidum at Venta, modern-day Winchester, was the de facto regional administrative centre; Winchester was however of secondary importance to the Roman-style town of Calleva, modern Silchester, built further north by a dominant Belgic polity known as the Atrebates in the 50s BCE. Julius Caesar invaded southeastern England briefly in 55 and again in 54 BCE, but he never reached Hampshire. Notable sites from this period include Hengistbury Head (now technically in Dorset), which was a major port. Pryor, F, 2004, Britain BC There is a "Museum of the Iron Age" in Andover.

The Romans invaded Britain again in 43 CE, and Hampshire was incorporated into the Roman province of Britannia very quickly. It is generally believed their political leaders allowed themselves to be incorporated peacefully. Venta became the capital of the administrative polity of the Belgae, which included most of Hampshire and Wiltshire and reached as far as Bath. It is not recorded whether the people of Hampshire played any role in Boudicca's rebellion of 60-61 CE, but there is evidence of burning in Winchester dated to around this period. Cunliffe, B, 1991, Wessex to AD 1000, p.218 For most of the next three centuries, southern Britain enjoyed relative peace. The later part of the Roman period saw most towns build defensive walls; a pottery industry based in the New Forest was exported widely across southern Britain. There was a fortification near Southampton called Clausentum, part of the Saxon Shore forts, traditionally seen as defences against maritime raids by Germanic tribes. The Romans officially withdrew from Britain in 410 CE. Cunliffe, B, 1991, Wessex to AD 1000 de la Bedoyere, Guy, 2006, Roman Britain: A New History Pryor, F, 2004, Britain AD 

Records are unreliable for the next two hundred years, but in this time southern Britain went from being Brythonic to being English and Hampshire emerged as the centre of what was to become the most powerful kingdom in Britain, the Kingdom of Wessex. Evidence of early Anglo-Saxon settlement has been found at Clausentum and on the Thames at Dorchester, dated to the fifth century, and by the seventh century, the population of Hampshire was predominantly English-speaking. It is also around this period that the administrative region of "Hampshire" seems to appear; the name is attested as "Hamtunscir" in 755, and Albany Major suggested that the traditional western and northern borders of Hampshire may even go back to the very earliest conquests of Cerdic, legendary founder of Wessex, at the very beginning of the sixth century. Major, Albany F Early Wars of Wessex (1912, 1978) p.17 Wessex gradually expanded westwards into Brythonic Dorset and Somerset in the seventh century. A statue in Winchester celebrates the powerful King Alfred, who repulsed the Vikings and stabilised the region in the 9th century. He was also a great scholar, who commissioned the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, a powerful tool in the development of the English identity. King Alfred proclaimed himself "King of England" in 886; but it was not until 927 that Athelstan of Wessex officially controlled the whole of England. Hinley, G, 2006, A Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons Fleming, R, 2010, Britain After Rome: The Fall and Rise 400 to 1070 

===Middle Ages Onwards===

By the Norman conquest, Winchester had been overtaken by London as the largest city in England, thanks in part to Alfred the Great's investments in infrastructure, and after the Norman Conquest King William I made it his capital. The centre of political power moved away from Hampshire, although Winchester remained a city of importance: it was the proximity of the New Forest to Winchester that made it such a prized royal hunting forest; indeed King William Rufus was famously killed in suspicious circumstances while hunting there. The county was recorded in the Domesday Book divided into 44 hundreds. From the 12th century the ports grew in importance, fuelled by trade with the continent, wool and cloth manufacture in the county, and the fishing industry, and a shipbuilding industry was established. By 1523 at the latest, the population of Southampton had outstripped that of Winchester.

Over several centuries a series of castles and forts were constructed along the coast of the Solent to defend the harbours at Southampton and Portsmouth. These include the Roman Portchester Castle which overlooks Portsmouth Harbour, and a series of forts built by Henry VIII including Hurst Castle, situated on a sand spit at the mouth of the Solent, Calshot Castle on another spit at the mouth of Southampton Water, and Netley Castle. Southampton and Portsmouth remained important harbours when rivals, such as Poole and Bristol declined, as they are amongst the few locations that combine shelter with deep water. Southampton has been host to many famous ships, including the Mayflower and the Titanic, the latter being staffed largely by natives of Southampton.

Hampshire played a crucial role in the Second World War due to the large Royal Navy harbour at Portsmouth, the army camp at Aldershot and the military Netley Hospital on Southampton Water, as well as its proximity to the army training ranges on Salisbury Plain and the Isle of Purbeck. Supermarine, the designers of the Spitfire and other military aircraft, were based in Southampton, which led to severe bombing of the city. Aldershot remains one of the British Army's main permanent camps. Farnborough is a major centre for the Aviation industry.

Although the Isle of Wight was traditionally part of Hampshire, it has been administratively independent for over a century, obtaining a county council of its own in 1890. The Isle of Wight became a full ceremonial county in 1974. Apart from a shared police force there are now no formal administrative links between the Isle of Wight and Hampshire, though many organisations still combine Hampshire and the Isle of Wight.

The towns of Bournemouth and Christchurch also fall within the traditional county of Hampshire, but were transferred to Dorset in the local government reorganisation of 1974. The boundary was changed again in 1992, when South Tidworth was transferred to Wiltshire.

The City Museum in Winchester covers the Iron Age and Roman periods, the Middle Ages, and the Victorian period over three floors.

===United States===
Hampshire was the departure point of some of those later to settle on the east coast of what is now the United States, in the 17th century, giving its name in particular to the state of New Hampshire. The counties of Isle of Wight and Southampton in Virginia reflect the origins of some of the earliest Jamestown settlers. Isle of Wight Historical Review Isle of Wight Plantation. 
Southampton from Netley Hospital

==Governance==
With the exceptions of the unitary authorities of Portsmouth and Southampton, Hampshire is governed by Hampshire County Council based in Winchester, with several non-metropolitan districts beneath it, and for the majority of the county, parish councils or town councils at the local level. The districts of Hampshire are the following:
*Basingstoke and Deane
*City of Winchester
*East Hampshire
*Eastleigh
*Fareham
*Gosport
*Hart
*Havant
*New Forest
*City of Portsmouth (unitary)
*Rushmoor
*City of Southampton (unitary)
*Test Valley
The county also contains two national parks; the first covering the New Forest, and therefore governance of this area is carried out by a national park authority as well as the New Forest District Council, the second the newer national park for the South Downs which covers the chalk downlands from Winchester eastwards which embraces a large number of local authority areas across three counties, Hampshire, West and East Sussex.

==Economy==
The Beaulieu River

Hampshire is a somewhat affluent county, with a Gross domestic product (GDP) of 32.3 billion in 2005 (22.4 billion when excluding Southampton and Portsmouth). Hampshire County Council, 2008. Summary figures  State of the economy. In 2006, Hampshire had a GDP per capita of 19,300, comparable with the UK as a whole and slightly below the South East England figure of 19,600. Hampshire County Council, 2008. Economic performance  State of the economy. 

Portsmouth and Winchester have the biggest job densities in the whole county, and therefore there is a high level of commuting into the cities from towns such as Hook, or even Micheldever. Southampton has the highest number of total jobs and commuting both into and out of the city is high. The county has a lower level of unemployment than the national average, at 1.9% when the national rate was 3.3%, and as of March 2005 has fallen to 1.1%. 39% are employed by large firms, compared with a national average of 42%. Hampshire has a considerably higher than national average employment in high-tech industries, but average levels in knowledge-based industry. 25.21% of the population work in the public sector. Hampshire County Council, 2004. Profile of Hampshire. 

Many rural areas of Hampshire have traditionally been reliant on rural industries such as agriculture, though the county was less rurally agricultural than most surrounding rural counties, and was mostly concentrated on the ancient rural art of dairy farming. The significance of agriculture as a rural employer and rural wealth creator has declined since the first half of the 20th century and agriculture currently employs 1.32% of the rural population.

The New Forest area is a National Park, and tourism is a significant economic segment in this area, with 7.5 million visitors in 1992. New Forest District Council, n.d. "Tourism questions and answers." The South Downs and the cities of Portsmouth, Southampton and Winchester also attract tourists to the county. Southampton Boat Show is one of the biggest annual events held in the county, and attracts visitors from throughout the country. In 2003 the county had a total of 31 million day visits, and 4.2 million longer stays. Hampshire County Council, United Kingdom Tourism Survey & GB Leisure Day Visits Survey, 2004. "Tourism Facts and Figures." 

The urban cities of Southampton and Portsmouth are both significant urban ports, with Southampton handling a large proportion of the national container freight and Portsmouth housing a large Royal Navy base. The maritime docks have traditionally been large employers in these maritime-urban cities, though again mechanisation has forced diversification of the urban-maritime economy.

==Demographics==
Southampton Docks
At the Census 2001 Office for National Statistics & Hampshire County Council, 2003. Census 2001 data the ceremonial county recorded a population of 1,644,249, of which 1,240,103 were in the administrative county, 217,445 were in the unitary authority of Southampton, and 186,701 were in Portsmouth. The population of the administrative county grew 5.6% from the 1991 census, Southampton grew 6.2% while Portsmouth remained unchanged, compared with 2.6% for England and Wales as a whole. Eastleigh and Winchester grew fastest at 9% each. The age structure of the population is similar to the national average. ((needs clarification))

96.73% of residents were white British, falling to 92.37% in Southampton. The significant ethnic minorities are Asian at 1.34% and mixed race at 0.84%. 0.75% of residents were migrants from outside the UK. 73.86% stated their religion as Christianity and 16.86% were not religious. Significant minority religions were Islam (0.76%) and Hinduism (0.33%).

The county has a high level of car ownership, with only 15.7% having no access to a private car compared with 26.8% for England and Wales. The county has a lower than average use of trains (3.2% compared with 4.1% for commuting) and buses (3.2% to 7.4%) but a higher than average use of bicycles (3.5% to 2.7%) and cars (63.5% to 55.3%). Hampshire County Council, 2005. Facts and Figures website. 

==Education==
The school system in Hampshire (including Southampton and Portsmouth) is comprehensive. Geographically inside the Hampshire LEA are twenty four independent schools, Southampton has three and Portsmouth has four. Few Hampshire schools have sixth forms, which varies by district council. There are 14 further education colleges within the Hampshire LEA, including 6 graded as 'outstanding' by Ofsted: Alton College, Brockenhurst College, Farnborough College of Technology, Farnborough Sixth Form College, Peter Symonds College, Queen Mary's College, and South Downs College

There are four universities, namely the University of Southampton, Southampton Solent University, the University of Portsmouth and the University of Winchester (which also had a small campus in Basingstoke until 2011). Farnborough College of Technology awards University of Surrey-accredited degrees.

==Politics==
Hampshire is divided into eighteen parliamentary constituencies. Fourteen of these are represented by Conservative Members of Parliament (MPs), two by the Liberal Democrats and two by Labour. Labour represents the largest urban centre, holding both Southampton constituencies (Test and Itchen). The Liberal Democrats hold Portsmouth South and Eastleigh.

The Conservatives represent a mix of rural and urban areas: Aldershot, Basingstoke, East Hampshire, Fareham, Gosport, Havant, Meon Valley, North East Hampshire, North West Hampshire, New Forest East, New Forest West, Portsmouth North, Romsey and Southampton North and Winchester.

At the 2013 local elections for Hampshire County Council, the Conservative Party had a 37.51% share of the votes, the Liberal Democrats had 21.71%, the UK Independence Party had 24.61% and Labour 10%. As a result, 45 Conservatives, 17 Liberal Democrats, 10 UKIP, four Labour and one Community Campaign councillor sit on the County Council. Hampshire County Council, 2013. . Southampton City Council, which is entirely independent, has 28 Labour, 16 Conservative, 2 Councillors Against the Cuts and 2 Liberal Democrat councillors. Southampton City Council, 2013. . Portsmouth City Council, also independent, has 25 Liberal Democrat, 12 Conservative and 5 Labour councillors. Portsmouth City Council, 2013. . 

Hampshire also has its own County Youth Council (HCYC) and is an independent youth-run organisation. It meets once a month around Hampshire and aims to give the young people of Hampshire a voice. It also has numerous district and borough youth councils including Basingstoke's "Basingstoke & Deane Youth Council". Along with the Youth council for the Test Valley District, youthExpress.

==Wildlife==
Hampshire has wildlife typical of the island of Great Britain. The River Test has a growing number of otters, although other areas of the county have quite low numbers. There are reports of Wild Boar across the county. The New Forest is known for its ponies, which have free rein over much of the area. One distinguishing feature is that Hampshire has a large free roaming herd of Red Deer, including more than 6,500 stags during busy seasons. The stag population is managed by the government and hunting is carefully regulated. http://www.forestry.gov.uk/pdf/Hunting.pdf/$file/Hunting.pdf 

==Physical geography==

=== Natural regions ===
Natural England has identified the following National Character Areas that lie wholly or partially in Hampshire: 

* Hampshire Downs
* New Forest
* South Hampshire Lowlands
* South Coast Plain
* South Downs
* Low Weald
* Thames Basin Heaths

=== Geology and climate ===

Hampshire's geology falls into two categories. In the south, along the coast is the "Hampshire Basin", an area of relatively non-resistant Eocene and Oligocene clays and gravels which are protected from sea erosion by the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, and the Isle of Wight. These low, flat lands support heathland and woodland habitats, a large area of which forms part of the New Forest. The New Forest has a mosaic of heathland, grassland, coniferous and deciduous woodland habitats that host diverse wildlife. The forest is protected as a national park, limiting development and agricultural use to protect the landscape and wildlife. Large areas of the New Forest are open common lands kept as a grassland plagioclimax by grazing animals, including domesticated cattle, pigs and horses, and several wild deer species. Erosion of the weak rock and sea level change flooding the low land has carved several large estuaries and rias, notably the 16 km long Southampton Water and the large convoluted Portsmouth Harbour. The Isle of Wight lies off the coast of Hampshire where the non-resistant rock has been eroded away, forming the Solent.

In the north and centre of the county the substrate is the rocks of the Chalk Group, which form the Hampshire Downs and the South Downs. These are high hills with steep slopes where they border the clays to the south. The hills dip steeply forming a scarp onto the Thames valley to the north, and dip gently to the south. The highest point in the county is Pilot Hill, which reaches a height of 286 m (938 ft), and lies on the border with West Berkshire. Butser Hill near Petersfield is the second highest point at 271 metres (889 ft) and lies in the South Downs National Park. The highest village in Hampshire is Bentworth, near Alton. The downland supports a calcareous grassland habitat, important for wild flowers and insects. A large area of the downs is now protected from further agricultural damage by the East Hampshire Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. The Itchen and Test are trout rivers that flow from the chalk through wooded valleys into Southampton Water. Nestled in a valley on the downs is Selborne, and the countryside surrounding the village was the location of Gilbert White's pioneering observations on natural history. Hampshire's county flower is the Dog Rose. BBC News, 5 May 2004. UK counties choose floral emblems. 

Hampshire has a milder climate than most areas of the British Isles, 

 being in the far south with the climate stabilising effect of the sea, but protected against the more extreme weather of the Atlantic coast. Hampshire has a higher average annual temperature than the UK average at 9.8 to, Met Office, 2000. Annual average temperature for the United Kingdom. average rainfall at 640 - per year, Met Office, 2000. Annual average rainfall for the United Kingdom. and holds higher than average sunshine totals of around 1,750 hours of sunshine per year. Met Office, 2000. Annual average sunshine for the United Kingdom. 

=== Hills ===
There is a separate list of hills with Hampshire's highest and most notable hills.

==Cities, towns and villages==
New apartment blocks in the rapidly changing Basingstoke
Hampshire's county town is Winchester, a historic city that was once the capital of the ancient kingdom of Wessex and of England until the Norman conquest of England. The port cities of Southampton and Portsmouth were split off as independent unitary authorities in 1997, although they are still included in Hampshire for ceremonial purposes. Fareham, Gosport and Havant have grown into a conurbation that stretches along the coast between the two main cities. The three cities are all university cities, Southampton being home to the University of Southampton and Southampton Solent University (formerly Southampton Institute), Portsmouth to the University of Portsmouth, and Winchester to the University of Winchester (formerly known as University College Winchester; King Alfred's College).The northeast of the county houses the Blackwater Valley conurbation, which includes the towns of Farnborough, Aldershot, Blackwater and Yateley and borders both Berkshire and Surrey.

Hampshire lies outside the green belt area of restricted development around London, but has good railway and motorway links to the capital, and in common with the rest of the south-east has seen the growth of dormitory towns since the 1960s. Basingstoke, in the northern part of the county, has grown from a country town into a business and financial centre. Aldershot, Portsmouth, and Farnborough have strong military associations with the Army, Royal Navy, and Royal Air Force respectively. The county also includes several market towns: Alton, Andover, Bishop's Waltham, Lymington, New Milton, Petersfield, Ringwood, Romsey and Whitchurch.

Cities and Towns by population size: (2001 census)
* Southampton  244,224
* Portsmouth  207,100
* Basingstoke  90,171 (town), 152,573 (borough)
* Gosport  69,348 (town), 77,000 (borough)
* Waterlooville  63,558
* Aldershot  58,120
* Farnborough  57,147
* Fareham/Portchester  56,010 (town), 109,619 (borough)
* Eastleigh  52,894 (town), 116,177 (borough)
* Andover  52,000
* Havant  45,435 (town), 115,300 (borough)
* Winchester  41,420 (town), 116,600 (district)
*
* Fleet  32,726

For the complete list of settlements see List of places in Hampshire.

==Culture, arts and sport==
Winchester Cathedral 
Due to Hampshire's long association with pigs and boars, natives of the county have been known as Hampshire hogs since the 18th century. Hampshire County Council, 2003. "Press Release: Hampshire's Hog has a home." Hampshire has literary connections, being the birthplace of authors including Jane Austen and Charles Dickens, and the residence of others, such as Charles Kingsley. Austen lived most of her life in Hampshire, where her father was rector of Steventon, Hampshire, and wrote all of her novels in the county. Hampshire also has many visual art connections, claiming the painter John Everett Millais as a native, and the cities and countryside have been the subject of paintings by L. S. Lowry and J. M. W. Turner. Selborne was the home of Gilbert White; his house is now a museum, which also includes The Oates Collection, dedicated to the explorer Lawrence Oates.

Hampshire is the home of many orchestras, bands and groups. Musician Laura Marling hails originally from Hampshire. The Hampshire County Youth Choir is based in Winchester, and has had successful tours of Canada and Italy in recent years. The Hampshire County Youth Orchestra (with its associated chamber orchestra and string orchestra) is based at Thornden Hall.

The Rose Bowl 
The game of cricket was largely developed in south-east England, with one of the first teams forming at Hambledon in 1750, with the Hambledon Club creating many of cricket's early rules. Hampshire County Cricket Club today is a successful first-class team, captained by Dimitri Mascarenhas. The main county ground is the Rose Bowl in West End, which has hosted several one day internationals and which, following redevelopment, hosted its first test match in 2011. Notable players include current England batsman Kevin Pietersen. Hampshire have also been captained by former Australian leg-spinner Shane Warne.

Hampshire's relatively safe waters have allowed the county to develop as one of the busiest sailing areas in the country, with many yacht clubs and several manufacturers on the Solent. The sport of windsurfing was invented at Hayling Island, which is to the south east of the county. 

Fratton Park as viewed from the Milton End in 2006 
Hampshire has several association football teams, including Premier League side Southampton F.C., League Two side Portsmouth F.C. and Conference Premier side Aldershot Town F.C.. Portsmouth F.C. and Southampton F.C. have traditionally been fierce rivals. Portsmouth won the FA Cup in 1939 and 2008 and Football League title twice, in 1949 and 1950, but have spent much of the last 50 years outside the top division, including three seasons in the Fourth Division, which they are currently competing in (the lowest division in senior football). Southampton, meanwhile, won the FA Cup in 1976, reached the final in 2003 and spent 27 unbroken years in England's top division between 1978 and 2005. Aldershot F.C. became members of the Football League in 1932 but never progressed beyond the Third Division, and on 25 March 1992 went into liquidation and were forced to resign from the league. A new football club, Aldershot Town F.C. was formed almost immediately, and started life in Division 3 of the Isthmian League. In 2008 Aldershot Town were crowned the Conference Premier champions and were promoted into the Football League, however they lost their Football League status after the 2012/13 season which saw them finish bottom of the football league.

Hampshire also has a number of Non League football teams. Basingstoke Town, Eastleigh, Farnborough and Havant & Waterlooville play in the Conference South. Bashley Gosport and AFC Totton play in the Southern Football League Premier Division and Sholing F.C. and Winchester City F.C. play in the Southern Football League Division One South and West.

Thruxton Circuit, in the north of the county, is Hampshire's premier motor racing circuit. The National Motor Museum is located in the New Forest adjacent to Beaulieu Palace House.

The Farnborough Airshow is a popular international event, held biennially.

==Media==
Hampshire Chronicle office, 1999
The county's news is covered on BBC TV by BBC South Today from its studios in Southampton. ITV news covers the county as part of ITV Meridian, though both BBC London and ITV London can be received in northern and eastern parts of the county. Countless commercial radio stations cover the area, and BBC Radio Solent looks after the majority of the county, while BBC Surrey can be heard in the north east. University journalism students also broadcast bulletins for local areas  such as Winol in Winchester.

Southampton and Portsmouth support daily newspapers; the Southern Daily Echo and Portsmouth News. The Basingstoke Gazette is published three times a week, and there are a number of other papers that publish on a weekly basis.

==Transport==
Southampton Airport, with an accompanying main line railway station, is an international airport situated in the Borough of Eastleigh, close to Swaythling in the city of Southampton. Cross-channel and cross-Solent ferries link the county to the Isle of Wight, the Channel Islands and continental Europe. The South Western Main Line (operated by South West Trains) railway from London to Weymouth runs through Winchester and Southampton, and the Wessex Main Line from Bristol to Portsmouth also runs through the county as does the Portsmouth Direct Line.

The M3 motorway connects the county to London. The construction of the Twyford Down cutting near Winchester caused major controversy by cutting through a series of ancient trackways (the Dongas) and other features of archaeological significance. The M27 motorway serves a bypass for the major conurbations and as a link to other settlements on the south coast. Other important roads include the A3, A31 and A36.The roads in the county are known for their heavy traffic, especially around Southampton and Portsmouth and the M27 and A27.

Hampshire formerly had several canals, but most of these have been abandoned and their routes built over. The Basingstoke Canal has been extensively restored, and is now navigable for most of its route, but the Salisbury and Southampton Canal, Andover Canal and Portsmouth and Arundel Canal have all disappeared. Restoration of the Itchen Navigation, linking Southampton and Winchester, primarily as a wildlife corridor, began in 2008.

==Notable people from Hampshire==

==Emergency services==
*Hampshire Constabulary
*Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service
*South Central Ambulance Service NHS Trust
*South East Coast Ambulance Service NHS Trust (for the North East corner of Hampshire)

==See also==
* Business in Hampshire
* Custos Rotulorum of HampshireKeepers of the Rolls
* Hampshire (UK Parliament constituency)Historical list of MPs for Hampshire constituency
* List of High Sheriffs of Hampshire
* List of churches in Hampshire
* List of hills of Hampshire
* List of Parliamentary constituencies in Hampshire
* List of places in Hampshire
* List of Lord Lieutenants of Hampshire
* Places of interest in Hampshire
* Recreational walks in Hampshire

==Notes==

==References==
*Encyclopdia Britannica Eleventh Edition. "Hampshire"
* Bullen, Michael et al, The Buildings of England: Hampshire (Winchester and the North). Yale, 2010. ISBN 978-0-300-12084-4
*Draper, Jo. 1990. Hampshire. Wimborne: Dovecote Press. ISBN 0-946159-82-3
*Pigot & Co's Atlas of the Counties of England, 1840. London: J Pigot & Co.

==External links==

* Hampshire County Council
* Images of Hampshire at the English Heritage Archive
*

 



[[Hard science fiction]]

Hard science fiction is a category of science fiction characterized by an emphasis on scientific or technical detail, or on scientific accuracy, or on both. The term was first used in print in 1957 by P. Schuyler Miller in a review of John W. Campbell, Jr.'s Islands of Space in Astounding Science Fiction. The complementary term soft science fiction (formed by analogy to "hard science fiction" ) first appeared in the late 1970s. The term is formed by analogy to the popular distinction between the "hard" (natural) and "soft" (social) sciences. The science fiction critic Gary Westfahl argues that neither term is part of a rigorous taxonomyinstead they are approximate ways of characterizing stories that reviewers and commentators have found useful. 

Today, the term "soft science fiction" is often used to refer to science fiction stories which lack a scientific focus or rigorous adherence to known science. The categorization "hard science fiction" represents a position on a broad continuum--ranging from "softer" to "harder". 

==Scientific rigor==
The heart of the "hard SF" designation is the relationship of the science content and attitude to the rest of the narrative, and (for some readers, at least) the "hardness" or rigor of the science itself. One requirement for hard SF is procedural or intentional: a story should try to be accurate, logical, credible and rigorous in its use of current scientific and technical knowledge about which technology, phenomena, scenarios and situations that are practically and/or theoretically possible. For example, the development of concrete proposals for spaceships, space stations, space missions, and a US space program in the 1950s and 1960s influenced a widespread proliferation of "hard" space stories. Later discoveries do not necessarily invalidate the label of hard SF, as evidenced by P. Schuyler Miller, who called Arthur C. Clarke's 1961 novel A Fall of Moondust hard SF, and the designation remains valid even though a crucial plot element, the existence of deep pockets of "moondust" in lunar craters, is now known to be incorrect.

There is a degree of flexibility in how far from "real science" a story can stray before it leaves the realm of hard SF. Some authors scrupulously avoid such technology as faster-than-light travel, while others accept such notions (sometimes referred to as "enabling devices", since they allow the story to take place ) but focus on realistically depicting the worlds that such a technology might make possible. In this view, a story's scientific "hardness" is less a matter of the absolute accuracy of the science content than of the rigor and consistency with which the various ideas and possibilities are worked out. 

Readers of "hard SF" often try to find inaccuracies in stories, a process which Gary Westfahl says writers call "the game". For example a group at MIT concluded that the planet Mesklin in Hal Clement's 1953 novel Mission of Gravity would have had a sharp edge at the equator, and a Florida high-school class calculated that in Larry Niven's 1970 novel Ringworld the topsoil would have slid into the seas in a few thousand years. The same book famously featured a devastating inaccuracy: the eponymous Ringworld is not (in) a stable orbit and would crash into the sun without active stabilization. Niven fixed these errors in his sequel The Ringworld Engineers, and noted them in the foreword.

==Representative works==
Arranged chronologically by publication year.

===Short stories===

*Hal Clement, "Uncommon Sense" (1945)
*James Blish, "Surface Tension" (1952), (Book 3 of The Seedling Stars ) The short story "Surface Tension" has also been described as an exemplar of soft science fiction. () 
*Tom Godwin, "The Cold Equations" (1954) 
*Poul Anderson, "Kyrie" (1968) 
*Frederik Pohl, "Day Million" (1971) 
*Larry Niven, "Inconstant Moon" (1971) and "The Hole Man" (1974) 
*Greg Bear, "Tangents" (1986) 
*Geoffrey A. Landis, "A Walk in the Sun" (1991) 
*Vernor Vinge, "Fast Times at Fairmont High" (2001) 

===Novels===

*Hal Clement, Mission of Gravity (1953) 
*Arthur C. Clarke, A Fall of Moondust (1961), Rendezvous with Rama (1972)
*Stanislaw Lem, Solaris (1961)
*Poul Anderson, Tau Zero (1970)
*James P. Hogan, The Two Faces of Tomorrow (1979) 
*Robert L. Forward, Dragon's Egg (1980) Some editions also include a preface by Larry Niven, admitting that "I couldn't have written it; it required too much real physics" 
*A.K. Dewdney, The Planiverse (1984)
*Robert Silverberg (editor), Murasaki (1992)
*Stephen Baxter, Ring (1996)
*Charles Sheffield, Between the Strokes of Night (1985) 
*Kim Stanley Robinson, The Mars trilogy (Red Mars (1992), Green Mars (1993), Blue Mars (1996)) 
*Ben Bova, Grand Tour series (19922009)
*Catherine Asaro, Primary Inversion (1995, 2012) Bulletin of Science, technology and Science 
*Nancy Kress, Beggars in Spain (1993) 
*Greg Egan, Schild's Ladder (2002) Schild's Ladder by Greg Egan 
*Alastair Reynolds, Pushing Ice (2005)
*Paul J. McAuley, The Quiet War (2008)
*Frank P. Ryan, The Doomsday Genie (2007)
*Michael K. Jones, Excursion (novel) (2012)

===Anime / Manga===
* Yukinobu Hoshino, 2001 Nights (1984, 1986)
* They Were Eleven (1986)
* (1987)
* Gunbuster (1988)
* Makoto Yukimura, Planetes (1999, 2004)
* Twin Spica (2003)
* Flag (2006)
* Pale Cocoon (2006)
* Denn Coil (2007)
* Moonlight Mile (2007)
* Steins;Gate (2009)
* Eden of the East (2009)
* Summer Wars (2009)
* Knights of Sidonia (2009)

==See also==
*Hard fantasy
*Hard science
*Interstellar travel in fiction
*Soft science fiction

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
*On Hard Science Fiction: A Bibliography, originally published in Science Fiction Studies #60 (July 1993).
*David G. Hartwell, "Hard Science Fiction,", Introduction to The Ascent of Wonder: The Evolution of Hard Science Fiction, 1994, ISBN 0-312-85509-5
*Kathryn Cramer's chapter on hard science fiction in The Cambridge Companion to SF, ed. Farah Mendlesohn & Edward James.
*
*A Political History of SF by Eric Raymond
*The Science in Science Fiction by Brian Stableford, David Langford, & Peter Nicholls (1982)
*David N. Samuelson, "Hard SF," pp. 194200, The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction, 2009.

==External links==
*Hard Science Fiction Exclusive Interviews
*Kheper Realism scale
*Science Fiction Stories with Good Astronomy & Physics: A Topical Index
*The Ascent of Wonder by David G. Hartwell & Kathryn Cramer. Story notes and introductions.
*The Ten Best Hard Science Fiction Books of all Time, selected by the editors of MIT's Technology Review, 2011
*Low-Level Science fiction Is there a need for this sub-genre?



[[Handloading]]

granules, rimless brass case, Boxer primer.]]

Handloading or reloading is the process of loading firearm cartridges or shotgun shells by assembling the individual components (case/hull, primer, powder, and bullet/shot), rather than purchasing completely assembled, factory-loaded ammunition. Boxer-primed cases are more commonly reloaded. Nonte, chapter 1, "Handloading, What and Why" (See centerfire ammunition.) 

Historically, handloading referred to the private manufacture of cartridges and shells using all newly manufactured components, whereas reloading referred to the private manufacture of cartridges and shells using previously fired cartridge cases and shotgun hulls using new bullets, shot, primers, and powder. In modern usage, some make no distinction between these terms, while others find important distinctions. One key distinction is the purpose for the practice; handloaders often seek smaller batches of high-quality ammunition, whereas reloaders are said to make large quantities of ammunition that does not need to be of as high quality but at least one authority (McPherson) holds that a better distinction for these connotations is that, regardless of quantity, handloads tend to be of generally high quality while reloads tend to be merely functional.

== Reasons for handloading ==
Economy, increased accuracy, performance, commercial ammunition shortages, and hobby interests are all common motivations for handloading both cartridges and shotshells. Reloading fired cartridge cases can save the shooter money, or provides the shooter with more, and higher quality, ammunition within a given budget. Reloading may not be cost effective for occasional shooters, as it takes time to recoup the cost of the required equipment, but those who shoot on a regular basis will see benefit as the brass cartridge case or shotgun shell hull (the most expensive components) can be reused many times (with proper maintenance). Besides economy, the ability to customize the performance of ammunition is a common goal. Hunters may desire cartridges with specialized bullets or specific performance as regards bullet and velocity. Target shooters seek the best achievable accuracy, as well as the best shot-to-shot consistency. Shotgunning enthusiasts can make specialty rounds not available in commercial inventories at any price. Many handloaders also customize their cartridges and shells to their specific firearms, usually in pursuit of accuracy: they can assemble precision ammunition using cartridge cases that have been fire formed in the chamber of a specific firearm. 

Handloaders also have the flexibility to make reduced-power rounds for hunting rifles, such as handloading to an equivalent of a milder-recoiling round to encourage recoil-averse hunters to become proficient with a full-power one. Rather than purchasing a special purpose rifle, which many novice hunters would outgrow within a few hunting seasons, a single rifle can be used with special handloaded rounds until such time more powerful rounds are desired and become appropriate. This use of specialized handloading techniques often provides significant cost savings, especially when a hunter in a family already has a full-power rifle and a new hunter in the family wishes to learn the sport. This technique also enables hunters to use the same rifle and caliber to hunt a wider variety of game.

Collectors of obsolete firearms who want to shoot those guns often must handload because appropriate cartridges or shotshells are no longer commercially produced. Handloaders can also create cartridges for which no commercial equivalent exists - wildcat cartridges. Nonte, chapter 14, "Case Forming: Making What You Need from What You've Got." As with any hobby, the pure enjoyment of the reloading process may be the most important benefit.

Recurring shortages of commercial ammunition are also reasons to reload cartridges and shotshells. When commercial supplies dry up, and store-bought ammunition is not available at any price, having the ability to reload one's own cartridges and shotshells economically provides an ability to continue shooting despite shortages.

There are three aspects to ballistics: internal ballistics, external ballistics, and terminal ballistics. Internal ballistics refers to things that happen inside the firearm during and after firing but before the bullet leaves the muzzle. The handloading process can realize increased accuracy and precision through improved consistency of manufacture, by selecting the optimal bullet weight and design, and tailoring bullet velocity to the purpose. Each cartridge reloaded can have each component carefully matched to the rest of the cartridges in the batch. Brass cases can be matched by volume, weight, and concentricity, bullets by weight and design, powder charges by weight, type, case filling (amount of total usable case capacity filled by charge), and packing scheme (characteristics of granule packing).

In addition to these critical items, the equipment used to assemble the cartridge also has an effect on its uniformity/consistency and optimal shape/size; dies used to size the cartridges can be matched to the chamber of a given gun. Modern handloading equipment enables a firearm owner to tailor fresh ammunition to a specific firearm, and to precisely measured tolerances far improving the comparatively wide tolerances within which commercial ammunition manufacturers must operate. Where the most extreme accuracy is demanded, such as in rifle benchrest shooting, handloading is a fundamental prerequisite for success. 

Insurgency and resistance groups, as well as military partisans, might also have need to handload cartridges and shotshells due to unavailability or scarcity of factory-produced commercial ammunition within particular jurisdictions, or under certain circumstances. Low quality of available factory ammunition, even without scarcity of ammunition, can also lead to the need for widespread fabrication of handloaded ammunition.

== Equipment ==
Hornady single stage reloading press ("O" frame) with die
The basic piece of equipment for handloading is the press. A press is a device that uses compound leverage to push the cases into the dies that perform the loading operations. Nonte, chapter 2, "Choosing Tools and Equipment" Presses vary from simple, inexpensive single stage models, to complex progressive models that will eject a loaded cartridge with each pull of a lever, at rates of 10 rounds a minute. 

=== Presses ===
Presses are often categorized by the letter of the alphabet that they most resemble: "O", "C", and "H". The sturdiest presses, suitable for bullet swaging functions as well as for normal reloading die usage, are of the "O" type. Heavy steel completely encloses the single die on these presses. Equally sturdy presses for all but bullet swaging use often resemble the letter "C". Both steel and aluminum construction are seen with "C" presses. Some users prefer "C" style presses over "O" presses, as there is more room to place bullets into cartridge mouths on "C" presses. Shotshell style presses, intended for non-batch use, for which each shotshell or cartridge is cycled through the dies before commencing onto the next shotshell or cartridge to be reloaded, commonly resemble the letter "H". 

Single stage presses, generally of the "O" or "C" types, are the simplest. They perform one step on one case at a time. When using a single stage press, cases are loaded in batches, one step for each cartridge per batch at a time. Batches are kept small, about 20-50 cases at a time, so that a batch is never left in a partially completed state, as high humidity and light can degrade the powder. Single stage presses are commonly most used for high-precision rifle cartridge handloading, but may be used for high-precision reloading of all cartridge types, and for working up loads (developing loading recipes) for ultimately manufacturing large numbers of cartridges on a progressive press. 

Turret presses, most commonly of the "C" type, are similar to single stage presses, but permit mounting all of the dies for one cartridge (or sometimes two cartridges) simultaneously, with each die being installed and correctly locked in position with lock rings onto the press at the same time. Batch operations are performed similar as to on a single stage press, but to switch dies, the turret is simply rotated, placing another die in position. Although turret presses operate much like single stage presses, they eliminate much of the setup time required in positioning individual dies correctly. 

Progressive presses handle several shells at once, with each pull of the lever performing a single step on all the cases at once. Progressive presses hold all the dies needed, plus a powder measure and a primer feed, and often also include an additional station where the powder levels are checked, to prevent over or under charges. Progressive presses also often feature case feeds that will hold hundreds of cases to be loaded, and all the user has to do is hold the bullet in place over the appropriate case mouth, and pull the lever. 

====Shotshell presses====

Shotshell presses are a special case, and are generally a single unit of the "H" configuration that handles all functions, dedicated to reloading just one gauge of shotshell. Shotshell reloading is similar to cartridge reloading, except that, instead of a bullet, a wad and a measure of shot are used, and after loading the shot, the shell is crimped shut. Both 6 and 8 fold crimps are in use, for paper hulls and plastic hulls, respectively. Likewise, roll crimps are in use for metallic, paper, and plastic hulls. The shotshell loader contains stations to resize the shell, measure powder, load the wad, measure shot, and crimp the shell. Due to the low cost of modern plastic shotshells, and the additional complexity of reloading fired shells, shotshell handloading is not as popular as cartridge handloading. For example, unlike when handloading rifle and pistol cartridges, where all the various components (cases, gas checks, powder, primers, etc.) from different manufacturers are usually all interchangeable, shotshells typically are loaded for particular brands of shotshell cases (called hulls) only with one specific brand of wad, shot cup (if used), primer, and powder, further increasing the complexity and difficulty of reloading shotshells. Substitution of components is not considered safe, as changing just one component, such as a brand of primer, can increase pressures by as much as 3500 PSI, which may exceed SAAMI pressure limits. Reloading shotshells is therefore more along the lines of precisely following a recipe with non-fungible components. Where shotshell reloading remains popular, however, is for making specialized shotgun shells, such as for providing lowered recoil, when making low cost "poppers" used for training retrievers before hunting season to acclimate hunting dogs to the sound of a gun firing without actually shooting projectiles, for achieving better shot patterning, or for providing other improvements or features not available in commercially-loaded shotshells at any price, such as when handloading obsolete shotshells with brass cases for gauges of shotshells that are no longer commercially manufactured.

Rifle and pistol reloading presses are usually not dedicated to reloading a single caliber of cartridge, although they can be, but are configured for reloading various cartridge calibers as needed. In contrast, shotshell presses are most often configured for reloading just one gauge of shotshell, e.g., 12 gauge, and are rarely, if ever, reconfigured for reloading other gauges of shotshells, as the cost of buying all new dies, shot bar, and powder bushing as required to switch gauges on a shotshell press often exceeds the cost of buying a new shotshell press outright, as shotshell presses typically come from the factory already set up to reload one gauge or bore of shotshell. Hence, it is common to use a dedicated shotshell press for reloading each gauge or bore of shotshell used. Likewise, the price of shot for reloading shotshells over the last several years has also risen by over an order of magnitude, such that lead shot that was readily available for around $0.50/lb. (ca. 2005) now reaches $2.00 per pound (2013.) Due to this large increase in the price of lead shot, the economy of reloading 12 gauge shotshells vs. just using promotional (low-cost) 12 gauge shotshells only starts to make economic sense for higher volume shooters, who may shoot more than 50,000 rounds a year. In contrast, the reloading of shotshells that are usually not available in low-cost, promotional pricings, such as .410 bore, 12 ga. slugs, 16 ga, 20 ga., and 28 ga., becomes more economical to reload in much smaller quantities, perhaps within only 3-5 boxes of shells per year. Reloading .410 bore, 12 ga. slugs, 16 ga., 20 ga, and 28 ga. shells therefore remains relatively common, more so than the reloading of 12 gauge shotshells, for which promotional shotshells are usually readily available from many retailers. These smaller bore and gauge shotshells also require much less lead shot, further lessening the impact of the rapid rises seen in the price of lead shot. The industry change to steel shot, arising from the US and Canadian Federal bans on using lead shotshells while hunting migratory wildfowl, has also had an impact on reloading shotshells, as the shot bar and powder bushing required on a dedicated shotshell press also must be changed for each hull type reloaded, and are different than what would be used for reloading shotshells with lead shot, further complicating the reloading of shotshells. 

With the recent rampant rise in lead shot prices, though, a major change in handloading shotshells has also occurred. Namely, a transition among high volume 12 gauge shooters from loading traditional 1-1/8 oz. shot loads to 7/8 oz. shot loads, or even 24 gm. (so-called International) shot loads has occurred. At 1-1/8 oz. per shotshell, a 25 lb. bag of lead shot can only reload approximately 355 shotshells. At 7/8 oz. per shotshell, a 25 lb. of leadshot can reload 457 shotshells. At 24 grams per shotshell, a 25 lb of leadshot can reload approximately 472 shotshells. Stretching the number of hulls that it is possible to reload from an industry standard 25 lb. bag of lead shot by 117 shells has significantly helped mitigate the large increase in the price of lead shot. That this change has also resulted in minimal changes to scores in the shooting sports such as skeet and trap has only expedited the switch among high volume shooters to shooting 24 gm. shotshells with their lesser amounts of shot.

With the recent shortages over 2012-2013 of 12 gauge shotshells in the United States (among all other types of rifle and pistol ammunition), the popularity of reloading 12 gauge shotshells has seen a widespread resurgence. Field use of the International 24 gm. 12 gauge shells has proven them to be effective on small game, while stretching the number of reloads possible from a bag of shot, and they have subsequently become popular for hunting small game. Since shot shells are typically reloaded at least 5 times, although upwards of 15 times are often possible for lightly-loaded shells, this transition to field use of 24 gm. loads has helped mitigate ammunition shortages for hunters.

Pacific single stage shotshell reloading press (a circular press design). The charge bar is the gray rectangular horizontal member located just below the two bottles containing shot and powder.
Shotshell presses typically use a charge bar to drop precise amounts of shot and powder. Most commonly, these charge bars are fixed in their capacities, with a single charge bar rated at, say, 1-1/8 oz. of lead shot, with a switchable powder bushing that permits dropping precisely measured fixed amounts of different types of powder repetitively (e.g., MEC.) On the other hand, some charge bars are drilled to accept bushings for dropping different fixed amounts of both shot and powder (e.g. Texan.) For the ultimate in flexibility, though, universal charge bars with micrometers dropping fixed volumes of powder and shot are also available; these are able to select differing fixed amounts of both powder and shot, and are popular for handloaders who load more than just a few published recipes, or, especially, among those who wish to experiment with numerous different published recipes. Fixed charge bars are rated for either lead or steel shot, but not for both. Universal charge bars, on the other hand, are capable of reloading both lead or steel shot, being adjustable. 

Shotshell presses are available in both single stage and progressive varieties. For shooters shooting fewer than approximately 500 shells a month, and especially shooting fewer than 100 shells a month, a single-stage press is often found to be adequate. For shooters shooting larger numbers of shells a month, progressive presses are often chosen. A single stage press can typically reload 100 hulls in approximately an hour. Progressive presses can typically reload upwards of 400 or 500 hulls an hour.

Shotshell presses are most commonly operated in non-batch modes. That is, a single hull will often be deprimed, reshaped, primed, loaded with powder, have a wad pressed in, be loaded with shot, be pre-crimped, and then be final crimped before being removed and a new hull being placed on the shotshell press at station 1. An alternative, somewhat faster method, often used on a single stage press is to work on 5 hulls in parallel sequentially, with but a single processed hull being located at each of the 5 stations available on a single stage shotshell press, while manually removing the finished shotshell from station 5 and then moving the 4 in-process hulls to the next station (1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4, 4 to 5) before adding a new hull at the deprimer (station 1) location. Both these modes of shotshell reloading are in distinct contrast to the common practice used with reloading pistol and rifle cartridges on a single stage press, which are most often processed in batch modes, where a common operation will commonly be done on a batch of up to 50 or 100 cartridges at a time, before proceeding to the next processing step. This difference is largely a result of shotshell presses having 5 stations available for use simultaneously, unlike a single stage cartridge press which typically has but one station available for use.

In general, though, shotshell reloading is far more complex than rifle and pistol cartridge reloading, and hence far fewer shotshell presses are therefore used relative to rifle and pistol cartridge reloading presses.

====.50 BMG and larger cartridge presses====

Reloading presses for reloading .50 BMG and larger cartridges are also typically caliber-specific, much like shotshell presses, as standard size rifle and pistol reloading presses are not capable of being pressed into such exotic reloading service. The reloading of such large cartridges is also much more complex, as developing a load using a specific lot of powder can require nearly all of a 5 lb. bottle of powder, and a load must be developed with but a single lot of powder for reasons of safety.

=== Dies ===
Reloading dies and shell holders for 7.5mm Swiss Dies are generally sold in sets of two or three dies, depending on the shape of the case. A three die set is needed for straight cases, while a two die set is used for bottlenecked cases. The first die of either set performs the sizing and decapping operation, except in some cases in the 3 die set, where decapping may be done by the second die. The middle die in a three-die set is used to expand the case mouth of straight cases (and decap in the case where this is not done by the first die), while in a two die set the entire neck is expanded as the case is extracted from the first die. The last die in the set seats the bullet and may apply a crimp. Special crimping dies are often used to apply a stronger crimp after the bullet is seated. Progressive presses sometimes use an additional "die" to meter powder into the case (though it is arguably not a real die as it does not shape the case). 

Standard dies are made from hardened steel, and require that the case be lubricated, for the resizing operation, which requires a large amount of force. Rifle cartridges require lubrication of every case, due to the large amount of force required, while smaller, thinner handgun cartridges can get away with alternating lubricated and unlubricated cases. Carbide dies have a ring of tungsten carbide, which is far harder and slicker than tool steel, and so carbide dies do not require lubrication. 

Modern reloading dies are generally standardized with 7/8-14 (or, for the case of 50 BMG dies, with 1-1/4x12) threads and are interchangeable with all common brands of presses, although older dies may use other threads and be press-specific.

Dies for bottle neck cases usually are supplied in sets of at least two dies, though sometimes a third is added for crimping. This is an extra operation and is not needed unless a gun's magazine or action design requires crimped ammunition for safe operation, such as autoloading firearms, where the cycling of the action may push the bullet back in the case, resulting in poor accuracy and increased pressures. Nonte, chapter 7, "Loading for Handguns" Crimping is also sometimes recommended to achieve full velocity for bullets, through increasing pressures so as to make powders burn more efficiently, and for heavy recoiling loads, to prevent bullets from moving under recoil. For FMJ bullets mounted in bottle neck cases, roll crimping is generally not ever used unless a cannelure is present on the bullet, to prevent causing bullet deformation when crimping. Rimless, straight wall cases, on the other hand, require a taper crimp, because they headspace on the case mouth; roll crimping causes headspacing problems on these cartridges. Rimmed, belted, or bottleneck cartridges, however, generally can safely be roll crimped when needed. Three dies are normally supplied for straight walled cases, with an optional fourth die for crimping. Crimps for straight wall cases may be taper crimps, suitable for rimless cartridges used in autoloaders, or roll crimps, which are best for rimmed cartridges such as are used in revolvers. 

There are also some specialty dies worth mentioning. Bump dies are designed to move the shoulder of a bottleneck case back just a bit to facilitate chambering. These are frequently used in conjunction with neck dies, as the bump die itself does not manipulate the neck of the case whatsoever. A bump die can be a very useful tool to anyone who owns a fine shooting rifle with a chamber that is cut to minimum headspace dimensions, as the die allows the case to be fitted to this unique chamber. Another die is the "hand die". A hand die has no threads and is operated - as the name suggests - by hand or by use of a hand operated arbor press. Hand dies are available for most popular cartridges, and although available as full-length resizing dies, they are most commonly seen as neck sizing dies. These use an interchangeable insert to size the neck, and these inserts come in 1/1000-inch steps so that the user can custom fit the neck of the case to his own chamber or have greater control over neck tension on the bullet. 

=== Shellholders ===
A shellholder, generally sold separately, is needed to hold the case in place as it is forced into and out of the dies. The reason shellholders are sold separately is that many cartridges share the same base dimensions, and a single shellholder can service many different cases. Shellholders are also specialized, and will generally only fit a certain make of reloading press, while modern dies are standardized and will fit a wide variety of presses. Different shell holders than used for dies are also required for use with some hand priming tools (e.g., Lee Autoprime tool.)

=== Scale ===
Hornady Powder Scale
A precision scale is a near necessity for reloading. While it is possible to load using nothing but a powder measure and a weight to volume conversion chart, this greatly limits the precision with which a load can be adjusted, increasing the danger for accidentally overloading cartridges with powder for loads near or at the maximum safe load. With a powder scale, an adjustable powder measure can be calibrated more precisely for the powder in question, and spot checks can be made during loading to make sure that the measure is not drifting. With a powder trickler, a charge can be measured directly into the scale, giving the most accurate measure. 

A scale also allows bullets and cases to be sorted by weight, which can increase consistency further. Sorting bullets by weight has obvious benefits, as each set of matched bullets will perform more consistently. Sorting cases by weight is done to group cases by case wall thickness, and match cases with similar interior volumes. Military cases, for example, tend to be thicker, while cases that have been reloaded numerous times will have thinner walls due to brass flowing forward under firing, and excess case length being later trimmed from the case mouth.

=== Priming tool ===
RCBS Priming Tool
Single stage presses often do not provide an easy way to prime cases. Various add-on tools can be used for priming the case on the down-stroke, or a separate tool can be used. Since cases loaded with a single stage press are done in steps, with the die being changed between steps, a purpose made priming tool is often faster than trying to integrate a priming step to a press step. A purpose made tool is also often more consistent than a model that fits on a single stage press, resulting in a more consistent primer seating depth. 

=== Powder measure ===
Hornady Powder Measure
Beginning reloading kits often include a weight to volume conversion chart for a selection of common powders, and a set of powder volume measures graduated in small increments. By adding the various measures of powder a desired charge can be measured out with a safe degree of accuracy. However, since multiple measures of powder are often needed, and since powder lots may vary slightly in density, a scale accurate to 1/10-grain (6.5 mg) is desirable. 

=== Bullet puller ===
Impact Bullet Puller from RCBS
Like any complex process, mistakes in handloading are easy to make. A bullet puller allows the handloader to disassemble mistakes. Most pullers use inertia to pull the bullet; they are shaped like hammers, and the case is locked in place inside. A sharp blow on a hard surface will suddenly stop the case, and the inertia of the heavy bullet will pull it free of the case in a few blows, trapping the powder and bullet in the body of the puller. Collet type pullers are also available, which use a caliber-specific clamp to grip the bullet, while the loading press is used to pull the case downwards. It is essential that the collet be a good match for the bullet diameter, because a poor match can result in significant deformation of the bullet. 
 

Bullet pullers are also used to disassemble loaded ammunition of questionable provenance or undesirable configuration, so that the components can be salvaged for re-use. Surplus military ammunition is often pulled for components, particularly the cartridge cases, which are often difficult to obtain for older foreign military rifles. Military ammunition is often tightly sealed, to make it resistant to water and rough handling, such as in machine gun feeding mechanisms. In this case, the seal between the bullet and cartridge can prevent the bullet puller from functioning. Pushing the bullet into the case slightly with a seating die will break the seal, and allow the bullet to be pulled. 

Primers are a more problematic issue. If a primer is not seated deeply enough, the cartridge (if loaded) can be pulled, and the primer re-seated with the seating tool. Primers that must be removed are frequently deactivated first&mdash; either firing the primed case in the appropriate firearm, or soaking in penetrating oil, which penetrates the water resistant coatings in the primer. 

Components pulled from loaded cartridges should be reused with care. Unknown or potentially contaminated powders, contaminated primers, and bullets that are damaged or incorrectly sized can all cause dangerous conditions upon firing.

=== Case trimmer ===
Hornady Manual Case Trimmer
Cases, especially bottleneck cases, will stretch upon firing. How much a case will stretch depends upon load pressure, cartridge design, chamber size, functional cartridge headspace (usually the most important factor), and other variables. Periodically cases need to be trimmed to bring them back into proper specifications. Most reloading manuals list both a trim size and a max length. Long cases can create a safety hazard through improper headspace and possible increased pressure. 

Several kinds of case trimmers are available. Die-based trimmers have an open top, and allow the case to be trimmed with a file during the loading process. Manual trimmers usually have a base that has a shellholder at one end and a cutting bit at the opposite end, with a locking mechanism to hold the case tight and in alignment with the axis of the cutter, similar to a small lathe. Typically the device is cranked by hand, but sometimes they have attachments to allow the use of a drill or powered screwdriver. Powered case trimmers are also available. They usually consist of a motor (electric drills are sometimes used) and special dies or fittings that hold the case to be trimmed at the appropriate length, letting the motor do the work of trimming. 

===Primer pocket tools===
Primer pocket cleaning tools are used to remove residual combustion debris remaining in the primer pocket; both brush designs and single blade designs are commonly used. Dirty primer pockets can prevent setting primers at, or below, the cartridge head. Primer pocket reamers or swagers are used to remove military crimps in primer pockets. 

Primer pocket uniformer tools are used to achieve a uniform primer pocket depth. These are small endmills with a fixed depth-spacing ring attached, and are mounted either in a handle for use as a handtool, or are sometimes mounted in a battery-operated screwdriver. Some commercial cartridges (notably Sellier & Bellot) use large rifle primers that are thinner than the SAAMI standards common in the United States, and will not permit seating a Boxer primer manufactured to U.S. standards; the use of a primer pocket uniformer tool on such brass avoids setting Boxer primers high when reloading, which would be a safety issue. Two sizes of primer pocket uniformer tools exist, the larger one is for large rifle (0.130-inch nominal depth) primer pockets and the smaller one is used for uniforming small rifle/pistol primer pockets. 

Flash hole uniforming tools are used to remove any burrs, which are residual brass remaining from the manufacturing punching operation used in creating flash holes. These tools resemble primer pocket uniformer tools, except being thinner, and commonly include deburring, chamfering, and uniforming functions. The purpose of these tools is to achieve a more equal distribution of flame from the primer to ignite the powder charge, resulting in consistent ignition from case to case. 

== Materials required ==
223 Remington brass
The following materials are needed for handloading ammunition: Nonte, chapter 3, "Cartridge Components" 

*Cases or shotshell hulls. For shotshells, plastic or paper cases can be reloaded, though plastic is more durable. Steel and aluminum cases do not have the correct qualities for reloading, so a brass case is essential (although nickel plated brass cases, while not as reformable as plain brass, can also be reloaded)
*Smokeless powder of an appropriate type. Generally, handgun cartridges and shotshells use faster powders, rifle cartridges use slower powder. Powder is generally of the "smokeless" type in modern cartridges, although on occasion the older "black" powder more commonly known as "gunpowder" may be used.
*Bullets, or shot and wads for shotshells.
*Primers
Case lubricant may also be needed, depending on the dies used.

== Reloading process ==

===Rifle/pistol cartridges===

The operations performed when handloading cartridges are: Nonte, chapter 4, "Loading Metallic Cartridges" 
*Case cleaning (optional, recommended for fired rifle or pistol cases)
*Case inspection (Look for cracks or other defects, and discard visibly imperfect cases. The interior may be inspected by a wire-feeler or feeler gage to detect emerging interior cracks. Bent case mouths may be repaired during resizing.)
*Lubricate cases (Carbide dies do not require lubrication.)
*Size/Resize the case (For previously fired cases, primer is pressed out in this step with most die sets.)
*Ream or swage crimp from primer pocket (reloading military cases only), or mill the primer pocket depth using a primer pocket uniformer tool
*Measure and trim the case length (as needed; rarely required with handgun cases)
*Deburr, ream case mouth and size case neck (optional, as-needed; trimmed cases need to be deburred); some bench rest shooters also do outside neck turning at this stage, to make the cartridge case have uniform thickness so that the bullet will be released with the most uniformity
*Clean primer pocket (optional; primer pockets will have deposits from combustion) and do flash hole uniforming (optional, generally, only bench rest shooters do this)
*Expand or chamfer case mouth (not required with boattail rifle bullets)
*Clean the lubricant from the cases
*Seat a new primer (primer pockets often become loose after multiple loadings; a lack of effort being required to seat new primers indicates a loose primer pocket; cases with loose primer pockets are usually discarded, after crushing the case to prevent its reuse)
*Add a measured amount of powder (critical step; incorrect powder charges are extremely dangerous, both underweight as well as overweight)
*Seat the bullet in the case for the correct cartridge overall length (OAL) and for aligning bullet cannelure (if present) with case mouth
*Crimp the bullet in place (optional; some may hold the bullet with neck tension alone)
*Cartridge inspection

Case Tumbler
When previously fired cases are used, they must be inspected before loading. Cases that are dirty or tarnished are often polished in a tumbler to remove oxidation and allow easier inspection of the case. Cleaning in a tumbler will also clean the interior of cases, which is often considered important for handloading high-precision target rounds. Cracked necks, non-reloadable cases (steel, aluminum, or Berdan primed cases), and signs of head separation are all reasons to reject a case. Cases are measured for length, and any that are over the recommended length are trimmed down to the minimum length. Competition shooters will also sort cases by brand and weight to ensure consistency. 

Removal of the primer, called decapping, is usually done with a die containing a steel pin that punches out the primer. Berdan primed cases require a different technique, either a hydraulic ram or a hook that punctures the case and levers it out from the bottom. Military cases have crimped-in primers, and decapping leaves a slight ridge that inhibits seating a new primer. A reamer or a swage is used to remove this crimp. 

When a cartridge is fired, the internal pressure expands the case to fit the chamber in a process called obturation. To allow ease of chambering the cartridge when it is reloaded, the case is swaged back to size. Competition shooters, using bolt action rifles that are capable of camming a tight case into place, often resize only the neck of the cartridge, called neck sizing, as opposed to the normal full length resizing process. Neck sizing is only useful for cartridges to be re-fired in the same firearm, as the brass may be slightly oversized in some dimensions for other chambers, but the precise fit of case to chamber will allow greater consistency and therefore greater potential accuracy. Some believe that neck sizing will permit a larger number of reloads with a given case in contrast to full size resizing, although this is controversial. Semi-automatic rifles and rifles with SAAMI minimum chamber dimensions often require a special small base resizing die, that sizes further down the case than normal dies, and allows for more reliable feeding. 

Once the case is sized down, the inside of the neck of the case will actually be slightly smaller than the bullet diameter. To allow the bullet to be seated, the end of the neck is slightly expanded to allow the bullet to start into the case. Boattailed bullets need very little expansion, while unjacketed lead bullets require more expansion to prevent shaving of lead when the bullet is seated. 

Large Rifle primers
Priming the case is the most dangerous step of the loading process, since the primers are pressure-sensitive. The use of safety glasses or goggles during priming operations can provide valuable protection in the rare event that an accidental detonation takes place. Seating a Boxer primer not only places the primer in the case, it also seats the anvil of the primer down onto the priming compound, in effect arming the primer. A correctly seated primer will sit slightly below the surface of the case. A primer that protrudes from the case may cause a number of problems, including what is known as a slam fire, which is the firing of a case before the action is properly locked when chambering a round. This may either damage the gun, and/or injure the shooter. A protruding primer will also tend to hang when feeding, and the anvil will not be seated correctly so the primer may not fire when hit by the firing pin. Primer pockets may need to be cleaned with a primer pocket brush to remove deposits that prevent the primer from being properly seated. Berdan primers must also be seated carefully, and since the anvil is part of the case, the anvil must be inspected before the primer is seated. For reloading cartridges intended for use in military-surplus firearms, rifles especially, "hard" primers are most commonly used instead of commercial "soft" primers. The use of "hard" primers avoids slamfires when loading finished cartridges in the military-surplus firearm. Such primers are available to handloaders commercially. 

The quantity of gunpowder is specified by weight, but almost always measured by volume, especially in larger scale operations. A powder scale is needed to determine the correct mass thrown by the powder measure, as loads are specified with a precision of 0.10 grain (6.5 mg). One grain is 1/7000 of a pound. Competition shooters will generally throw a slightly underweight charge, and use a powder trickler to add few granules of powder at a time to the charge to bring it to the exact weight desired for maximum consistency. Special care is needed when charging large capacity cases with fast burning, low volume powders. In this instance, it is possible to put two charges of powder in a case without overflowing the case, which can lead to dangerously high pressures and a significant chance of bursting the chamber of the firearm. Non-magnum revolver cartridges are the easiest to do this with, as they generally have relatively large cases, and tend to perform well with small charges of fast powders. Some powders meter (measure by volume) better than others due to the shape of each granule. When using volume to meter each charge, it is important to regularly check the charge weight on a scale throughout the process. 

Competition shooters also often sort bullets by weight, often down to 0.10 grain (6.5 mg) increments. The bullet is placed in the case mouth by hand, and then seated with the press. At this point, the expanded case mouth is also sized back down. A crimp can optionally be added, either by the seating die or with a separate die. Taper crimps are used for cases that are held in the chamber by the case mouth, while roll crimps may be used for cases that headspace on a rim or on the cartridge neck. Roll crimps hold the bullet far more securely, and are preferred in situations, such as magnum revolvers, where recoil velocities are significant. A tight crimp also helps to delay the start of the bullet's motion, which can increase chamber pressures, and help develop full power from slower burning powders (see internal ballistics). 

===Shotgun shotshells===

Pacific single stage shotshell reloading press (an inline design), showing the 5 stations standard to shotshell presses.
Unlike the presses used for reloading metallic cartridges, the presses used for reloading shotgun shells have become standardized to contain 5 stations, with the exact configuration of these 5 stations arranged either in a circle or in a straight row. Nonetheless, the operations performed using the industry-standard 5 station shotshell presses when handloading shotshells with birdshot, although slightly different, are very similar as to when reloading metallic cartridges:
*Selecting an appropriate charge bar and powder bushing, or charge bar with shot bushing and powder bushing, or a universal charge bar (if used) for measuring shot and powder, for the shotshell press.
*Verifying that all components are properly selected (hull, primer, powder, wad, and shot). (No substitutions are allowed in components, nor in charge weights of shot and powder. The only substitution allowed is in the brand of shot and the size of the shot (#8, #9, etc. Also, no substitutions are allowed in the shot material itself (whether it is lead shot, hevi-shot, steel shot, etc.), as the malleability of lead shot is noticeably different than steel.)
*Loading shot and powder in press, and verifying that the as-dropped weights are per an established, published, loading recipe using a calibrated scale. (Typically, 5 to 10 trials of shot and powder drops, each, are recommended by shotshell press or universal charge bar user manuals.) 
*Adjusting bushings or universal charge bar settings to account for small differences in densities due to lot-to-lot variations in both powder and shot.
*Inspecting each hull. (Examining for cracks or other hull defects, and discarding any visibly imperfect hulls. Also, turning each hull upside down to remove any foreign object debris before depriming.)
*Removing the fired primer and sizing/resizing the brass outer diameter at the base of the hull (Station 1).
*Inserting a primer in the well of the press, and sizing/resizing the inner diameter of the hull while inserting a new primer (Station 2).
*Verifying primer is fully seated, not raised. If primer is not fully seated, re-running operation at Station 2 until primer is fully seated.
*Positioning primed hull (at Station 3), pulling handle down, toggling charge bar to drop measured amount of powder, raising handle, inserting wad, dropping handle again to seat wad, toggling charge bar to drop measured amount of shot, raising handle.
*Pre-crimping of shell (Station 4).
*Final crimping of shell (Station 5).
*Inspecting crimping on shell. If crimp is not fully flat, re-crimping (Station 5).
*Inspecting bottles of shot and powder on the shotshell press, adding more as needed before it runs out.
*Cutting open 4 or 5 shells randomly selected from a large lot of handloaded shells, respectively, and verifying that the as-thrown weights of powder and shot are both within desired tolerances of the published recipe that was followed. (Optional, but recommended.)

The exact details for accomplishing these steps on particular shotshell presses vary depending on the brand of press, although the presence of 5 stations is standard among all modern presses.

The use of safety glasses or goggles while reloading shotshells can provide valuable protection in the rare event that an accidental detonation takes place during priming operations.

The quantities of both gunpowder and shot are specified by weight when loading shotshells, but almost always measured solely by volume. A powder scale is therefore needed to determine the correct mass thrown by the powder measure, and by the shot measure, as powder loads are specified with a precision of 0.10 grain (6.5 mg), but are usually thrown with a tolerance of 0.2 to 0.3 grains in most shot shell presses. Similarly, shot payloads in shells are generally held to within a tolerance of plus or minus 3-5 grains. One grain is 1/7000 of a pound.

Shotshell reloading for specialty purposes, such as for buckshot or slugs, or other specialty rounds, is often practiced, but varies significantly from the process steps discussed previously for handloading birdshot shotshells. The primary difference is that large shot cannot be metered in a charge bar, and so must be manually dropped, a ball at a time, in a specific configuration. Likewise, the need for specialty wads or extra wads, in order to achieve the desired stackup distance to achieve a full and proper crimp for a fixed shell length, say 2-3/4", causes the steps to differ slightly when handloading such shells.

Modern shotshells are all uniformly sized for Type 209 primers. However, reloaders should be aware that older shotshells were sometimes primed with a Type 57 or Type 69 primer (now obsolete), meaning that shotgun shell reloading tends to be done only with modern (or recently produced) components. Being essentially "published recipe" dependent, antique shotshell reloading is not widely practiced, being more of a specialty, or niche, activity. Of course, when reloading for very old shotguns, such as those with Damascus barrels, special shotshell recipes that limit pressures to less than 4500 psi are still available, and these "recipes" are reloaded by some shotgunning enthusiasts. Typical shotshell pressures for handloads intended for modern shotguns range from approximately 4700 psi to 10,000 psi.

Brass shotshells are also reloaded, occasionally, but typically these are reloaded using standard rifle/pistol reloading presses with specialty dies, rather than with modern shotshell presses. Rather than plastic wads, traditional felt and paperboard wads are also generally used (both over powder and over shot) when reloading brass shotgun shells. Reloading brass shotshells is not widely practiced. 

Shotguns, in general, operate at much lower pressures than pistols and rifles, typically operating at pressures of 10,000 psi, or less, for 12 gauge shells, whereas rifles and pistols routinely are operated at pressures in excess of 35,000 psi, and sometimes upwards of 50,000 psi. The SAAMI maximum permitted pressure limit is only 11,500 psi for 12 gauge 2-3/4 inch shells, so the typical operating pressures for many shotgun shells are only slightly below the maximum permitted pressures allowed for safe ammunition. Because of this small difference in typical operating vs. maximum industry allowed pressures, and the fact that even small changes in components can cause pressure variances in excess of 4,000 psi, the components used in shotshell reloading must not be varied from published recipes, as the margin of safety relative to operating pressures for shotguns is much lower than for pistols and rifles. This lower operating pressure for shotguns and shells is also the reason why shotgun barrels have noticeably thinner walls than rifle and pistol barrels.

== Legal aspects ==
Since many countries heavily restrict the civilian possession of ammunition and ammunition components, including primers and smokeless powder, handloading may be explicitly or implicitly illegal in certain countries. Even without specific restrictions on powder and primers, they may be covered under other laws governing explosive materials. Handloading may require study and passing an exam to acquire a handloading permit prior to being allowed to handload ammunition in some jurisdictions. This is done to avoid catastrophic accidents caused by lack of knowledge/skill as much as possible, and also allows the government to maintain information on who reloads their own cartridges. The standards organization C.I.P. rules that the products of handloaders that do not comply with the C.I.P. ammunition approval rules for commercial ammunition manufacturers cannot be legally sold in C.I.P. member states.

Many firearms manufacturers abdicate responsibility for the operation and safety of their arm when untested ammunition is fired. Generally, this means that the maker's warranty is void and the manufacturer not liable for any damage to the gun or personal injury if handloaded ammunition is used which exceeded established limits for a particular arm. This arises because firearm manufacturers point out that while they have some influence and scope for redress with ammunition manufacturers, they have no such influence over the actions of incompetent or overly ambitious individuals who assemble ammunition. 

=== Situation in the USA ===
In the United States of America, handloading is not only legal and requires no permit, but is also quite popular. This popularity is attributable to the vast majority of cartridge cases used in that country being of the Boxer primer type. During periods of particularly high demand for ammunition, such as after the November 2008 election of President Barack Obama, or after the 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban in that country, factory ammunition can become considerably more expensive or even unavailable in stores. The Houston Chronicle, sourced from the Associated Press Handloading can provide a "self-serve" source during such periods.

Some media writers and many attorneys recommend against using handloaded ammunition for defensive use. This applies not only to ammunition loaded by an individual, but also to so-called remanufactured ammunition which is loaded by smaller private companies. Experts point to potential legal liabilities (depending on the jurisdiction) that the shooter may incur if using handloaded ammunition for defense, such as an implied malice on the part of the shooter, as the use of handloaded ammunition may give the impression that "regular bullets weren't deadly enough". Additionally, forensic reconstruction of a shooting relies on using identical ammunition from the manufacturer, where handloaded ammunition cannot be guaranteed identical to the ammunition used in the shooting, since "the defendant literally manufactured the evidence". In particular, powder residue patterning is used by law enforcement to validate the distance between the firearm and the person shot using known facts from the manufacturer about powder type, content, volume, muzzle velocity, and other ballistic factors. With handloaded or remanufactured ammunition, these parameters are not available. On the other hand, some carry handloaded ammunition without problems in their specific jurisdictions. Any person wishing to carry a self-defense firearm is strongly urged to contact an attorney in their state of residence about this and related topics, and make informed decisions based on fact, not Internet legend.

=== Situation in Canada ===
Handloading is legal in Canada. The Explosives Act Explosives Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. E-17) at Department of Justice. Retrieved 2011-11-16. places limits on the amount of powder (either smokeless or black) that may be stored in a building, on the manner in which it is stored, and on how much powder may be available for use at any time. Legal Info for Reloaders at Canadian Shooting Sports Association. Retrieved 2011-11-16 The Act is the responsibility of Natural Resources Canada. Acts and Regulations at Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-16. If the quantity of powder stored for personal use exceeds 75 kg, then a Propellant Magazine Licence (Type P) is required. There is no limit on the number of primers that may be stored for non-commercial use. Explosive Regulations and the Industry at Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-16. 

=== Situation in Germany ===

As an example for a European country, handloading in the FR Germany requires a course, terminated in an exam, in handloading and handling of explosive propellants; often, this is offered in combination with a course and exam in muzzle-loading and black powder-shooting. The State's Ministry of the Interior conducts the exam. When passed and the reloader can provide a reason for his will to reload ("Bedrfnisprfung"), he can apply for a permit to a quota of propellant for five years (after which time he has to extend the permit). Every propellant is recorded into the permit. Primers, cartridges, bullets and reloading equipment are available without permit.

As German law gives maximum pressures for every commercial caliber, the handloader is allowed to non-commercially give away his ammunition. He is liable for incorrect loading. His references are data-books by propellant manufacturers (like RWS), bullet manufacturers (like Speer), reloading tool manufacturers (like Lyman) or neutral institutions (like the DEVA). Firearms manufacturers give guarantee as long as the handloaded ammunition is within the correct parameters.

In order to investigate gun destruction  material fault or incorrectly loaded ammunition? , and for handloaders to get data for new loads, gun and/or handloaded cartridges can be sent to the "Deutsche Versuchs- und Prfanstalt fr Jagd- und Sportwaffen (DEVA)" (German institute for testing and examining of hunting and sporting guns); http://www.deva-institut.de the DEVA returns a pressure diagram and a report whether this load is within legal range for this ammunition.

=== South Africa ===
Hand loading or reloading is allowed in South Africa as long as you are in possession of a competency certificate to possess a firearm as well as a license to possess such a firearm. Sport shooters load to make the shooting sports more affordable and hunters load to obtain greater accuracy. Powder and primers are strictly controlled by law and can not exceed for 2 kg for powder and 2400 primers. The amount of ammunition you may have in your possession is also limited to 200 rounds per chambering. If you are a registered dedicated sportsman, the quantities are unlimited. Although the powder's quantity is unlimited if you are a dedicated sportsman, storage of excess amounts of powder is dangerous due to the potential of fire occurring from accidental ignition. A manual from a South African powder manufacturer Rheinmetall Denel Munition (previously Somchem) is available for reloaders with adequate information and guidelines.

== Atypical handloading ==
Berdan primers, with their off-center flash holes and lack of self-contained anvil, are more difficult to work with than the easily removed Boxer primers. The primers may be punctured and pried out from the rear, or extracted with hydraulic pressure. Primers must be selected carefully, as there are more sizes of Berdan primers than the standard large and small pistol, large and small rifle of Boxer primers. The case must also be inspected carefully to make sure the anvil has not been damaged, because this could result in a failure to fire. Nonte, chapter 15, "Problems and Solutions" 

It is typically agreed that rimfire cartridges (e.g. 22 Long Rifle) are not hand-loaded, although there are some shooters that unload commercial rimfire cartridges, and use the primed case to make their own loads, or to generate special rimfire wildcat cartridges. These cartridges are highly labor-intensive to produce. Reloading Techniques: 22 Win. Magnum Rimfire, Performance Shooter, April 1996 

Some shooters desiring to reload for obsolete rimfire cartridges alter the firearm in question to function as a centerfire, which allows them to reload. Often it is possible to reform cases from similarly sized ammunition which is in production, and this is the most economical way of obtaining brass for obscure or out of production calibers. Even if custom brass must be manufactured, this is often far less expensive than purchasing rare, out of production ammunition. Cartridges like the 56-50 Spencer, for example, are not readily obtainable in rimfire form, but can be made from shortened 50-70 cartridges or even purchased in loaded form from specialty dealers. Supplier of loaded, centerfire 56-50 cartridges 

An unusual solution to the problem of obtaining ammunition for the very old pinfire cartridges is even available. This solution uses specialized cartridges that use a removable pin and anvil which hold a percussion cap of the type use in caplock firearms. To reload a fired case, the pin is removed, allowing the anvil to slide out; a percussion cap is placed in the anvil, it is re-inserted, and the pin serves to lock the anvil in place, as well as to ignite the percussion cap.

Shotshell reloading is sometimes done for scatter shot loads, consisting of multiple wads separating groups of shot, which are intended for use at short distance hunting of birds. Similarly, shotshell reloading for buck shot loads and non-lethal "bean bag" loads are sometimes handloaded. These types of shotshells are rarely handloaded. Nonte, chapter 12, "Special-Purpose Shotshell Loads" 

== Accuracy considerations ==
Several different powder samples
Precision and consistency are key to developing accurate ammunition. Various methods are used to ensure that ammunition components are as consistent as possible. Since the firearm is also a variable in the accuracy equation, careful tuning of the load to a particular firearm can yield significant
accuracy improvements. What affects the accuracy of ammunition? 

===Cases===
The internal volume of the cartridge case, or case capacity, has a significant impact on the pressure developed during ignition, which has a great impact on the velocity of the bullet. Cases from different manufacturers can vary in wall thickness, and as cases are repeatedly fired and reloaded the brass flows up to the neck and is trimmed off, increasing capacity as well as weakening the case. The first step to ensuring consistent case capacity is sorting the cases by headstamp, so each lot of cases is from the same manufacturer and/or year. A further step would be to then weigh these cases, and sort by case weight. 

The neck of the case is another variable, since this determines how tightly the bullet is held in place during ignition. Inconsistent neck thickness and neck tension will result in variations in pressure during ignition. These variables can be addressed by annealing and thinning the neck, as well as by careful control of the crimping operation. 
Common Rifle Casings

===Bullets===
Bullets must be well balanced and consistent in weight, shape, and seating depth to ensure that they correctly engage the rifling, exit the barrel at a consistent velocity, and fly straight. Buying bullets from a high quality source will help ensure quality, but for ultimate accuracy some shooters will measure even the best bullets, and reject all but the most consistent. Measurement of the weight is the easiest, and bullets that are out of round can be detected by rotating the bullet while measuring with a micrometer. There is even a device available that will detect changes in jacket thickness and internal voids in jacketed rifle bullets, though its high cost makes it prohibitively expensive for all but the most dedicated shooters. 

The transition from case to barrel is also very important. If the bullets have to travel a varying distance from the case to the point where they engage the rifling, then this can result in variations in pressure and velocity. The bearing surface of the bullet should ideally be seated as close as possible to the rifling. Since it is bearing surface that matters here, it is important that the bullets have a consistent bearing surface. 

===Load tuning===
Tuning load to gun can also yield great increases in accuracy, especially for standard, non-accurized rifles. Different rifles, even of the same make and model, will often react to the same ammunition in different ways. The handloader is afforded a wider selection of bullet weights than can readily be found in commercially loaded ammunition, and there are many different powders that can be used for any given cartridge. Trying a range of bullets and a variety of powders will determine what combination of bullet and powder gives the most consistent velocities and accuracies. Careful adjustment of the amount of powder can give the velocity that best fits the natural harmonics of the barrel (see accurize and internal ballistics). For ultimate accuracy and performance, the handloader also has the option of using a wildcat cartridge; wildcats are the result of shaping the cartridge and chamber themselves to a specific end, and the results push the envelope of velocity, energy, and accuracy. Most, but not all, reloads perform best when the powder selected fills 95% or more of the case (by volume). 

== Cost considerations ==
Those who reload with the primary goal of maximizing accuracy or terminal performance may end up paying more per reloaded round than for commercial ammunitionthis is especially true for military calibers which are commonly available as surplus. Maximum performance, however, requires the highest quality components, which are usually the most expensive. Reloaders who reload with the primary goal of saving money on ammunition, however, can make a few tradeoffs to realize significant cost savings with a minimal sacrifice in quality. Nonte, chapter 5, "Selecting the Best Load" 

===Case life maximization===
Digital calipers for measuring case length
Since the case is the single most expensive part of a loaded round, the more times a case can be re-used, the better. Cases that are loaded to a moderate pressure will generally last longer, as they will not be work hardened or flow under pressure as much as cases loaded to higher pressures. Use of moderate pressure loads extends the life of the case significantly, not to mention saving quite a bit of wear and tear on the barrel. Work hardening can cause cracks to occur in the neck as the hardened brass loses its malleability, and is unable to survive swaging back into shape during the resizing operation. Rifle brass tends to flow towards the neck (this is why rifle brass must be trimmed periodically) and this takes brass away from the rear of the case. Eventually, this will show as a bright ring near the base of the cartridge, just in front of the thick web of brass at the base. If brass is used after this ring appears, it risks a crack, or worse, a complete head separation, which will leave the forward portion of the brass lodged in the chamber of the gun. This generally requires a special stuck case removal tool to extract, so it is very undesirable to have a head separation. 

With bottlenecked cartridge cases, choosing the right sizing die can also have an impact. Full length sizing of cartridges is often thought to greatly shorten case life by work hardening the full length of the case, which can cause the case neck to split, although some studies show that the number of reloads possible with a case is essentially the same for either full length sizing as for neck sizing only if the issue is one of neck hardening. If the reloaded cartridges are going to be used in the same firearm in which they were previously fired, though, and if that firearm has a bolt action or other action with a strong camming action on closing, then full length resizing may not be needed. A collet neck sizing die can be used to size just the case neck enough to hold the bullet, and leave the rest of the case unsized. The resulting cartridge should be able to fit back into the specific rifle that previously fired it, though the fit will be tight and require more force to chamber than a full length resized case, especially on rifles with factory chambers which tend to be out of round. The use of a neck-sizing die in conjunction with moderate pressure loads may extend the life of the case significantly by minimizing the amount of case that is work hardened or stretched. This is especially true for reloads intended for military rifles with intentionally large chambers such as the Lee-Enfield in .303 British. The use of partial length or neck sizing for cartridges used in such large chambers permits effectively switching the headspacing from relying on the rim of a rimmed cartridge to the shoulder of the bottle neck transition instead, increasing the number of times a rimmed military cartridge can be reloaded from once to perhaps 5 or more times, all while avoiding dangerous incipient head separations. One final form of limiting case wear is, unfortunately, limited strictly to benchrest shooters with custom-cut chambers. The chamber of these rifles is cut so that there is just enough room, typically just a few thousandths of an inch, in the neck area. The result of using this type of chamber is that fired rounds don't require any resizing whatsoever once the case is fired. The brass will 'spring back' a bit after firing, and will properly hold a new bullet without further manipulation. Some refer to this as a 'fitted' neck, however it is a function of both the carefully cut precision neck and the case adjusted to fit with very little clearance. 

Work hardening happens to all cases, even low-pressure handgun cases. The sudden increase in pressure upon firing hits the brass like a hammer, changing its crystalline structure and making it more brittle. The neck of the case, if it becomes too brittle, will be incapable of standing the strain of resizing, expanding, crimping, and firing, and will split during loading or firing. While a neck split during firing is not a significant danger, a split neck will render the case incapable of holding the bullet in place, so the case must be discarded or recycled as a wildcat cartridge of shorter overall length, allowing the split section to be removed. The simplest way to decrease the effects of work hardening is to decrease the pressure in the case. Loading to the minimum power level listed in the reloading manual, instead of the maximum, can significantly increase case life. Slower powders generally also have lower pressure peaks, and may be a good choice. 
 

Annealing brass to make it softer and less brittle is fairly easy, but annealing cartridge cases is a more complex matter. Since the base of the case must be hard, it cannot be annealed. What is needed is a form of heat treatment called differential hardening, where heat is carefully applied to part of the case until the desired softness is reached, and then the heat treatment process is halted by rapidly cooling the case. Since annealing brass requires heating it to about 660 F (350 C), the heating must be done in such a way as to heat the neck to that temperature, while preventing the base of the case from being heated and losing its hardness. The traditional way is to stand the cases in a shallow pan full of water, then heat the necks of the cases with a torch, but this method makes it difficult to get an even heating of the entire case neck. A temperature-sensitive crayon can be used at the point to which it is to be annealed, which is just behind the shoulder for bottlenecked cartridges, or at the bottom of the bullet seating depth for straight-wall cartridges. The neck of the case is placed in a propane torch flame and heated it until the crayon mark changes color, indicating the correct temperature. Once the correct temperature is reached the case is completely quenched in water to stop the annealing process at the desired hardness. Failing to keep the base of the case cool can anneal the case near the head, where it must remain hard to function properly. Gun Tests article on case annealing. Another approach is to immerse the case mouth in a molten alloy of lead that is at the desired annealing temperature for a few seconds, then quickly shake off the lead and quench the case. 

Cases that have small cracks at the neck may not be a complete loss. Many cartridges, both commercial and wildcats, can be made by shortening a longer cartridge. For example, a 223 Remington can be shortened to become a .222 Remington, which can further be shortened to become a .221 Fireball. Similarly, .30-06 Springfield can become .308 Winchester, which can become any number of specialized benchrest shooting cartridges. Since the cracking is likely due to a brittle neck, the cases should be annealed before attempting to reform them, or the crack may propagate and ruin the newly formed shorter case as well. 

=== Powder cost minimization ===
Powder is another significant cost of reloading, and one over which the handloader has significant control. In addition to the obvious step of using a minimum charge, rather than a full power one, significant cost savings may be obtained through careful powder choice. Given the same bullet and cartridge, a faster burning powder will generally use a smaller charge of powder than required with a slower powder. For example, a 44 Magnum firing a 240-grain lead semi-wadcutter could be loaded with either Accurate Arms #2, a very fast pistol powder, or #9, a very slow pistol powder. When using the minimum loads, 9.0 grains (0.58 g) of AA #2 yield a velocity of 1126 ft/s (343 m/s), and 19.5 grains (1.26 g) of #9 yield 1364 ft/s (416 m/s). For the same amount of powder, AA #2 can produce approximately twice as many rounds, yet both powders cost the same per weight.

The tradeoff comes in terms of power and accuracy; AA #2 is designed for small cases, and will burn inconsistently in the large 44 Magnum case. AA #9, however, will fill the case much better, and the slow burn rate of AA #9 is ideal for magnum handgun rounds, producing 20% higher velocities (at maximum levels) while still producing less pressure than the fast burning AA #2. A medium burning powder might actually be a better choice, as it could split the difference in powder weights while delivering more power and accuracy than the fastest powder. Accurate Arms, source of loading information for fast vs. slow powder comparison 

One solution that is applicable to revolvers in particular is the possibility of using a reduced-volume case. Cartridges such as 357 Magnum and 44 Magnum are just longer versions of their parent rounds of .38 Special and .44 Special, and the shorter rounds will fire in the longer chambers with no problems. The reduced case capacity allows greater accuracy with even lighter loads. A 44 Special loaded with a minimum load of AA #2 uses only 4.2 grains (0.27 g) of powder, and produces a modest 771 ft/s (235 m/s). It is important to note that when reloading .38 Special and .44 Special, extreme care must be exercised to not exceed maximum powder specifications - i.e. a 357 Magnum load must never be used in a .38 special case, as even though the powder charge may fit, the difference in case volumes will likely create an overpressure scenario resulting in unsafe conditions.

== Bullets ==
27-Caliber Sierra Bullets
While the case is usually the most expensive component of a cartridge, the bullet is usually the most expensive part of the reloaded round, especially with handgun ammunition. It is also the best place to save money with handgun ammunition. This is because the bullets are used one time, and the case lasts for many reloadings.

Other advantages of casting or swaging bullets from lead wire (which is pricier but avoids many quality-control issues of casting) is the ability to precisely control many attributes of the resulting bullet. Custom bullet molds are available from a number of sources, allowing the handloader to pick the exact weight, shape, and diameter of the bullet to fit the cartridge, firearm, and intended use. A good example of where this is useful is for shooters of older military surplus firearms, which often exhibit widely varying bore and groove diameters; by making bullets specifically intended for the firearm in question, accuracy of the resulting cartridges can be significantly increased. 

=== Casting ===
Cast bullets as cast (left), with gas check (center) and lubricated (right).
For the truly frugal, the cheapest method of obtaining bullets, buckshot, and slugs intended for reloading use at low to moderate velocities is casting them.

This requires a set of bullet, buckshot, or slug molds, which are available from a number of sources, and a source of known quality lead. Linotype and automotive wheelweights are often used as sources of lead that are blended together in a molten state to achieve the desired Brinell hardness. Other sources of scrap lead, such as recovered bullets, lead cable sheathing, lead pipe, or even leadacid battery plates, (EXTREME caution should be used as modern battery components, when melted, can yield hazardous, even deadly gases) can yield usable lead with some degree of effort, including purification and measuring of hardness. Nonte, chapter 8, "Casting and Swaging Bullets" 

Cast bullets are also the cheapest bullets to buy, though generally only handgun bullets are available in this form. Some firearms manufacturers, such as those using polygonal rifling like Glock and H&K, advise against the use of cast bullets. For shooters who would like to shoot cast bullets, aftermarket barrels are generally available for these models with conventional rifling, and the cost of the barrel can generally be recouped in ammunition savings after a few thousand rounds.

Soft lead bullets are generally used in handguns with velocities of 1000 ft/s (300 m/s) or lower, while harder cast bullets may be used, with careful powder selection, in rifles with velocities of 2000 ft/s (600 m/s) or slightly more. Low Pressure & High Velocity with Cast Bullets, from Jesse's Hunting and Outdoors The limit is the point at which the powder gas temperature and pressure starts to melt the base of the bullet, and leave a thin coating of molten and re-solidified lead in the bore of the gun&mdash;a process called leading the bore. Cast lead bullets may also be fired in full power magnum handgun rounds like the 44 Magnum with the addition of a gas check, which is a thin aluminum, zinc or copper washer or cup that is crimped over a tiny heel on the base of appropriate cast bullets. This provides protection for the base of the bullet, and allows velocities of over 1500 ft/s (450 m/s) in handguns, with little or no leading of the bore. Nonte, chapter 10, "Lead Bullet Loads for Rifles" 

Such cast lead bullets, intended for use with a gas check, will have a reduced diameter at the rear of the cast lead bullet, onto which the gas check can be swaged using a lubricating/resizing press. All cast lead bullets, whether with or without a gas check, must still be lubricated, to prevent leading of the rifling of the barrel. A lubricating/resizing press, which is a special purpose bullet processing press, can be either a standalone press dedicated to lubricating and resizing bullets, or can be an add-on to a reloading press, at the option of the handloader. Not all handloaders resize cast lead bullets, although all handloaders do lubricate cast lead bullets. An option to using a lubricating press is simply to coat the bullets with bullet lube, which can be done either with a spray, in a tumbler, in a plastic bowel with a liquid lube, in a tray with melted bullet lube, or even with a manual lubricating process.

Slugs for shotgun shells are also commonly cast from pure lead by handloaders, for subsequent reloading into shotgun shells. Although roll crimps of shotgun hull cases are commonly used for handloading these cast lead slugs, in place of the fold crimps that are used when reloading shot into shotgun shells, some published recipes specifically do include fold crimps. For published recipes using fold crimps and shot wads used as sabots, slugs can be easily reloaded using standard shotshell presses and techniques, without requiring any roll crimp tools. Whether roll crimps or fold crimps are used, cast lead slugs are commonly used in jurisdictions where rifles are banned for hunting, under the reasoning that fired slugs will not travel but over short distances, unlike rifle bullets which can travel up to several miles when fired. Use of cast lead slugs is therefore very common when hunting large game near populated areas.

Similarly, cast lead buckshot is often cast by handloaders, for reloading into shotgun shells for hunting larger game animals. Such buckshot is then placed by hand into shotgun shells when handloaded, due to the necessity of having to stack the buckshot balls into specific configurations depending on the gauge of shotgun shell being reloaded, the choice of wad, the volume of powder, and the size of the buckshot (e.g., 00, 000, 0000 buckshot). Such cast lead buckshot is never simply dropped from a shotshell press charge bar into a shotgun shell when reloading.

===Swaging===
Most shooters prefer jacketed bullets, especially in rifles and pistols. The hard jacket material, generally copper or brass, resists deformation and handles far higher pressures and temperatures than lead. Several companies offer swaging presses (both manual and hydraulic) that will manufacture on a small scale jacketed bullets that can rival or surpass the quality of commercial jacketed bullets. Two swaging equipment manufacturers offer equipment and dies designed to turn 22 Long Rifle cases into brass jackets for 22 caliber (5.56 mm) bullets. Corbin, maker of commercial and consumer grade bullet swaging equipment, including the equipment to turn 22 LR cases into jacketed bullets A reference manual for bullet swaging is offered by Corbin.

Swage dies from Corbin, as an example, come in three variants:
* R dies are used for bullet swaging in the reloading press. No expensive special press is needed; however, the reloading press cannot swage all calibers and variants of bullets.
* S dies are steel dies for a manual press. They have a maximum caliber of .458 in and a maximum jacket length of 1.3 in.
* H dies are dies designed for hydraulic presses and are offered in calibers up to 25 mm and jacket lengths of more than 1.3". In a hydraulic press, bullets from powdered metal can be swaged.

Every bullet diameter, and most of the bullet types, need special dies, making swaging a rather investment-intensive enterprise.

===Purchased Bullets===
Handloaders have the choice to swage but most choose to purchase pre-made jacketed bullets, due to the obscure nature of swaging and the specialized, expensive equipment. The process of manufacturing a jacketed bullet is far more complex than for a cast bullet; first, the jacket must be punched from a metal sheet of precise thickness, filled with a premeasured lead core, and then swaged into shape with a high pressure press in multiple steps. This involved process makes jacketed bullets far more expensive on average than cast bullets. Further complicating this are the requirements for controlled expansion bullets (see terminal ballistics), which require a tight bond between the jacket and the core. Premium expanding bullets are, with match grade bullets, at the top tier in expense.

=== Plated Bullets ===
A more economical alternative was made available to the handloader in the 1980s, the copper plated bullet. Ranier Ballistics has been making plated bullets since 1983. Copper plated bullets are lead bullets that are electroplated with a copper jacket. While thinner than a swaged bullet jacket, the plated jacket is far thicker than normal electroplate, and provides significant structural integrity to the bullet. Since the jacket provides the strength, soft lead can be used, which allows bullets to be swaged or cast into shape before plating. While not strong enough for most rifle cartridges, plated bullets work well in many handgun rounds, with a recommended maximum velocity of 1250 ft/s (375 m/s). Ranier Ballistics plated bullet FAQ, listing maximum recommended velocity Plated bullets fall between cast and traditional jacketed bullets in price.

While originally sold only to handloaders as an inexpensive substitute for jacketed bullets, the plated bullet has come far. The ammunition manufacturer Speer now offers the Gold Dot line, commercially loaded premium handgun ammunition using copper plated hollow point bullets. Speer Gold Dot description and patent number Patent 5,079,814, for an electroplated hollow point bullet (the Speer Gold Dot) The strong bond between jacket and core created by the electroplating process makes expanding bullets hold together very well, and the Gold Dot line is now in use by many police departments. Comparison of various 9 x 19 mm expanding bullet loads, including the Speer Gold Dot plated bullet 

== Other resources ==

=== Ballistics ===
* Powley Computer
* Muzzle Energy Calculator

=== Cartridge information ===
* Cartridges of the World 8th Edition, Book by Frank Barnes, DBI Books, 1997, ISBN 0-87349-178-5
* Handbook for Shooters & Reloaders vol I, Book by P.O. Ackley; Plaza Publishing, 1962, ISBN 978-99929-4-881-1
* Handbook for Shooters & Reloaders vol II, Book by P.O. Ackley; Plaza Publishing, 1966, ASIN B000BGII48
* The Handloader's Manual of Cartridge Conversions, Book by John J. Donnelly, Stoeger Publishing, 1987, ISBN 978-0-88317-269-8
* Designing and Forming Custom Cartridges, Book by Ken Howell, Precision Shooting, 1995, ISBN 0-9643623-0-9
* Cartridge Dimensions at Steves Pages
* Cartridge Dimensions at 6mmBR.com
* Cartridge history, loading, and dimensions at ReloadBench.com

=== Reloading ===
*
* Accurate Online load data
* Barnes Reloading Manual Number 3; Edited by Dave Scovill, LP, 2001
* Black Powder Handbook & Loading Manual, 2nd Edition; Book by Sam Fadala, Lyman Publications, 2001 UPC #011516971005
* ReloadBullets - Handloading how-to's and Advanced Loading Techniques
* Handloads.com
* Hodgdon Online Reloading Info
* * Lapua Shooting and Reloading Manual 2nd Edition; Book by Nammo Lapua, LP, 2000, ISBN 951-97156-2-2
* Waters, Ken, Ken Waters' Notebook, Wolfe Publishing Co, 2006, ISBN 1-879356-61-9
* Modern Reloading; Book by Richard Lee, LP, 1996
* 
* Sierra Reloading Manual 5th Edition; Book by Sierra Bullets, LP, 2003
* Speer Reloading Manual Number 13; Book by Speer, Blount, Inc., 1998
* The Ultimate Reloader Website

== See also ==
* Pacific tool company

== References ==

*

== External links ==
*MidwayUSA's Application charts and reloading information
*Reloading the 303 British
*Varmint Al's Reloading Page
*Reloading Quick-start



[[Houston Texans]]

The Houston Texans are a professional American football team based in Houston, Texas. The team is a member of the South Division of the American Football Conference (AFC) in the National Football League (NFL). The Texans joined the NFL in 2002 as an expansion team after Houston's previous franchise, the Houston Oilers, moved to Nashville, Tennessee, where they are now the Tennessee Titans. Houston Texans History The team majority owner is Bob McNair. The team clinched its first playoff berth during the 2011 season as champions of the AFC South. Ultimate Texans AFC South champion Texans reach playoffs for first time in dramatic fashion The Texans repeated as AFC South champions in 2012.

==Franchise history==

In 1997, Houston entrepreneur Bob McNair had a failed bid to bring a National Hockey League expansion team to the city, and Bud Adams relocated the city's NFL team, the Houston Oilers, to Nashville where they were renamed Tennessee Titans. Given the Cleveland Browns had just suffered a controversial relocation to become the Baltimore Ravens, the league promised to return football to Cleveland within the following three years, and probably add another expansion team to even out the franchises at 32. As Houston was one of the favorites for the extra franchise along with Toronto and Los Angeles (which had lost the Rams and the Raiders in 1995), McNair then decided to join the football project and founded Houston NFL Holdings with partner Steve Patterson. In association with Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, they would push for a domed stadium as part of the bid to lure the NFL back to Houston. The expansion team was originally awarded to Los Angeles on March 16, 1999, but given the city had problems in providing an acceptable ownership team and stadium deal, both of which had been promised in Houston for two years, in October the NFL instead awarded the 32nd team to Houston, at the cost of $700 million. 

The Houston Texans joined the league at the 2002 NFL season, playing at the newly founded Reliant Stadium. While the team struggled in early seasons, luck started to change once native Houstonian Gary Kubiak became the head coach in 2006. The Texans finished with a .500 season (8 wins and 8 defeats) in both 2007 and 2008, and nearly qualified for the 200910 NFL playoffs with a 97 result in 2009. In 2010, the team started the season on a 42 record going into a Week 7 bye week, but promptly collapsed 28 in the second part of the season, finishing 610. The following season, former Cowboys head coach Wade Phillips was hired as the defensive coordinator of the Texans, and the improved defense led to the Texans finishing 106, winning their first AFC South title. Texans have climbed to the top of NFL, The Boston Globe The Texans then beat wild card Cincinnati Bengals 3110 in the first round of the 2011-12 NFL playoffs, before a 2013 defeat to the Ravens in the semifinals. 

The Texans would surge as the team to beat in the AFC South in , holding an 11-1 record by week 14. However, they lost three of their last four games to finish 12-4, though having beaten the rival Indianapolis Colts allowed them to clinch their 2nd AFC South title. The Texans once again beat the Bengals in the wild-card round, but they would once again fall in the second round, this time with a loss to the New England Patriots. The Texans would start 20 in 2013, but went into a tailspin and lost every game afterwards. Head Coach Kubiak would be fired after being swept by the rival Jacksonville Jaguars, who themselves started 08. Wade Phillips would fill in as head coach, but the Texans' luck did not change, and they finished 2-14, tying, with 2006, their worst record in franchise history. The 14-game losing streak amassed is also the worst in franchise history.

The Texans will enter the 2014 season with the 14-game losing streak on their back from last season. Former Penn State head coach Bill O'Brien will be the Texans' new Head Coach, and the third in franchise history. http://blog.chron.com/ultimatetexans/2014/01/bill-obrien-officially-introduced-as-texans-new-coach/ 

==Team identity==

===Nickname===
On March 2, 2000, Houston NFL 2002 announced that the team name search had been narrowed down to five choices: Bobcats, Stallions, Texans, Toros, and Apollos. The list of names was determined after several months of research conducted jointly by Houston NFL 2002 and NFL Properties. An online survey regarding the name generated more than 65,000 responses in just seven days.

On September 6, 2000, the NFL's 32nd franchise was officially christened the Houston Texans before thousands at a downtown rally on Texas Avenue. McNair explained that the name evoked "someone who's powerful, independent, courageous and hard-working". The name had previously been the name of a defunct World Football League franchise, which moved to Louisiana to become the Shreveport Steamer, and the nickname Texans was also used by the precursor of the present-day Kansas City Chiefs, the Dallas Texans of the AFL. The nickname "Texans" was more recently used by the now-defunct Canadian Football League franchise in San Antonio. Owner Bob McNair did have to make a deal with Chiefs' owner Lamar Hunt to use the Texans nickname for his new team. 

===Logos and Uniforms===
Houston Texans uniform combination

Along with the team name, McNair also unveiled the team logo, an abstract depiction of a bull's head, split in such a way to resemble the flag of Texas, including a lone star to stand for the eye, the five points of which representing pride, courage, strength, tradition and independence. McNair described the colors as "Deep Steel Blue", "Battle Red" and "Liberty White". A year later the Texans unveiled their uniforms during another downtown rally.

The Texans' helmet is dark blue with the Texans bull logo. The helmet was initially white when the team name and logo were unveiled, but was later changed to dark blue. The uniform design consists of red trim and either dark blue or white jerseys. The team typically wears white pants with its blue jerseys and blue pants with its white jerseys. Starting with the 2006 season, the Texans wear all-white for their home opener, and the team began to wear an all-blue combination for home games vs. the Indianapolis Colts. In 2003, the Texans introduced an alternative red jersey with blue trim; they wear this jersey at one home game each year, usually against a division rival. In 2007 the Texans introduced red pants for the first time, pairing them with the red jerseys for an all-red look (this uniform combination was not well-received and has since been retired). In October 2008 the Texans paired blue socks (instead of the traditional red) with their blue pants and white jerseys.

In 2002 the team wore a patch commemorating their inaugural season.

Image:Texans Inagural Season.gif|Inaugural Season Patch(2002)
Image:texansexpdraft.gif|Expansion Draft Logo(2002)
Image:TexansSecondary.jpg|Secondary Logo(2006present)

===Mascots and cheerleaders===
The team's official mascot is Toro. http://www.houstontexans.com/kids/toro.asp The team also has a cheerleading squad simply named the Houston Texans Cheerleaders. 

==Rivalries==
The Texans are the youngest franchise in the NFL, having only been competing in the League since 2002. For most of that time, they were considered perennial bottom-dwellers in the AFC South. For that reason, they have not had the history or the reputation on which to build classic rivalries like the ones that often exist between older franchises.

However, there are a few franchises for whom Texans fans hold special animosity. The Tennessee Titans, formerly the Houston Oilers before their relocation in the 1990s, are viewed by many Houston fans as the Texans' chief rival. The Jacksonville Jaguars, and the Indianapolis Colts, whom the Texans have never defeated in Indianapolis (compiling an all-time record of 012 there), are also rivals to the Texans.

More recently, Houston has defeated the Cincinnati Bengals in the Wild-Card Round of the playoffs in two consecutive seasons, forming a potential future rivalry with that franchise, one with similarities to the former AFC Central rivalry between the Bengals and Oilers.

==Statistics==

===Win-loss record===
As of the end of the 2013 season, the Texans' overall regular season win-loss record is 79113 (.411). They are 22 (.500) all-time in playoff games. The Texans posted their best-ever season record in 2012 finishing at 124. The team's worst-ever seasons on record are 214 in both 2005 and 2013.

The Texans participated in the playoffs for the first time at the end of the 2011 season, after having clinched the South Division title and qualifying as the AFC's third seed. In the Wildcard Round they hosted a playoff game for the first time, defeating the Cincinnati Bengals 3110. The following weekend they were defeated 2013 by the Baltimore Ravens on the road in the Divisional Round.

In 2012, the Texans won the AFC South Division and were seeded third once again. They again beat the Cincinnati Bengals at home in the Wildcard Round, this time by a score of 1913. On the road in the Divisional Round against the New England Patriots the Texans were defeated 4128.

===Notable records vs opponents===
As members of the AFC South, the Texans play six of their sixteen games each season against other AFC South teams. The Texans have a cumulative record of 2646 (.361) against their three divisional rivals. This includes lifetime records of 1311 against the Jacksonville Jaguars, 915 against the Tennessee Titans, and 420 against the Indianapolis Colts (including an 0-12 mark on the road). The Texans have fared better against the rest of their conference, posting a record of 3339 (.458) against AFC teams from divisions other than the South. The Texans are 2028 (.417) against NFC teams.

As of the end of 2013, there are two teams against which the Texans have never lost: the Chicago Bears (30) and Miami Dolphins (70). There are also two teams which the Texans have never beaten: the Minnesota Vikings (03) and Philadelphia Eagles (03). The Eagles are on the Texans' schedule for 2014. The Texans will play against the Dolphins in 2015, and against the Bears and the Vikings, both NFC North teams, in 2016. Since the Dolphins are the only one of these four mentioned teams in the same conference as the Texans (AFC), they will be able to play each other far more often (Click here for more information on the NFL's scheduling formula).

==NFL playoffs record==

==Players of note==

===Current roster===

===NFL Draft history===

====First-round draft picks by year====

 = Pro Bowler 

* Asterisk indicates a player who was selected to the Pro Bowl only as a member of another team.

 Year Pick Player Position College 
 2002 1st overall David Carr Quarterback Fresno State 
 2003 3rd overall Andre Johnson Wide receiver Miami (FL) 
 2004 10th overall Dunta Robinson Cornerback South Carolina 
 2004 27th overall (from Tennessee) Jason Babin* Defensive end Western Michigan 
 2005 16th overall (from New Orleans) Travis Johnson Defensive tackle Florida State 
 2006 1st overall Mario Williams Defensive end North Carolina State 
 2007 10th overall (from Atlanta) Amobi Okoye Defensive tackle Louisville 
 2008 26th overall (from Baltimore) Duane Brown Offensive tackle Virginia Tech 
 2009 15th overall Brian Cushing Linebacker Southern California 
 2010 20th overall Kareem Jackson Cornerback Alabama 
 2011 11th overall J.J. Watt Defensive end Wisconsin 
 2012 26th overall Whitney Mercilus Defensive end Illinois 
 2013 27th overall DeAndre Hopkins Wide receiver Clemson 
 2014 1st overall Jadeveon Clowney Defensive end South Carolina 

===Awards and honors===

==Coaches of note==

===Head coaches===

 Name From To Seasons Record Division Titles 
 W L T 
 Dom Capers January 21, 2001 January 2, 2006 4 18 46 0 0 
 Gary Kubiak January 26, 2006 December 6, 2013 8 61 64 0 2 
 Wade Phillips December 6, 2013 January 1, 2014 Interim 0 4 0 0 
 Bill O'Brien January 2, 2014 Present 1 0 0 0 0 

===Offensive coordinators===
* Chris Palmer (20022005)
* Troy Calhoun (2006)
* Mike Sherman (2007)
* Kyle Shanahan (20082009)
* Rick Dennison (20102013)
* Bill O'Brien (2014Present)

===Defensive coordinators===
* Vic Fangio (20022005)
* Richard Smith (20062008)
* Frank Bush (20092010)
* Wade Phillips (20112013)
* Romeo Crennel (2014Present)

====Current staff====

==Traditions==
* Battle Red Day  On Battle Red Day the team wears the red alternate jerseys and fans are encouraged to wear red to the game. Starting in 2007 and including 2008, this included the Texans wearing red pants along with the red jerseys.
* Bull Pen  The sections behind the north end zone of Reliant Stadium are known as the Bull Pen. Some of the most avid Texans fans attend games in the Bull Pen and regular members have helped create and implement fan traditions, songs and chants, such as:
*-Holding up giant Texans jerseys while the visiting teams players are announced
*-Turning their backs on the opposing team after they score
*-Gathering as a group for tailgating in the NW corner of the Platinum Lot of Reliant Stadium at the Blue Crew tailgate and conducting the Bull Pen Toast every game approximately an hour and a half prior to kickoff
*-Walking in the HEB Holiday Parade on Thanksgiving Day
*-Visiting the Bull Pen Pub for TORO Wraps, cheerleader autographs and to listen and dance with the Bull Pen Pep Band
* Bull Pen Pep Band  45-member musical group that performs at all Houston Texans home games.
* Pre-Kickoff Tradition  Before each kickoff at a home game, the Texans will run a short clip of a raging bull thrashing the opponent of the week. The video is paired with the AC/DC song "Thunderstruck". 
* Player Introduction  When the players are introduced before the game, the announcer says the player's first name and the crowd yells out the last name (e.g. The announcer will say "Linebacker Brian..." and the crowd will yell out "CUSHING!!!").

==Radio and television==
, the Texans' flagship radio stations were KILT SportsRadio 610AM and KILT 100.3FM. The AM station has an all-sports format, while the FM station plays contemporary country music. Both are owned by CBS Radio. Marc Vandermeer is the play-by-play announcer. Heisman Trophy winner Andre Ware provides color commentary, and SportsRadio 610 host Rich Lord serves as the sideline reporter. Preseason games are telecast by KTRK, an ABC owned and operated station. Joel Meyers calls the preseason games on TV, with former Oilers running back Spencer Tillman providing color commentary.

Spanish-language radio broadcasts of the team's games are aired on KLAT Univisin Amrica 1010AM. Enrique Vsquez is the play-by-play announcer. Jos Jojo Padrn provides color commentary, and Fernando Hernndez serves as sideline reporter.

===Radio affiliates===
Texans Radio Affiliates

 City Call Sign Frenquency 
 Alpine, Texas KVLF-AM 1240 AM 
 Athens, Texas KLVQ-AM 1410 AM 
 Austin, Texas KVET-AM 1300 AM 
 Big Spring, Texas KBYG-AM 1400 AM 
 Brenham, Texas KWHI-AM 1280 AM 
 Carthage, Texas KGAS-AM 1590 AM 
 Carthage, Texas KGAS-FM 104.3 FM 
 College Station, Texas KZNE-AM 1150 AM 
 Corpus Christi, Texas KSIX-AM 1230 AM 
 Henderson, Texas KWRD-AM 1470 AM 
 Houston, Texas KILT-FM 100.3 FM 
 Liberty, Texas KSHN-FM 99.9 FM 
 Livingston, Texas KETX-FM 92.3 FM 
 Lufkin, Texas KSML-AM 1260 AM 
 Marshall, Texas KMHT-AM 1450 AM 
 Marshall, Texas KMHT-FM 103.9 FM 
 New Braunfels, Texas KGNB-AM 1420 AM 
 Orange, Texas KOGT-AM 1600 AM 
 San Angelo, Texas KKSA-AM 1260 AM 
 San Antonio, Texas KZDC-AM 1250 AM 
 Texarkana, Texas KCMC 940 AM 
 Temple, Texas KTEM-AM 1400 AM 
 Wichita Falls, Texas KSEY-AM 1230 AM 

==Theme music==
The theme song of the Texans is "It's Football Time In Houston" by Clay Walker. The Texans tried to introduce a new fight song in 2003 written by Chad Kroeger from Nickelback, but quickly returned to the original after a negative reception by fans. The song was donated by Walker to the City of Houston. 

The Texans' defensive squad takes the field to the sound of "Bulls on Parade" by Rage Against the Machine. The Texans started using the song after OLB Connor Barwin coined the nickname in a Tweet in 2011. 

On January 5, 2012, local Houston rap artists Slim Thug, Paul Wall and ZRo released a song titled "HOUSTON" supporting the Houston Texans. The YouTube video has amassed over a million views becoming unofficially the Texans most popular theme song.

"Hats Off To The Bull" by the hard rock band Chevelle has become another popular theme song of the entire team. It is frequently played at home games.

==Work in the community==
The Houston Texans organization is a supporter of the character education program, Heart of a Champion. 

== See also ==

==Notes and references==

==External links==
* 

 



[[Heart of Oak]]

"Heart of Oak" is the official march of the Royal Navy of the United Kingdom. It is also the official march of several Commonwealth navies including the Royal Canadian Navy and the Royal New Zealand Navy. Royal Canadian Sea Cadets sing "Heart of Oak" during days of their parades. (It was also the official march of the Royal Australian Navy, but has now been replaced by the new march, "Royal Australian Navy").

The music was composed by Dr. William Boyce, and the words were written by the 18th-century English actor David Garrick. "Heart of Oak" was originally written as an opera. It first saw the light of day on New Year's Eve of 1760, sung by Samuel Thomas Champnes, one of Handel's soloists, in Garrick's pantomime "Harlequin's Invasion", at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane.

The "wonderful year" referenced in the first verse was 1759, an "Annus mirabilis" during which British forces were victorious in several significant battles: the Battle of Minden on 1st of August 1759, the Battle of Lagos on 19 August 1759, the Battle of the Plains of Abraham (outside Quebec City) on 13 September 1759, and the Battle of Quiberon Bay on 20 November 1759. (This battle foiled a French invasion project planned by the Duc de Choiseul to knock Britain out of the Seven Years' War, hence the reference in the song to 'flat-bottom' invasion barges). These victories were followed a few months later by the Battle of Wandiwash in India on 22 January 1760. Britain's continued success in the war boosted the song's popularity.

The oak in the song's title refers to the wood from which British warships were traditionally made in the age of sail. The "Heart of oak" is the strongest central wood of the tree. The phrase "hearts of oak" appears in English translations of the Aeneid.

The reference to "freemen not slaves" echos the refrain "Britons never will be slaves!" of Rule, Britannia!, written two decades earlier. 

==Lyrics==
Come, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,
To add something more to this wonderful year;
To honour we call you, as freemen not slaves,
For who are so free as the sons of the waves?

Chorus:
Heart of Oak are our ships, 
Jolly Tars are our men, 
We always are ready: Steady, boys, Steady! 
We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again. 

We ne'er see our foes but we wish them to stay,
They never see us but they wish us away;
If they run, why we follow, and run them ashore,
For if they won't fight us, what can we do more?

(Chorus)

They say they'll invade us these terrible foe,
They frighten our women, our children, our beaus,
But if should their flat-bottoms, in darkness set oar,
Still Britons they'll find to receive them on shore.

(Chorus)

We still make them feel and we still make them flee,
And drub them ashore as we drub them at sea,
Then cheer up me lads with one heart let us sing,
Our soldiers and sailors, our statesmen and king.

(Chorus X2)

Alternative first verse:
Come, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,
With heads carried high, we will banish all fear;
To honour we call you, as freemen not slaves,
For who are so free as the sons of the waves?

Alternative last verse:
Britannia triumphant her ships rule the seas,
Her watch word is justice her password is free,
So come cheer up my lad, with one heart let us sing,
Our soldiers, our sailors, our statesmen, our king.

==New lyrics==
A new version was presented on 16 April 1809 and published in the Spirit of the public Journals, vol. XIII, p. 75 by Reverend Rylance.

When Alfred, our King, drove the Dane from this land,
He planted an oak The reference is to an oak which stood close to the Water Walk, the Magdalen College, Oxford, and by tradition was planted by King Alfred. However the oak collapsed in 1778 and a chair for the college President was made from it. with his own royal hand;
And he pray'd for Heaven's blessing to hallow the tree,
As a sceptre for England, the queen of the sea.

Chorus:
:Heart of oak Reference to the rift sawing of hardwoods used in boat and ship construction. This produces timber less susceptible to warping and shrinkage and lumber of great stability. Contemporary opinions were that the British sailors were more steady in combat than the French who were prone to over-excitement and therefore more difficult to command in combat. are our ships,
:Hearts of oak are our men,
:We always are ready, steady boys, steady,
:To charge and to conquer again and again.

The sapling shot up and stuck firm to the ground;
It defied every tempest that bellow'd around;
And still was it seen with fresh vigour to shoot,
When the blood of our martyrs had moisten'd its root.

(Chorus)

But the worms of corruption had eaten their way
Through its bark; till a Wardle The name Wardle is said to be derived from "Ward Hill", implying "fortified place"; a reference to the ship of the line described as "wooden walls". has swept them away,
He has sworn, no such reptiles our tree shall infest,
And our patriots soon shall extirpate the nest.

(Chorus)

Yon tyrant, whose rule abject Europe bemoans 
Yon brood of usurpers who sit on her thrones 
Shall look on our country, and tremble with awe,
Where a son of the Monarch has bow'd to the law,

(Chorus)

Now long live the Briton, who dar'd to revive
The spirit which Britons scarce felt was alive;
His name shall be carv'd, while of freedom we sing,
On the oak that was planted by Alfred our King.

(Chorus)

==See also==
*Royal Air Force March Past

==References and notes==

==External links==
*"Heart of Oak" (MP3) at Sounds of the Stadacona Band
*"Heart of Oak" (MP3) at Canadian Historical Sound Recordings



[[Harold Holt]]

Harold Edward Holt, CH (; "Holt", Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, Random House, 2001. 5 August 190817 December 1967), was an Australian politician and the 17th Prime Minister of Australia.

Holt spent 32 years in Parliament, including many years as a senior Cabinet Minister, but was Prime Minister for only 22 months. This abbreviated term necessarily limited his personal and political impact, especially when compared to his immediate predecessor Sir Robert Menzies, who was Prime Minister for a total of 18 years.

As Minister for Immigration (19491956), Holt was responsible for the relaxation of the White Australia policy and as Treasurer under Menzies, he initiated major fiscal reforms including the establishment of the Reserve Bank of Australia, and launched and guided the process to convert Australia to decimal currency. As Prime Minister, he oversaw landmark changes including the historic decision not to devalue the Australian dollar in line with the British pound, and the 1967 constitutional referendum in which an overwhelming majority of Australians voted in favour of giving the Commonwealth power to legislate specifically for indigenous Australians.

His term as Prime Minister was brought to an early end in December 1967 when he disappeared while swimming at Cheviot Beach near Portsea, Victoria, and was presumed drowned.

Today, Holt is mainly remembered for his somewhat controversial role in expanding Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War; for his famous "All the way with LBJ" quote; and for the sensational circumstances of his death. In the opinion of his biographer Tom Frame, these have tended to obscure the many achievements of Holt's long and distinguished political career.

==Early life==
Harold Holt in the 1930s

Born in the NSW Stanmore on 5 August 1908, Holt was the elder of Thomas and Olive (Williams) Holt's two children. He and his brother Cliff (Clifford Thomas Holt, born 1910), spent their early life in Sydney and attended three different schools in Sydney and Adelaide between 1913 and 1919. In 1921, Thomas Holt enrolled his sons at Wesley College in Melbourne, where the future Prime Minister Robert Menzies had been a star pupil. By this time, Thomas Holt had left teaching and moved into theatrical and artist management in partnership with the noted entrepreneur Hugh D. McIntosh, owner of the Tivoli theatre circuit. For several years in the early 1930s, he was based in London.

Harold Holt's parents divorced in 1918. In 1924, when Holt was sixteen, his mother died and he did not attend her funeral. A lack of parental affection, his parents' divorce and his mother's early death instilled deep feelings of loneliness and insecurity in the young Holt, driving him to seek approval and acclaim through personal endeavour and career achievement, and fueling his eagerness to please others and his need to be liked. A formative event was his singing performance at his school's annual Speech Night in December 1926  none of his family were present, and the sense of loneliness he felt that night remained with him throughout his life.
Harold and Zara Holt in 1950.
Holt won a scholarship to Queen's College at the University of Melbourne and began his law degree in 1927. He excelled in many areas of university life  he won College 'Blues' for cricket and Australian rules football, as well as the College Oratory and Essay Prize. A member of the Melbourne Inter-University Debating team and the United Australia Organization 'A' Grade debating team, he was president of both the Sports and Social Club and the Law Students' Society.

Holt had dated Viola Thring (known as Lola; 191171), daughter of his father's business partner F. W. Thring (and half-sister of the actor Frank Thring), but she ultimately rejected Holt only to marry his divorced father. Harold Holt thus acquired a step-mother who was three years his junior. Treasury Publications. Retrieved 21 February 2014 

While at university, Holt met Zara Kate Dickins, and they soon became lovers. However, the couple split up in 1934 and Zara travelled overseas. In London she met Captain James Fell, a British Army officer, and they married in March 1935. Her first son Nicholas was born in 1937, followed by twin boys Sam and Andrew, born in 1939. By this time, however, she had renewed her relationship with Holt and her marriage to Fell ended soon after the twins' birth. Tom Frame's biography reveals that Holt was the twins' biological father. Zara and Fell subsequently divorced, she married Holt in 1946 and he adopted the three boys. Although they remained married until Holt's death in 1967, Zara's memoirs confirmed longstanding rumours that Holt had a number of extramarital affairs.

Holt graduated with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1930. He was admitted to the Victorian Bar in November 1932 and served his articles with the Melbourne firm of Fink, Best & Miller, but the Great Depression meant that he was unable to find work as a barrister. His father, based in London at the time, wanted him to further his studies in England, but the worsening economy also made this impossible.

==Early political career==
Holt in 1953

Holt was drawn to politics in the early 1930s and joined the Prahran branch of the United Australia Party (UAP) in 1933. At the 1934 federal election, Holt unsuccessfully contested the safe Labor seat of Yarra for the UAP, running against former Prime Minister James Scullin. In March 1935, he unsuccessfully contested the safe Victorian state Labor seat of Clifton Hill. Holt stood again for the federal House of Representatives on 17 August 1935, at a by-election for the marginally conservative seat of Fawkner, this time successfully. At age 27, he was one of Australia's youngest-ever MPs.

From this point on, Holt dedicated himself single-mindedly to a career in politics and reportedly had few outside interests apart from his well-known passion for sport and the sea. He was a 'workaholic', typically working up to 16 hours a day and subsisting on 45 hours sleep each night.

In 1939, Holt's mentor Robert Menzies became Prime Minister after the sudden death of the incumbent Joseph Lyons and the short-term caretaker ministry of Sir Earle Page. Holt's energy, dedication and ability earned him rapid promotion and in April 1939, he was appointed Minister without Portfolio assisting the Minister for Supply and Development. In October 1939, he became Minister in charge of Scientific and Industrial Research, and during NovemberDecember 1939, he was Acting Minister for Air and Civil Aviation.

In May 1940, without resigning his seat, Holt joined the Second Australian Imperial Force as a gunner, but a few months later three Cabinet ministers and several of Australia's top military staff were killed in an air crash in Canberra. Menzies recalled Holt from the army, appointing him Minister without Portfolio assisting the Minister for Trade and Customs, and his recall earned him the ironic nickname "Gunner Holt."

In October 1940, Holt was elevated to Cabinet, becoming Minister for Labour and National Service, and one of his most significant achievements in this portfolio was the introduction of the Child Endowment Act, passed in April 1941.

In August 1941, a front-bench revolt forced Menzies to resign as Prime Minister. He was replaced by the Country Party leader Arthur Fadden. Holt was among those who withdrew their support, although he never revealed his reasons for doing so. In October 1941, the UAP was ousted by a no-confidence vote; the ALP leader John Curtin was invited to form a new government; and Menzies resigned as UAP leader. By 1944, the UAP had effectively disintegrated and in 1945, Menzies formally established a new political party, the Liberal Party of Australia, and forged an enduring coalition with the Country Party. Holt was one of the first members to join the Liberal Party's Prahran branch.

==Ministerial career==
Holt as Minister for Labour at a Raymond Terrace Masonite factory in 1954.

After eight years in opposition, the Coalition won the federal election of December 1949 and Menzies began his record-setting second term as Prime Minister. At this election, Holt saw his majority in Fawkner nearly disappear in the redistribution. He transferred to Higgins, one of several new seats created in the 1949 redistribution. The seat was created as a safe Liberal seat; it had been carved out of the wealthier portions of Fawkner. Holt won it easily. He was appointed to the prestigious portfolios of Minister for Labour and National Service (19491958; he had previously served in this portfolio 194041) and Minister for Immigration (19491956), by which time he was being touted in the press as a "certain successor to Menzies and a potential Prime Minister". In Immigration, Holt continued and expanded the massive immigration program initiated by his ALP predecessor, Arthur Calwell. However, he displayed a more flexible and caring attitude than Calwell, who was a strong advocate of the White Australia policy.

Holt excelled in the Labour portfolio and has been described as one of the best Labour ministers since Federation. Although the conditions were ripe for industrial unrestCommunist influence in the union movement was then at its peak, and the right-wing faction in Cabinet was openly agitating for a showdown with the unionsthe combination of strong economic growth and Holt's enlightened approach to industrial relations saw the number of working hours lost to strikes fall dramatically, from over two million in 1949 to just 439,000 in 1958.

Holt fostered greater collaboration between the government, the courts, employers and trade unions. He enjoyed good relationships with union leaders like Albert Monk, President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions; and Jim Healy, leader of the radical Waterside Workers Federation;and he gained a reputation for tolerance, restraint and a willingness to compromise, although his controversial decision to use troops to take control of cargo facilities during a waterside dispute in Bowen, Queensland in September 1953 provoked bitter criticism.

Holt's personal profile and political standing grew throughout the 1950s. He served on numerous committees and overseas delegations, he was appointed a Privy Counsellor in 1953, and in 1954 he was named one of Australia's six best-dressed men. In 1956, he was elected Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and became Leader of the House, and from this point on, he was generally acknowledged as Menzies' heir apparent.

In December 1958, following the retirement of Arthur Fadden, Holt succeeded him as Treasurer, thus confirming his status as the number-three man in the government and the second-highest ranking Liberal. He delivered his first Budget in August 1959 and his achievements included major reforms to the banking system (originated by Fadden)including the establishment of the Reserve Bank of Australiaand the planning and preparation for the introduction of decimal currency.
Holt, then Treasurer of Australia, and U.S President John F. Kennedy in the Oval Office in 1963. Both men would be associated largely with the unusual circumstances of their deaths.

However, in November 1960, Holt made one of the few major missteps of his career. He brought down a mini-budget in an attempt to slow consumption, control inflation and reduce the deficit, but his action triggered the worst credit squeeze since 1945: the economy was driven into recession; the stock market slumped; private investment, housing activity and motor vehicle sales fell; unemployment rose to almost two percent (the highest rate since the Depression); and several major companies collapsed.

Holt's blunder damaged his career and brought the Coalition dangerously close to losing the 1961 election. For much of the night, it looked as though Labor might bring down the Menzies government, but a narrow win by Liberal Billy Snedden in Bruce ended any realistic chance of opposition leader Arthur Calwell becoming Prime Minister. However, the Coalition was assured of another term in government only when Moreton was called for Liberal Jim Killen, giving the Coalition a precarious one-seat majority. Holt was roundly criticised, his public profile was damaged, and he later described 196061 as "my most difficult year in public life". But his political stock, like the economy, soon recovered.

Holt continued as federal Treasurer until January 1966, when Menzies finally retired. With Menzies' support, Holt was elected leader of the Liberal Party, thus becoming Prime Minister. By this time, he had been an MP for almost 31 yearsthe longest wait of any non-caretaker Australian Prime Minister.

==Holt as Prime Minister==
Prime Minister Holt (2nd from left) during the SEATO-Summit 1966

Holt was sworn in as Prime Minister on Australia Day, 26 January 1966. His original Cabinet included:

* John McEwen (CP) Deputy Prime Minister, leader of the Country Party, Minister for Trade and Industry;
* William McMahon (LP), Treasurer;
* Paul Hasluck (LP), Minister for External Affairs;
* Allen Fairhall (LP), Minister for Defence;
* Charles Adermann (CP) Minister for Primary Industry;
* Charles Barnes (CP), Minister for Territories;
* David Fairbairn (LP), Minister for National Development;
* Senator John Gorton (LP), Minister for Works and Minister in Charge of Commonwealth Activities in Education and Research;
* Senator Denham Henty (LP), Minister for Supply;
* Alan Hulme (LP), Postmaster-General;
* Les Bury (LP), Minister for Labour;
* Malcolm Fraser (LP), Minister for the Army.

Holt's term in office covered almost exactly the tumultuous calendar years of 196667. His short tenure meant that he had limited personal and political impact as Prime Minister, and he is remembered mainly for the dramatic circumstances of his disappearance and presumed death. His untoward demise has tended to obscure the major events and political trends of his term in office, especially his role in maintaining and expanding Australia's military commitment to the Vietnam War.

Holt's tenure fell during one of the hottest periods of the Cold War era, and his government faced some unenviable foreign policy challenges. Global political, commercial and military alignments were rapidly reconfigured as the Soviets and the US vied for world domination in diverse theatres of conflict. Australia's ties with the UK weakened rapidly as Britain closed foreign bases, disengaged from its former territories East of Suez and began courting the EEC, as a result of which American investment in Australia increased dramatically and Australia's onetime enemy Japan replaced the UK as Australia's major trading partner.

Strategically, the period was dominated by Lyndon Johnson's fateful decision to escalate the war in South East Asia. Australia's involvement in Vietnam increased significantly under Holt, with Australian troops fighting and dying in sometimes desperate battles like Long Tan. Growing community unrest about the draft, the rising tide of casualties and social debate about the moral rectitude of the war fuelled the first significant stirrings of organised domestic opposition, such as the influential community anti-conscription organisation Save Our Sons.
The Holts meeting with Prime Minister of the U.K Harold Wilson and Mrs Wilson in 1967.

There was also considerable anxiety about the volatile situation in Indonesia, in which Sukarno was replaced by General Suharto, while the Chinese Communist Party launched the cataclysmic Cultural Revolution. The precarious international situation reached a crisis point in June 1967 when the Six Day War flared in the Middle East and six days later China tested its first H-bomb. As the Space Race gathered momentum, the continuing turmoil of decolonisation visited wars, coups, famine, armed uprisings and violent repression on countries across South and Central America, Africa and Asia.

The transfer of power from Menzies to Holt in February 1966 was smooth and unproblematic, and at the federal election later that year, the electorate overwhelmingly endorsed Holt, giving the Holt-McEwen Coalition government a 41-seat majority, the largest in Australian history up to that time. They also won 56% of the two-party preferred vote, which is still the greatest winning margin at a federal election in Australian political history.

Behind the scenes, however, Menzies' retirement had created a power vacuum in the party, and internal divisions soon emerged. Menzies' domination of the party, and the fact that Holt's succession had been established for many years, meant that a secure second rank of leadership had not been developed. Holt's disappearance at the end of 1967 forced the party to choose a "wild card" successor from the Senate after the leading contender, deputy Liberal leader William McMahon, was unexpectedly eliminated from the contest due to a dispute with their Coalition partners, the Country Party.

Political historian James Jupp says that, in domestic policy, Holt identified with the reformist wing of Victorian Liberalism. One of his most notable achievements was to initiate the process of breaking down the preferential White Australia policy by ending the distinction between Asian and European migrants and by permitting skilled Asians to settle with their families. He also established the Australian Council for the Arts (later the Australia Council), which began the tradition of federal government support for Australian arts and artists, an initiative that was considerably expanded by Holt's successor John Gorton.

In the area of constitutional reform, undoubtedly the most significant event of Holt's time as Prime Minister was the 1967 referendum in which an overwhelming majority of Australians voted in favour of giving the Commonwealth power to legislate specifically for indigenous Australians and to include them in the Commonwealth census.

In economics, Holt's tenure began with the phasing in of Australia's new system of decimal currency, launched on 14 February 1966, and it was marked by a major realignment of commercial and military ties away from the UK and towards the US and Asia. Although all the preparatory work for the decimal changeover had been done while Menzies was Prime Minister, Holt had particular responsibility as Treasurer for currency matters, and he was centrally involved in both the decision to change and its implementation.

In 1967 the Holt government made the historic decision not to depreciate the Australian dollar in line with Britain's depreciation of the pound sterling, a custom that Australia had previously always followed, but this decision created considerable dissent within the Coalition; Country Party leader John McEwen was particularly angered by the movehe saw it as a threat to Australia's balance of payments and feared that it would lead to increased production costs for primary industry.

In terms of party politics, one of the most significant features of Holt's brief tenure as PM is that his unexpected death triggered the beginning of an unprecedented period of turmoil within the Liberal Party and a rapid decline in the Coalition's electoral fortunes. For twenty-two years, from its founding in 1944 to his retirement in 1966, the Liberal Party had had only one leader, Robert Menzies. After Menzies' retirement, the party had three leaders in six years: Holt, Gorton and William McMahon. In December 1969, the ALP under Gough Whitlam came within four seats of ending the Coalition's hold on power before winning a convincing victory in 1972.

==Holt and Vietnam==
Prime Minister Harold Holt with US Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara at The Pentagon in July 1966.
Prime Minister Harold Holt with U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson in October 1966.

During Holt's term in office, the Vietnam War was the dominant foreign policy issue. The Holt government significantly increased Australia's military involvement in the war and Holt vehemently defended U.S. policy in the region. He also forged a close relationship with U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson, whom he had first met in Melbourne in 1942. Holt visited Washington in mid-1966 and Johnson visited Australia in October that year, the first time a serving American president had visited Australia.

Whilst Holt stated that his friendship with Johnson was reflected in the strong relationship between Australia and the US, former Australian diplomat and foreign-affairs expert Alan Renouf was more cynical in his assessment of the situation. In the chapter on Vietnam in The Frightened Country, his 1979 book on Australian foreign policy, Renouf bluntly suggested that Holt was in effect "seduced" by Johnson, and notes that the Johnson administration criticized the Holt government for not doing enough and repeatedly pressured Australia to increase its troop commitment in Vietnam.

On taking office, Holt declared that Australia had no intention of increasing its commitment to the war, but just one month later, in December 1966, he announced that Australia would treble its troop commitment to 4,500, including 1,500 National Service conscripts, creating a single independent Australian task force based at Nui Dat.

Five months later, in May, Holt was obliged to announce the death of the first National Service conscript in Vietnam, Private Errol Wayne Noack, aged 21. Just before his disappearance, Holt approved a further increase in troop numbers, committing a third battalion to the wara decision that was subsequently revoked by his successor, John Gorton.

Holt visited the US in late June 1966, where he gave a speech in Washington in the presence of President Johnson. Reported in The Australian on 1 July 1966, Holt's speech concluded with a remark which has come to be seen as encapsulating his unquestioning support for Johnson, for America's Vietnam policy and for continued Australian military involvement in the Vietnam War:

:"You have in us not merely an understanding friend but one staunch in the belief of the need for our presence in Vietnam.

:"We are not there because of our friendship, we are there because, like you, we believe it is right to be there and, like you, we shall stay there as long as it seems necessary to achieve the purposes of the South Vietnamese Government and the purposes that we join in formulating and progressing together.

:"And so, sir, in the lonelier and perhaps even more disheartening moments which come to any national leader, I hope there will be a corner of your mind and heart which takes cheer from the fact that you have an admiring friend, a staunch friend that will be all the way with LBJ."

Following his Washington visit Holt went on to London and in a speech there given on 7 July he was sharply critical of the UK, France and other U.S. allies that had refused to commit troops to the Vietnam War.

On 20 October 1966, President Johnson arrived in Australia at Holt's invitation for a three-day state visit, the first to Australia by a serving U.S. President. The tour marked the first major anti-war demonstrations staged in Australia. In Sydney, protesters lay down in front of the car carrying Johnson and the Premier of New South Wales, Robert Askin (prompting Askin's notorious order to "Run over the bastards"). In Melbourne, a crowd estimated at 750,000 turned out to welcome Johnson, although a vocal anti-war contingent demonstrated against the visit by throwing paint bombs at Johnson's car and chanting "LBJ, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?".

In December, Australia signed a controversial agreement with the United States that would allow the U.S. to establish a secret strategic communications facility at Pine Gap in the Northern Territory. On 20 December 1966, Holt announced that Australia's military force in Vietnam was to be increased again to 6,300 troops plus an additional twelve tanks, two minesweepers and eight bombers.

==1966 general election==

Holt fought his first and only general election as Prime Minister on 26 November 1966, focusing his campaign on the issue of Vietnam and the supposed Communist threat in Asia. Labor leader Arthur Calwell bitterly opposed Australia's part in the war and promised that Australian troops would be brought home if Labor won office, and opposition to overseas service by Australian conscripts had long been part of ALP policy.

Although domestic opposition to the war was beginning to build, Australia's involvement in Vietnam still enjoyed majority popular support. The Coalition scored a stunning victory over the ALP, winning many former ALP seats and sweeping back into power with (at the time) the largest parliamentary majority since Federation. The Liberal Party increased its numbers from 52 to 61, and the Country Party from 20 to 21, with Labor dropping from 51 to 41 seats, and one Independent. Among the new members elected was future federal Treasurer Phillip Lynch.

==1967==
In early 1967, Arthur Calwell retired as ALP leader and Gough Whitlam succeeded him. Whitlam proved a far more effective opponent, both in the media and in parliament, and Labor soon began to recover from its losses and gain ground, with Whitlam repeatedly besting Holt in Parliament. By this time, the long-suppressed tensions between the Coalition partners over economic and trade policies were also beginning to emerge. Throughout his reign as Liberal leader, Menzies had enforced strict party discipline but, once he was gone, dissension began to surface. Some Liberals soon became dissatisfied by what they saw as Holt's weak leadership. Alan Reid asserts that Holt was being increasingly criticised within the party in the months before his death, that he was perceived as being "vague, imprecise and evasive" and "nice to the point that his essential decency was viewed as weakness".

Holt during a visit to US president Lyndon B. Johnson 1 June 1967

Holt's popularity and political standing was damaged by his perceived poor handling of a series of controversies that emerged during 1967. In April, the ABC's new nightly current affairs program This Day Tonight ran a story which criticised the government's decision not to reappoint the Chair of the ABC Board, Sir James Darling. Holt responded rashly, questioning the impartiality of the ABC and implying political bias on the part of journalist Mike Willesee (whose father Don Willesee was an ALP Senator and future Whitlam government minister), and his statement drew strong protests from both Willesee and the Australian Journalists' Association.

In May, increasing pressure from the media and within the Liberal Party forced Holt to announce a parliamentary debate on the question of a second inquiry into the 1964 sinking of HMAS Voyager to be held on 16 May. The debate included the maiden speech by newly elected NSW Liberal MP Edward St John QC, who used the opportunity to criticize the government's attitude to new evidence about the disaster. An enraged Holt interrupted St John's speech, in defiance of the parliamentary convention that maiden speeches are heard in silence; his blunder embarrassed the government and further undermined Holt's support in the Liberal Party. A few days later, Holt announced a new Royal Commission into the disaster.

In June, Holt travelled to London via Canada, where on 6 June he opened the Australian Pavilion at Expo 67 in Montreal; on the return journey, the Holts stayed with the Johnsons at the presidential summer resort, Camp David, in Maryland. 

===VIP Aircraft affair===
In October the government became embroiled in another embarrassing controversy over the alleged misuse of VIP aircraft, which came to a head when John Gorton (Government Leader in the Senate) tabled documents that showed that Holt had unintentionally misled Parliament in his earlier answers on the matter. Support for his leadership was eroded even further by his refusal to sack the Minister for Air, Peter Howson, in order to defuse the scandal, fuelling criticism from within the party that Holt was "weak" and lacked Menzies' ruthlessness. Much of the blame for the episode within the Public Service was visited upon Sir John Bunting, Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, although other figures such as the Deputy Secretary Peter Lawler were able to protect themselves. One of John Gorton's first acts upon becoming Prime Minister in January 1968 was to sideline Bunting by creating a separate Department of the Cabinet Office with Bunting as its head, and replaced him with Lenox Hewitt.

In November 1967, the government suffered a serious setback in the Senate election, winning just 42.8 per cent of the vote against Labor's 45 per cent. The coalition also lost the seats of Corio and Dawson to Labor in by-elections. Alan Reid says that, within the party, the reversal was blamed on Holt's mishandling of the VIP planes scandal. In December, days before Holt disappeared, the Chief Government Whip Dudley Erwin decided to meet with Holt and confront him about growing unrest in the party. According to Alan Reid's account, Erwin had no concerns about policy; his anxiety was entirely focussed on Holt's leadership style, his parliamentary performance and his public image.

The notes Erwin made for his planned meeting with Holt (which he evidently provided to Reid) indicate that he and others were worried that Holt was too susceptible to traps set for him by the ALP over issues like the VIP jets scandal, and that he had repeatedly let himself become the target of Opposition "harassment" instead of letting his ministers take the heat on controversial issues.

==Disappearance==
On the morning of Sunday 17 December 1967, Holt together with friends Christopher Anderson, Jan Lee and George Illson and his two bodyguards, drove down from Melbourne to see the British yachtsman Alec Rose sail through Port Phillip Heads in his boat Lively Lady to complete a leg of his solo circumnavigation of the globe, which started and ended in England. Around noon, the party drove to one of Holt's favourite swimming and snorkelling spots, Cheviot Beach on Point Nepean near Portsea, on the eastern arm of Port Phillip Bay. Holt decided to go swimming, although the surf was heavy and Cheviot Beach was notorious for its strong currents and dangerous rip tides.

Ignoring his friends' pleas not to go in, Holt began swimming, but soon disappeared from view. Fearing the worst, his friends raised the alert. Within a short time, the beach and the water off shore were being searched by a large contingent of police, Royal Australian Navy divers, Royal Australian Air Force helicopters, Army personnel from nearby Point Nepean and local volunteers. This quickly escalated into one of the largest search operations in Australian history, but no trace of Holt could be found.

Two days later, on 19 December 1967, the government made an official announcement that Holt was thought to be dead. The Governor-General Lord Casey sent for the Country Party leader and Coalition Deputy Prime Minister John McEwen, and he was sworn in as caretaker Prime Minister until such time as the Liberals elected a new leader.

Holt was a strong swimmer and an experienced skindiver, with what Holt's biographer Tom Frame describes as "incredible powers of endurance underwater". However, his health was evidently far from perfect at the time of his death  he had collapsed in Parliament earlier in the year, apparently suffering from a "vitamin deficiency", and this had raised fears among some senior Liberals that he might have a heart condition.

In September 1967, Holt had suffered a recurrence of an old shoulder injury, which reportedly caused him agonising pain, and for this he was prescribed strong painkillers. He ignored recent advice from his doctor Marcus de Laune Faunce not to play tennis or swim until the shoulder healed and reportedly obtained a prescription for morphine from another doctor. Tom Frame also records that Holt had already got into trouble twice while skindiving earlier in 1967  on the first occasion, while snorkeling at Portsea in May, he got into severe difficulties because of a leaking snorkel and had to be pulled from the water by friends, gasping for breath, blue in the face, and vomiting seawater.

===Memorial service===
A memorial service held at St Paul's Anglican Cathedral in Melbourne on 22 December was attended by a number of international dignitaries including President Johnson and Charles, Prince of Wales. Among the many Asian leaders were Nguyn Vn Thiu, President of South Vietnam and Park Chung-hee, President of South Korea. It was also one of the first events to be transmitted from Australia to other countries via satellite.

===Speculation===
There were many rumours surrounding Holt's death, including claims that he had committed suicide or faked his own death in order to run away with his mistress. The mystery became the subject of numerous urban myths in Australia, including persistent claims that he was kidnapped (or rescued) by a Chinese submarine, or the far-fetched claim that he had been abducted by a UFO. In 1983, British journalist Anthony Grey published a controversial book in which he claimed that Holt had been an agent for the People's Republic of China and that he had been picked up by a Chinese submarine off Portsea and taken to China. Such conspiracy theories rely on the fact that his body was never found.

John Keel in his book Operation Trojan Horse (1970) claimed of this disappearance that "The elementals had predicted this." 
. Originally published in 1970 . 

More recently, media speculation about Holt's death has focussed on the possibility that he took his own life. Journalist Ray Martin made a documentary, Who Killed Harold Holt?, screened in November 2007, which suggested that Holt might have committed suicide. The Bulletin magazine featured a story supporting the suicide theory. In support of the view, The Bulletin quoted fellow cabinet minister Doug Anthony who spoke about Holt's depression shortly before his death. The suggestion of suicide was emphatically rejected by Holt's son Sam, by his biographer Tom Frame, and by former prime minister and Holt's Cabinet colleague at the time, Malcolm Fraser. 

On 23 October 2008, ABC Television broadcast the one-hour docu-drama The Prime Minister is Missing, starring 1960s pop idol Normie Rowe as Holt. This programme covered much of the same ground as Martin's documentary, but rejected Martin's suggestion that Holt had committed suicide, stating that he was a vocal 'life affirmer'. The documentary also noted that Holt was suffering from a shoulder injury and had been advised not to swim.

===Inquiries into Holt's disappearance===
No official federal government inquiry was conducted, on the grounds that it would have been a waste of time and money. Neither was an inquest held at the time because Victorian law did not provide any mechanism for reporting presumed or suspected deaths to the Victorian Coroner. However, the Commonwealth and Victoria Police compiled a 108-page report into the disappearance, including statements from all eyewitnesses and details of the search operation. Report by the Commonwealth and Victoria Police on Disappearance of the Prime Minister The Right Honourable Harold Holt, C.H. M.P. Cheviot Beach, Portsea, Victoria, Sunday 17 December 1967, National Archives of Australia 

The law in Victoria was changed in 1985, and in 2003 the Victoria Police Missing Persons Unit formally reopened 161 pre-1985 cases in which drowning was suspected but no body was found. Holt's son Nicholas Holt said that after 37 years there were few surviving witnesses and no new evidence would be presented. On 2 September 2005, the Coroner's finding was that Holt had drowned in accidental circumstances on 17 December 1967. 

==Leadership crisis==

Holt's disappearance triggered a leadership crisis in the Liberal Party which briefly raised the possibility of a split in the Coalition. It was expected that Liberal deputy leader and Treasurer William McMahon would succeed Holt as both Liberal leader and Prime Minister. However, on the morning of 18 December, Deputy Prime Minister Jack McEwen publicly declared that neither he nor his Country Party colleagues would serve in a government headed by McMahon. McEwen refused to give his reasons, saying only that McMahon knew what they were. However, it was well known that McMahon was a strong supporter of free trade and tariff reformanathema to the staunchly protectionist McEwen.

The following day, 19 December, McEwen persuaded Casey that it would be inappropriate to appoint a Liberal as interim Prime Minister, as it would give him an unfair advantage in the leadership contest. With this in mind, McEwen was sworn in as caretaker Prime Minister on the understanding that his commission would continue only until such time as the Liberals could elect a new leader. With McMahon unexpectedly eliminated from the contest, Senator John Gorton was elected Liberal leader on 9 January 1968, and was sworn in as Prime Minister on 10 January, replacing McEwen.

In the Queen's Birthday Honours of June 1968, Holt's widow Zara Holt was made a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire, becoming Dame Zara Holt DBE. She later married for a third time, to a Liberal party colleague of Holt's, Jeff Bate, and was then known as Dame Zara Bate.

==Memorials==
Melbourne's Harold Holt Swim Centre

Harold Holt is most famously commemorated by the Harold Holt Swim Centre in the Melbourne suburb of Glen Iris. The complex was under construction at the time of Holt's disappearance, and since he was Malvern's local member, it was named in his memory. The irony of commemorating Holt with a swimming pool has been a wry source of amusement to many Australians. Bryson, Bill. In a Sunburned Country (Broadway Books, New York, 2000) ISBN 0-7679-0385-4 

In 1968, the newly commissioned United States Navy Knox class destroyer escort USS Harold E. Holt (FF-1074) was named in his honour. She was launched by Holt's widow Dame Zara at the Todd Shipyards in Los Angeles on 3 May 1969, and was the first American warship to bear the name of a foreign leader.

In 1969, a plaque commemorating Holt was bolted to the seafloor off Cheviot Beach after a memorial ceremony. It bears the inscription:

Other memorials include:

* the suburb of Holt, Australian Capital Territory;
* the Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt;
* the Division of Holt, an electoral district in the Australian House of Representatives in Victoria;
* a sundial and garden in the Fitzroy Gardens, Melbourne;
* a wing for boarders at Wesley College, Melbourne;
* the Harold Holt Fisheries Reserves  five protected areas in southern Port Phillip, located at Swan Bay, Point Lonsdale, Mud Islands, Point Nepean and Pope's Eye (The Annulus).

By way of a folk memorial, he is recalled in the Australian vernacular expression "do a Harold Holt" (or "do the Harry"), rhyming slang for "do a bolt" meaning "to disappear suddenly and without explanation", although this is usually employed in the context of disappearance from a social gathering rather than a case of presumed death. Belinsky, Natalya. Australian Slang'.' Retrieved 7 January 2008. 

==See also==
* First Holt Ministry
* Second Holt Ministry
* Declared death in absentia
* List of people who disappeared mysteriously

==Notes==

==References and further reading==
* 
* 
* Hancock, Ian (2000), 'Harold Edward Holt,' in Michelle Grattan (ed.), Australian Prime Ministers, New Holland, Sydney, pages 270285. ISBN 1-86436-756-3
* Holt, Dame Zara (1968), My Life and Harry. An Autobiography, Herald and Weekly Times, Melbourne.
* Hughes, Colin A (1976), Mr Prime Minister. Australian Prime Ministers 19011972, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, Victoria, Ch.19. ISBN 0-19-550471-2
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Harold HoltAustralia's Prime Ministers / National Archives of Australia
* 
* Video Documentary



[[Heavy metal music]]

Heavy metal (or simply metal) is a genre of rock music Du Noyer (2003), p. 96; Weinstein (2000), pp. 1113. that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, largely in the United Kingdom and the United States. Weinstein (2000), pp. 14, 118. With roots in blues rock and psychedelic rock, the bands that created heavy metal developed a thick, massive sound, characterized by highly amplified distortion, extended guitar solos, emphatic beats, and overall loudness. Heavy metal lyrics and performance styles are often associated with masculinity, aggression and machismo. Fast (2005), pp. 8991; Weinstein (2000), pp. 7, 8, 23, 36, 103, 104. 

The first heavy metal bands such as Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple and Black Sabbath attracted large audiences, though they were often derided by critics, a status common throughout the history of the genre. During the mid-1970s, Judas Priest helped spur the genre's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence; Walser (1993), p. 6. "As much as Sabbath started it, Priest were the ones who took it out of the blues and straight into metal." Bowe, Brian J. Judas Priest: Metal Gods. ISBN 0-7660-3621-9. Motrhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an increasing emphasis on speed. Bands in the New Wave of British Heavy Metal such as Iron Maiden and Saxon followed in a similar vein. Before the end of the decade, heavy metal fans became known as "metalheads" or "headbangers".

During the 1980s, glam metal became a commercial force with groups like Mtley Cre and Poison. Underground scenes produced an array of more extreme, aggressive styles: thrash metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica, Megadeth, Slayer, and Anthrax, while other styles of the most extreme subgenres of metal like death metal and black metal remain subcultural phenomena. Since the mid-1990s, popular styles such as groove metal (e.g. Pantera), which blends extreme metal with hardcore punk, and nu metal (e.g. Slipknot), which often incorporates elements of grunge and hip hop, have further expanded the definition of the genre.

==Characteristics==
Heavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars, emphatic rhythms, dense bass-and-drum sound, and vigorous vocals. Metal subgenres variously emphasize, alter, or omit one or more of these attributes. New York Times critic Jon Pareles writes, "In the taxonomy of popular music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard-rockthe breed with less syncopation, less blues, more showmanship and more brute force." Pareles, Jon. "Heavy Metal, Weighty Words" The New York Times, July 10, 1988. Retrieved on November 14, 2007. The typical band lineup includes a drummer, a bassist, a rhythm guitarist, a lead guitarist, and a singer, who may or may not be an instrumentalist. Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound. Weinstein (2000), p. 25 

Judas Priest, performing in 2005
The electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically been the key element in heavy metal. Weinstein (2000), p. 23 The heavy metal guitar sound comes from a combined use of high volumes and heavy distortion. Walser, Robert (1993). Running with the Devil: Power, Gender, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music. Wesleyan University Press. p. 10. ISBN 0-8195-6260-2.
 With rhythm guitar parts, the "heavy crunch sound in heavy metal...created by palm muting" the strings with the right hand and using distortion. "Lesson four- Power chords". Marshall Amps. Palm muting creates a tighter, more precise sound and it emphasizes the low end. Damage Incorporated: Metallica and the Production of Musical Identity. By Glenn Pillsbury. Routledge, 2013
 

The lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides with the traditional "frontman" or bandleader role of the vocalist, creating a musical tension as the two "contend for dominance" in a spirit of "affectionate rivalry". Heavy metal "demands the subordination of the voice" to the overall sound of the band. Reflecting metal's roots in the 1960s counterculture, an "explicit display of emotion" is required from the vocals as a sign of authenticity. Weinstein (2000), p. 26 

Critic Simon Frith claims that the metal singer's "tone of voice" is more important than the lyrics. Cited in Weinstein (2000), p. 26 Metal vocals vary widely in style, from the multioctave, theatrical approach of Judas Priest's Rob Halford and Iron Maiden's Bruce Dickinson, to the gruff style of Motrhead's Lemmy and Metallica's James Hetfield, to the growling of many death metal performers, and to the harsh screams of black metal.

The prominent role of the bass is also key to the metal sound, and the interplay of bass and guitar is a central element. The bass guitar provides the low-end sound crucial to making the music "heavy". Weinstein (2000), p. 24 Metal basslines vary widely in complexity, from holding down a low pedal point as a foundation to doubling complex riffs and licks along with the lead and/or rhythm guitars. Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument, an approach popularized by Metallica's Cliff Burton in the early 1980s. "Cliff Burton's Legendary Career: The King of Metal Bass". Bass Player, February 2005. Retrieved on November 13, 2007. Some bassists use a distorted bass tone, an approach popularized by Burton and Motrhead's Lemmy.

The essence of metal drumming is creating a loud, constant beat for the band using the "trifecta of speed, power, and precision". Dawson, Michael. "Chris Adler: More than Meets the Eye". Modern Drummer Online. Retrieved on November 13, 2007. Metal drumming "requires an exceptional amount of endurance", and drummers have to develop "considerable speed, coordination, and dexterity...to play the intricate patterns" used in metal. Berry and Gianni (2003), p. 85 A characteristic metal drumming technique is the cymbal choke, which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand (or, in some cases, the same striking hand), producing a burst of sound. The metal drum setup is generally much larger than those employed in other forms of rock music. 

In live performance, loudnessan "onslaught of sound," in sociologist Deena Weinstein's descriptionis considered vital. In his book Metalheads, psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers to heavy metal concerts as "the sensory equivalent of war." Arnett (1996), p. 14 Following the lead set by Jimi Hendrix, Cream and The Who, early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks for volume. As Blue Cheer's Dick Peterson put it, "All we knew was we wanted more power." Walser (1993), p. 9 A 1977 review of a Motrhead concert noted how "excessive volume in particular figured into the band's impact." Paul Sutcliffe quoted in Waksman, Steve. "Metal, Punk, and Motrhead: Generic Crossover in the Heart of the Punk Explosion". Echo: A Music-Centered Journal 6.2 (Fall 2004). Retrieved on November 15, 2007. Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music, powerful sound, timbre, and volume are the key elements of metal. She argues that the loudness is designed to "sweep the listener into the sound" and to provide a "shot of youthful vitality." 

===Musical language===

====Rhythm and tempo====
An example of a rhythmic pattern used in heavy metal. The upper stave is a palm-muted rhythm guitar part. The lower stave is the drum part.

The rhythm in metal songs is emphatic, with deliberate stresses. Weinstein observes that the wide array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the "rhythmic pattern to take on a complexity within its elemental drive and insistency." In many heavy metal songs, the main groove is characterized by short, two-note or three-note rhythmic figuresgenerally made up of 8th or 16th notes. These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by using a palm-muted technique on the rhythm guitar. "Master of Rhythm: The Importance of Tone and Right-hand Technique", Guitar Legends, April 1997, p. 99 

Brief, abrupt, and detached rhythmic cells are joined into rhythmic phrases with a distinctive, often jerky texture. These phrases are used to create rhythmic accompaniment and melodic figures called riffs, which help to establish thematic hooks. Heavy metal songs also use longer rhythmic figures such as whole note- or dotted quarter note-length chords in slow-tempo power ballads. The tempos in early heavy metal music tended to be "slow, even ponderous." By the late 1970s, however, metal bands were employing a wide variety of tempos. In the 2000s decade, metal tempos range from slow ballad tempos (quarter note = 60 beats per minute) to extremely fast blast beat tempos (quarter note = 350 beats per minute). 

====Harmony====
One of the signatures of the genre is the guitar power chord. Walser (1993), p. 2 In technical terms, the power chord is relatively simple: it involves just one main interval, generally the perfect fifth, though an octave may be added as a doubling of the root. Although the perfect fifth interval is the most common basis for the power chord, See, e.g., Glossary of Guitar Terms. Mel Bay Publications. Retrieved on November 15, 2007. power chords are also based on different intervals such as the minor third, major third, perfect fourth, diminished fifth, or minor sixth. "Shaping Up and Riffing Out: Using Major and Minor Power Chords to Add Colour to Your Parts", Guitar Legends, April 1997, p. 97 Most power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up and down the fretboard. Schonbrun (2006), p. 22 

====Typical harmonic structures====
Heavy metal is usually based on riffs created with three main harmonic traits: modal scale progressions, tritone and chromatic progressions, and the use of pedal points. Traditional heavy metal tends to employ modal scales, in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes. Walser (1993), p. 46 Harmonically speaking, this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions such as the Aeolian progressions I-VI-VII, I-VII-(VI), or I-VI-IV-VII and Phrygian progressions implying the relation between I and II (I-II-I, I-II-III, or I-II-VII for example). Tense-sounding chromatic or tritone relationships are used in a number of metal chord progressions. Marshall, Wolf. "Power LordClimbing Chords, Evil Tritones, Giant Callouses", Guitar Legends, April 1997, p. 29 Dunn, Sam (2005). "Metal: A Headbanger's Journey". Warner Home Video (2006). Retrieved on March 19, 2007. 

The tritone, an interval spanning three whole tonessuch as C and F#was a forbidden dissonance in medieval ecclesiastical singing, which led monks to call it diabolus in musica"the devil in music." The first explicit prohibition of that interval seems to occur with the "development of Guido of Arezzo's hexachordal system which made B flat a diatonic note, namely as the 4th degree of the hexachordal on F. From then until the end of Renaissance the tritone, nicknamed the 'diabolus in musica', was regarded as an unstable interval and rejected as a consonance" (Sadie, Stanley . "Tritone", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 1st ed. MacMillan, pp. 1545. ISBN 0-333-23111-2. See also Arnold, Denis . "Tritone", in The New Oxford Companion to Music, Volume 1: A-J. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-311316-3). During the Baroque and Classical eras, the interval came to be accepted, though in a specific, controlled way. It is only during the Romantic era and in modern classical music that composers have used it freely, exploiting the evil connotations with which it is culturally associated. Because of that original symbolic association, it came to be heard in Western cultural convention as "evil". Heavy metal has made extensive use of the tritone in guitar solos and riffs, such as in the beginning of "Black Sabbath".

Heavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis. A pedal point is a sustained tone, typically in the bass range, during which at least one foreign (i.e., dissonant) harmony is sounded in the other parts. Kennedy (1985), "Pedal Point", p. 540 

====Relationship with classical music====
Ritchie Blackmore, founder of Deep Purple and Rainbow, known for the neoclassical approach in his guitar performances
Robert Walser argues that, alongside blues and R&B, the "assemblage of disparate musical styles known...as 'classical music'" has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre's earliest days. He claims that metal's "most influential musicians have been guitar players who have also studied classical music. Their appropriation and adaptation of classical models sparked the development of a new kind of guitar virtuosity changes in the harmonic and melodic language of heavy metal." Walser (1993), p. 58 

In an article written for Grove Music Online, Walser states that the "1980s brought on ...the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th-century European models, especially Bach and Antonio Vivaldi, by influential guitarists such as Ritchie Blackmore, Marty Friedman, Jason Becker, Uli Jon Roth, Eddie Van Halen, Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen". Walser, Robert. "Heavy metal". Grove Music Online. Accessed March 6, 2010. http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/public/book/omo_gmo (subscription required for access). Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that "If done correctly, metal and classical fit quite well together. Classical and metal are probably the two genres that have the most in common when it comes to feel, texture, creativity." Wagner, Wilson, pg. 156. 

Although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration, classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practicesclassical in the art music tradition, metal in the popular music tradition. As musicologists Nicolas Cook and Nicola Dibben note, "Analyses of popular music also sometimes reveal the influence of 'art traditions.' An example is Walser's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of the performance practices of nineteenth-century Romanticism. However, it would be clearly wrong to claim that traditions such as blues, rock, heavy metal, rap or dance music derive primarily from 'art music.'" See Cook and Dibben (2001), p. 56 

===Lyrical themes===
Black Sabbath and the many metal bands they inspired have concentrated lyrically "on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music," according to scholars David Hatch and Stephen Millward. They take as an example Sabbath's second album Paranoid (1970), which "included songs dealing with personal trauma'Paranoid' and 'Fairies Wear Boots' (which described the unsavoury side effects of drug-taking) as well as those confronting wider issues, such as the self-explanatory 'War Pigs' and 'Hand of Doom.'" Hatch and Millward (1989), p. 167 

Nuclear annihilation was addressed in later metal songs such as Black Sabbath's "Electric Funeral", Iron Maiden's "2 Minutes to Midnight", Ozzy Osbourne's "Killer of Giants", Megadeth's "Rust in Peace... Polaris", and Metallica's "Fight Fire with Fire". Death is a predominant theme in heavy metal, routinely featuring in the lyrics of bands as otherwise widely different as Slayer and W.A.S.P. The more extreme forms of death metal and grindcore tend to have aggressive and gory lyrics.

King Diamond, known for writing conceptual lyrics about horror stories
Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topica thread running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam and nu metal bands. Weinstein (1991), p. 36 Romantic tragedy is a standard theme of gothic and doom metal, as well as of nu metal, where teenage angst is another central topic. Heavy metal songs often feature outlandish, fantasy-inspired lyrics, lending them an escapist quality. Iron Maiden's songs, for instance, are frequently inspired by mythology, fiction, and poetry, as in "Rime of the Ancient Mariner", based on the Samuel Taylor Coleridge poem.

Led Zeppelin lyrics often make reference to The Lord of the Rings as well as other mythology and folklore, such as in the songs "The Battle of Evermore", the Viking raids "Immigrant Song", "Ramble On", "No Quarter", and "Achilles Last Stand". Other examples include Black Sabbath's "The Wizard", Megadeth's "The Conjuring" and "Five Magics", and Judas Priest's "Dreamer Deceiver". Since the 1980s, with the rise of thrash metal and songs such as Metallica's "...And Justice for All" and Megadeth's "Peace Sells", more metal lyrics have included socio-political commentary. Genres such as melodic death metal, progressive metal, and black metal often explore philosophical themes.

The thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism. According to Jon Pareles, "Heavy metal's main subject matter is simple and virtually universal. With grunts, moans and subliterary lyrics, it celebrates...a party without limits.... he bulk of the music is stylized and formulaic." Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal, and others have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult. During the 1980s, the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics, particularly those in heavy metal songs. See, e.g., Ewing and McCann (2006), pp. 104113 Music critic Robert Christgau called metal "an expressive mode it sometimes seems will be with us for as long as ordinary whiteboys fear girls, pity themselves, and are permitted to rage against a world they'll never beat". 

In 1990, Judas Priest was sued in American court by the parents of two young men who had shot themselves five years earlier, allegedly after hearing the subliminal statement "do it" in a Priest song. While the case attracted a great deal of media attention, it was ultimately dismissed. In some predominantly Muslim countries, heavy metal has been officially denounced as a threat to traditional values. In countries such as Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, and Malaysia, there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians and fans being arrested and incarcerated. 

===Image and fashion===

Kiss performing in 2004, wearing makeup
For certain artists and bands, visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal. In addition to its sound and lyrics, a heavy metal band's "image" is expressed in album sleeve art, logos, stage sets, clothing, and music videos. Weinstein (2000), p. 27 Some heavy metal acts such as Alice Cooper, Kiss, Lordi and Gwar have outrageous performance personas and stage shows.

Down-the-back long hair, according to Weinstein, is the "most crucial distinguishing feature of metal fashion." Weinstein (2000), p. 129 Originally adopted from the hippie subculture, by the 1980s and 1990s heavy metal hair "symbolised the hate, angst and disenchantment of a generation that seemingly never felt at home," according to journalist Nader Rahman. Long hair gave members of the metal community "the power they needed to rebel against nothing in general." Rahman, Nader. "Hair Today Gone Tomorrow". Star Weekend Magazine, July 28, 2006. Retrieved on November 20, 2007. 

The classic uniform of heavy metal fans consists of light colored, ripped frayed or torn blue jeans, black T-shirts, boots and black leather or jeans jackets.... T-shirts are generally emblazoned with the logos or other visual representations of favorite metal bands." Weinstein (2000), p. 127 Metal fans also "appropriated elements from the S&M community (chains, metal studs, skulls, leather and crosses)." In the 1980s, a range of sources, from punk and goth music to horror films, influenced metal fashion. Pospiszyl, Tom. "Heavy Metal". Umelec, January 2001. Retrieved on November 20, 2007. Many metal performers of the 1970s and 1980s used radically shaped and brightly colored instruments to enhance their stage appearance. Thompson (2007), p. 135; Blush, Steven. "American Hair MetalExcerpts: Selected Images and Quotes". FeralHouse.com. Retrieved on November 25, 2007. 

Fashion and personal style was especially important for glam metal bands of the era. Performers typically wore long, dyed, hairspray-teased hair (hence the nickname, "hair metal"); makeup such as lipstick and eyeliner; gaudy clothing, including leopard-skin-printed shirts or vests and tight denim, leather, or spandex pants; and accessories such as headbands and jewelry. Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, bands in the Japanese movement known as visual keiwhich includes many nonmetal groupsemphasize elaborate costumes, hair, and makeup. 

===Physical gestures===
Fans raise their fists and make the "devil horns" gesture at a concert by Estonian heavy metal group Metsatll in 2006
Many metal musicians when performing live engage in headbanging, which involves rhythmically beating time with the head, often emphasized by long hair. The il cornuto, or devil horns, hand gesture, also widespread, was popularized by vocalist Ronnie James Dio while with Black Sabbath and Dio. Although Gene Simmons of Kiss claims to have been the first to make the gesture on the 1977 Love Gun album cover, there is speculation as to who started the phenomenon. Appleford, Steve. "Odyssey of the Devil Horns". MK Magazine, September 9, 2004. Retrieved on March 31, 2007. 

Attendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense; Deena Weinstein has argued that this is due to the music's largely male audience and "extreme heterosexualist ideology." She identifies two primary body movements that substitute for dancing: headbanging and an arm thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture. Weinstein, p. 130 The performance of air guitar is popular among metal fans both at concerts and listening to records at home. Weinstein, p. 95 

===Fan subculture===

Deena Weinstein argues that heavy metal has outlasted many other rock genres largely due to the emergence of an intense, exclusionary, strongly masculine subculture. Weinstein, pp. 103, 7, 8, 104 While the metal fanbase is largely young, white, male, and blue-collar, the group is "tolerant of those outside its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress, appearance, and behavior." Weinstein, pp. 102, 112 Identification with the subculture is strengthened not only by the shared experience of concert-going and shared elements of fashion, but also by contributing to metal magazines and, more recently, websites. Weinstein, pp. 181, 207, 294 

A heavy metal fan wearing a denim jacket with band patches and artwork of the heavy metal bands Metallica, Guns N' Roses, Iron Maiden, Slipknot, Dio and Led Zeppelin
The metal scene has been characterized as a "subculture of alienation", with its own code of authenticity. "Three profiles of heavy metal fans: A taste for sensation and a subculture of alienation", Jeffrey Arnett. In Qualitative Sociology; Publisher Springer Netherlands. ISSN 0162-0436 (Print) 15737837 (Online). Volume 16, Number 4 / December 1993. Pages 423443. This code puts several demands on performers: they must appear both completely devoted to their music and loyal to the subculture that supports it; they must appear uninterested in mainstream appeal and radio hits; and they must never "sell out". Weinstein, pp. 46, 60, 154, 273 For the fans themselves, the code promotes "opposition to established authority, and separateness from the rest of society." Weinstein, pp. 166 

Musician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observes, "Most of the kids who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they don't know what to do with" and that metal is "outsider music for outsiders. Nobody wants to be the weird kid; you just somehow end up being the weird kid. It's kind of like that, but with metal you have all the weird kids in one place." Dunn, "Metal: A Headbanger's Journey" B000EGEJIY (2006) Scholars of metal have noted the tendency of fans to classify and reject some performers (and some other fans) as "poseurs" "who pretended to be part of the subculture, but who were deemed to lack authenticity and sincerity." Arnett, Jeffrey Jensen (1996). Metalheads: Heavy Metal Music and Adolescent Alienation. 

==Etymology==
The origin of the term "heavy metal" in a musical context is uncertain. The phrase has been used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy, where the periodic table organizes elements of both light and heavy metals (e.g. uranium). An early use of the term in modern popular culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs. His 1962 novel The Soft Machine includes a character known as "Uranian Willy, the Heavy Metal Kid." Burroughs's next novel, Nova Express (1964), develops the theme, using heavy metal as a metaphor for addictive drugs: "With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life formsHeavy Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notesAnd The Insect People of Minraud with metal music." Burroughs, William S. "Nova Express". New York: Grove Press, 1964. Pg. 112. The phrase was later lifted by Sandy Pearlman, who used the term to describe The Byrds for their supposed "aluminium style of context and effect", particularly on their album The Notorious Byrd Brothers (1968). 
Jimi Hendrix, playing in Sweden in 1967
Metal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in "hippiespeak": "heavy" is roughly synonymous with "potent" or "profound," and "metal" designates a certain type of mood, grinding and weighted as with metal. Christe (2003), p. 10 The word "heavy" in this sense was a basic element of beatnik and later countercultural slang, and references to "heavy music"typically slower, more amplified variations of standard pop farewere already common by the mid-1960s. Iron Butterfly's debut album, released in early 1968, was titled Heavy. The first use of "heavy metal" in a song lyric is in reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song "Born to Be Wild", also released that year: Walser (1993), p. 8 "I like smoke and lightning/Heavy metal thunder/Racin' with the wind/And the feelin' that I'm under." A late, and disputed, claim about the source of the term was made by "Chas" Chandler, former manager of the Jimi Hendrix Experience. In a 1995 interview on the PBS program Rock and Roll, he asserted that heavy metal "was a term originated in a New York Times article reviewing a Jimi Hendrix performance," in which the author likened the event to "listening to heavy metal falling from the sky." A source for Chandler's claim has never been found.

The first documented use of the phrase to describe a type of rock music identified to date appears in a review by Barry Gifford. In the May 11, 1968, issue of Rolling Stone, he wrote about the album A Long Time Comin' by U.S. band Electric Flag: "Nobody who's been listening to Mike Bloomfieldeither talking or playingin the last few years could have expected this. This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock." Gifford, Barry. Rolling Stone, May 11, 1968, p. 20. In January 1970 Lucian K. Truscott IV reviewing Led Zeppelin II for the Village Voice described the sound as "heavy" and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge. "Riffs". Lucian K. Truscott IV for the Village Voice. January 22, 1970. "Led Zeppelin, popularly looked on as an English version of Blue Cheer, given to Vanilla Fudgeish heavy-handedness in all that it does, has come out with a good album, 'Led Zeppelin II' (Atlantic SD 8236). Sure, it's 'heavy.' Sure, it's volume-rock at a time when the trend seems to be toward acoustical niceties of country music". 

Other early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Mike Saunders. In the November 12, 1970, issue of Rolling Stone, he commented on an album put out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie: "Safe as Yesterday Is, their first American release, proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways. Here they were a noisy, unmelodic, heavy metal-leaden shit-rock band with the loud and noisy parts beyond doubt. There were a couple of nice songs...and one monumental pile of refuse." He described the band's latest, self-titled release as "more of the same 27th-rate heavy metal crap." 

In a review of Sir Lord Baltimore's Kingdom Come in the May 1971 Creem, Saunders wrote, "Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal tricks in the book." Creem critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. Weinstein (1991), p. 19 Through the decade, heavy metal was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown. In 1979, lead New York Times popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called "heavy-metal rock" as "brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs," Rockwell, John. New York Times, February 4, 1979, p. D22 and, in a different article, as "a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers." Rockwell, John. New York Times, August 13, 1979, p. C16 

Coined by Black Sabbath drummer, Bill Ward, "downer rock" was one of the earliest terms used to describe this style of music and was applied to acts such as Sabbath and Bloodrock. Classic Rock magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of Quaaludes and the drinking of wine. Later the term would be replaced by "heavy metal." Kevin Holm-Hudson, Progressive Rock Reconsidered, (Routledge, 2002), ISBN 0-8153-3715-9 

The terms "heavy metal" and "hard rock" have often been used interchangeably, particularly in discussing bands of the 1970s, a period when the terms were largely synonymous. Du Noyer (2003), pp. 96, 78 For example, the 1983 Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll includes this passage: "known for its aggressive blues-based hard-rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy-metal band of the mid-Seventies." Pareles and Romanowski (1983), p. 4 

==History==

===Antecedents: 1950s to mid-1960s===
Heavy metal's quintessential guitar style, built around distortion-heavy riffs and power chords, traces its roots to early 1950s Memphis electric blues guitarists such as Joe Hill Louis, Willie Johnson, and particularly Pat Hare, who captured a "grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound" on records such as James Cotton's "Cotton Crop Blues" (1954); Robert Palmer, "Church of the Sonic Guitar", pp. 13-38 in Anthony DeCurtis, Present Tense, Duke University Press, 1992, pp. 24-27. ISBN 0-8223-1265-4. the late 1950s instrumentals of Link Wray, particularly "Rumble" (1958); Strong (2004), p. 1693; Buckley (2003), p. 1187 the early 1960s surf rock music of Dick Dale, including "Let's Go Trippin'" (1961) and "Misirlou" (1962); and The Kingsmen's version of "Louie, Louie" (1963), which made it a garage rock standard. Buckley (2003) p. 1144. 

Cream performing on the Dutch television program Fanclub in 1968
However, the genre's direct lineage begins in the mid-1960s. American blues music was a major influence on the early British rockers of the era. Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of many classic blues songs, often speeding up the tempos. As they experimented with the music, the UK blues-based bandsand the U.S. acts they influenced in turndeveloped what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal, in particular, the loud, distorted guitar sound. The Kinks played a major role in popularizing this sound with their 1964 hit "You Really Got Me". Weinstein (1991), p. 18; Walser (1993), p. 9 

In addition to The Kinks' Dave Davies, other guitarists such as The Who's Pete Townshend and The Yardbirds' Jeff Beck were experimenting with feedback. Wilkerson (2006), p. 19. [ "The Yardbirds"]. Richie Unterberger. Allmusic. Retrieved 30 August 2011. Where the blues rock drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits, drummers began using a more muscular, complex, and amplified approach to match and be heard against the increasingly loud guitar. Walser (1993), p. 10 Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their reliance on amplification, often becoming more stylized and dramatic. In terms of sheer volume, especially in live performance, The Who's "bigger-louder-wall-of-Marshalls" approach was seminal. McMichael (2004), p. 112 

The combination of blues rock with psychedelic rock formed much of the original basis for heavy metal. Weinstein (1991), p. 16 One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of genres was the British power trio Cream, who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce, as well as Ginger Baker's double bass drumming. Charlton (2003), pp. 23233 Their first two LPs, Fresh Cream (1966) and Disraeli Gears (1967), are regarded as essential prototypes for the future style. The Jimi Hendrix Experience's debut album, Are You Experienced (1967), was also highly influential. Hendrix's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists and the album's most successful single, "Purple Haze", is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit. 

During the late sixties, many psychedelic singers such as Arthur Brown, began to create outlandish, theatrical and often macabre performances; which in itself became incredibly influential to many metal acts. Polly Marshall, The God of Hellfire, the Crazy Life and Times of Arthur Brown, ISBN 0-946719-77-2, SAF Publishing, 2005, page 175. Polly Marshall, The God of Hellfire, the Crazy Life and Times of Arthur Brown, ISBN 0-946719-77-2, SAF Publishing, 2005, page 103. Vanilla Fudge, whose first album also came out in 1967, has been called "one of the few American links between psychedelia and what soon became heavy metal." 

===Origins: late 1960s and early 1970s===

John Kay of Steppenwolf
Critics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band. Most credit either Led Zeppelin or Black Sabbath, with American commentators tending to favour Led Zeppelin and British commentators tending to favour Black Sabbath, though many give equal credit to both. A few commentatorsmainly Americanargue for other groups including Iron Butterfly, Steppenwolf or Blue Cheer. Weinstein (2000), pp. 14-15. 

In 1968, the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce. That January, the San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran's classic "Summertime Blues", from their debut album Vincebus Eruptum, that many consider the first true heavy metal recording. McCleary (2004), pp. 240, 506. The same month, Steppenwolf released its self-titled debut album, including "Born to Be Wild", which refers to "heavy metal thunder" in describing a motorcycle. In July, another two epochal records came out: The Yardbirds' "Think About It" (from the 1967 Yardbirds album Little Games)B-side of the band's last singlewith a performance by guitarist Jimmy Page; and Iron Butterfly's In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida, with its 17-minute-long title track, a prime candidate for first-ever heavy metal album.

The Jeff Beck Group, whose leader had preceded Page as The Yardbirds' guitarist, released its debut record that same month: Truth featured some of the "most molten, barbed, downright funny noises of all time," breaking ground for generations of metal ax-slingers. Gene Santoro, quoted in Carson (2001), p. 86. In October, Page's new band, Led Zeppelin, made its live debut. The Beatles' White Album, which also came out that month, included "Birthday" and "Helter Skelter", then one of the heaviest-sounding songs ever released by a major band. Blake (1997), p. 143 The Pretty Things' rock opera S.F. Sorrow, released in December, featured "proto heavy metal" songs such as "Old Man Going" and "I See You". Mason, Stewart. [ "I See You: Review"]. Allmusic. Retrieved 2012-10-17. 

In this counterculture period MC5, who began as part of the Detroit garage rock scene, developed a raw distorted style that has been seen as a major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music. Bukszpan (2003), p. 141. Braunstein and Doyle (2002), p. 133. The Stooges also began to establish and influence a heavy metal and later punk sound, with songs such as "I Wanna Be Your Dog", featuring pounding and distorted heavy guitar power chord riffs. Pink Floyd released two of their heaviest and loudest songs to date; "Ibiza Bar" and "The Nile Song", which was regarded as "one of the heaviest songs the band recorded". Kellman, Andy. [ "Relics, Pink Floyd: Review"]. Allmusic. Retrieved 2012-10-17. J. DeRogatis, Turn On Your Mind: Four Decades of Great Psychedelic Rock (Milwaukee, Michigan: Hal Leonard, 2003), ISBN 0-634-05548-8, p. 132. King Crimson's debut album included 21st Century Schizoid Man, which was considered heavy metal by several critics. Fricke, David. "King Crimson: The Power To Believe : Music Reviews : Rolling Stone". web.archive.org. Archived from the original. Buckley 2003, p. 477, "Opening with the cataclysmic heavy-metal of '21st Century Schizoid Man', and closing with the cathedral-sized title track," 

alt=A colour photograph of the four members of Led Zeppelin performing onstage, with some other figures visible in the background
In January 1969, Led Zeppelin's self-titled debut album was released and reached number 10 on the Billboard album chart. In July, Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream-inspired, but cruder sound, Grand Funk Railroad, played the Atlanta Pop Festival. That same month, another Cream-rooted trio led by Leslie West released Mountain, an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals. In August, the groupnow itself dubbed Mountainplayed an hour-long set at the Woodstock Festival. Though often identified now as "hard rock", the band's official debut album, Mountain Climbing (1970), placed 85th on the list of "Top 100 Metal Albums" compiled by Hit Parader in 1989. In November, Love Sculpture, with guitarist Dave Edmunds, put out Forms and Feelings, featuring a pounding, aggressive version of Khachaturian's "Sabre Dance". Grand Funk Railroad's Survival (1971) placed 72nd (Walser , p. 174). Grand Funk's debut album, On Time, also came out that month. In the fall, Led Zeppelin II went to number 1 and the album's single "Whole Lotta Love" hit number 4 on the Billboard pop chart. The metal revolution was under way.

Led Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre, with Page's highly distorted guitar style and singer Robert Plant's dramatic, wailing vocals. Charlton (2003), p. 239 Other bands, with a more consistently heavy, "purely" metal sound, would prove equally important in codifying the genre. The 1970 releases by Black Sabbath (Black Sabbath and Paranoid) and Deep Purple (In Rock) were crucial in this regard. 

Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to an industrial accident guitarist Tony Iommi suffered before cofounding the band. Unable to play normally, Iommi had to tune his guitar down for easier fretting and rely on power chords with their relatively simple fingering. di Perna, Alan. "The History of Hard Rock: The 70's". Guitar World. March 2001. Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969 vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style. Charlton (2003), p. 241 In 1970, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major UK chart hits with "Paranoid" and "Black Night", respectively. Buckley 2003, p. 232, "Black Night', a UK #2 hit in November 1970, stole its riff from Ricky Nelson's 'Summertime'." That same year, two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode: Uriah Heep with Very 'Eavy... Very 'Umble and UFO with UFO 1. Bloodrock released their self-titled debut album, containing a collection of heavy guitar riffs, gruff style vocals and sadistic and macabre lyrics. Guarisco, Donald A. [ "Bloodrock: Bloodrock > Review"]. Allmusic. Retrieved 5 February 2012. Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context. The occult lyrics and imagery employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential; Led Zeppelin also began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album, released in 1971. Fast (2001), pp. 7071 

Brian Robertson, Phil Lynott, Scott Gorham of Thin Lizzy performing during the Bad Reputation Tour, 24 November 1977
On the other side of the Atlantic, the trend-setting group was Grand Funk Railroad, "the most commercially successful American heavy-metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976, established the Seventies success formula: continuous touring." Pareles and Romanowski (1983), p. 225 Other bands identified with metal emerged in the U.S., such as Blue yster Cult (1972), Aerosmith (1973) and Kiss (1974). In Germany, Scorpions debuted with Lonesome Crow in 1972. Blackmore, who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep Purple's Machine Head (1972), quit the group in 1975 to form Rainbow. These bands also built audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows. 

As described above, there are arguments about whether these and other early bands truly qualify as "heavy metal" or simply as "hard rock". Those closer to the music's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label. AC/DC, which debuted with High Voltage in 1975, is a prime example. The 1983 Rolling Stone encyclopedia entry begins, "Australian heavy-metal band AC/DC..." Pareles and Romanowski (1983), p. 1 Rock historian Clinton Walker writes, "Calling AC/DC a heavy metal band in the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today.... were a rock 'n' roll band that just happened to be heavy enough for metal." Walker (2001), p. 297 The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification: Ian Christe describes how the band "became the stepping-stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition." Christe (2003), p. 54 

In certain cases, there is little debate. After Black Sabbath, the next major example is Britain's Judas Priest, which debuted with Rocka Rolla in 1974. In Christe's description,

"Black Sabbath's audience was...left to scavenge for sounds with similar impact. By the mid-1970s, heavy metal aesthetic could be spotted, like a mythical beast, in the moody bass and complex dual guitars of Thin Lizzy, in the stagecraft of Alice Cooper, in the sizzling guitar and showy vocals of Queen, and in the thundering medieval questions of Rainbow.... Judas Priest arrived to unify and amplify these diverse highlights from hard rock's sonic palette. For the first time, heavy metal became a true genre unto itself." Christe (2003), pp. 1920 

Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the U.S. until 1980, for many it was the definitive post-Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin-guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a nonbluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts. While heavy metal was growing in popularity, most critics were not enamored of the music. Objections were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice, Walser (1993), p. 11 but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity: reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, leading critic Robert Christgau described it as "dull and decadent...dim-witted, amoral exploitation." Christgau (1981), p. 49 

===Mainstream: late 1970s and 1980s===
Iron Maiden, one of the central bands in the New Wave of British Heavy Metal
Punk rock emerged in the mid-1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as what was perceived as the overindulgent, overproduced rock music of the time, including heavy metal. Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk, disco, and more mainstream rock. With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high-energy sound and "lo-fi", do it yourself ethos. Underground metal bands began putting out cheaply recorded releases independently to small, devoted audiences. Christe (2003), pp. 30, 33 

Motrhead, founded in 1975, was the first important band to straddle the punk/metal divide. With the explosion of punk in 1977, others followed. British music papers such as the NME and Sounds took notice, with Sounds writer Geoff Barton christening the movement the "New Wave of British Heavy Metal". Christe (2003), p. 33 NWOBHM bands including Iron Maiden, Saxon, and Def Leppard reenergized the heavy metal genre. Following the lead set by Judas Priest and Motrhead, they toughened up the sound, reduced its blues elements, and emphasized increasingly fast tempos. 

In 1980, the NWOBHM broke into the mainstream, as albums by Iron Maiden and Saxon, as well as Motrhead, reached the British top 10. Though less commercially successful, other NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant influence on metal's development. Weinstein (1991), p. 44 In 1981, Motrhead became the first of this new breed of metal bands to top the UK charts with No Sleep 'til Hammersmith.

The first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight. Deep Purple had broken up soon after Blackmore's departure in 1975, and Led Zeppelin broke up following drummer John Bonham's death in 1980. Black Sabbath was routinely upstaged in concert by its opening act, the Los Angeles band Van Halen. Christe (2003), p. 25 Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitarists of the erahis solo on "Eruption", from the band's self-titled 1978 album, is considered a milestone. Christe (2003), p. 51 

Inspired by Van Halen's success, a metal scene began to develop in Southern California during the late 1970s. Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip, bands such as Quiet Riot, Ratt, Mtley Cre, and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the earlier 1970s Rivadavia, Eduardo. [ "Quiet Riot"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on March 25, 2007; Neely, Kim "Ratt". Rolling Stone. Retrieved on April 3, 2007; Barry Weber & Greg Prato. [ "Mtley Cre"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on April 3, 2007; Dolas, Yiannis. "Blackie Lawless Interview". Rockpages. Retrieved on April 3, 2007. and incorporated the theatrics (and sometimes makeup) of glam rock acts such as Alice Cooper and Kiss. Christe (2003), pp. 5557 The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized hedonism and wild behavior. Musically, the style was distinguished by rapid-fire shred guitar solos, anthemic choruses, and a relatively pop-oriented melodic approach. The glam metal movementalong with similarly styled acts such as New York's Twisted Sisterbecame a major force in metal and the wider spectrum of rock music.

In the wake of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal and Judas Priest's breakthrough British Steel (1980), heavy metal became increasingly popular in the early 1980s. Many metal artists benefited from the exposure they received on MTV, which began airing in 1981sales often soared if a band's videos screened on the channel. Christe (2003), p. 79 Def Leppard's videos for Pyromania (1983) made them superstars in America and Quiet Riot became the first domestic heavy metal band to top the Billboard chart with Metal Health (1983). One of the seminal events in metal's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California, where the "heavy metal day" featuring Ozzy Osbourne, Van Halen, Scorpions, Mtley Cre, Judas Priest, and others drew the largest audiences of the three-day event. Weinstein (1991), p. 45 

Between 1983 and 1984, heavy metal went from an 8 percent to a 20 percent share of all recordings sold in the U.S. Walser (1993), p. 12 Several major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched, including Kerrang! (in 1981) and Metal Hammer (in 1984), as well as a host of fan journals. In 1985, Billboard declared, "Metal has broadened its audience base. Metal music is no longer the exclusive domain of male teenagers. The metal audience has become older (college-aged), younger (pre-teen), and more female." Walser (1993), pp. 1213, 182 n. 35 

By the mid-1980s, glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts, music television, and the arena concert circuit. New bands such as L.A.'s Warrant and acts from the East Coast like Poison and Cinderella became major draws, while Mtley Cre and Ratt remained very popular. Bridging the stylistic gap between hard rock and glam metal, New Jersey's Bon Jovi became enormously successful with its third album, Slippery When Wet (1986). The similarly styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with The Final Countdown (1986). Its title track hit number 1 in 25 countries. In 1987, MTV launched a show, Headbanger's Ball, devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos. However, the metal audience had begun to factionalize, with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as "light metal" or "hair metal." Walser (1993), p. 14; Christe (2003), p. 170 

One band that reached diverse audiences was Guns N' Roses. In contrast to their glam metal contemporaries in L.A., they were seen as much more raw and dangerous. With the release of their chart-topping Appetite for Destruction (1987), they "recharged and almost single-handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years." Christe (2003), p. 165 The following year, Jane's Addiction emerged from the same L.A. hard-rock club scene with its major label debut, Nothing's Shocking. Reviewing the album, Rolling Stone declared, "as much as any band in existence, Jane's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin." The group was one of the first to be identified with the "alternative metal" trend that would come to the fore in the next decade. Meanwhile, new bands such as New York's Winger and New Jersey's Skid Row sustained the popularity of the glam metal style. Covach, John. "Heavy Metal, Rap, and the Rise of Alternative Rock (19821992)". What's That Sound? An Introduction to Rock and its History (W. W. Norton). Retrieved on November 16, 2007. 

===Other metal genres: 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s===
Many subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 1980s. Weinstein (1991), p. 21 Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal, most notably by the editors of Allmusic, as well as critic Garry Sharpe-Young. Sharpe-Young's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major categories: thrash metal, death metal, black metal, power metal, and the related subgenres of doom and gothic metal. Sharpe-Young (2007), p. 2 

====Thrash metal====

Thrash metal band Slayer performing in 2007
Thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the New Wave of British Heavy Metal, [ "GenreThrash Metal"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on March 3, 2007. particularly songs in the revved-up style known as speed metal. The movement began in the United States, with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene. The sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal bands and their glam metal successors. Low-register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with shredding leads. Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral, gory language. Thrash has been described as a form of "urban blight music" and "a palefaced cousin of rap". Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), p. 26 

The subgenre was popularized by the "Big Four of Thrash": Metallica, Anthrax, Megadeth, and Slayer. Walser (1993), p.14 Three German bands, Kreator, Sodom, and Destruction, played a central role in bringing the style to Europe. Others, including San Francisco Bay Area's Testament and Exodus, New Jersey's Overkill, and Brazil's Sepultura, also had a significant impact. Although thrash began as an underground movement, and remained largely that for almost a decade, the leading bands of the scene began to reach a wider audience. Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the Billboard album chart in 1986 with Master of Puppets, the genre's first platinum record. Nicholls (1997), p. 378 Two years later, the band's ...And Justice for All hit number 6, while Megadeth and Anthrax also had top 40 records on the American charts. [ "MetallicaArtist Chart History"]; [ "MegadethArtist Chart History"]; [ "AnthraxArtist Chart History"]. Billboard.com. Retrieved on April 7, 2007. 

Though less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four, Slayer released one of the genre's definitive records: Reign in Blood (1986) was credited for incorporating heavier guitar timbres, and for including explicit depictions of death, suffering, violence and occult into thrash metal's lyricism. Phillipov (2012), p. 15, 16 Slayer attracted a following among far-right skinheads, and accusations of promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), p. 30; O'Neil (2001), p. 164 Even though Slayer did not receive substantial media exposure, their music played key role in the development of extreme metal. Harrison (2011), p. 61 

In the early 1990s, thrash achieved breakout success, challenging and redefining the metal mainstream. Walser (1993), p. 15 Metallica's self-titled 1991 album topped the Billboard chart, Billboard 200, chart date: 1991-08-31 as the band established international following. Harrison (2011), p. 60 Megadeth's Countdown to Extinction (1992) debuted at number two, Billboard 200, chart date: 1992-08-01 Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10, Billboard 200, chart date: 1993-06-12; Billboard 200, chart date: 1994-10-15 and albums by regional bands such as Testament and Sepultura entered the top 100. [ Billboard 200 Chart Position: Testament  Ritual, chart date: 1992-05-30]; [ Billboard 200 Chart Position: Sepultura  Chaos A.D., chart date: 1993-11-06] 

====Death metal====

Schuldiner.jpg|thumb|left|150px|Death's Chuck Schuldiner, "widely recognized as the father of death metal" Rivadavia, Eduardo. [ "DeathBiography". Allmusic. Retrieved on November 23, 2007. ]]
Thrash soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres. "Slayer's music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal," according to MTV News. The Greatest Metal Bands of All TimeSlayer. MTVNews.com. Retrieved on February 27, 2008. The NWOBHM band Venom was also an important progenitor. The death metal movement in both North America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism employed by such acts. Florida's Death and the Bay Area's Possessed are recognized as seminal bands in the style. Both groups have been credited with inspiring the subgenre's name, the latter via its 1984 demo Death Metal and the song "Death Metal", from its 1985 debut album Seven Churches (1985). In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal was created. Ekeroth, Daniel (2011). 

Death metal utilizes the speed and aggression of both thrash and hardcore, fused with lyrics preoccupied with Z-grade slasher movie violence and Satanism. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), p. 27 Death metal vocals are typically bleak, involving guttural "death growls," high-pitched screaming, the "death rasp," Van Schaik, Mark. "Extreme Metal Drumming" Slagwerkkrant, March/April 2000. Retrieved on November 15, 2007. and other uncommon techniques. [ "GenreDeath Metal/Black Metal"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on February 27, 2007. Complementing the deep, aggressive vocal style are downtuned, highly distorted guitars and extremely fast percussion, often with rapid double bass drumming and "wall of sound"style blast beats. Frequent tempo and time signature changes and syncopation are also typical.

Death metal, like thrash metal, generally rejects the theatrics of earlier metal styles, opting instead for an everyday look of ripped jeans and plain leather jackets. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), p. 28 One major exception to this rule was Deicide's Glen Benton, who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on stage. Morbid Angel adopted neo-fascist imagery. These two bands, along with Death and Obituary, were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid-1980s. In the UK, the related style of grindcore, led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise Terror, emerged from the anarcho-punk movement. 

Photo of the burned ruins of Fantoft stave church as depicted on Burzum's 1992 EP Aske

====Black metal====

The first wave of black metal emerged in Europe in the early and mid-1980s, led by Britain's Venom, Denmark's Mercyful Fate, Switzerland's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost, and Sweden's Bathory. By the late 1980s, Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave. Christe (2003), p. 270 Black metal varies considerably in style and production quality, although most bands emphasize shrieked and growled vocals, highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking, a "dark" atmosphere and intentionally lo-fi production, with ambient noise and background hiss. Jurek, Thom. [ "Striborg: Nefaria"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on November 15, 2007 

Satanic themes are common in black metal, though many bands take inspiration from ancient paganism, promoting a return to supposed pre-Christian values. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), p. 212 Numerous black metal bands also "experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal, folk, classical music, electronica and avant-garde." Darkthrone drummer Fenriz explains, "It had something to do with production, lyrics, the way they dressed and a commitment to making ugly, raw, grim stuff. There wasn't a generic sound." Campion, Chris. "In the Face of Death". The Observer (UK), February 20, 2005. Retrieved on April 4, 2007. 

By 1990, Mayhem was regularly wearing corpsepaint; many other black metal acts also adopted the look. Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements and Immortal brought blast beats to the fore. Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with considerable violence in the early 1990s, Christe (2003), p. 276 with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings. Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash; beginning in Norway, much of the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co-opted by the commercial metal industry. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), pp. 3132 According to former Gorgoroth vocalist Gaahl, "Black Metal was never meant to reach an audience.... had a common enemy which was, of course, Christianity, socialism and everything that democracy stands for." 

By 1992, black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia, including Germany, France, and Poland. Moynihan, Sderlind (1998), pp. 271, 321, 326 The 1993 murder of Mayhem's Euronymous by Burzum's Varg Vikernes provoked intensive media coverage. Around 1996, when many in the scene felt the genre was stagnating, Vikernes, Varg. "A Burzum Story: Part VIThe Music". Burzum.org, July 2005; retrieved on April 4, 2007. several key bands, including Burzum and Finland's Beherit, moved toward an ambient style, while symphonic black metal was explored by Sweden's Tiamat and Switzerland's Samael. [ "GenreSymphonic Black Metal"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on April 9, 2007. In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade, Norway's Dimmu Borgir brought black metal closer to the mainstream, Tepedelen, Adem. "Dimmu Borgir's 'Death Cult'". Rolling Stone, November 7, 2003. Retrieved on September 10, 2007. as did Cradle of Filth. Bennett, J. . Decibel, June 2007. Retrieved on September 10, 2007. 

====Power metal====

Swedish power metal band HammerFall after a concert in Milan, Italy, in 2005
During the late 1980s, the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the harshness of death and black metal. [ "Genre  Power Metal"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on March 20, 2007. Though a relatively underground style in North America, it enjoys wide popularity in Europe, Japan, and South America. Power metal focuses on upbeat, epic melodies and themes that "appeal to the listener's sense of valour and loveliness." Christe (2003), p. 372 The prototype for the sound was established in the mid-to-late 1980s by Germany's Helloween, which combined the power riffs, melodic approach, and high-pitched, "clean" singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash's speed and energy, "crystalliz the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal." [ "Helloween  Biography"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on April 8, 2007. 

Traditional power metal bands like Sweden's HammerFall, England's DragonForce, and Florida's Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style. See, e.g., Reesman, Bryan. [ "HammerFall: Glory to the Brave"]. Allmusic; Henderson, Alex. [ "DragonForce: Sonic Firestorm"]. Allmusic. Both retrieved on November 11, 2007. Many power metal bands such as Florida's Kamelot, Finnish groups Nightwish, Stratovarius and Sonata Arctica, Italy's Rhapsody of Fire, and Russia's Catharsis feature a keyboard-based "symphonic" sound, sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers. Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South America, where bands like Brazil's Angra and Argentina's Rata Blanca are popular. 

Closely related to power metal is progressive metal, which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson. This style emerged in the United States in the early and mid-1980s, with innovators such as Queensrche, Fates Warning, and Dream Theater. The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey's Symphony X, whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter-day shredders. [ "Genre  Progressive Metal"]. Allmusic. Retrieved on March 20, 2007. 

====Doom metal====

Emerging in the mid-1980s with such bands as California's Saint Vitus, Maryland's The Obsessed, Chicago's Trouble, and Sweden's Candlemass, the doom metal movement rejected other metal styles' emphasis on speed, slowing its music to a crawl. Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath. Christe (2003), p. 345 The Melvins have also been a significant influence on doom metal and a number of its subgenres. Begrand, Adrien. "Blood and Thunder: The Profits of Doom". February 15, 2006. PopMatters.com. Retrieved on April 8, 2007. Doom emphasizes melody, melancholy tempos, and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal. Wray, John. "Heady Metal". New York Times, May 28, 2006. Retrieved on March 21, 2007. 

The 1991 release of Forest of Equilibrium, the debut album by UK band Cathedral, helped spark a new wave of doom metal. During the same period, the doom-death fusion style of British bands Paradise Lost, My Dying Bride, and Anathema gave rise to European gothic metal, Sharpe-Young (2007), pp. 246, 275; see also Stphane Leguay, "Metal Gothique" in Carnets Noirs, ditions E-dite, 3e dition, 2006, ISBN 2-84608-176-X. with its signature dual-vocalist arrangements, exemplified by Norway's Theatre of Tragedy and Tristania. New York's Type O Negative introduced an American take on the style. Sharpe-Young (2007), p. 275 

In the United States, sludge metal, mixing doom and hardcore, emerged in the late 1980sEyehategod and Crowbar were leaders in a major Louisiana sludge scene. Early in the next decade, California's Kyuss and Sleep, inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of stoner metal, Christe (2003), p. 347 while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre. Jackowiak, Jason. "Hex: Or Printing in the Infernal Method". Splendid Magazine, September 2005. Retrieved on March 21, 2007. The late 1990s saw new bands form such as the Los Angelesbased Goatsnake, with a classic stoner/doom sound, and Sunn O))), which crosses lines between doom, drone, and dark ambient metalthe New York Times has compared their sound to an "Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake". 

===New fusions: 1990s and early 2000s===

The era of metal's mainstream dominance in North America came to an end in the early 1990s with the emergence of Nirvana and other grunge bands, signaling the popular breakthrough of alternative rock. Christe (2003), pp. 3046; Weinstein (1991), p. 278 Grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound, but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands, such as their "flashy and virtuosic solos" and "appearance-driven" MTV orientation. 

Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge, Christe (2003), p. 231 but also because of the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post-thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie. Birchmeier, Jason. [ "Pantera"]. Allmusic.com. Retrieved on March 19, 2007. A few new, unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decadePantera's Far Beyond Driven topped the Billboard chart in 1994but, "In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead." Christe (2003), p. 305 Some bands tried to adapt to the new musical landscape. Metallica revamped its image: the band members cut their hair and, in 1996, headlined the alternative musical festival Lollapalooza founded by Jane's Addiction singer Perry Farrell. While this prompted a backlash among some long-time fans, Christe (2003), p. 312 Metallica remained one of the most successful bands in the world into the new century. Christe (2003), p. 322 

Layne Staley of Alice in Chains, one of the most popular acts identified with alternative metal performing in 1992
Like Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term "alternative metal." Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as Soundgarden, credited as making a "place for heavy metal in alternative rock", and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement. The label was applied to a wide spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles: Faith No More combined their alternative rock sound with punk, funk, metal, and hip hop; Primus joined elements of funk, punk, thrash metal, and experimental music; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock; bands such as Fear Factory, Ministry and Nine Inch Nails began incorporating metal into their industrial sound, and vice versa, respectively; and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route, while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper. Alternative metal artists, though they did not represent a cohesive scene, were united by their willingness to experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics (with the stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombiealso identified with alt-metalsignificant, if partial, exceptions). Alternative metal's mix of styles and sounds represented "the colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world." Christe (2003), p. 224 

In the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres. Christe (2003), pp. 32425 Dubbed "nu metal", bands such as Slipknot, Linkin Park, Limp Bizkit, Papa Roach, P.O.D., Korn and Disturbed incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip hop, often including DJs and rap-style vocals. The mix demonstrated that "pancultural metal could pay off." Christe (2003), p. 329 Nu metal gained mainstream success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest, which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal. Christe (2003), p. 324 In 1999, Billboard noted that there were more than 500 specialty metal radio shows in the U.S., nearly three times as many as ten years before. Christe (2003), p. 344 While nu metal was widely popular, traditional metal fans did not fully embrace the style. Christe (2003), p. 328 By early 2003, the movement's popularity was on the wane, though several nu metal acts such as Korn or Limp Bizkit retained substantial followings. 

===Recent trends: midlate 2000s===
Children of Bodom, performing at the 2007 Masters of Rock festival

Metal remained popular in the 2000s, particularly in continental Europe. By the new millennium Scandinavia had emerged as one of the areas producing innovative and successful bands, while Belgium, The Netherlands and especially Germany were the most significant markets. K. Kahn-Harris, Extreme Metal: Music and Culture on the Edge (Oxford: Berg, 2007), ISBN 1-84520-399-2, pp. 86 and 116. Established continental metal bands that placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 2003 and 2008, including Finnish band Children of Bodom, Norwegian act Dimmu Borgir, Germany's Blind Guardian and Sweden's HammerFall. 

Metalcore, a hybrid of extreme metal and hardcore punk, Weinstein (2000), p. 288; Christe (2003), p. 372 emerged as a commercial force in the mid-2000s decade. It is rooted in the crossover thrash style developed two decades earlier by bands such as Suicidal Tendencies, Dirty Rotten Imbeciles, and Stormtroopers of Death. Christe (2003), p. 184 Through the 1990s, metalcore was mostly an underground phenomenon; I. Christe, Sound of the Beast: The Complete Headbanging History of Heavy Metal (London: HarperCollins, 2003), ISBN 0-380-81127-8, p. 184. early bands include Earth Crisis, Mudrian, Albert (2000). Choosing Death: The Improbable History of Death Metal and Grindcore. Feral House. ISBN 1-932595-04-X. p. 222-223 Ian Glasper, Terrorizer no. 171, June 2008, p. 78, "here the term (metalcore) is used in its original context, referencing the likes of Strife, Earth Crisis, and Integrity (...)" Hogan's Heroes, 1948-1999 Muze, Inc. Hogan's Heroes. "Pop Artists Beginning with 'Hod'", Phonolog, 1999, p. 1. No. 7-278B Section 207. HXC Revolution. Converge, Hatebreed Ross Haenfler, Straight Edge: Clean-living Youth, Hardcore Punk, and Social Change, Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0-8135-3852-1, p. 87-88. and Shai Hulud. Mason, Stewart. "Shai Hulud". Allmusic. Retrieved February 17, 2012. "A positively themed metalcore band with some straight-edge and Christian leanings, the influential Shai Hulud have maintained a strong band identity since their original formation in the mid-'90s". By 2004, melodic metalcoreinfluenced as well by melodic death metalwas popular enough that Killswitch Engage's The End of Heartache and Shadows Fall's The War Within debuted at numbers 21 and 20, respectively, on the Billboard album chart. 

Bullet for My Valentine are one of the leading bands in the metalcore genre.
Welsh band Bullet for My Valentine's third studio album Fever debuted at position number 3 on The Billboard 200 and number 1 on Billboard's Rock and Alternative charts, making it the band's most successful record to date. In recent years, metalcore bands have received prominent slots at Ozzfest and the Download Festival. Lamb of God, a groove metal band, hit the Billboard top 10 in 2006 with Sacrament. The success of these bands and others such as Trivium and Avenged Sevenfold Avenged Sevenfold Confirmed For Ozzfest's Main Stage which have released both metalcore and straight-ahead thrash albums. Evolving even further from metalcore comes mathcore, a more rhythmically complicated and progressive style brought to light by bands such as The Dillinger Escape Plan, Converge, and Protest the Hero. Kevin Stewart-Panko, "The Decade in Noisecore", Terrorizer no. 75, Feb 2000, p. 22-23. Mathcore's main defining quality is the use of odd time signatures, and has been described to possess rhythmic comparability to free Jazz. "Contemporary grindcore bands such as The Dillinger Escape Plan have developed avant-garde versions of the genre incorporating frequent time signature changes and complex sounds that at times recall free jazz." Keith Kahn-Harris (2007) Extreme Metal, Berg Publishers, ISBN 1-84520-399-2, p. 4. 

Mastodon, which plays in a progressive/sludge style, has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States, dubbed by some critics the "New Wave of American Heavy Metal". Sharpe-Young, Garry, New Wave of American Heavy Metal (link). 

The term "retro-metal" has been applied to such bands as Texas-based The Sword, California's High on Fire, Sweden's Witchcraft and Australia's Wolfmother. Wolfmother. Rolling Stone, April 18, 2006. Retrieved on March 31, 2007. The Sword's Age of Winters (2006) drew heavily on the work of Black Sabbath and Pentagram; Witchcraft added elements of folk rock and psychedelic rock; and Wolfmother's self-titled 2005 debut album had "Deep Purple-ish organs," "Jimmy Page-worthy chordal riffing," and lead singer Andrew Stockdale howling "notes that Robert Plant can't reach anymore." 

==See also==

* Heavy metal subgenres
* List of heavy metal bands
* List of heavy metal festivals
* Timeline of heavy metal music

==Notes==

==References==
* Arnold, Denis (1983). "Consecutive Intervals", in The New Oxford Companion to Music, Volume 1: A-J. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-311316-3.
* Arnett, Jeffrey Jensen (1996). Metalheads: Heavy Metal Music and Adolescent Alienation. Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-2813-6.
* Berelian, Essi (2005). Rough Guide to Heavy Metal. Rough Guides. Foreword by Bruce Dickinson of Iron Maiden. ISBN 1-84353-415-0.
* Berry, Mick and Jason Gianni (2003). The Drummer's Bible: How to Play Every Drum Style from Afro-Cuban to Zydeco. See Sharp Press. ISBN 1-884365-32-9.
* Blake, Andrew (1997). The Land Without Music: Music, Culture and Society in Twentieth-century Britain. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-4299-2.
* Buckley, Peter (2003). The Rough Guide to Rock. Rough Guides. ISBN 1-84353-105-4.
* Braunstein, P. and Doyle, M. W., Imagine Nation: the American Counterculture of the 1960s and '70s (London: Routledge, 2002), ISBN 0-415-93040-5.
* Bukszpan, D. (2003), The Encyclopedia of Heavy Metal. Barnes & Noble. ISBN 0-7607-4218-9.
* Carson, Annette (2001). Jeff Beck: Crazy Fingers. Backbeat Books. ISBN 0-87930-632-7.
* Charlton, Katherine (2003). Rock Music Styles: A History. McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-249555-3.
* Christe, Ian (2003). Sound of the Beast: The Complete Headbanging History of Heavy Metal. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-380-81127-8.
* Christgau, Robert (1981). "Master of Reality (1971) ", in Christgau's Record Guide. Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 0-89919-026-X.
* Cook, Nicholas, and Nicola Dibben (2001). "Musicological Approaches to Emotion", in Music and Emotion. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-263188-8.
* Du Noyer, Paul (ed.) (2003). The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Music. Flame Tree. ISBN 1-904041-70-1
* Ekeroth, Daniel (2011), Swedish Death Metal. Bazillion Points. ISBN 978-0-9796163-1-0
* Ewing, Charles Patrick, and Joseph T. McCann (2006). Minds on Trial: Great Cases in Law and Psychology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-518176-X.
* Fast, Susan (2001). In the Houses of the Holy: Led Zeppelin and the Power of Rock Music. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-511756-5.
* Fast, Susan (2005). "Led Zeppelin and the Construction of Masculinity", in Music Cultures in the United States, ed. Ellen Koskoff. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-96588-8.
* Guibert, Grme, and Fabien Hein (ed.) (2007), "Les Scnes Metal. Sciences sociales et pratiques culturelles radicales", Volume! La revue des musiques populaires, n5-2, Bordeaux: ditions Mlanie Seteun. ISBN 978-2-913169-24-1.
* Harrison, Thomas (2011). Music of the 1980s. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-36599-7
* Hatch, David, and Stephen Millward (1989). From Blues to Rock: An Analytical History of Pop Music. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-2349-1.
* Kahn-Harris, Keith and Fabien Hein (2007), "Metal studies: a bibliography", Volume! La revue des musiques populaires, n5-2, Bordeaux: ditions Mlanie Seteun. ISBN 978-2-913169-24-1.
* Kennedy, Michael (1985). The Oxford Dictionary of Music. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-311333-3.
* Leguay, Stphane (2006). "Metal Gothique", in Carnets Noirs, ditions E-dite, 3rd edition, ISBN 2-84608-176-X.
* McCleary, John Bassett (2004). The Hippie Dictionary: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the 1960s and 1970s. Ten Speed Press. ISBN 1-58008-547-4.
* McMichael, Joe (2004). The Who Concert File. Omnibus Press. ISBN 1-84449-009-2.
* Moynihan, Michael, and Dirik Sderlind (1998). Lords of Chaos (2nd ed.). Feral House. ISBN 0-922915-94-6.
* Nicholls, David (1998). The Cambridge History of American Music. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-45429-8
* O'Neil, Robert M. (2001). The First Amendment and Civil Liability. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-34033-0.
* Pareles, Jon, and Patricia Romanowski (eds.) (1983). The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll. Rolling Stone Press/Summit Books. ISBN 0-671-44071-3.
* Phillipov, Michelle (2012). Death Metal and Music Criticism: Analysis at the Limits Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-6459-4
* Pillsbury, Glenn T. (2006). Damage Incorporated: Metallica and the Production of Musical Identity. Routledge.
* Sadie, Stanley (1980). "Consecutive Fifth, Consecutive Octaves", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (1st ed.). MacMillan. ISBN 0-333-23111-2.
* Schonbrun, Marc (2006). The Everything Guitar Chords Book. Adams Media. ISBN 1-59337-529-8.
* Sharpe-Young, Garry (2007). Metal: The Definitive Guide. Jawbone Press. ISBN 978-1-906002-01-5.
* Strong, Martin C. (2004). The Great Rock Discography. Canongate. ISBN 1-84195-615-5.
* Thompson, Graham (2007). American Culture in the 1980s. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 0-7486-1910-0.
* Wagner, Jeff (2010). Deviation (book)|Mean Deviation: Four Decades of Progressive Heavy Metal]. Bazillion Points. ISBN 978-0-9796163-3-4.
* Walser, Robert (1993). Running with the Devil: Power, Gender, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music. Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 0-8195-6260-2.
* Waksman, Steve (2009). This Ain't The Summer of Love: Conflict and Crossover in Heavy Metal and Punk. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-25310-8.
* Weinstein, Deena (1991). Heavy Metal: A Cultural Sociology. Lexington. ISBN 0-669-21837-5. Revised edition: (2000). Heavy Metal: The Music and its Culture. Da Capo. ISBN 0-306-80970-2.
* Wilkerson, Mark Ian (2006). Amazing Journey: The Life of Pete Townshend. Bad News Press. ISBN 1-4116-7700-5.
* van Zoonen, Liesbet (2005). Entertaining the Citizen: When Politics and Popular Culture Converge. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0-7425-2906-1.
*Wiederhorn, Jon. Louder Than Hell: The Definitive Oral History of Metal. It Books, 14 May 2013 ISBN 978-0061958281

==External links==

* [ Allmusic entry] for heavy metal

 



[[Helvetii]]

Map of the Roman province Maxima Sequanorum (c. 300 AD), which comprised the territories of the Helvetii, Sequani and several smaller tribes. The relative locations of the Helvetian pagi Tigurini and Verbigeni, though indicated on the map, remain unknown. 
A map of Gaul in the 1st century BC, showing the relative positions of the Celtic tribes.

The Helvetii were a Gallic tribe or tribal confederation occupying most of the Swiss plateau at the time of their contact with the Roman Republic in the 1st century BC. According to Julius Caesar, the Helvetians were divided into four subgroups or pagi. Of these Caesar only names the Verbigeni and the Tigurini, Bell.Gall. 1.27 and 1.12, respectively while Poseidonios mentions the Tigurini and the Tougeni (). Strabo 4.1.8, 7.2.2. They feature prominently in the Commentaries on the Gallic War, with their failed migration attempt to southwestern Gaul (58 BC) serving as a catalyst for Caesar's conquest of Gaul.

== Etymology ==

The endonym Helvetii can be derived from the PIE root *pelh1u- "many", Celtic elu-, which is seen in Welsh elw, meaning "gain" or "profit", and the Old Irish prefix il-, meaning "many" or "multiple". The second part of the name has sometimes been interpreted as *etu-, "terrain, grassland", thus interpreting the tribal name as "rich in land". Xavier Delamarre, (, 2003), pp. 162 and 168. 

The name of the national personification of Switzerland, Helvetia, and the country's Neo-Latin name, Confoederatio Helvetica, are both derived from the name of the Helvetii.

== Tribal organisation ==
Of the four Helvetian pagi or sub-tribes, Caesar only names the Verbigeni (Bell. Gall. 1.27) and the Tigurini (1.12), Poseidonios the Tigurini and the Tougeni (). 
There has been substantial debate in Swiss historiography(beginning with Felix Sthelin1927) on whether the Tougeni may or may not be identified with the Teutones mentioned by Livy. Sthelin, Die Schweiz in rmischer Zeit (1927) suggested a corruption of the tribal name in the manuscript tradition of Strabo. 
A stone marker bearing the inscription INTER TOVTONOS CAH(F?) found in Miltenberg on the Main river (which had been the nordern border of the older Helvetian territory according to Tacitus, Germania, 28) is sometimes taken to support this theory. See Sthelin, 1948, p. 59; Strabo 4.1.8, 7.2.2. Ancient writers usually classify the Teutons as "Germanic" and the Helvetii as "Gallic", but these ethnic attributions are debatable; the fluidity of these terms is well illustrated by Ludwig Rbekeil, , Vienna 2002. 

According to Caesar, the territory abandoned by the Helvetii had comprised 400 villages and 12 oppida (fortified settlements). His tally of the total population taken from captured Helvetian records written in Greek is 263,000 people, including fighting men, old men, women and children. However, these figures are generally dismissed as too high by modern scholars (see hereafter).

Like many other tribes, the Helvetii did not have kings at the time of their clash with Rome but instead seem to have been governed by a class of noblemen (Lat. equites). Other tribal aristocracies were the Aedui (Bell. Gall. 1.3), the Arverni (Bell. Gall. 7.4), or the Remi (Bell. Gall. 2.3). When Orgetorix, one of their most prominent and ambitious noblemen, was making plans to establish himself as their king, he faced execution by burning if found guilty. Caesar does not explicitly name the tribal authorities prosecuting the case and gathering men to apprehend Orgetorix, but refers to them by the Latin terms civitas ("state" or "tribe") and magistratus ("officials"). Bell. Gall. 1.4. 

== History ==

===Earliest historical sources and settlement===

The name of the Helvetians is first mentioned in a graffito on a vessel from Mantua (c. 300 BC). Reproduction in R.C. De Marinis, Gli Etruschi a Nord del Po, Mantova, 1986. The inscription in Etruscan letters reads eluveitie, which has been interpreted as the Etruscan form of the Celtic (h)eluetios (the Helvetian), presumably referring to a man of Helvetian descent living in Mantua.

In his Natural History (c. 77 AD), Pliny provides a foundation myth for the Celtic settlement of Cisalpine Gaul in which a Helvetian named Helico plays the role of culture hero. Helico had worked in Rome as a craftsman and then returned to his home north of the Alps with a dried fig, a grape, and some oil and wine, the desirability of which caused his countrymen to invade northern Italy. Pliny the Elder, Historia naturalis 12.2. 

The Greek historian Poseidonios (c. 13550 BC), whose work is preserved only in fragments by other writers, offers the earliest historical record of the Helvetii. Poseidonios described the Helvetians of the late 2nd century BC as "rich in gold but peaceful," without giving clear indication to the location of their territory. Strabon 7.2.2. His reference to gold washing in rivers has been taken as evidence for an early presence of the Helvetii in the Swiss plateau, with the Emme as being one of the gold-yielding rivers mentioned by Poseidonios. This interpretation is now generally discarded, SPM IV Eisenzeit, Basel 1999, p. 31f. as Poseidonios' narrative makes it more likely that the country some of the Helvetians left in order to join in the raids of the Teutones, Cimbri, and Ambrones was in fact southern Germany and not Switzerland.

That the Helvetians originally lived in southern Germany is confirmed by the Alexandrian geographer Claudius Ptolemaios (c. 90168 AD), who tells us of an   (i.e. "Helvetic deserted lands") north of the Rhine. Ptol. 2.11.6. Tacitus knows that the Helvetians once settled in the swath between Rhine, Main, and the Hercynian forest. Germ. 28.2. The abandonment of this northern territory is now usually placed in the late 2nd century BC, around the time of the first Germanic incursions into the Roman world, when the Tigurini and Toygenoi/Toutonoi are mentioned as participants in the great raids.

===First contact with the Romans===

Die Helvetier zwingen die Rmer unter dem Joch hindurch ("The Helvetians force the Romans to pass under the yoke"). Romantic painting by Charles Gleyre (19th century) celebrating the Helvetian victory over the Romans at Agen (107 BC) under Divicos command.
The Germanic tribes of the Cimbri and Ambrones probably reached southern Germany around the year 111 BC, where they were joined by the Tigurini, and, probably the Teutoni-Toutonoi-Toygenoi. (The precise identity of the latter group is unclear. Poseidonios saw the Toutonoi/Teutoni as a subgroup of the Helvetii. Cf. Furger-Gunti, p. 76f. )

The tribes began a joint invasion of Gaul, including the Roman Provincia Narbonensis, which led to the Tigurinis victory over a Roman army under L. Cassius Longinus near Agendicum in 107 BC, in which the consul was killed. According to Caesar, the captured Roman soldiers were ordered to pass through under a yoke set up by the triumphant Gauls, a dishonour that called for both public as well as private vengeance. Bell.Gall. 1.12. Caesar is the only narrative source for this episode, as the corresponding books of Livys histories are only preserved in the Periochae, short summarising lists of contents, in which hostages given by the Romans, but no yoke, are mentioned. L. Cassius cos. a Tigurinis Gallis, pago Heluetiorum, qui a ciuitate secesserant, in finibus Nitiobrogum cum exercitu caesus est. / Milites, qui ex ea caede superauerant, obsidibus datis et dimidia rerum omnium parte, ut incolumes dimitterentur, cum hostibus pacti sunt. (Periochae LXV) 

In 105 BC, the allies annihilated another Roman army near Arausio, and went on to harry Spain, Gaul, Noricum, and northern Italy. They split up in two groups in 103 BC, with the Teutones and Ambrones marching on a western route through the Provincia and the Cimbri and Tigurini crossing the eastern Alps (probably by the Brenner pass). While the Teutones and Ambrones were slaughtered in 102 BC by Gaius Marius, the Cimbri and the Tigurini wintered in the Padan plain. The following year, Marius virtually destroyed the Cimbri in the battle of Vercellae. The Tigurini, who had planned on following the Cimbri, turned back over the Alps with their booty and joined those of the Helvetians who had not participated in the raids.

===Caesar and the Helvetian campaign of 58 BC===
Julius Caesar and Divico parley after the battle at the Sane. Historic painting of the 19th century by Karl Jauslin.

====Prelude====
The Helvetii were the first Gallic tribe of the campaign to be confronted by Caesar. He narrates the events of the conflict in the opening sections of Commentarii de Bello Gallico. Book 1, Chapters 2-29 Due to the political nature of the Commentarii, Caesar's purpose in publicizing his own achievements may have distorted the significance of events and the motives of those who participated. 

The nobleman Orgetorix is presented as the instigator of a new Helvetian migration, in which the entire tribe was to leave their territory and, according to Caesar, to establish a supremacy over all of Gaul. This exodus was planned over three years, in the course of which Orgetorix conspired with two noblemen from neighbouring tribes, Casticus of the Sequani and Dumnorix of the Aedui, that each should accomplish a coup d'etat in his own country, after which the three new kings would collaborate. When word of his aspirations to make himself king reached the Helvetii, Orgetorix was summoned to stand trial, facing execution on the pyre should he be found guilty. For the time being, he averted a verdict by arriving at the hearing set for him with ten thousand followers and bondsmen; yet before the large force mustered by the authorities could apprehend him, he died under unexplained circumstances, the Helvetii believed by his own hand. . 

Nevertheless, the Helvetii did not give up their planned emigration, but burned their homes in 58 BC. They were joined by a number of tribal groups from neighbouring regions: the Raurici, the Latobrigi, the Tulingi and a group of Boii, who had besieged Noreia. . They abandoned their homes completely with the intention of settling among the Santones (Saintonge). The easiest route would take them through the Rhne valley, and thus through the Roman Provincia Narbonensis.

====Battle of the Sane====
When they reached the boundaries of the Allobroges, the northernmost tribe of the Provincia, they found that Caesar had already dismantled the bridge of Geneva to stop their advance. The Helvetians sent the most illustrious men of their state to negotiate, promising a peaceful passage through the Provincia. Caesar stalled them by asking for some time for consideration, which he used to assemble reinforcements and to fortify the southern banks of the Rhne. When the embassy returned on the agreed-upon date, he was strong enough to bluntly reject their offer. The Helvetii now chose the more difficult northern route through the Sequani territory, which traversed the Jura Mountains via a very narrow pass at the site of the modern Fort l'cluse, but bypassed the Provincia. After ravaging the lands of the Aedui tribe, who called upon Caesar to help them, they began the crossing of the Sane, which took them several days. As only a quarter of their forces were left on the eastern banks, Caesar attacked and routed them. According to Caesar, those killed had been the Tigurini, on whom he had now taken revenge in the name of the Republic and his family. Is pagus appellabatur Tigurinus; nam omnis civitas Helvetia in quattuor pagos divisa est. Hic pagus unus, cum domo exisset, patrum nostrorum memoria L. Cassium consulem interfecerat et eius exercitum sub iugum miserat. Ita sive casu sive consilio deorum immortalium quae pars civitatis Helvetiae insignem calamitatem populo Romano intulerat, ea princeps poenam persolvit. Qua in re Caesar non solum publicas, sed etiam privatas iniurias ultus est, quod eius soceri L. Pisonis avum, L. Pisonem legatum, Tigurini eodem proelio quo Cassium interfecerant. Bell. Gall. 1.12. 

After the battle, the Romans quickly bridged the river, thereby prompting the Helvetii to once again send an embassy, this time led by Divico, another figure whom Caesar links to the ignominious defeat of 107 BC by calling him bello Cassio dux Helvetiorum (i.e. leader of the Helvetii in the Cassian campaign). What Divico had to offer was almost a surrender, namely to have the Helvetii settle wherever Caesar wished them to, although it was combined with the threat of an open battle if Caesar should refuse. Caesar demanded hostages to be given to him and reparations to the Aedui and Allobroges. Divico responded by saying that they were accustomed to receive, not to give hostages; a fact the Roman people could testify to, Bell. Gall. 1.14. this once again being an allusion to the giving of hostages by the defeated Romans at Agen.

====Battle of Bibracte====
In the cavalry battle that followed, the Helvetii prevailed over Caesars Aedui allies under Dumnorix command, and continued their journey, while Caesars army was being detained by delays in his grain supplies, caused by the Aedui on the instigations of Dumnorix, who had married Orgetorix daughter. A few days later, however, near the Aeduan oppidum Bibracte, Caesar caught up with the Helvetii and faced them in a major battle, which ended in the Helvetiis retreat and the capture of most of their baggage by the Romans.

Leaving the largest part of their supplies behind, the Helvetii covered around 60 km in four days, eventually reaching the lands of the Lingones (the modern Langres plateau). Caesar did not pursue them until three days after the battle, while still sending messengers to the Lingones warning them not to assist the Helvetii in any way. The Helvetii then offered their immediate surrender and agreed both to providing hostages and to giving up their weapons the next day. In the course of the night, 6000 of the Verbigeni fled from the camp out of fear of being massacred once they were defenceless. Caesar sent riders after them and ordered those who were brought back to be counted as enemies, which probably meant being sold into slavery.

====Return of the migrants====
In order for them to defend the Rhine frontier against the Germans, he then allowed the Helvetii, Tulingi and Latobrigi to return to their territories and to rebuild their homes, instructing the Allobroges to supply them with a sufficient supply of grain. Caesar does not mention the Raurici, who seem to have built a new oppidum at Basel-Mnsterhgel upon their return. The Aedui were granted their wish that the Boii who had accompanied the Helvetii would settle on their own territory as allies in the oppidum Gorgobina. The nature of Caesars arrangement with the Helvetii and the other tribes is not further specified by the consul himself, but in his speech Pro Balbo of 56 BC, Cicero mentions the Helvetii as one among several tribes of foederati, i.e. allied nations who were neither citizens of the Republic nor her subjects, but obliged by treaty to support the Romans with a certain number of fighting men. Cic. Balb. 32. 

====Caesar's report of the numbers====
According to the victor, tablets with lists in Greek characters were found at the Helvetian camp, listing in detail all men able to bear arms with their names and giving a total number for the women, children and elderly who accompanied them. Bell. Gall. 1.29. The numbers added up to a total of 263,000 Helvetii, 36,000 Tulingi, 14,000 Latobrigi, 23,000 Rauraci, and 32,000 Boii, all in all 368,000 heads, 92,000 of whom were warriors. A census of those who had returned to their homes listed 110,000 survivors, which meant that only about 30 percent of the emigrants had survived the war.

Caesar's report has been partly confirmed by excavations near Geneva and Bibracte. However, much of his account has not yet been corrobated by archaeology, whilst his narrative must in wide parts be considered as biased and, in some points, unlikely. For a start, only one out of the fifteen Celtic oppida in the Helvetii territory so far has yielded evidence for destruction by fire. Many other sites, for example the sanctuary at Mormont, do not exhibit any signs of damage for the period in question, and Celtic life continued seemingly undisturbed for the rest of the 1st century BC up to the beginning of the Roman era, with an accent rather on an increase in prosperity than on a Helvetic twilight. Furger-Gunti, 118ff. With the honourable status as foederati taken into account, it is hard to believe that the Helvetii ever sustained casualties quite as heavy as those given by the Roman military leader.

In general, numbers written down by ancient military authors have to be taken as gross exaggerations. Cf. G Walser, Caesar und die Germanen. Studien zur polit. Tendenz rmischer Feldzubgerichte. Historia, Einzelschrifen, Vol. 1, 1956. What Caesar claims to have been 368,000 people is estimated by other sources to be rather around 300,000 (Plutarch), or 200,000 (Appian); To illustrate this staple of exaggeration with an example, one can take a look at the numbers given for the forces of two Valaisan tribes as a basis for calculation. Caesar tells us (Bell. Gall. 3.1-6.) that his legate Galba was attacked by an army of 30,000 men of the Veragri and the Seduni, who lived around their capitals Octodurus and modern Sierre. Geiser (Un monnayage celtique en Valais. Schweizerische numismatische Rundschau 63, p. 55-125, 1984) has been able to determine the extent of the former tribes territory, and it will be safe to assume that the Veragri and Seduni together occupied about half the cultivated land of the Valais, with the Nantuates and Ubii inhabiting the other half. As commonly done for Celtic nations, in order to arrive at the total number of people, we multiply the number of fighting men by four, thus arriving at a total population of 120,000 for the two tribes combined. By adding an equal number of people for the two other tribes, one arrives at a total of 240,000 inhabitants for the Valais valley in the 1st century BC. In contrast, the modern-day Swiss canton has only 278,000 inhabitants, including the urban settlements. in the light of a critical analysis, even these numbers seem far too high. Furger-Gunti considers an army of more than 60,000 fighting men extremely unlikely in the view of the tactics described, and assumes the actual numbers to have been around 40,000 warriors out of a total of 160,000 emigrants. Furger-Gunti, 102. Delbrck suggests an even lower number of 100,000 people, out of which only 16,000 were fighters, which would make the Celtic force about half the size of the Roman body of c. 30,000 men. H. Delbrck Geschichte der Kriegskunst im Rahmen der politischen Geschichte, Vol. 1, 1900, pp. 428 and 459f. The real numbers will never be determined exactly. Caesars specifications can at least be doubted by looking at the size of the baggage train that an exodus of 368,000 people would have required: Even for the reduced numbers that Furger-Gunti uses for his calculations, the baggage train would have stretched for at least 40 km, perhaps even as far as 100 km. Furger-Gunti, 104. 

In spite of the now much more balanced numerical weight we have to assume for the two opposing armies, the battle seems far less glorious a victory than Caesar presented it to be. The main body of the Helvetii withdrew from the battle at nightfall, abandoning, as it seemed, most of their wagons, which they had drawn up into a wagon fort; they retreated northwards in a forced night march and reached the territory of the Lingones four days after the battle. What Caesar implies to have been a desperate flight without stopping could actually have been an ordered retreat of moderate speed, covering less than 40 km a day. Furger-Gunti (p. 116) allows only 60 km for the distance between Bibracte and the fines Lingonum, while Langres and Autun are in fact separated by more than twice this distance. For the average speed of pre-motorised travel, cf. Norbert Ohler Reisen im Mittelalter, p. 141. Caesar himself does not appear as a triumphant victor in turn, being unable to pursue the Helvetii for three days, both on account of the wounds of the soldiers and the burial of the slain. However, it is clear that Caesars warning to the Lingones not to supply his enemies was quite enough to make the Helvetii leaders once again offer peace. On what terms this peace was made is debatable, but as said before, the conclusion of a foedus casts some doubt on the totality of the defeat.

====Questions of motive====
As Caesars account is heavily influenced by his political agenda, it is difficult to determine the actual motive of the Helvetii movement of 58 BC. One might see the movement in the light of a Celtic retreat from areas which were later to become Germanic; it can be debated whether they ever had plans to settle in the Saintonge, as Caesar claims (Bell. Gall. 1,10.). It was certainly in the latters personal interest to emphasise any kind of parallel between the traumatic experience of the Cimbrian and Teutonic incursions and the alleged threat that the Helvetii were to the Roman world. The Tigurinis part in the destruction of L. Cassius Longinus and his army was a welcome pretext to engage in an offensive war in Gaul whose proceeds permitted Caesar not only to fulfil his obligations to the numerous creditors he owed money to, but also to further strengthen his position within the late Republic. Cf. Birkhan, 243f. In this sense, even the character of Divico, who makes his appearance in the Commentarii half a century after his victory over L. Cassius Longinus, seems more like another hackneyed argument stressing Caesars justification to attack, than like an actual historical figure. That the victor of Agen was still alive in 58 BC or, if yes, that he was physically still capable of undertaking such a journey at all, seems more than doubtful. Nevertheless, Divico became somewhat of a hero within the Swiss national feeling of the 19th century and in the course of the "Geistige Landesverteidigung" of the 20th century.

=== The Helvetii as Roman subjects ===
The Helvetii and Rauraci most likely lost their status as foederati only six years after the battle of Bibracte, when they supported Vercingetorix in 52 BC with 8,000 and 2,000 men, respectively. Sometime between 50 and 45 BC, the Romans founded the Colonia Iulia Equestris at the site of the Helvetian settlement Noviodunum (modern Nyon), and around 44 BC the Colonia Raurica on Rauracan territory. These colonies were probably established as a means of controlling the two most important military access routes between the Helvetian territory and the rest of Gaul, blocking the passage through the Rhne valley and Sundgau.

In the course of Augustus' reign, Roman dominance became more concrete. Some of the traditional Celtic oppida were now used as legionary garrisons, such as Vindonissa or Basilea (modern Basel); others were relocated, such as the hill-fort on the Bois de Chtel, whose inhabitants founded the new capital of the civitas at nearby Aventicum. First incorporated into the Roman province of Gallia Belgica, later into the Germania Superior and finally into the Diocletian province of Maxima Sequanorum, the former territories of the Helvetii and their inhabitants were as thoroughly romanised as the rest of Gaul.

===The rising of 68/69 AD===
What seems to have been the last action of the Helvetii as a tribal entity happened shortly after the death of emperor Nero in 68 AD. Like the other Gallic tribes, the Helvetii were organised as a civitas; they even retained their traditional grouping into four pagi CIL 13,5076 names the Tigurini as one of these pagi. and enjoyed a certain inner autonomy, including the defence of certain strongholds by their own troops. In the civil war which followed Neros death, the civitas Helvetiorum supported Galba; unaware of his death, they refused to accept the authority of his rival, Vitellius. The Legio XXI Rapax, stationed in Vindonissa and favouring Vitellius, stole the pay of a Helvetian garrison, which prompted the Helvetians to intercept Vitellian messengers and detain a Roman detachment. Aulus Caecina Alienus, a former supporter of Galba who was now at the head of a Vitellian invasion of Italy, launched a massive punitive campaign, crushing the Helvetii under their commander Claudius Severus and routing the remnants of their forces at Mount Vocetius, killing and enslaving thousands. The capital Aventicum surrendered, and Julius Alpinus, head of what was now seen as a Helvetian uprising, was executed. In spite of the extensive damage and devastations the civitas had already sustained, according to Tacitus the Helvetii were only saved from total annihilation owing to the pleas of one Claudius Cossus, a Helvetian envoy to Vitellius, and, as Tacitus puts it, of well-known eloquence. Tacitus Hist. 1.67-69. 

==Confirmed and assumed Celtic Oppida in Switzerland==
Celtic (orange) and Raetic (green) settlements in Switzerland
The distribution of La Tne culture burials in Switzerland indicates that the Swiss plateau between Lausanne and Winterthur was relatively densely populated. Settlement centres existed in the Aare valley between Thun and Bern, and between Lake Zurich and the river Reuss. The Valais and the regions around Bellinzona and Lugano also seem to have been well-populated; however, those lay outside the Helvetian borders.

Almost all the Celtic oppida were built in the vicinity of the larger rivers of the Swiss midlands. Not all of them existed at the same time. For most of them, we do not have any idea as to what their Celtic names might have been, with one or two possible exceptions. Where a pre-Roman name is preserved, it is added in brackets. Cf. Furger-Gunti 1984, S. 5058. Those marked with an asterisk (*) were most likely occupied by neighbouring tribes (Raurici, Veragri, etc.) rather than the Helvetii.

* Altenburg-Rheinau
* Basel*
* Bern-Engehalbinsel (possibly Brenodurum Bern, Engehalbinsel, Rmerbad )
* Bois de Chtel, Avenches
* Eppenberg
* Jensberg
* Genve (Genava)*
* Lausanne (Lousonna)
* Martigny (Octodurus)*
* Mont Chaibeuf*
* Mont Terri*
* Mont Vully
* Sermuz
* etliberg, Zrich
* Windisch (Vindonissa)

== Notes ==

== Bibliography ==
* 
* Andres Furger-Gunti: Die Helvetier: Kulturgeschichte eines Keltenvolkes. Neue Zrcher Zeitung, Zrich 1984. ISBN 3-85823-071-5
* Alexander Held: Die Helvetier. Verlag Neue Zrcher Zeitung, Zrich 1984.
* Felix Mller / Genevive Lscher: Die Kelten in der Schweiz. Theiss, Stuttgart 2004. ISBN 3-8062-1759-9.
* Felix Staehelin: Die Schweiz in Rmischer Zeit. 3., neu bearb. und erw. Aufl. Schwabe, Basel 1948
* Gerold Walser: Bellum Helveticum: Studien zum Beginn der Caesarischen Eroberung von Gallien. (Historia. Einzelschriften 118). Steiner, Stuttgart 1998. ISBN 3-515-07248-9
* SPM IV Eisenzeit - Age du Fer - Et del Ferro, Basel 1999. ISBN 3-908006-53-8.

== External links ==
* Celts in Switzerland (German)

 



[[Heretics of Dune]]

Heretics of Dune is a 1984 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert, fifth in a series of six novels. It was ranked as the #13 hardcover fiction best seller of 1984 by The New York Times. 

==Plot introduction==
Fifteen hundred years have passed since the 3,500-year reign of the God Emperor Leto Atreides II ended with his assassination; humanity is firmly on the Golden Path, Leto's plan to save humanity from destruction. By crushing the aspirations of humans for over three thousand years, Leto caused the Scattering, an explosion of humanity into the rest of the universe upon his death. Now, some of those who went out into the universe are coming back, bent on conquest. Only the Bene Gesserit perceive the Golden Path and are therefore faced with a choice: keep to their traditional role of hidden manipulators who quietly ease tensions and guide human progress while struggling for their own survival, or embrace the Golden Path and push humanity onward into a new future where humans are free from the threat of extinction.

==Plot summary==
Much has changed in the millennium and a half since the death of the God Emperor. Sandworms have reappeared on Arrakis (now called Rakis) and renewed the flow of the all-important spice melange to the galaxy. With Leto's death, a hugely complex economic system built on spice collapsed, resulting in trillions leaving known space in a great Scattering. A new civilization has risen, with three dominant powers: the Ixians, whose no-ships are capable of piloting between the stars and are invisible to outside detection; the Bene Tleilax, who have learned to manufacture spice in their axlotl tanks and have created a new breed of Face Dancers; and the Bene Gesserit, a matriarchal order of subtle political manipulators who possess superhuman abilities. However, people from the Scattering are returning with their own peculiar powers. The most powerful of these forces are the Honored Matres, a violent society of women bred and trained for combat and the sexual control of men.

On Rakis, a girl called Sheeana has been discovered who can control the giant worms. The Bene Gesserit intends to use a Tleilaxu-provided Duncan Idaho ghola to gain control of this sandrider, and the religious forces of humanity whom they know will ultimately worship her. The Tleilaxu have altered the ghola to bring its physical reflexes up to modern standards. The Bene Gesserit leader, Mother Superior Taraza, brings Miles Teg to guard the new Idaho. Taraza also sends Reverend Mother Darwi Odrade to take command of the Bene Gesserit keep on Rakis. Odrade is a loose cannon; she does not obey normal Bene Gesserit prohibitions about love, and is also Teg's biological daughter. Bene Gesserit Imprinter Lucilla is also sent by Taraza to bind Idaho's loyalty to the Sisterhood with her sexual talents. However, Lucilla must deal with Reverend Mother Schwangyu, head of the ghola project but also the leader of a faction within the Bene Gesserit who feel the gholas are a danger.

Above the planet Gammu, Taraza is captured and held hostage by the Honored Matres aboard an Ixian no-ship. The Honored Matres insist Taraza invite Teg to the ship, hoping to gain control of the ghola project. Teg manages to turn the tables on the Matres, and rescues the Mother Superior and her party. An attack is then made on Sheeana on Rakis, which is prevented by the intervention of the Bene Gesserit. Odrade starts training Sheeana as a Bene Gesserit. At about the same time an attempt is made on the life of Idaho, but Teg is able to defeat it. Teg flees with Duncan and Lucilla into the countryside. In an ancient Harkonnen no-globe, Teg proceeds to awaken Idaho's original memories, but does so before Lucilla can imprint Duncan and thus tie him to the Sisterhood. In the meantime, Taraza has been searching for Teg and his party, and finally establishes contact. During the operation, however, Teg and his companions are ambushed. Teg is captured while Lucilla and Duncan escape. Teg is tortured by a T-Probe, but under pressure discovers new abilities; one of them is to speed up his physical and mental reactions, which enables him to escape. At the same time, Idaho is ambushed and taken hostage.

Taraza arranges a meeting with the Tleilaxu Master Waff, who is soon forced to tell her what he knows about the Honored Matres. When pressed on the issue of Idaho, he also admits that the Bene Tleilax have conditioned their own agenda into him. As the meeting draws to a close, Taraza accidentally divines that Waff is a Zensunni, giving the Bene Gesserit a lever to understand their ancient competitor. She and Odrade meet Waff again on Rakis. He tries to assassinate Taraza but Odrade convinces him that the Sisterhood shares the religious beliefs of the Bene Tleilax. Taraza offers full alliance with them against the onslaught of forces out of the Scattering. This agreement causes consternation among the Bene Gesserit, but Odrade realizes that Taraza's plan is to destroy Rakis. By destroying the planet, the Bene Gesserit would be dependent on the Tleilaxu for the spice, ensuring an alliance.

Lucilla arrives at a Bene Gesserit safe house to discover it has been taken over by a young Honored Matre named Murbella, who has partially subdued Idaho. After being defeated in a quick bout of personal combat, Murbella assumes that Lucilla is the Great Honored Matre, and allows Lucilla and Burzmali to watch through the window of a locked room while she completes the sexual enslavement of the ghola. However, hidden Tleilaxu conditioning kicks in, and Duncan responds with an equal technique, one that overwhelms Murbella. Stunned and exhausted, Murbella dimly realizes that the man is the ghola they had been warned to search for, and unlocks the door to the room to gain Lucilla's assistance in killing him. But Lucilla says, "We will kill no one. This ghola goes to Rakis."

The Honored Matres attack Rakis, killing Taraza. Odrade becomes temporary leader of the Bene Gesserit before escaping with Sheeana into the desert on a worm. Teg also goes to a supposed safe house, only to discover the Honored Matres. He unleashes himself upon the complex, before capturing a no-ship and locating Duncan and Lucilla. They and the captured Murbella are taken to Rakis with him. When they arrive, Teg finds Odrade and Sheeana and their giant worm. He loads them all up in his no-ship, finally leading his troops out on a last suicidal defense of Rakis, designed to attract the rage of the Honored Matres. The Honored Matres attack Rakis, destroying the planet and the sandworms except for the one the Bene Gesserit escape with. They intend to drown the worm in a mixture of water and spice, turning it into sandtrout which will turn the secret Bene Gesserit planet Chapterhouse into another Dune.

==References==



[[Halakha]]

Halakha (, ; also transliterated as Halacha or Halachah) or Halocho ( ) is the collective body of Jewish religious laws derived from the Written and Oral Torah. It includes the 613 mitzvot ("commandments"), subsequent talmudic and rabbinic law and the customs and traditions compiled in the Shulchan Aruch (literally "Set Table", but more commonly known as the "Code of Jewish Law").

Judaism classically draws no distinction in its laws between religious and non-religious life; Jewish religious tradition does not distinguish clearly between religious, national, racial, or ethnic identities. Hershel Edelheit, Abraham J. Edelheit, History of Zionism: A Handbook and Dictionary, p.3, citing Solomon Zeitlin, The Jews. Race, Nation, or Religion? ( Philadelphia: Dropsie College Press, 1936). Halakha guides not only religious practices and beliefs, but numerous aspects of day-to-day life. Halakha is often translated as "Jewish Law", although a more literal translation might be "the path" or "the way of walking". The word derives from the root that means to go or to walk.

Historically, in the diaspora, halakha served many Jewish communities as an enforceable avenue of civil and religious law. Since the Age of Enlightenment, emancipation, and haskalah in the modern era, Jewish citizens are bound to halakha only by their voluntary consent. Under contemporary Israeli law, however, certain areas of Israeli family and personal status law are under the authority of the rabbinic courts and are therefore treated according to halakha. Some differences in halakha itself are found among Ashkenazi, Mizrahi, Sephardi, and Yemenite Jews, which are reflective of the historic and geographic diversity of various Jewish communities within the Diaspora.

== Etymology and terminology ==
The name "halakha" is derived from the Hebrew halakh () meaning "to walk" or "to go". Taken literally, therefore, "halakha" translates as "the way to go" rather than "law". "Halakha" is used to refer to a single law, the corpus of rabbinic legal texts, or to the overall system of religious law.

Halakha is often contrasted with aggadah, the diverse corpus of rabbinic exegetical, narrative, philosophical, mystical and other "non-legal" texts. At the same time, since writers of halakha may draw upon the aggadic and even mystical literature, there is a dynamic interchange between the genres.

Halakha constitutes the practical application of the 613 mitzvot ("commandments", singular mitzvah) in the Torah, as developed through discussion and debate in the classical rabbinic literature, especially the Mishnah and the Talmud (the "Oral law") and as codified in the Mishneh Torah or Shulchan Aruch ("Code of Law").

The halakha is a comprehensive guide to all aspects of human life, both corporeal and spiritual. Its laws, guidelines, and opinions cover a vast range of situations and principles, in the attempt to realize what is implied by the central Biblical commandment to "be holy as I your God am holy". They cover what are claimed to better ways for a Jew to live, based on what is not stated, but has been derived from the Hebrew Bible.

Because halakha is developed and applied by various halakhic authorities rather than one sole "official voice", different individuals and communities may well have different answers to halakhic questions. Controversies lend rabbinic literature much of its creative and intellectual appeal. With few exceptions, controversies are not settled through authoritative structures because during the age of exile Jews have lacked a single judicial hierarchy or appellate review process for halakha. Instead, Jews interested in observing halakha typically choose to follow specific rabbis or affiliate with a more tightly structured community.

Halakha has been developed and pored over throughout the generations since before 500 BCE, in a constantly expanding collection of religious literature consolidated in the Talmud. First and foremost it forms a body of intricate judicial opinions, legislation, customs, and recommendations, many of them passed down over the centuries, and an assortment of ingrained behaviors, relayed to successive generations from the moment a child begins to speak. It is also the subject of intense study in yeshivas; see Torah study.

== Laws of the Torah ==

Broadly, the halakha comprises the practical application of the commandments (each one known as a mitzvah) in the Torah, as developed in subsequent rabbinic literature; see The Mitzvot and Jewish Law. According to the Talmud (Tractate Makot), there are 613 mitzvot ("commandments") in the Torah; in Hebrew these are known as the Taryag mitzvot " . There are 248 positive mitzvot and 365 negative mitzvot given in the Torah, supplemented by seven mitzvot legislated by the rabbis of antiquity; see Rabbinical commandments.

===Categories===
Jewish law may be categorized in various ways. Besides the basic categories applied to the mitzvot in antiquity, during the medieval period Jewish law was classified by such works as Maimonides' Mishneh Torah and Joseph Karo's Shulchan Aruch.

Classical Rabbinic Judaism has two basic categories of laws:
*Laws believed revealed by God to the Jewish people at Mount Sinai (e.g. the written Pentateuch and elucidations therefrom, Halacha l'Moshe miSinai);
*Laws of human origin including Rabbinic decrees, interpretations, customs, etc.

This division between revealed and rabbinic commandments (mitzvot) may influence the importance of a rule, its enforcement and the nature of its ongoing interpretation. Halakhic authorities may disagree on which laws fall into which categories or the circumstances (if any) under which prior Rabbinic rulings can be re-examined by contemporary rabbis, but all halakhic Jews hold that both categories exist and that the first category is immutable, with exceptions only for life-saving and similar emergency circumstances.

A second classical distinction is between the Written Law, laws written in the Hebrew Bible, and the Oral Law, laws believed transmitted orally prior to compilation in texts such as the Mishnah, Talmud, and Rabbinic codes.

Commandments are divided into positive and negative commands, which are treated differently in terms of divine and human punishment. Positive commandments (of which tradition holds there are 248) require an action to be performed and are considered to bring the performer closer to God. Negative commandments (traditionally 365 in number) forbid a specific action, and violations create a distance from God. In striving to "be holy" as God is holy, a person attempts so far as possible to live in accordance with God's wishes for humanity, striving to more completely live with each of these with every moment of one's life.

A further division is made between chukim ("decrees"  laws without obvious explanation, such as shatnez, the law prohibiting wearing clothing made of mixtures of linen and wool), mishpatim ("judgments"  laws with obvious social implications) and eduyot ("testimonies" or "commemorations", such as the Shabbat and holidays). Through the ages, various rabbinical authorities have classified the commandments in various other ways.

A different approach divides the laws into a different set of categories:
*Laws in relation to God (bein adam la-Makom), and
*Laws about relations with other people (bein adam la-chavero).

There is a notion in halakha that violations of the latter are more severe, in certain ways, because of the requirement that one must obtain forgiveness both from the offended person and from God.

As a practical matter, the mitzvot also may be classified in line with how they might be implemented after the destruction of the Temple. Some mitzvot are relevant only in the Land of Israel. Many laws pertaining to holiness and purity can no longer be performed as the holy Sanctuary in Jerusalem no longer exists. Some laws require a kind of beit din (Jewish court) that no longer exists. p.11, R. Yisrael Meir haKohen (Chofetz Chayim), The Concise Book of Mitzvoth. 

Within Talmudic literature, Jewish law is divided into the six orders of the Mishnah, which are categories by proximate subject matter: Zeraim ("Seeds") for agricultural laws and prayer, Moed ("Festival"), for the Sabbath and the Festivals, Nashim ("Women"), dealing primarily with marriage and divorce, Nezikin ("Damages"), for civil and criminal law, Kodashim ("Holy things"), for sacrifices and the dietary laws, and Tohorot ("Purities") for ritual purity. However, Talmudic texts often deal with laws outside these apparent subject categories. As a result, Jewish law came to be categorized in other ways in the post-Talmudic period.

In the major codes of Jewish law, two other main categorization schemes are found. Maimonides' Mishneh Torah divides the laws into fourteen sections. The codification efforts that culminated in the Shulchan Aruch divide the law into four sections, including only laws that do not depend on being in the Land of Israel.

===Sin===
Judaism regards the violation of the commandments, the mitzvot, to be a sin.

The generic Hebrew word for any kind of sin is aveira ("transgression"). Based on the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible) Judaism describes three levels of sin:
* Pesha  an "intentional sin"; an action committed in deliberate defiance of God
* Avon  a "sin of lust or uncontrollable emotion, committed against one's will and is not in line with one's true inner desires". It is a sin done knowingly, but not done to defy God
* Chet  an "unintentional sin"

Relatedly, the three terms - Chayyav, Patur, Mutar - in the Gemara and halakhic codes classify the permissibility of an action or the severity of its prohibition and punishment.
* Chayyav (), literally "liable, obligated" means the one who transgresses the prohibition is responsible for his/her criminal actions, and deserves to pay the price for them.
* Patur () means "exempt" of liability to punishment, however the action is rabbinically forbidden.
* Mutar () means the action is permitted.

Judaism understands that the vast majority of people, aside from those who are termed Tzadikim Gemurim (Hebrew: , "the righteous"), will succumb to sin in their lives. However, a state of sin does not condemn a person to damnation; there is always a road of teshuva (Hebrew: ; repentance, literally: "return"). There are some classes of people for whom this is exceedingly difficult, such as those who commit adultery, as well as those who slander others.

In earlier days, when Jews had a functioning court system (the beth din and the Sanhedrin high court), courts were empowered to administer physical punishments for various violations, upon conviction by far stricter standards of evidence than are acceptable in courts in modern democracies: execution, corporal punishment, incarceration, excommunication. Since the fall of the Temple, executions have been forbidden. Since the fall of the autonomous Jewish communities of Europe, the other punishments also have been discontinued.

Today, then, one's accounts are reckoned solely by God. The Talmud says that although courts capable of executing sinners no longer exist, the prescribed penalties continue to be applied by Providence. For instance, someone who has committed a sin punishable by stoning might fall off a roof, or someone who ought to be executed by strangulation might drown. Ketubot 30b 

===Gentiles and Jewish law===
Judaism has always held that people who are not Jews are only obliged to follow the seven Noahide Laws; these are laws that the Oral Law derives from the covenant God made with Noah after the flood, which Judaism holds apply to all descendants of Noah, i.e., all living people. The Noahide laws are derived in the Talmud (Tractate Sanhedrin 57a), and are listed here:

* Murder is forbidden.
* Theft is forbidden.
* Sexual immorality is forbidden.
* Eating flesh cut from a still-living animal is forbidden.
* Belief in and worship of, or prayer to, "idols" is forbidden.
* Blaspheming against God is forbidden.
* Society must establish a fair system of legal justice to administer law honestly.

The details of these laws are codified from the Talmudic texts in the Mishneh Torah. They can be found mainly in chapters 9 and 10 of Hilkhoth Melakhim u'Milhamotehem in Sefer Shoftim, the fourteenth book of the Mishneh Torah.

== Sources and process ==

 +Eras of Jewish law * The Tannaim (literally the \"repeaters\") are the sages of the Mishnah (0200) * The Amoraim (literally the \"sayers\") are the sages of the Gemara (200500) * The Savoraim (literally the \"reasoners\") are the classical Persian rabbis (500650) * The Geonim (literally the \"prides\" or \"geniuses\") are the rabbis of Sura and Pumbeditha, in Babylonia (6501038) * The Rishonim (literally the \"firsts\") are the rabbis of the late medieval period (c. 10381563) preceding the Shulchan Aruch * The Acharonim (literally the \"lasts\") are the rabbis from roughly 1500 to the present. 

:See also: Oral Torah #Components of the Oral Law; Rabbinic literature.

The boundaries of Jewish law are determined through the halakhic process, a religious-ethical system of legal reasoning. Rabbis generally base their opinions on the primary sources of halakha as well as on precedent set by previous rabbinic opinions. The major sources and genre of halakha consulted include:

* The foundational Talmudic literature (especially the Mishna and the Babylonian Talmud) with commentaries;
**Talmudic hermeneutics: the science which defines the rules and methods for the investigation and exact determination of the meaning of the Scriptures; includes also the rules by which the Halakhot are derived from and established by the written law. These may be seen as the rules by which early Jewish law was derived.
**Gemara - see particularly #Argumentation and debate there - the Talmudic process of elucidating the Halakha
* The post-Talmudic codificatory literature, such as Maimonides' Mishneh Torah and the Shulchan Aruch with commentaries;
* Regulations and other "legislative" enactments promulgated by rabbis and communal bodies:
** Gezeirah: "preventative legislation" of the Rabbis, intended to prevent violations of the commandments
** Takkanah: "positive legislation", practices instituted by the Rabbis not based (directly) on the commandments
* Minhag: Customs, community practices, and customary law, as well as the exemplary deeds of prominent (or local) rabbis;
* The she'eloth u-teshuvoth (responsa, literally "questions and answers") literature.
* Dina d'malchuta dina ("the law of the land is law"): an additional aspect of halakha, being the principle recognizing non-Jewish laws and non-Jewish legal jurisdiction as binding on Jewish citizens, provided that they are not contrary to any laws of Judaism. This principle applies primarily in areas of commercial, civil and criminal law.

In antiquity, the Sanhedrin functioned essentially as the Supreme Court and legislature for Judaism, and had the power to administer binding law, including both received law and its own Rabbinic decrees, on all Jews  rulings of the Sanhedrin became halakha; see Oral law. That court ceased to function in its full mode in 40 CE. Today, the authoritative application of Jewish law is left to the local rabbi, and the local rabbinical courts, with only local applicability. In branches of Judaism that follow halakha, lay individuals make numerous ad-hoc decisions, but are regarded as not having authority to decide definitively.

Since the days of the Sanhedrin, however, no body or authority has been generally regarded as having the authority to create universally recognized precedents. As a result, halakha has developed in a somewhat different fashion from Anglo-American legal systems with a Supreme Court able to provide universally accepted precedents. Generally, contemporary halakhic arguments are effectively, yet unofficially, peer-reviewed. When a rabbinic posek ("decisor") proposes a new interpretation of a law, that interpretation may be considered binding for the posek's questioner or immediate community. Depending on the stature of the posek and the quality of the decision, an interpretation may also be gradually accepted by rabbis and members of similar Jewish communities.

Under this system, there is a tension between the relevance of earlier and later authorities in constraining halakhic interpretation and innovation. On the one hand, there is a principle in halakha not to overrule a specific law from an earlier era, after it got accepted by the community as a law or vow. Rema Choshen Mishpat Chapter 25 On the other hand, another principle recognizes the responsibility and authority of later authorities, and especially the posek handling a concurrent question. In addition, the halakha embodies a wide range of principles that permit judicial discretion and deviation (Ben-Menahem). Generally speaking, a rabbi in any one period will not overrule specific laws from an earlier era, unless supported by a relevant earlier precedent; see list below. There are important exceptions to this principle, which empower the posek (decisor) or beth din (court) responsible for a given opinion.

Notwithstanding the potential for innovation, rabbis and Jewish communities differ greatly on how they make changes in halakha. Notably, poskim frequently extend the application of a law to new situations, but do not consider such applications as constituting a "change" in halakha. For example, many Orthodox rulings concerning electricity are derived from rulings concerning fire, as electricity is deemed to be a form of fire. In contrast, Conservative Poskim consider that switching on electrical equipment is physically and chemically more like turning on a water tap (which is permissible) than lighting a fire (which is not permissible), and therefore permitted on Shabbat. The reformative Conservative Judaism, in some cases, explicitly interprets halakha to take into account its view of contemporary society. For instance, most Conservative rabbis extend the application of certain Jewish obligations and permissible activities to women (see How halakha is viewed today below).

Within certain Jewish communities, formal organized bodies do exist. Within Modern Orthodox Judaism, there is no one committee or leader, but Modern Orthodox rabbis generally agree with the views set by consensus by the leaders of the Rabbinical Council of America. Within Conservative Judaism, the Rabbinical Assembly has an official Committee on Jewish Law and Standards.

Note that, Takkanot, in general, do not affect or restrict observance of Torah mitzvot. (In common parlance sometimes people use the general term takkanah to refer either gezeirot or takkanot.) However, the Talmud states that in exceptional cases, the Sages had the authority to "uproot matters from the Torah" in certain cases. In Talmudic and classical halakhic literature, this authority refers to the authority to prohibit some things that would otherwise be biblically sanctioned (shev v'al ta'aseh). Rabbis may rule that a Torah mitzvah should not be performed, e.g. blowing the shofar on Shabbat, or taking the lulav and etrog on Shabbat. These takkanot are executed out of fear that some might otherwise carry the mentioned items between home and the synagogue, thus inadvertently violating a Sabbath melakha. Another rare and limited form of takkanah involved overriding Torah prohibitions. In some cases, the Sages allowed the temporary violation of a prohibition in order to maintain the Jewish system as a whole. This was part of the basis for Esther's relationship with Ahasuerus. (Sanhedrin) For general usage of takkanaot in Jewish history see the article Takkanah. For examples of this being used in Conservative Judaism see Conservative Halakha.

===Historical analysis===

The antiquity of the rules can be determined only by the dates of the authorities who quote them; in general, they can not safely be declared older than the tanna to whom they are first ascribed. It is certain, however, that the seven middot of Hillel and the thirteen of Ishmael are earlier than the time of Hillel himself, who was the first to transmit them.

The Talmud itself gives no information concerning the origin of the middot, although the Geonim regarded them as Sinaitic. Modern historians believe that it is decidedly erroneous to consider the middot as traditional from the time of Moses on Sinai.

The middot seem to have been first laid down as abstract rules by the teachers of Hillel, though they were not immediately recognized by all as valid and binding. Different schools interpreted and modified them, restricted or expanded them, in various ways. Akiba and Ishmael and their scholars especially contributed to the development or establishment of these rules. Akiba devoted his attention particularly to the grammatical and exegetical rules, while Ishmael developed the logical. The rules laid down by one school were frequently rejected by another because the principles that guided them in their respective formulations were essentially different. According to Akiba, the divine language of the Torah is distinguished from the speech of men by the fact that in the former no word or sound is superfluous.

Some scholars have observed a similarity between these rabbinic rules of interpretation and the hermeneutics of ancient Hellenistic culture. For example, Saul Lieberman argues that the *names* (e.g. kal vahomer) of Rabbi Ishmael's middot are Hebrew translations of Greek terms, although the methods of those middot are not Greek in origin. Lieberman, Saul. Rabbinic interpretation of scripture and The hermeneutic rules of the aggadah in Hellenism in Jewish Palestine (NY, 1950) See also, Daube, David. "Rabbinic methods of interpretation and Hellenistic rhetoric" HUCA 22 (1949) 239ff. 

== Views today ==

Orthodox Judaism holds that halakha is the divine law as laid out in the Torah (five books of Moses), rabbinical laws, rabbinical decrees and customs combined. The rabbis, who made many additions and interpretations of Jewish Law, did so only in accordance with regulations they believe were given for this purpose to Moses on Mount Sinai, see Deuteronomy 17:11. See Orthodox Judaism, Beliefs about Jewish law and tradition.

Conservative Judaism holds that halakha is normative and binding, and is developed as a partnership between people and God based on Sinaitic Torah. While there are a wide variety of Conservative views, a common belief is that halakha is, and has always been, an evolving process subject to interpretation by rabbis in every time period. See Conservative Judaism, Beliefs.

Reform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism both hold that modern views of how the Torah and rabbinic law developed imply that the body of rabbinic Jewish law is no longer normative (seen as binding) on Jews today. Those in the traditionalist wing of these movements believe that the halakha represents a personal starting-point, holding that each Jew is obligated to interpret the Torah, Talmud and other Jewish works for themselves, and this interpretation will create separate commandments for each person.

Those in the liberal and classical wings of Reform believe that in this day and era most Jewish religious rituals are no longer necessary, and many hold that following most Jewish laws is actually counterproductive. They propose that Judaism has entered a phase of ethical monotheism, and that the laws of Judaism are only remnants of an earlier stage of religious evolution, and need not be followed. This is considered wrong, and even heretical, by Orthodox and Conservative Judaism.

Humanistic Jews value the Torah as a historical, political, and sociological text written by their ancestors. They do not believe "that every word of the Torah is true, or even morally correct, just because the Torah is old". The Torah is both disagreed with and questioned. Humanistic Jews believe that the entire Jewish experience, and not only the Torah, should be studied as a source for Jewish behavior and ethical values. 

===Flexibility===
Despite its internal rigidity, halakha has generally been a flexible system, addressing issues on the basis of circumstance and precedent. The classical approach has permitted new rulings regarding modern technology. These rulings guide the observant about the proper use of electricity on the Sabbath and holidays within the parameters of halakhah. Indeed, many scholarly tomes have been published and are constantly being reviewed ensuring the maximum coordination between electrical appliances and technology with the needs of the religiously observant Jew, with a great range of opinions. Often, as to the applicability of the law in any given situation, the proviso is to "consult your local rabbi or posek". Modern critics, however, have charged that with the rise of movements that challenge the "divine" authority of halakha, traditional Jews have greater reluctance to change, not only the laws themselves but also other customs and habits, than traditional Rabbinical Judaism did prior to the advent of Reform in the 19th century.

===Differences between Orthodox and Conservative Judaism===
Orthodox Jews maintain halakha is derived from the divine law of the Torah (Bible), rabbinical laws, rabbinical decrees and customs combined. As such it should be adhered to as an unalterable authority. They also believe there are traditional formulas that date back to Moses on how the divine law may be interpreted - see above, "Rules by which early Jewish law was derived". While Conservative Jews have varied views regarding the origin of the Torah and its authority today, and believe it can be continuously reinterpreted. Their view of halakha has given rise to substantial differences in approach as well as result.

====Orthodox Judaism====
Orthodox Jews believe that halakha is a religious system, whose core represents the revealed will of God. Although Orthodox Judaism acknowledges that rabbis made many decisions and decrees regarding Jewish Law where the written Torah itself is non-specific, they did so only in accordance with regulations given to them by Moses on Mount Sinai (see Deuteronomy 5:8-13). These regulations were transmitted orally until shortly after the destruction of the second temple. They were then recorded in the Mishnah, and explained in the Talmud and commentaries throughout history, including today. Orthodox Judaism believes that subsequent interpretations have been derived with the utmost accuracy and care. The most widely accepted codes of Jewish law are known as Mishneh Torah and the Shulchan Aruch. No rabbi has the right to change Jewish law unless he clearly understands how it coincides with the precepts of the Talmud and later codes of Jewish law. Later commentaries were accepted by many rabbis as final; however, other rabbis may disagree. 

Orthodox Judaism has a range of opinions on the circumstances and extent to which change is permissible. Haredi Jews generally hold that even minhagim (customs) must be retained and existing precedents cannot be reconsidered. Modern Orthodox authorities are generally more inclined to permit limited changes in customs, and some reconsideration of precedent. All Orthodox authorities, however, agree that only later Rabbinical interpretations are subject to reconsideration, and hold that core sources of Divine written and oral law, such as the Torah the Mishnah and the Talmud, cannot be overridden.

====Conservative Judaism====

One view held by Conservative Judaism is that while God is real, the Torah is not the word of God in a literal sense. However, in this view the Torah is still held as mankind's record of its understanding of God's revelation, and thus still has divine authority. In this view, traditional Jewish law is still seen as binding. Jews who hold to this view generally try to use modern methods of historical study to learn how Jewish law has changed over time, and are in some cases more willing to change Jewish law in the present.

A key practical difference between Conservative and Orthodox approaches is that Conservative Judaism holds that its Rabbinical body's powers are not limited to reconsidering later precedents based on earlier sources, but the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) is empowered to override Biblical and Taanitic prohibitions by takkanah (decree) when perceived to be inconsistent with modern requirements and/or views of ethics. The CJLS has used this power on a number of occasions, most famously in the "driving teshuva", which says that if someone is unable to walk to any synagogue on the Sabbath, and their commitment to observance is so loose that not attending synagogue may lead them to drop it altogether, their rabbi may give them a dispensation to drive there and back; and more recently in its decision prohibiting the taking of evidence on Mamzer status on the grounds that implementing such a status is immoral. The CJLS has also held that the Talmudic concept of Kavod HaBriyot permits lifting rabbinic decrees (as distinct from carving narrow exceptions) on grounds of human dignity, and used this principle in a December 2006 opinion lifting all rabbinic prohibitions on homosexual conduct (the opinion held that only male-male anal sex was forbidden by the Bible and that this remained prohibited). Conservative Judaism also made a number of changes to the role of women in Judaism, including counting women in the minyan and ordaining women as rabbis. The latter was accomplished by simple vote on the faculty of the JTS. Orthodox Judaism holds that takkanot (Rabbinical decrees) can only supplement and can never nullify Biblical law, and significant decisions must be accompanied by scholarly responsa citing sources and halakhic precedent.

An example of how different views of the origin of Jewish law inform Conservative approaches to interpreting that law involves the CJLS's acceptance of Rabbi Elie Kaplan Spitz's responsum decreeing the Biblical category of mamzer as "inoperative", in which The CJLS adopted the Responsum's view that of how, in the Conservative view of halakha, the "morality which we learn through the unfolding narrative of our tradition" informs the application of Mosaic law:

The responsum cited several examples of how, in Spitz's view, the Rabbinic Sages declined to enforce punishments explicitly mandated by Torah law. The examples include the "trial of the accused adulteress (Sotah)", the "Law of the Breaking of the Neck of the Heifer" and the application of the death penalty for the "rebellious child". Spitz argues that the punishment of the Mamzer has been effectively inoperative for nearly two thousand years due to deliberate rabbinic inaction (with a few rule-proving counterexamples, including the 18th century Orthodox rabbi Ismael ha-Kohen of Modena, who decreed that a child should have the word "mamzer" tattooed to his forehead). Further he suggested that the Rabbis have long regarded the punishment declared by the Torah as immoral, and came to the conclusion that no court should agree to hear testimony on "mamzerut". His motion was passed by the CJLS.

The decision represented a watershed for Conservative Judaism because it represented an explicit abrogation of a Biblical injunction on the grounds of contemporary morality, as distinct from exigency. The dissenters, who included Rabbi Joel Roth as well as a partial concurrence by Rabbi Daniel Nevins, argued for reaffirming the classical halakhic framework in which human decrees inform and often limit but never wholly abrogate law believed to be of Divine origin, stating that "we should acknowledge that God's law is beyond our authority to eliminate", but should continue the traditional approach of applying strict evidentiary rules and presumptions that tend to render enforcement unlikely. He also argued that the current framework is moral, both because proving mamzer status sufficiently beyond all doubt is already so difficult that it is rare, and because the mere existence and possibility of mamzerut status, even if rarely enforced, creates an important incentive for divorcing parties to obtain a get (Jewish religious divorce) to avoid the sin of adultery. He cited a responsum by prominent Haredi Orthodox Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef as an example of how the traditional approach works. Rabbi Yosef was faced with the child of a woman who had left a religious marriage without religious divorce and had a child in the second marriage, seemingly an open-and-shut case of Mamzer status. Rabbi Yosef proceeded to systematically discredit the evidence that the former marriage had ever taken place. The Ketubah was mysteriously not found and hence disqualified, and the officiating Rabbi's testimony was never sufficiently corroborated and hence not credible. Rabbi Yosef then found reason to doubt that the new husband was ever the father, finding that because the ex-husband occasionally delivered alimony personally, an ancient presumption (one of many) that any time a husband and wife are alone together the law presumes intercourse has taken place governed the case. He held that Jewish law could not disprove, and hence had to conclude, that the original husband really was the child's father and there was no case of Mamzer status.

== Codes of Jewish law ==

The Torah and the Talmud are not formal codes of law: they are sources of law. There are many formal codes of Jewish law that have developed over the past two thousand years. These codes have influenced, and in turn, have been influenced by, the responsa; History of Responsa thus provides an informative complement to the survey below.

The major codes are:

* The Mishnah, composed by Rabbi Judah the Prince, in 200 CE, as a basic outline of the state of the Oral Law in his time. This was the framework upon which the Talmud was based; the Talmud's dialectic analysis of the content of the Mishna (gemara; completed c. 500) became the basis for all later halakhic decisions and subsequent codes.

* Codifications by the Geonim of the halakhic material in the Talmud. An early work, She'iltot ("Questions") by Achai of Shabcha (c. 752), discusses over 190 Mitzvot  exploring and addressing various questions on these. The first legal codex proper, Halakhot Pesukot ("Decided Laws"), by Yehudai Gaon (c. 760), rearranges the Talmud passages in a structure manageable to the layman. (It was written in vernacular Aramaic, and subsequently translated into Hebrew as Hilkhot Riu). Halakhot Gedolot ("Great Law Book"), by R. Simeon Kayyara, published two generations later, contains extensive additional material, mainly from Responsa and Monographs of the Geonim, and is presented in a form that is closer to the original Talmud language and structure. (Probably since it was distributed, also, amongst the newly established Ashkenazi communities.) The She'iltot was influential on both subsequent works.

* The Hilchot of the Rif, Rabbi Isaac Alfasi (10131103), summations of the legal material in the Talmud. Alfasi transcribed the Talmud's halakhic conclusions verbatim, without the surrounding deliberation; he also excludes all Aggadic (non-legal, homiletic) matter. The Hilchot soon superseded the geonic codes, as it contained all the decisions and laws then relevant, and additionally, served as an accessible Talmudic commentary; it has been printed with almost every subsequent edition of the Talmud.

* The Mishneh Torah (also known as the Yad HaHazaka for its 14 volumes; "yad" has a numeric value of 14), by Maimonides (Rambam; 11351204). This work encompasses the full range of Talmudic law; it is organized and reformulated in a logical system  in 14 books, 83 sections and 1000 chapters  with each halakha stated clearly. The Mishneh Torah is very influential to this day, and several later works reproduce passages verbatim. It also includes a section on Metaphysics and fundamental beliefs. (Some claim this section draws heavily on Aristotelian science and metaphysics; others suggest that it is within the tradition of Saadia Gaon.) It is the main source of practical halakha for many Yemenite Jews  mainly Baladi and Dor Daim  as well as for a growing community referred to as talmidei haRambam.

* The work of the Rosh, Rabbi Asher ben Jehiel (1250?/1259?1328), an abstract of the Talmud, concisely stating the final halakhic decision and quoting later authorities, notably Alfasi, Maimonides, and the Tosafists. This work superseded Rabbi Alfasi's and has been printed with almost every subsequent edition of the Talmud.

* The Sefer Mitzvot Gadol (The "SeMaG") of Rabbi Moses ben Jacob of Coucy (first half of the 13th century, Coucy, Northern France). "SeMaG" is organised around the 365 negative and the 248 positive commandments, separately discussing each of them according to the Talmud (in light of the commentaries of Rashi and the Tosafot) and the other codes existent at the time. Sefer Mitzvot Katan ("SeMaK") by Isaac ben Joseph of Corbeil is an abridgement of the SeMaG, including additional practical halakha, as well as agaddic and ethical material.

* "The Mordechai"  by Mordecai ben Hillel, d. Nuremberg 1298  serves both as a source of analysis, as well of decided law. Mordechai considered about 350 halakhic authorities, and was widely influential, particularly amongst the Ashkenazi and Italian communities. Although organised around the Hilchot of the Rif, it is, in fact, an independent work. It has been printed with every edition of the Talmud since 1482.

* The Arba'ah Turim (The Tur, The Four Columns) by Rabbi Jacob ben Asher (12701343, Toledo, Spain). This work traces the halakha from the Torah text and the Talmud through the Rishonim, with the Hilchot of Alfasi as its starting point. Ben Asher followed Maimonides's precedent in arranging his work in a topical order, however, the Tur covers only those areas of Jewish law that were in force in the author's time. The code is divided into four main sections; almost all codes since this time have followed the Tur's arrangement of material.
** Orach Chayim: "The Way of Life" worship and ritual observance in the home and synagogue, through the course of the day, the weekly sabbath and the festival cycle.
** Yoreh De'ah: "Teach Knowledge" assorted ritual prohibitions, dietary laws and regulations concerning menstrual impurity.
** Even Ha'ezer: "The Rock of the Helpmate" marriage, divorce and other issues in family law.
** Choshen Mishpat: "The Breastplate of Judgment" The administration and adjudication of civil law.

*The Beit Yosef, and the Shulchan Aruch of Rabbi Yosef Karo (14881575). The Beit Yosef is a huge commentary on the Tur in which Rabbi Karo traces the development of each law from the Talmud through later rabbinical literature (examining thirty-two authorities, beginning with the Talmud and ending with the works of Rabbi Israel Isserlein). The Shulchan Aruch is, in turn, a condensation of the Beit Yosef  stating each ruling simply (literally translated, Shulchan Aruch means "set table"); this work follows the chapter divisions of the Tur. The Shulchan Aruch, together with its related commentaries, is considered by many to be the most authoritative compilation of halakha since the Talmud. In writing the Shulchan Aruch, Rabbi Karo based his rulings on three authorities  Maimonides (Rambam), Asher ben Jehiel (Rosh), and Isaac Alfasi (Rif); he considered the Mordechai in inconclusive cases. Sephardic Jews, generally, refer to the Shulchan Aruch as the basis for their daily practice.

*The works of Rabbi Moshe Isserles ("Rema"; Krakw, Poland, 1525 to 1572). Rema noted that the Shulchan Aruch was based on the Sephardic tradition, and he created a series of glosses to be appended to the text of the Shulkhan Aruch for cases where Sephardi and Ashkenazi customs differed (based on the works of Yaakov Moelin, Israel Isserlein, and Israel Bruna). The glosses are called Hamapah, the "Tablecloth" for the "Set Table". His comments are now incorporated into the body of all printed editions of the Shulchan Aruch, typeset in a different script; today, "Shulchan Aruch" refers to the combined work of Karo and Isserles. Isserles' Darkhei Moshe is similarly a commentary on the Tur and the Beit Yosef.

* The Levush Malkhut ("Levush") of Rabbi Mordecai Yoffe (c. 1530-1612). A ten volume work, five discussing halakha at a level "midway between the two extremes: the lengthy Beit Yosef of Caro on the one hand, and on the other Caro's Shulchan Aruch together with the Mappah of Isserles, which is too brief", that particularly stresses the customs and practices of the Jews of Eastern Europe. The Levush was exceptional among the codes, in that it treated certain Halakhot from a Kabbalistic standpoint.

* The Shulchan Aruch HaRav of Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi (c. 1800) was an attempt to recodify the law as it stood at that time  incorporating commentaries on the Shulchan Aruch, and subsequent responsa  and thus stating the decided halakha, as well as the underlying reasoning. The work was written, partly, so that laymen would be able to study Jewish law. Unfortunately, most of the work was lost in a fire prior to publication. It is the basis of practice for Chabad-Lubavitch and other Hasidic groups, and is quoted as authoritative by many subsequent works, Hasidic and non-Hasidic alike.

* Works structured directly on the Shulchan Aruch, providing analysis in light of Acharonic material and codes. The Mishnah Berurah of Rabbi Yisroel Meir ha-Kohen, (the "Chofetz Chaim", Poland, 18381933) is a commentary on the "Orach Chayim" section of the Shulchan Aruch, discussing the application of each halakha in light of all subsequent Acharonic decisions. It has become the authoritative halakhic guide for much of Orthodox Ashkenazic Jewry in the postwar period. Aruch HaShulchan by Rabbi Yechiel Michel Epstein (18291888) is a scholarly analysis of halakha through the perspective of the major Rishonim. The work follows the structure of the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch; rules dealing with vows, agriculture, and ritual purity, are discussed in a second work known as Aruch HaShulchan he'Atid. Kaf HaChaim on Orach Chayim and parts of Yoreh De'ah, by the Sephardi sage Yaakov Chaim Sofer (Baghdad and Jerusalem, 18701939) is similar in scope, authority and approach to the Mishnah Berurah. Yalkut Yosef, by Rabbi Yitzhak Yosef, is a voluminous, widely cited and contemporary work of halakha, based on the rulings of Rabbi Ovadia Yosef.

* "Layman oriented" digests of halakha. The Kitzur Shulchan Aruch of Rabbi Shlomo Ganzfried (Hungary 18041886), based on the very strict Hungarian customs of the 19th century, became immensely popular after its publication due to its simplicity. This work is not binding in the same way as the Mishneh Torah or the Shulchan Aruch. It is still popular in Orthodox Judaism as a framework for study, if not always for practice. Chayei Adam and Chochmat Adam by Avraham Danzig (Poland, 17481820) are similar Ashkenazi works, but are regarded as a more appropriate basis for practice. The Ben Ish Chai by Yosef Chaim (Baghdad, 18321909) is a corresponding Sephardi work.

* Temimei Haderech ("A Guide To Jewish Religious Practice") by Rabbi Isaac Klein with contributions from the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of the Rabbinical Assembly. This scholarly work is based on the previous traditional law codes, but written from a Conservative Jewish point of view. It is not accepted among Orthodox Jews.

== See also ==
* Antinomianism
* Jewish ethics
* Jewish medical ethics
* Mishpat Ivri
* Religious law

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
* J. David Bleich, Contemporary Halakhic Problems (5 vols), Ktav. ISBN 0-87068-450-7, ISBN 0-88125-474-6, ISBN 0-88125-315-4, ISBN 0-87068-275-X, Feldheim ISBN 1-56871-353-3
* Menachem Elon, Ha-Mishpat ha-Ivri (trans. Jewish Law: History, Sources, Principles ISBN 0-8276-0389-4), Jewish Publication Society. ISBN 0-8276-0537-4
* Jacob Katz, Divine Law in Human Hands  Case Studies in Halakhic Flexibility, Magnes Press. ISBN 965-223-980-1
*Moshe Koppel, "Meta-Halakhah: Logic, Intuition, and the Unfolding of Jewish Law," ISBN 1-56821-901-6
* Mendell Lewittes, Jewish Law: An Introduction, Jason Aronson. ISBN 1-56821-302-6
* Daniel Pollack ed., Contrasts in American and Jewish Law, Ktav. ISBN 0-88125-750-8
* Emanuel Quint, A Restatement of Rabbinic Civil Law (11 vols), Gefen Publishing. ISBN 0-87668-765-6, ISBN 0-87668-799-0, ISBN 0-87668-678-1, ISBN 0-87668-396-0, ISBN 0-87668-197-6, ISBN 1-56821-167-8, ISBN 1-56821-319-0, ISBN 1-56821-907-5, ISBN 0-7657-9969-3, ISBN 965-229-322-9, ISBN 965-229-323-7, ISBN 965-229-375-X
* Emanuel Quint, Jewish Jurisprudence: Its Sources & Modern Applications , Taylor and Francis. ISBN 3-7186-0293-8
* Steven H. Resnicoff, Understanding Jewish Law, LexisNexis, 2012. ISBN 9781422490204
* Joel Roth, Halakhic Process: A Systemic Analysis, Jewish Theological Seminary. ISBN 0-87334-035-3
* Joseph Soloveitchik, Halakhic Man, Jewish Publication Society trans. Lawrence Kaplan. ISBN 0-8276-0397-5
* 
* 

== External links ==

;Full-text resources of major halakhic works

* Mishneh Torah
*: Hebrew: mechon-mamre.org; wikisource
*: Translation: chabad.org

*Arba'ah Turim
*: Hebrew: wikisource

*Shulchan Aruch
*: Hebrew: chassidus.org (archived); wikisource
*: Translation: wikisource (incomplete); shulchanarach.com (incomplete)

*Shulchan Aruch HaRav
*: Hebrew: wikisource; chabadlibrary.org

*Aruch HaShulchan
*: Hebrew: wikisource

*Kitzur Shulchan Aruch
*: Hebrew: www.kitzur.net; shofar.net; wikisource
*: Translation: Yona Newman (100% complete); torah.org (incomplete)

*Ben Ish Chai
*: Hebrew: wikisource; shechem.org

*Kaf HaChaim
*: Hebrew: hebrewbooks.org (volume 1; others available via search on site)

* Mishnah Berurah
*: Hebrew: wikisource; mishnaberura.com (With .mp3 and .wma files); hebrewbooks.org
*: Translation: torah.org 

*Chayei Adam
*: Hebrew: daat.ac.il

*Chochmat Adam:
*: Hebrew: daat.ac.il

*Peninei Halachah:
*: Hebrew: ph.yhb.org.il
*: Translation: ph.yhb.org.il/en

*Yalkut Yosef
*: Hebrew: yalkut.info

*A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice:
*: jtsa.edu (archived)

*A Halacha Wiki
*: Halachipedia.com

 



[[History of ancient Israel and Judah]]

The Iron Age kingdom of Israel (blue) and kingdom of Judah (yellow), with their neighbors (tan) (8th century BCE)

Israel and Judah were related Iron Age kingdoms of the ancient Levant. The Kingdom of Israel emerged as an important local power by the 9th century BCE before falling to the Neo-Assyrian Empire in 722 BCE. Israel's southern neighbor, the Kingdom of Judah, emerged in the 8th century Grabbe 2008, pp. 2256. and enjoyed a period of prosperity as a client-state of first Assyria and then Babylon before a revolt against the Neo-Babylonian Empire led to its destruction in 586 BCE. Following the fall of Babylon to the Persian king Cyrus the Great in 539 BCE, some Judean exiles returned to Jerusalem, inaugurating the formative period in the development of a distinctive Judahite identity in the Persian province of Yehud. Yehud was absorbed into the subsequent Hellenistic kingdoms that followed the conquests of Alexander the Great, but in the 2nd century BCE the Judaeans revolted against the Hellenist Seleucid Empire and created the Hasmonean kingdom. This, the last nominally independent Judean kingdom, came to an end in 63 BCE with its conquest by Pompey of Rome. With the installation of client kingdoms under the Herodian Dynasty, the Kingdom of Israel was wracked by civil disturbances which culminated in the Jewish Revolt, the destruction of the Temple, the emergence of rabbinical Judaism and Early Christianity. 

==Periods==
*Iron Age I: 12001000
*Iron Age II: 1000586
*Neo-Babylonian: 586539
*Persian: 539332
*Hellenistic: 33253 King 2001, p. xxiii. 

==Sources==
The sources for the history of ancient Israel and Judah can be broadly divided into the biblical narrative (the Hebrew Bible, Deuterocanonical and non-biblical works for the later period) and the archaeological record. The latter can again be divided between epigraphy (written inscriptions, both from Israel and other lands including Mesopotamia and Egypt) and the material record (everything else).

===The Biblical narrative===
The Torah contains "sagas, heroic epics, oral traditions, annals, biographies, narrative histories, novellae, belles lettres, proverbs and wisdom-sayings, poetry, prophecy, apocalyptic, and much more ... the whole finally woven into a composite, highly complex literary fabric sometime in the Hellenistic era." Dever 2001, p. 2. 

===The archaeological record===

In the 1920s, the German scholar Albrecht Alt proposed that an Israelite conquest of Canaan  the story of the book of Joshua  was not supported by the archaeological record. Instead, he proposed that the main biblical idea was still correct, but that the Israelites entered Canaan peacefully instead of through conquest. Later, this compromise was abandoned, and the Israelites were interpreted to be indigenous Canaanites. The revision of Israelite origins has implications for Israelite religion: whereas the Bible had depicted them as monotheists from the beginning, the new thought was that they were polytheists who gave rise to a small and ultimately successful group of monotheistic revolutionaries. Rendsburg, pp.3-5 Gary Rendsburg classifies this point of view as "minimalist," as opposed to a "maximalist" view, which he follows, that sees archaeological evidence as supporting the biblical narrative. Rendsburg, pp.6-7 

Albrecht Alt's view, even if it recognized the Israelites as Canaanites by origin, still treated the post-Conquest biblical story as real history. But eventually that too was challenged. The most radical reconstruction states that the Jews originated as a "mixed multitude" of settlers sent to Jerusalem by the Persians, where they concocted a past for themselves. There are few scholars who now believe this. Rendsburg, pp.5-6 Instead modern studies have revealed that the Israelites emerged from a dramatic social transformation of Canaanite nomads of the central hill country of Canaan around 1200 BCE, with no signs of violent invasion or even of peaceful infiltration of a clearly defined ethnic group from elsewhere. Finkelstein and Silberman (2001) Free Press, New York, p. 107, ISBN 0-684-86912-8 

==Late Bronze Age Background (16001200 BCE)==
The Canaanite god Ba'al, 14th12th century BCE (Louvre museum, Paris)
The eastern Mediterranean seaboard  the Levant  stretches 400 miles north to south from the Taurus Mountains to the Sinai desert, and 70 to 100 miles east to west between the sea and the Arabian desert. Miller 1986, p. 36. The coastal plain of the southern Levant, broad in the south and narrowing to the north, is backed in its southernmost portion by a zone of foothills, the Shephelah; like the plain this narrows as it goes northwards, ending in the promontory of Mount Carmel. East of the plain and the Shephelah is a mountainous ridge, the "hill country of Judah" in the south, the "hill country of Ephraim" north of that, then Galilee and the Lebanon mountains. To the east again lie the steep-sided valley occupied by the Jordan River, the Dead Sea, and the wadi of the Arabah, which continues down to the eastern arm of the Red Sea. Beyond the plateau is the Syrian desert, separating the Levant from Mesopotamia. To the southwest is Egypt, to the northeast Mesopotamia. The location and geographical characteristics of the narrow Levant made the area a battleground among the powerful entities that surrounded it. Coogan 1998, pp. 47. 

Canaan in the Late Bronze Age was a shadow of what it had been centuries earlier: many cities were abandoned, others shrank in size, and the total settled population was probably not much more than a hundred thousand. Finkelstein 2001, p. 78. Settlement was concentrated in cities along the coastal plain and along major communication routes; the central and northern hill country which would later become the biblical kingdom of Israel was only sparsely inhabited Killebrew 2005, pp. 389. although letters from the Egyptian archives indicate that Jerusalem was already a Canaanite city-state recognising Egyptian overlordship. Cahill in Vaughn 1992, pp. 2733. Politically and culturally it was dominated by Egypt, Kuhrt 1995, p. 317. each city under its own ruler, constantly at odds with its neighbours, and appealing to the Egyptians to adjudicate their differences. 

The Canaanite city-state system broke down at the end of the Late Bronze period, Killebrew 2005, pp. 106. and Canaanite culture was then gradually absorbed into that of the Philistines, Phoenicians and Israelites. Golden 2004b, pp. 612. The process was gradual rather than swift: McNutt 1999, p. 47. a strong Egyptian presence continued into the 12th century BCE, and, while some Canaanite cities were destroyed, others continued to exist in Iron I. Golden 2004a, p. 155. 
Israel's history in a graphic content

==Iron Age I (12001000 BCE)==
The Merneptah stele. While alternative translations exist, the majority of biblical archeologists translate a set of hieroglyphs as "Israel", representing the first instance of the name Israel in the historical record.

The name Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah c. 1209 BCE, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is no more." Stager in Coogan 1998, p. 91. This "Israel" was a cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organised state; Dever 2003, p. 206. Archaeologist Paula McNutt says: "It is probably ... during Iron Age I a population began to identify itself as 'Israelite'," differentiating itself from its neighbours via prohibitions on intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and religion. McNutt 1999, pp. 35. 

In the Late Bronze Age there were no more than about 25 villages in the highlands, but this increased to over 300 by the end of Iron I, while the settled population doubled from 20,000 to 40,000. McNutt 1999, pp.46-47. The villages were more numerous and larger in the north, and probably shared the highlands with pastoral nomads who left no remains. McNutt 1999, p. 69. Archaeologists and historians attempting to trace the origins of these villagers have found it impossible to identify any distinctive features that could define them as specifically Israelite  collared-rim jars and four-room houses have been identified outside the highlands and thus cannot be used to distinguish Israelite sites, Miller 1986, p. 72. and while the pottery of the highland villages is far more limited than that of lowland Canaanite sites, it develops typologically out of Canaanite pottery that came before. Killebrew 2005, p. 13. Israel Finkelstein proposed that the oval or circular layout that distinguishes some of the earliest highland sites, and the notable absence of pig bones from hill sites, could be taken as a marker of ethnicity, but others have cautioned that these can be a "common-sense" adaptation to highland life and not necessarily revelatory of origins. Edelman in Brett 2002, p. 46-47. Other Aramaean sites also demonstrate a contemporary absence of pig remains at that time, unlike earlier Canaanite and later Philistine excavations.

In The Bible Unearthed (2001), Finkelstein and Silberman summarised recent studies. They described how, up until 1967, the Israelite heartland in the highlands of western Palestine was virtually an archaeological 'terra incognita'. Since then, the traditional territories of the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh have been covered by intensive surveys. These surveys have revealed the sudden emergence of a new culture contrasting with the Philistine and Canaanite societies existing in the Land of Israel earlier during Iron Age I. This new culture is characterised by the lack of pork remains (whereas pork formed 20% of the Philistine diet in places), an abandonment of the Philistines/Canaanite custom of having highly decorated pottery, and the practice of circumcision. The Israelite ethnic identity had been created, not from the Exodus and a subsequent conquest, but from a transformation of the existing Canaanite-Philistine cultures. Avraham Faust (2009) "How Did Israel Become a People? The Genesis of Israelite Identity. Biblical Archaeology Review 201: pp. 62-69, 92-94 

From then on, over a period of hundreds of years until after the return of the exiles from Babylon, the Canaanites were gradually absorbed by the Israelites and other tribes until after the period of Ezra (~450 BCE) whereafter there is no more biblical record of them. Holy Bible. King James version. Ezra, Chapter 9 Hebrew (see Hebrew language), a dialect of Canaanite, became the language of the hill country and later the valleys and plains. 

Modern scholars therefore see Israel arising peacefully and internally from existing people in the highlands of Canaan. Gnuse 1997, pp.28,31 

==Iron Age II (1000550 BCE)==
A reconstructed Israelite house, 10th7th century BCE. Eretz Israel Museum, Tel Aviv.
Unusually favourable climatic conditions in the first two centuries of Iron Age II brought about an expansion of population, settlements and trade throughout the region. Thompson 1992, p. 408. In the central highlands this resulted in unification in a kingdom with the city of Samaria as its capital, possibly by the second half of the 10th century BCE when an inscription of the Egyptian pharaoh Shoshenq I, the biblical Shishak, records a series of campaigns directed at the area. Mazar in Finkelstein 2007, p. 163. Israel had clearly emerged by the middle of the 9th century BCE, when the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III names "Ahab the Israelite" among his enemies at the battle of Qarqar (853). At this time Israel was apparently engaged in a three-way contest with Damascus and Tyre for control of the Jezreel Valley and Galilee in the north, and with Moab, Ammon and Damascus in the east for control of Gilead; the Mesha stele (c. 830), left by a king of Moab, celebrates his success in throwing off the oppression of the "House of Omri" (i.e., Israel). It bears what is generally thought to be the earliest extra-biblical Semitic reference to the name Yahweh (YHWH), whose temple goods were plundered by Mesha and brought before his own god Kemosh. 
French scholar Andr Lemaire has reconstructed a portion of line 31 of the stele as mentioning the "House of David". Biblical Archaeology Review 1994, pp. 3037 The Tel Dan stele (c. 841) tells of the death of a king of Israel, probably Jehoram, at the hands of a king of Aram Damascus. A century later Israel came into increasing conflict with the expanding neo-Assyrian empire, which first split its territory into several smaller units and then destroyed its capital, Samaria (722). Both the biblical and Assyrian sources speak of a massive deportation of people from Israel and their replacement with settlers from other parts of the empire  such population exchanges were an established part of Assyrian imperial policy, a means of breaking the old power structure  and the former Israel never again became an independent political entity. Lemche 1998, p. 85. 

Judah emerged somewhat later than Israel, probably during the 9th century BCE, but the subject is one of considerable controversy. There are indications that during the 10th and 9th centuries BCE, the southern highlands had been divided between a number of centres, none with clear primacy. Lehman in Vaughn 1992, p. 149. During the reign of Hezekiah, between c. 715 and 686 BCE, a notable increase in the power of the Judean state can be observed. David M. Carr, Writing on the Tablet of the Heart: Origins of Scripture and Literature, Oxford University Press, 2005, 164. This is reflected in archaeological sites and findings, such as the Broad Wall; a defensive city wall in Jerusalem; and Hezekiah's Tunnel, an aqueduct designed to provide Jerusalem with water during an impending siege by the Assyrians led by Sennacherib; and the Siloam Inscription, a lintel inscription found over the doorway of a tomb, has been ascribed to comptroller Shebna. LMLK seals on storage jar handles, excavated from strata in and around that formed by Sennacherib's destruction, appear to have been used throughout Sennacherib's 29-year reign, along with Bullae from sealed documents, some that belonged to Hezekiah himself and others that name his servants; Seal of Amariah Hananiah--Servant of Hezekiah 

King Ahaz's Seal is a piece of reddish-brown clay that belonged to King Ahaz of Judah, who ruled from 732 to 716 BCE. This seal contains not only the name of the king, but the name of his father, King Yehotam. In addition, Ahaz is specifically identified as "king of Judah." The Hebrew inscription, which is set on three lines, reads as follows: "l'hz*y/hwtm*mlk*/yhdh", which translates as "belonging to Ahaz (son of) Yehotam, King of Judah." First Impression: What We Learn from King Ahazs Seal (#m1), by Robert Deutsch, Archaeological Center. 

In the 7th century Jerusalem grew to contain a population many times greater than earlier and achieved clear dominance over its neighbours. Thompson 1992, pp. 4101. This occurred at the same time that Israel was being destroyed by Assyria, and was probably the result of a cooperative arrangement with the Assyrians to establish Judah as an Assyrian vassal controlling the valuable olive industry. Judah prospered as an Assyrian vassal state (despite a disastrous rebellion against Sennacherib), but in the last half of the 7th century BCE Assyria suddenly collapsed, and the ensuing competition between the Egyptian and Neo-Babylonian empires for control of the land led to the destruction of Judah in a series of campaigns between 597 and 582. 

==Babylonian period==
The Ishtar Gate of Babylon
Babylonian Judah suffered a steep decline in both economy and population Grabbe 2004, p. 28. and lost the Negev, the Shephelah, and part of the Judean hill country, including Hebron, to encroachments from Edom and other neighbours. Lemaire in Blenkinsopp 2003, p. 291. Jerusalem, while probably not totally abandoned, was much smaller than previously, and the town of Mizpah in Benjamin in the relatively unscathed northern section of the kingdom became the capital of the new Babylonian province of Yehud Medinata. Davies 2009. (This was standard Babylonian practice: when the Philistine city of Ashkalon was conquered in 604, the political, religious and economic elite not the bulk of the population was banished and the administrative centre shifted to a new location). Lipschits 2005, p. 48. There is also a strong probability that for most or all of the period the temple at Bethel in Benjamin replaced that at Jerusalem, boosting the prestige of Bethel's priests (the Aaronites) against those of Jerusalem (the Zadokites), now in exile in Babylon. Blenkinsopp in Blenkinsopp 2003, pp. 1035. 

The Babylonian conquest entailed not just the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple, but the liquidation of the entire infrastructure which had sustained Judah for centuries. Blenkinsopp 2009, p. 228. The most significant casualty was the state ideology of "Zion theology," Middlemas 2005, pp. 12. the idea that the god of Israel had chosen Jerusalem for his dwelling-place and that the Davidic dynasty would reign there forever. Miller 1986, p. 203. The fall of the city and the end of Davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile community  kings, priests, scribes and prophets  to reformulate the concepts of community, faith and politics. Middlemas 2005, p. 2. The exile community in Babylon thus became the source of significant portions of the Hebrew Bible: Isaiah 4055; Ezekiel; the final version of Jeremiah; the work of the priestly source in the Pentateuch; and the final form of the history of Israel from Deuteronomy to 2 Kings. Middlemas 2005, p. 10. Theologically, the Babylonian exiles were responsible for the doctrines of individual responsibility and universalism (the concept that one god controls the entire world) and for the increased emphasis on purity and holiness. Most significantly, the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a strong sense of Hebrew identity distinct from other peoples, Middlemas 2005, p. 17. with increased emphasis on symbols such as circumcision and Sabbath-observance to sustain that distinction. Bedford 2001, p. 48. 

The concentration of the biblical literature on the experience of the exiles in Babylon disguises the fact that the great majority of the population remained in Judah; for them, life after the fall of Jerusalem probably went on much as it had before. Barstad 2008, p. 109. It may even have improved, as they were rewarded with the land and property of the deportees, much to the anger of the community of exiles remaining in Babylon. Albertz 2003a, p. 92. The assassination around 582 of the Babylonian governor by a disaffected member of the former royal House of David provoked a Babylonian crackdown, possibly reflected in the Book of Lamentations, but the situation seems to have soon stabilised again. Albertz 2003a, pp. 956. Nevertheless, those unwalled cities and towns that remained were subject to slave raids by the Phoenicians and intervention in their internal affairs by Samaritans, Arabs, and Ammonites. Albertz 2003a, p. 96. 

==Persian period==

When Babylon fell to the Persian Cyrus the Great in 539 BCE, Judah (or Yehud medinata, the "province of Yehud") became an administrative division within the Persian empire. Cyrus was succeeded as king by Cambyses, who added Egypt to the empire, incidentally transforming Yehud and the Philistine plain into an important frontier zone. His death in 522 was followed by a period of turmoil until Darius the Great seized the throne in about 521. Darius introduced a reform of the administrative arrangements of the empire including the collection, codification and administration of local law codes, and it is reasonable to suppose that this policy lay behind the redaction of the Jewish Torah. Blenkinsopp 1988, p. 64. After 404 the Persians lost control of Egypt, which became Persia's main rival outside Europe, causing the Persian authorities to tighten their administrative control over Yehud and the rest of the Levant. Lipschits in Lipschits 2006, pp. 869. Egypt was eventually reconquered, but soon afterward Persia fell to Alexander the Great, ushering in the Hellenistic period in the Levant.

Yehud's population over the entire period was probably never more than about 30,000 and that of Jerusalem no more than about 1,500, most of them connected in some way to the Temple. Grabbe 2004, pp. 2930. According to the biblical history, one of the first acts of Cyrus, the Persian conqueror of Babylon, was to commission Jewish exiles to return to Jerusalem and rebuild their Temple, a task which they are said to have completed c. 515. Nodet 1999, p. 25. Yet it was probably not until the middle of the next century, at the earliest, that Jerusalem again became the capital of Judah. Davies in Amit 2006, p. 141. The Persians may have experimented initially with ruling Yehud as a Davidic client-kingdom under descendants of Jehoiachin, Niehr in Becking 1999, p. 231. but by the mid5th century BCE, Yehud had become, in practice, a theocracy, ruled by hereditary high priests, Wylen 1996, p. 25. with a Persian-appointed governor, frequently Jewish, charged with keeping order and seeing that taxes (tribute) were collected and paid. Grabbe 2004, pp. 1545. According to the biblical history, Ezra and Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem in the middle of the 5th century BCE, the former empowered by the Persian king to enforce the Torah, the latter holding the status of governor with a royal commission to restore Jerusalem's walls. Soggin 1998, p. 311. The biblical history mentions tension between the returnees and those who had remained in Yehud, the returnees rebuffing the attempt of the "peoples of the land" to participate in the rebuilding of the Temple; this attitude was based partly on the exclusivism that the exiles had developed while in Babylon and, probably, also partly on disputes over property. Miller 1986, p. 458. During the 5th century BCE, Ezra and Nehemiah attempted to re-integrate these rival factions into a united and ritually pure society, inspired by the prophesies of Ezekiel and his followers. Blenkinsopp 2009, p. 229. 

The Persian era, and especially the period between 538 and 400 BCE, laid the foundations for the Jewish and Christian religions and the beginning of a scriptural canon. Albertz 1994, pp. 4378. Other important landmarks in this period include the replacement of Hebrew as the everyday language of Judah by Aramaic (although Hebrew continued to be used for religious and literary purposes) Kottsieper in Lipschits 2006, pp. 10910. and Darius's reform of the empire's bureaucracy, which may have led to extensive revisions and reorganizations of the Jewish Torah. The Israel of the Persian period consisted of descendants of the inhabitants of the old kingdom of Judah, returnees from the Babylonian exile community, Mesopotamians who had joined them or had been exiled themselves to Samaria at a far earlier period, Samaritans, and others. Becking in Albertz 2003b, p. 19. 

==Hellenistic period==
The Hasmonean kingdom at its largest extent

On the death of Alexander the Great (322), Alexander's generals divided the empire among themselves. Ptolemy I, the ruler of Egypt, seized Yehud Medinata, but his successors lost it in 198 to the Seleucids of Syria. At first, relations between Seleucids and Jews were cordial, but the attempt of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (174163) to impose Hellenic cults on Judea sparked a national rebellion that ended in the expulsion of the Seleucids and the establishment of an independent Jewish kingdom under the Hasmonean dynasty. Some modern commentators see this period also as a civil war between orthodox and hellenized Jews. Hasmonean kings attempted to revive the Judah described in the Bible: a Jewish monarchy ruled from Jerusalem and including all territories once ruled by David and Solomon. In order to carry out this project, the Hasmoneans forcibly converted one-time Moabites, Edomites, and Ammonites to Judaism, as well as the lost kingdom of Israel. Davies 1992, pp. 14950. Some scholars argue that the Hasmonean dynasty institutionalized the Jewish biblical canon. Philip R. Davies in The Canon Debate, page 50: "With many other scholars, I conclude that the fixing of a canonical list was almost certainly the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty." 

In 63 BCE the Roman general Pompey conquered Jerusalem and made the Jewish kingdom a Client state of Rome. In 4039 BCE, Herod the Great was appointed King of the Jews by the Roman Senate, and in 6 CE the last ethnarch of Judea was deposed by the emperor Augustus, his territories combined with Idumea and Samaria and annexed as Iudaea Province under direct Roman administration. Ben-Sasson 1976, p. 246. The name Judea (Iudaea) ceased to be used by Greco-Romans after the revolt of Simon Bar Kochba in 135 CE; the area was henceforth called Syria Palaestina (Greek: , Palaistin; Latin: Palaestina).

==Religion==

===Iron Age Yahwism===
Israelite monotheism evolved gradually out of pre-existing beliefs and practices of the ancient world. Gnuse 1997, pp. 623. The religion of the Israelites of Iron Age I, like the Canaanite faith from which it evolved Tubbs, Jonathan (2006)"The Canaanites" (BBC Books) and other ancient Near Eastern religions, was based on a cult of ancestors and worship of family gods (the "gods of the fathers"). Van der Toorn 1996, p.4. Its major deities were not numerous  El, Asherah, and Yahweh, with Baal as a fourth god, and perhaps Shamash (the sun) in the early period. Smith 2002, p. 57. By the time of the early Hebrew kings, El and Yahweh had become fused and Asherah did not continue as a separate state cult, although she continued to be popular at a community level until Persian times. Dever (2005), p. Yahweh, later the national god of both Israel and Judah, seems to have originated in Edom and Midian in southern Canaan and may have been brought north to Israel by the Kenites and Midianites at an early stage. Van der Toorn 1999, p. 9113. After the monarchy emerged at the beginning of Iron Age II, kings promoted their family god, Yahweh, as the god of the kingdom, but beyond the royal court, religion continued to be both polytheistic and family-centered as it was also for other societies in the ancient Near East. Van der Toorn 1996, p. 1812. 

There is a general consensus among scholars that the first formative event in the emergence of the distinctive religion described in the Bible was triggered by the destruction of Israel by Assyria in c. 722 BCE. Refugees came south to Judah, bringing with them laws and a prophetic tradition of Yahweh. This religion was subsequently adopted by the landowners, who in 640 BCE placed on the throne the eight-year-old Josiah. Judah at this time was a vassal state of Assyria, but Assyrian power collapsed in the 630s, and around 622, Josiah and the Deuteronomists launched a bid for independence expressed as loyalty to "Yahweh alone" and in the law-code in the Book of Deuteronomy, written as a treaty between Judah and Yahweh to replace the vassal-treaty with Assyria. Dunn and Rogerson, pp.153154 

The earliest Israelite inscription found alluding to Yahveh as the redeemer of Jerusalem dates to the 7th century BCE. Khirbet Beit Lei also contains the oldest known Hebrew writing of the word "Jerusalem" as the inscription, "I am YHWH thy Lord. I will accept the cities of Judah and I will redeem Jerusalem," and "Absolve us oh merciful God. Absolve us oh YHWH." 

According to the Deuteronomists, the treaty with Yahweh would enable the god to preserve both the city and the king in return for the people's worship and obedience to the legal code. The destruction of Jerusalem, its Temple, and the Davidic dynasty by Babylon in 587/586 BCE was deeply thought-provoking and led to revisions of the national mythos. The history books, Joshua and Judges to Samuel and Kings, interpreted the Babylonian destruction as divinely-ordained punishment for the failure of the Hebrew kings to worship Yahweh to the exclusion of all other deities. 

=== Second Temple Judaism ===

The Second Temple period (520 BCE  70 CE) differed in significant ways from what had gone before. Avery Peck, p.58 A number of scholars believe that Monotheism emerged among the priests of the Temple establishment during the seventh and sixth centuries BCE, as did beliefs regarding angels and demons. Grabbe (2004), pp. 243-244 It was at this time that the Torah was written, circumcision and Sabbath-observance became symbols of Jewish identity, and the institution of the synagogue became increasingly important. Avery Peck, p.59 

==See also==
*Biblical archaeology
*Chronology of the Bible
*Intertestamental period
*History of the Southern Levant
*History of Israel
*Jew
*Jewish diaspora
*Old Testament
*Tanakh
*United Monarchy
*History of the Jews in Iran
*History of the Jews in the Roman Empire
*History of the Jews in Egypt
*Lachish relief

==References==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
* 
* Liverani, Mario (2005). Israel's History and the History of Israel, London, Equinox.
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*

==Further reading==

*Avery-Peck, Alan, and Neusner, Jacob, (eds), "The Blackwell Companion to Judaism (Blackwell, 2003)
*Boadt, Lawrence, "Reading the Old Testament: An Introduction" (Paulist Press, 1984)
*Brettler, Marc Zvi, "The Creation of History in Ancient Israel" (Routledge, 1995), and also review at Dannyreviews.com
*Cook, Stephen L., "The social roots of biblical Yahwism" (Society of Biblical Literature, 2004)
*Day, John (ed), "In search of pre-exilic Israel: proceedings of the Oxford Old Testament Seminar" (T&T Clark International, 2004)
*Gravett, Sandra L., "An Introduction to the Hebrew Bible: A Thematic Approach" (Westminster John Knox Press, 2008)
*Grisanti, Michael A., and Howard, David M., (eds), "Giving the Sense:Understanding and Using Old Testament Historical Texts" (Kregel Publications, 2003)
*Hess, Richard S., "Israelite religions: an archaeological and biblical survey" Baker, 2007)
*Kavon, Eli, "Did the Maccabees Betray the Hanukka Revolution?", The Jerusalem Post, 26 December 2005
*Lemche, Neils Peter, "The Old Testament between theology and history: a critical survey" (Westminster John Knox Press, 2008)
*Levine, Lee I., "Jerusalem: portrait of the city in the second Temple period (538 B.C.E.70 C.E.)" (Jewish Publication Society, 2002)
*Na'aman, Nadav, "Ancient Israel and its neighbours" (Eisenbrauns, 2005)
*Penchansky, David, "Twilight of the gods: polytheism in the Hebrew Bible" (Westminster John Knox Press, 2005)
*Provan, Iain William, Long, V. Philips, Longman, Tremper, "A Biblical History of Israel" (Westminster John Knox Press, 2003)
*Russell, Stephen C., "Images of Egypt in early biblical literature" (Walter de Gruyter, 2009)
*Sparks, Kenton L., "Ethnicity and identity in ancient Israel" (Eisenbrauns, 1998)
*Stackert, Jeffrey, "Rewriting the Torah: literary revision in Deuteronomy and the holiness code" (Mohr Siebeck, 2007)
*Vanderkam, James, "An introduction to early Judaism" (Eerdmans, 2001)
*Velazquez, Efrain, "The Persian Period and the Origins of 'Israel': Beyond the Myths", (Bible and Interpretation, July 2009)
*Library of latest modern books of biblical studies and biblical criticism



[[List of kings of Persia]]

The following is a list of kings and queens of Main Dynasties of ancient Persia, which includes all of the empires ruling over geographical Iran and territories lost and their rulers.
For more comprehensive lists of kings, queens, sub-kings and sub-queens of Iran please see:
*List of rulers of Pre-Achaemenid kingdoms of Iran
*List of rulers of Elam
*List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

== Awan Dynasty (c. 26002270 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Awan Dynasty Awan's geographical site is unknown. But it is very probable that it was near Poshtkuh of Lorestan. The first three kings of Awan were also kings of Mesopotamia. Legrain, 1922; Cameron, 1936; The Cambridge History of Iran; Hinz, 1972; The Cambridge Ancient History; Majidzadeh, 1991; Majidzadeh, 1997; Vallat \"Elam ...\", 1998. (c. 26002270 BC) 
 Unnamed King of Awan ?? c. 2580 BC ? ? Contemporary with Ur-Nungal king of Uruk Cameron, 1936. 
 ...Lu King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Kur-Ishshak King of Awan ?? ? c. 2550 BC ? 36 years. contemporary with Lugal-Anne-Mundu king of Adab & Ur-Nanshe king of Lagash 
 Peli King of Awan ?? c. 2500 BC ? ? 
 Tata I King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Ukku-Tanhish King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Hishutash King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Shushun-Tarana King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Napi-Ilhush King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Kikku-Siwe-Temti King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Hishep-Ratep I King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Luh-Ishshan King of Awan ?c. 2325 BC ? c. 2325 BC Son of Hishep-Ratep I 
 Hishep-Ratep II King of Awan ?? c. 2325 BC ? Son of Luh-Ishshan 
 Emahsini Potts, 1999. King of Awan ?2311 BC c. 2315 BC 2311 BC 
 Helu King of Awan ?? ? ? ? 
 Hita King of Awan ?? c. 2270 BC c. 2270 BC ? contemporary of Naram-Sin king of Akkad 
 Kutik-Inshushinak Hinz, 1972. King of Awan ?? c. 2100 BC c. 2100 BC Son of Shinpi-hish-huk contemporary of Ur-Nammu king of Ur. Susa conquered by Ur troops in 2078 and 2016 BC. After him, kings of Simashki took the leadership of Elam. 
 

== Simashki Dynasty (c. 2070c. 1975 BC) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Simashki Dynasty Some archaeologists have suggested that Simashki was located in the north of Elam and Anshan near modern Isfahan. Cameron, 1936; The Cambridge History of Iran; Hinz, 1972; The Cambridge Ancient History; Majidzadeh, 1991; Majidzadeh, 1997; Vallat \"Elam ...\", 1998. (c. 2070c. 1975 BC) 
 Gir-Namme I King of Simashki ?? ? ? ? 
 Tazitta I King of Simashki ?? c. 2040 BC c. 2037 BC ? 
 Eparti I King of Simashki ?? ? c. 2033 BC ? 
 Gir-Namme II King of Simashki ?? c. 2033 BC ? ? 
 Tazitta II King of Simashki ?? ? ? ? 
 Lurak-Luhhan King of Simashki ?2022 BC c. 2028 BC 2022 BC ? 
 Hutran-Temti King of Simashki ?? ? ? ? 
 Indattu-Inshushinak I King of Simashki ?2016 BC ? 2016 BC Son of Hutran-Temti 
 Kindattu King of Simashki ?? Before c. 2006 BC After c. 2005 BC Son of Tan-Ruhuratir Conqueror of Ur 
 Indattu-Inshushinak II King of Simashki ?? c. 1980 BC ? Son of Pepi Cont. Shu-ilishu king of Isin & Bilalama king of Eshnunna 
 Tan-Ruhuratir I King of Simashki ?? c. 1965 BC ? Son of Indattu-Inshushinnak II Cont. Iddin-Dagan king of Isin 
 Indattu-Inshushinak III King of Simashki ?? ? ? Son of Tan-Ruhuratir I More than 3 years 
 

== Epartid Dynasty (c. 1975c. 1500 BC) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Epartid Dynasty Cameron, 1936; The Cambridge History of Iran; Hinz, 1972; The Cambridge Ancient History; Majidzadeh, 1991; Majidzadeh, 1997; Vallat, \"Elam ...\", 1998. (c. 1975c. 1500 BC) 
 Eparti II King of Simashki, king of Anshan & Susa, Sukkalmah ?? c. 1973 BC ? Married with a daughter of Iddin-Dagan king of Isin in 1973 BC. Vallat, \"Elam ...\", 1998. cont. Iddin-Dagan king of Isin 
 Shilhaha King of Anshan & Susa, Sukkalmah ?? ? ? Son of Eparti II 
 Kuk-Nashur I Sukkalmah ?? ? ? son (ruhushak) \"Ruhushak\" means son of sister but probably it refers to a dynastical marriage between siblings. See Vallat, \"Elam ...\", 1998. of Shilhaha 
 Atta-hushu Sukkal and Ippir of Susa, Shepherd of the people of Susa, Shepherd of Inshushinak ?After c. 1894 BC ?1928 BC After c. 1894 BC Son of Kuk-Nashur I (?) 
 Tetep-Mada Shepherd of the people of Susa ?? After c. 1890 BC ? Son of Kuk-Nashur I (?) 
 Palar-Ishshan Sukkalmah ?? ? ? ? 
 Kuk-Sanit ?? ? ? Son of Palar-Ishshan (?) 
 Kuk-Kirwash Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Elam and Simashki and Susa ?? ? ? Son of Lan-Kuku & nephew of Palar-Ishshan 
 Tem-Sanit ?? ? ? Son of Kuk-Kirwash 
 Kuk-Nahhunte ?? ? ? Son of Kuk-Kirwash 
 Kuk-Nashur II Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Elam, Sukkal of Elam and Simashki and Susa ?? ? ? Son of Kuk-Nahhunte (?) 
 Shirukduh Sukkalmah ?? c. 1790 BC ? ? Cont. Shamshi-Adad I king of Assyria 
 Shimut-Wartash I ?? ? ? Son of Shirukduh 
 Siwe-Palar-Hupak Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Susa, Prince of Elam ?? Before c. 1765 BC After c. 1765 BC Son of Shirukduh 
 Kuduzulush I Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Susa ?? ? ? Son of Shirukduh 
 Kutir-Nahhunte I Sukkalmah ?? c. 1710 BC ? Son of Kuduzulush I 
 Atta-Merra-Halki ?? ? ? Son of Kuduzulush I (?) 
 Tata II Sukkal ?? ? ? Brother of Atta-Merra-Halki 
 Lila-Irtash ?? ? ? Son of Kuduzulush I 
 Temti-Agun Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Susa ?? ? ? Son of Kutir-Nahhunte I 
 Kutir-Shilhaha Sukkalmah, Sukkal ?? ? ? Son of Temti-Agun 
 Kuk-Nashur III Sukkal of Elam, Sukkal of Susa ?? Before c. 1646 BC After c. 1646 BC Son of Kutir-Shilhaha 
 Temti-Raptash ?? ? ? Son of Kutir-Shilhaha 
 Shimut-Wartash II ?? ? ? son of Kuk-Nashur III 
 Shirtuh King of Susa ?? ? ? Son of Kuk-Nashur III 
 Kuduzulush II Sukkalmah, King of Susa ?? ? ? Son of Shimut-Wartash II 
 Tan-Uli Sukkalmah, Sukkal ?? ? ? ? 
 Temti-Halki Sukkalmah, Sukkal of Elam and Simashki and Susa ?? ? ? Son of Tan-Uli 
 Kuk-Nashur IV Sukkalmah ?? ? ? Son of Tan-Uli 
 Kutik-Matlat ?? c. 1500 BC ? Son of Tan-Uli 
 

==Kidinuid Dynasty (c. 1500c. 1370 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Kidinuid Dynasty (c. 1500c. 1370 BC) 
 Kidinu King of Anshan & Susa ?? 15th century BC ? ? 
 Inshushinak-Sunkir-Nappipir King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? ? 
 Tan-Ruhuratir II King of Anshan & Susa ?? 15th century BC ? ? 
 Shalla King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? ? 
 Temti-Ahar King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1370 BC ? ? Cont. Kadashman-Enlil I Kassite king of Babylon 
 

== Igehalkid Dynasty (c. 1400c. 1200 BC) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Igehalkid Dynasty (c. 1400c. 1200 BC) 
 Pahir-Ishshan I King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1390 BC ? Son of Ige-Halki Cont. Kurigalzu I Kassite king of Babylon 
 Kidin-Hutran I King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Pahir-Ishshan I Vallat, Francois. Elam: The History of Elam. 
 Attar-Kittah II King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Ige-Halki 
 Humban-Numena I King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1370 BC ? Son of Attar-Kittah II cont. Burna-Buriash II Kassite king of Babylon 
 Untash-Napirisha or Untash-Humban 80px King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1340 BC ? Son of Humban-Numena I 
 Kidin-Hutran II King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Untash-Naprisha 
 Napirisha-Untash or Humban-Untash King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Kidin-Hutran II 
 Pahir-Ishshan II King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? ? 
 Unpatar-Napirisha or Unpatar-Humban King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Pahir-Ishshan II 
 Kidin-Hutran III King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1224 BC c. 1217 BC Son of Pahir-Ishshan II contemporary of Enlil-nadin-shumi & Adad-shuma-iddina Kassite kings of Babylon 
 

==Shutrukid Dynasty (c. 1200c. 1000 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Shutrukid Dynasty (c. 1200  c. 1000 BC) 
 Hallutush-Inshushinak King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1200 BC ? ? 
 Shutruk-Nahhunte I King of Anshan & Susa ?? Before c. 1158 BC After c. 1158 BC Son of Hallutush-Inshushinak 
 Kutir-Nahhunte II King of Anshan & Susa ?? Before c. 1155 BC After c. 1155 BC Son of Shutruk-Nahhunte I 
 Shilhak-Inshushinak I King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? Son of Shutruk-Nahhunte I 
 Hutelutush-Inshushinak King of Anshan & Susa ?? before c. 1110 BC after c. 1110 BC Son of Kutir-Nahhunte II 
 Shilhina-Hamru-Lakamar King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 1110 BC ? Son of Shilhak-Inshushinak I 
 Humban-Numena II King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 11th century BC ? ? 
 Shutruk-Nahhunte II King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 11th century BC ? Son of Humban-Numena II 
 Shutur-Nahhunte I King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 11th century BC ? Son of Humban-Numena II 
 Akshir-Shimut King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? ? 
 Akshir-Nahhunte King of Anshan & Susa ?? ? ? ? 
 Kara-Indash King of Elam ?? ? ? ? 
 

== Neo-Elamites (c. 821  c. 640) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Neo-Elamites (c. 821  c. 640) Cameron, 1936; The Cambridge History of Iran; Hinz, 1972; The Cambridge Ancient History; Majidzadeh, 1991; Vallat, 1995; Majidzadeh, 1997; Vallat, \"Elam ...\", 1998; Reade, 2000; Henkelman, 2003; Tavernier, 2004. 
 Unknown King of Elam ?? c. 821 BC c. 821 BC ? cont. Shamshi-Adad V king of Assyria 
 Humban-Tahrah I King of Elam ?743 BC ? 743 BC ? 
 Humban-Nikash I King of Elam ?717 BC 743 BC 717 BC Son of Humban-Tahrah I 
 Shutur-Nahhunte II King of Anshan & Susa ?699 BC 717 BC 699 BC Son (Ruhushak) of Humban-Nikash I 
 Hallushu-Inshushinak King of Anshan & Susa ?c. 693 BC 699 BC c. 693 BC Brother of Shutur-Nahhunte II 
 Kutir-Nahhunte III King of Anshan & Susa ?c 692 BC c. 693 BC c. 692 BC Son of Hallushu-Inshushinak 
 Humban-Numena III King of Anshan & Susa ?c. 688 BC c 692 BC c. 688 BC Son of Hallushu-Inshushinak 
 Humban-Haltash I King of Anshan & Susa ?c. 681 BC c. 688 BC c. 681 BC Son of Humban-Numena III (?) 
 Humban-Haltash II King of Anshan & Susa ?c. 675 BC c. 681 BC c. 675 BC Son of Humban-Haltash I 
 Urtak-Inshushinak King of Anshan & Susa ?663 BC c. 675 BC 663 BC Brother of Humban-Haltash II 
 Temti-Humban-Inshushinak I King of Anshan & Susa ?c. 653 BC 663 BC c. 653 BC Brother of Urtak-Inshushinak 
 Humban-Nikash II King of Anshan & Susa ?651 BC c. 653 BC 651 BC Son of Urtak-Inshushinak 
 Tammaritu King of Anshan & Susa ?after 645/4 BC 652 BC 649 BC Son of Humban-Hapua son of Urtak-Inshushinak 
 Indabibi King of Anshan & Susa ?after July 648 BC 649 BC after July 648 BC ? 
 Humban-Haltash III King of Anshan & Susa ?after 645/4 BC after July 648 BC 645/4 BC Son of Atta-hamiti-Inshushinak He was defeated and then captured by Assyrians. 
 Tammaritu King of Anshan & Susa ?after 645/4 BC 647 BC 647 BC Son of Humban-Hapua & Urtak-Inshushinak 
 Humban-Nikash III King of Anshan & Susa ?after 645/4 BC 647 BC 647 BC Son of Atta-Merra-Halki 
 Umhuluma King of Anshan & Susa ?? 647 BC 647 BC ? 
 Indattu-Inshushinak IV King of Anshan & Susa ?? 647 BC c. 646 BC ? 
 Humban-Hapua King of Anshan & Susa ?? 647 BC 647 BC ? 
 Pa'e King of Anshan & Susa ?after 645/4 BC autumn 646 after 645/4 BC ? 
 Shutur-Nahhunte III King of Anshan & Susa ?? c. 646 BC ? Son of Indattu-Inshushinak IV After him, kingdom of Anshan transferred to Achaemenids 
 

== Median Empire (674652 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Median Empire (674652 BC) Cameron, 1936; Dyakonov 1956; The Cambridge History of Iran 
 Phraortes Xarita (?) King of Media ?652 BC 674 BC 652 BC Son of Deioces Killed in battle with Assyrians and Scythians. Domination of Scythia 652625 BC 
 Kingdom of Scythia (652625 BC) 
 Madea King of Scythia ?625 BC 652 BC 625 BC Son of Partatua King of Scythia 
 Median Empire (625535 BC) 
 Cyaxares Huvaxara King of Media ?585 BC 625 BC 585 BC Son of Xarita 
 Astyages / Ahasuerus Ishtuvigu King of Media ?585 BC 585 BC 550 BC Son of Cyaxares Deposed and later killed 
 Cyaxares II / Darius King of Media 600?535? BC 550 BC 535? BC Son of Astyages Died at Babylon of old age. Co-reigned with Cyrus the Great 
 

== Achaemenid Empire (550330 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Achaemenid Empire (550330 BC) 
 Cyrus the Great 80px The Great King, King of Kings, King of Anshan, King of Media, King of Babylon, King of Sumer and Akkad, King of the Four Corners of the World 600530 BC 559 BC 530 BC Son of Cambyses I king of Anshan and Mandana daughter of Astyages King of Anshan from 559 BC. Killed in battle with Massagetes 
 Cambyses 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?521 BC 530 BC 522 BC Son of Cyrus the Great Died while en route to put down a rebellion. 
 Bardiya Gaumata (?) The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?522 BC 522 BC 522 BC Son of Cyrus the Great (possibly an imposter claiming to be Bardiya) Killed by Persian aristocrats 
 Darius I 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt 550486 BC 522 BC 486 BC Son of Hystaspes 
 Xerxes I 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt 519465 BC 485 BC 465 BC Son of Darius I Killed 
 Artaxerxes I 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?424 BC 465 BC 424 BC Son of Xerxes I 
 Xerxes II Artaxerxes The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?424 BC 424 BC 424 BC Son of Artaxerxes I Only recognised in Persia itself, killed by Sogdianus 
 ? Sogdianus The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?423 BC 424 BC 423 BC Son of Artaxerxes I Only recognised in Persia and Elam, killed by Darius II 
 Darius II Ochus 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?404 BC 424 BC 404 BC Son of Artaxerxes I 
 Artaxerxes II Arsaces 80px The Great King, King of Kings 436358 BC 404 BC 358 BC Son of Darius II 
 Artaxerxes III Ochus 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?338 BC 358 BC 338 BC Son of Artaxerxes II Killed 
 Artaxerxes IV Arses The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt ?336 BC 338 BC 336 BC Son of Artaxerxes III Killed 
 Darius III Artashata 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Pharaoh of Egypt 380330 BC 336 BC 330 BC Son of Artaxerxes IV Killed by Artaxerxes V 
 Artaxerxes V Bessus 80px The Great King, King of Kings ?329 BC 330 BC 329 BC Probably a descendant of Artaxerxes II Killed by Alexander III 
 

== Macedonian Empire (330309 BC)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Macedonian Empire (330312 BC) 
 Alexander the Great 80px King 356  13 June 323 BC 330 BC 323 BC Son of Philip II of Macedonia King of Macedonia from 336 BC as Alexander III 
 Philip III Arrhidaeus King c. 359  317 BC June 323 BC 317 BC Son of Philip II of Macedonia Killed by Olympias 
 Alexander IV King Sept. 323  309 BC Sept. 323 BC 309 BC Son of Alexander III King of Macedonia as Alexander IV until 309 BC. Killed by Cassander son of Antipater 
 Perdiccas Regent ?321 BC June 323 BC 321 BC Regent for Alexander IV & Philip III, Prince of Orestis 
 Antipater Regent 398?319 BC 321 BC 319 BC Son of Iollas Regent for Alexander IV & Philip III 
 Polyperchon Regent 394303 BC 319 BC 316 BC Son of Simmias Regent for Alexander IV & Philip III 
 Antigonus Monophthalmus 80px King 382301 BC 312 BC 301 BC Son of Philip of Elymiotis Ruler over Anatolia from 323, adding Syria and the east in 317. King from 306 BC until 301 BC. Killed at the Battle of Corupedium 
 

== Seleucid Empire (311129 BC) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Seleucid dynasty (311129 BC) 
 Seleucus I Nicator 80px King c. 358281 BC 311 BC 281 BC Son of Antiochus son of Seleucus Assumed title of \"King\" from 306 BC. 
 Antiochus I Soter 80px King ?261 BC 281 BC 261 BC Son of Seleucus I Co-ruler from 291 
 Antiochus II Theos 80px King 286246 BC 261 BC 246 BC Son of Antiochus I 
 Seleucus II Callinicus 80px King ?225 BC 246 BC 225 BC Son of Antiochus II 
 Seleucus III Ceraunus Alexander 80px King c. 243223 BC 225 BC 223 BC Son of Seleucus II 
 Antiochus III the Great 80px Great King c. 241187 BC 223 BC 187 BC Son of Seleucus II 
 Seleucus IV Philopator 80px King ?175 BC 187 BC 175 BC Son of Antiochus III 
 Antiochus IV Epiphanes 80px King c. 215163 BC 175 BC 163 BC Son of Antiochus III Killed in Elymais 
 Antiochus V Eupator 80px King c. 172161 BC 163 BC 161 BC Son of Antiochus IV 
 Demetrius I Soter 80px King 185150 BC 161 BC 150 BC Son of Seleucus IV 
 Alexander Balas 80px King ?146 BC 150 BC 146 BC Purported son of Antiochus IV 
 Demetrius II Nicator 80px King ?139 BC 146 BC 139 BC Son of Demetrius I Defeated and captured by Parthians. He married Rhodogune daughter of Mithridates I 
 Antiochus VI Dionysus 80px King 148138 BC 145 BC 142 BC Son of Alexander III. Jointly with Demetrius II. 
 Antiochus VII Sidetes 80px King ?129 BC 139 BC 129 BC Son of Demetrius I Killed in battle with Phraates II 
 

==Parthian Empire (247 BC  AD 228)==
The Seleucid Dynasty gradually lost control of Persia. In 253, the Arsacid Dynasty established itself in Parthia. The Parthians gradually expanded their control, until by the mid-2nd century BC, the Seleucids had completely lost control of Persia. Control of eastern territories was permanently lost by Antiochus VII in 129 BC.
For more comprehensive lists of kings, queens, sub-kings and sub-queens of this Era see:
*List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Arsacid dynasty (247 BC  228 AD) 
 Arsaces I Tiridates I or Arsaces 80px King, Karen, Autocrator ?211 BC 247 BC 211 BC A descendant of Arsaces son of Phriapatius who was probably son of Artaxerxes II 
 Arsaces II Arsaces 80px ?185 BC 211 BC 185 BC Assar, 2004.Assar, 2005. Assar, \"Moses of Choren & the Early Parthian Chronology\", 2006. Son of Arsaces I 
 Arsaces III Phriapatius 80px ?170 BC 185 BC 170 BC Grandson of Tiridates I 
 Arsaces IV Phraates I 80px ?167 BC 170 BC 167 BC Ghashghai, H.R., \"The successors of Mithridates II\" Son of Phriapatius 
 Arsaces V Mithridates I 80px The Great King, Theos, Theopator, Philhellene ?132 BC 167 BC 132 BC Assar, G.R.F., \"A Revised Parthian Chronology of the Period 165-91 B.C.\" Ghashghai, H.R., \"The successors of Mithridates II\" Son of Phriapatius 
 Arsaces VI Phraates II 80px The Great King, Philopator, Theopator, Nikephoros ?127 BC 132 BC 127 BC Son of Mithridates I Killed in battle with Scythians 
 Arsaces VII Artabanus I 80px King ?126 BC 127 BC 126 BC Son of Phriapatius Killed in battle with Tocharians 
 Arsaces VIII Vologases (I) The Great King, Theopator, Philadelphos, Philhellene, Epiphanes ?122 BC 126 BC 122 BC Son of Phriapatius He was the first Arsacid king of Media, Arran and Iberia 
 Arsaces IX Artabanus (II) The Great King, King of kings, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?121 BC 122 BC 121 BC Son of Artabanus I Killed in battle with Medians 
 Arsaces X Mithridates II 80px The Great King, The Great King of Kings, Epiphanes, Soter ?91 BC 121 BC Assar, G.R.F., \"A Revised Parthian Chronology of the Period 165-91 B.C.\" 91 BC Son of Artabanus I 
 Arsaces XI Gotarzes I 80px The Great King, Epiphanes, Philhellene, Euergetes, Autocrator ?87 BC 91 BC 87 BC Son of Mithridates II 
 Arsaces XII Artabanus (III) The Great King, Theopator, Nicator ?77? BC 91 BC 77? BC Son of Vologases (I) 
 Arsaces XIII Mithridates (III) The Great King, The Great King of Kings, Dikaios, Euergetes, Philhellene, Autocrator, Philopator, Epiphanes ?67 BC 88 BC 67 BC Son of Mithridates II 
 Arsaces XIV Orodes I 80px The Great King, Euergetes, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?75 BC 80 BC 75 BC Son of Mithridates II 
 Arsaces XV Sanatruces I 80px The Great King, Theopator, Euergetes, Epiphanes, Philhellene 15770 BC 77 BC 70 BC Son of Vologases (I) 
 Arsaces XVI ? The Great King, Theopator, Euergetes, Epiphanes, Philhellene, Eusebes ?66 BC 77 BC 66 BC ? The most obscure major monarch of the first millennium BC. Nothing about him is currently known. 
 Arsaces XVII Phraates III 80px The Great King, Theos, Euergetes, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?57 BC 70 BC 57 BC Son of Sanatruces I Killed by Orodes II 
 Arsaces XVIII ? The Great King, Philopator, Euergetes, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?63 BC 66 BC 63 BC Son of Arsaces XVI The second most obscure monarch of the first millennium BC, nothing about him is known. 
 Arsaces XIX Mithridates III (or IV) 80px The Great King, The Great King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Theos, Eupator, Theopator, Philhellene ?54 BC 65 BC 54 BC Son of Phraates III Killed by Orodes II 
 Arsaces XX Orodes II 80px King of Kings, Philopator, Eupator, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene, Ktistes ?38 BC 57 BC 38 BC Son of Phraates III Killed by Phraates IV 
 Arsaces XXI Pacorus I 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?38 BC 50 BC 38 BC Son of Orodes II Killed in battle with Romans 
 Arsaces XXII Phraates IV 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?2 BC 38 2 BC Son of Orodes II Killed by Musa 
 Arsaces XXIII Tiridates II King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene, Autocrator, Philoromaeos ?after 23 BC 30 BC 25 BC Probably a descendant of Mithridates (III) Deposed and went to Rome 
 Arsaces XXIV Mithridates (V) Josephus Flavius, Antiquities of the Jews, Book XVI, Ch.8.4 ? ?? BC 12 BC 9 BC Probably a descendant of Mithridates (III) 
 Musa Musa 80px Queen of Queens, Thea, Urania ?4? AD 2 BC 4 AD Queen of Phraates IV 
 Arsaces XXV Phraates V 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?4 AD 2 BC 4 AD Son of Phraates IV & Musa Deposed and went to Rome 
 Arsaces XXVI Orodes III 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?6 4 6 Probably a descendant of Mithridates (III) Killed by Parthian aristocrats 
 Arsaces XXVII Vonones I 80px The Great King, King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene, Nikephorus ?19 8 12 Son of Phraates IV Deposed and went to Rome. Later, He was killed by Romans. 
 Arsaces XXVIII Artabanus III 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?40 10 40 Probably a descendant of Mithridates (III) 
 Arsaces XXIX Tiridates III ? ?? 35 36 Probably a descendant of Tiridates II Deposed and went to Rome 
 Arsaces XXX Cinnamus ? ?? 37 37 Son of Artabanus III Abdicated 
 Arsaces XXXI Gotarzes II 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene 1151 40  51 Son of Artabanus III 
 Arsaces XXXII Vardanes I 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?46 40 46 Son of Artabanus III Killed by Gotarzes II 
 Arsaces XXXIII Vonones II 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?51 c. 45 51 
 Arsaces XXXIV Mithridates (VI) Tacitus, The Annals, 11.10 ? ?? 49 50 Son of Vonones II Deposed and mutilated by Gotarzes II 
 Arsaces XXXV Vologases I (or II) 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene, The Lord ?77 51 77 Son of Vonones II 
 Arsaces XXXVI Vardanes II King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?? 55 58 Son of Vologases I (or II) Deposed 
 Arsaces XXXVII Vologases II (or III) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?? 77 89/90 Probably son of Vologases I 
 Arsaces XXXVIII Pacorus II 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?115 77 115 Son of Vonones II 
 Arsaces XXXIX Artabanus IV King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?? 80 81 Probably son of Artabanus III 
 Arsaces XL Osroes I 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?130 89/90 130 Probably son of Vologases II (or III) 
 Arsaces XLI Vologases III (or IV) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?148 105 148 ? 
 Arsaces XLII Mithridates IV (or VII) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?c. 145 115 c. 145 Brother of Osroes I Killed in battle with Romans 
 Arsaces XLIII Parthamaspates 80px King of Kings, Euergetes, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?after 123 116 117 Son of Osroes I Deposed and went to Rome 
 Arsaces XLIV See: Unknown King (III) (c. A.D. 140) Sanatruces II King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?c. 145 c. 145 c. 145 son of Mithridates IV (or VII) Killed in battle with Romans 
 Arsaces XLV Vologases IV (or V) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?191 148 191 Son of Mithridates IV (or VII) 
 Arsaces XLVI Vologases V (or VI) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?208 191 208 Son of Vologases IV (or V) 
 Arsaces XLVII Osroes II King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?? c. 190 c. 195 Probably son of Vologases IV (or V) 
 Arsaces XLVIII Vologases VI (or VII) 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene 181228 208 228 Son of Vologases V (or VI) Killed by Ardashir I 
 Arsaces XLIX Artabanus V 80px King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?226 213 226 Son of Vologases V (or VI) Killed by Ardashir I 
 Arsaces L Tiridates IV See: Tiridates III (c. A.D. 224  228?) King of Kings, Dikaios, Epiphanes, Philhellene ?? 217 222 Son of Vologases IV (or V) He was also king of Armenia 
 

== Sasanian Empire (224651) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 House of Sasan 
 Ardashir I 80px Shahanshah In Persian it means \"King of Kings\" 180  February 242 28 April 224 February 242 Son of Papak, who was son of Sasan 
 Shapur I 80px Shahanshah 215  May 270 12 April 240 May 270 Son of Ardashir I 
 Hormizd I Hormozd-Ardashir 80px Shahanshah, Wuzurg Armananshah \"The great king of Armenians\" ?June 271 May 270 June 271 Son of Shapur I 
 Bahram I 80px Shahanshah, Gilanshah ?September 274 June 271 September 274 Son of Shapur I 
 Bahram II 80px Shahanshah ?293 September 274 293 Son of Bahram I 
 Bahram III 80px Shahanshah, Sakanshah ?293 293 293 Son of Bahram II Deposed 
 Narseh I 80px Shahanshah, Wuzurg Armananshah ?302 293 302 Son of Shapur I 
 Hormizd II 80px Shahanshah ?309 302 309 Son of Narseh I Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Adhur Narseh Shahanshah ?309 309 309 Son of Hormizd II Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Shapur II 80px Shahanshah, Dh al-aktf \"The penetrator of the shoulders\" 309  379 309 379 Son of Hormizd II 
 Ardashir II 80px Shahanshah ?383 379 383 Son of Shapur II 
 Shapur III 80px Shahanshah ?Dec. 388 383 Dec. 388 Son of Shapur II Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Bahram IV 80px Shahanshah, Kirmanshah ?399 Dec. 388 399 Son of Shapur II 
 Yazdegerd I 80px Shahanshah 363  21 January 420 399 21 January 420 Son of Shapur III Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Bahram V 80px Shahanshah 406  20 June 438 21 January 420 20 June 438 Son of Yazdegerd I 
 Yazdegerd II 80px Shahanshah ?15 December 457 20 June 438 15 December 457 Son of Bahram V 
 Hormizd III Shahanshah 399459 457 459 Son of Yazdegerd II Killed by Peroz I 
 Peroz I 80px Shahanshah ?Jan. 484 457 Jan. 484 Son of Yazdegerd II Killed in battle with Hephthalites 
 Balash 80px Shahanshah ?488 Feb. 484 488 Son of Yazdegerd II 
 Kavadh I 80px Shahanshah 449  13 September 531 488 496 Son of Peroz I Deposed 
 Djamasp 80px Shahanshah ?502 496 498 Son of Peroz I Deposed 
 Kavadh I 80px Shahanshah 449  13 September 531 498 13 September 531 Son of Peroz I 
 Khosrau I 80px Shahanshah, Anushiravan, The Just 500  31 January 579 13 September 531 31 January 579 Son of Kavadh I 
 Hormizd IV 80px Shahanshah 540  5 September 590 31 January 579 5 September 590 Son of Khosrau I Killed by Vistahm 
 Khosrau II 80px Shahanshah, Aparviz 570  February 28, 628 Sept. 590 Sept. 590 Son of Hormizd IV Deposed and went to Byzantine territory 
 House of Mihran 
 Bahram VI Mehrbandak 80px Shahanshah, Chubineh ?591 Sept. 590 Jan. 591 Son of Bahram Gushnasp from House of Mihran Assassinated under the order of Khosrau II 
 House of Sasan 
 Khosrau II 80px Shahanshah, Aparviz 570  February 28, 628 Jan. 591 25 February 628 Son of Hormizd IV Executed by Mihr Hormozd under the orders of Kavadh II 
 House of Ispahbudhan 
 Vistahm 80px Shahanshah ?596 or 600 591 596 or 600 Son of Shapur from the House of Ispahbudhan. He was the uncle of Khosrau II and husband of Gorduya, sister of Bahram VI Killed by his wife Gorduya or by his general Pariowk 
 House of Sasan 
 Kavadh II Shiruyah 80px Shahanshah ?15 September 628 25 February 628 15 September 628 Son of Khosrau II Died from plague 
 Ardashir III 80px Shahanshah 621  27 April 629 15 September 628 27 April 629 Son of Kavadh II Killed by Shahrbaraz 
 House of Mihran 
 Shahrbaraz 80px Shahanshah, Shahrvaraz ?17 June 629 27 April 629 17 June 629 Sasanian general from the House of Mihran Killed by Farrokh Hormizd under the orders of Borandukht 
 House of Sasan 
 Khosrau III 80px Shahanshah ?630 630 630 Nephew of Khosrau II Killed after a few days reign 
 Borandukht (First reign) 80px Shahbanu \"Queen\" 590  632 17 June 629 16 June 630 Daughter of Khosrau II Deposed by Iranian aristocrats and replaced by Shapur-i Shahrvaraz 
 Shapur-i Shahrvaraz Shahanshah ?? 630 630 Son of Shahrbaraz and an unknown sister of Khosrau II Deposed by Iranian aristocrats and replaced by Azarmidokht 
 Peroz II Gushnasp-Bandeh Shahanshah ?630 630 630 Son of Mihran-Goshnasp & Chaharbakht who was daughter of Yazdandad son of Khosrau I. Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Azarmidokht 80px Shahbanu ?631 630 631 Daughter of Khosrau II Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Khosrau IV Khurrazadh 80px Shahanshah ?631 631 631 Son of Khosrau II Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 House of Ispahbudhan 
 Farrokh Hormizd 80px Shahanshah ?631 630 631 Son of Sasanian general Vinduyih, the brother of Vistahm Killed by Siyavakhsh under the orders of Azarmidokht 
 House of Sasan 
 Hormizd VI 80px Shahanshah ?631 630 631 Grandson of Khosrau II Killed by Iranian aristocrats 
 Borandukht (Second reign) 80px Shahbanu 590  632 631 632 Daughter of Khosrau II Restored to the Sasanian throne, and later strangled to death by Piruz Khosrow 
 Yazdegerd III 80px Shahanshah 624  651 16 June 632 651 Son of Shahryar the son of Khosrau II Killed by a miller 
 

== Rulers of Tabaristan ==

===Dabuyid dynasty (642760)===

Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Dabuyid dynasty (642760) 
 Gil Gavbara 80px Ispahbadh ?660 642 660 Son of Piruz 
 Dabuya Ispahbadh, Gil-Gilan, Padashwargarshah ?676 660 676 Son of Gil Gavbara 
 Farrukhan the Great 80px Ispahbadh, Gil-Gilan, Padashwargarshah ?728 712 728 Son of Dabuya 
 Dadhburzmihr 80px Ispahbadh, Gil-Gilan, Padashwargarshah ?740/741 728 740/741 Son of Farrukhan the Great 
 Farrukhan the Little Ispahbadh, Gil-Gilan, Padashwargarshah ?747/48 740/741 747/48 Son of Farrukhan the Great Regent for Khurshid of Tabaristan 
 Khurshid of Tabaristan 80px Ispahbadh, Gil-Gilan, Padashwargarshah 734  761 740/741 760 Son of Dadhburzmihr Committed suicide 
 

==Rashidun Caliphate (651661)==
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Rashidun Caliphate (632 - 661) 
 Uthman ibn Affan 80px Abu Amr, Zonnurain, Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 579656 644 656 Son of Affan, of the Umayyad clan. Killed by Kharijites 
 Ali Ibn Abi Talib 80px Abul-Hasan, Al-Mortaza, Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin, Great Imam 598661 656 661 Son of Abu Talib, of the Hashemite clan. Son-in-law of Muhammad. Killed by Kharijites 
 

==Umayyad Caliphate (661750)==

Kunya Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Umayyad Clan (661750) 
 Abu Abdullah Muawiyah I Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 661 680 Son of Abu Sufyan ibn Harb, cousin of Uthman ibn Affan and distant cousin of Muhammad 
 Abu Khalid Yazid I Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 680 683 Son of Muawiyah I 
 Abu Abd ur-Rahman Muawiyah II Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 683 684 Son of Yazid I Abdicated (?) 
 Abu Abd al-Malik Marwan I Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 684 685 Son of Hakam cousin of Muawiyah I Killed by his wife 
 Abu'l-Walid Abd al-Malik Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 685 705 Son of Marwan I 
 Abu'l-Abbas al-Walid I Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 705 715 Son of Abd al-Malik 
 Abu Ayyub Sulayman Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 715 717 Son of Abd al-Malik 
 Abu Haf Umar II Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 717 720 Son of Abd al-Aziz son of Marwan I 
 Abu Khalid Yazid II Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 720 724 Son of Abd al-Malik 
 Abu'l-Walid Hisham Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 724 743 Son of Abd al-Malik 
 Abu'l-Abbas al-Walid II Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 743 744 Son of Yazid II 
 Abu Khalid Yazid III Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 744 744 Son of al-Walid I and Shahfarand daughter of Peroz III Killed 
 Abu Ishaq Ibrahim Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 744 744 Son of al-Walid I Killed 
 Abu Abd al-Malik Marwan II Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 744 750 Son of Muhammad son of Marwan I Ruled from Harran in the Jazira. Killed by Saffah 
 

==Abbasid Caliphate (750946)==

Throne name Original name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Abbasid Clan (750-946) 
 As-Saffah Abu'l-Abbas Abdullah 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 721-754 750 754 Son of Muhammad son of Ali son of Abdullah son of Abbas who was Muhammad's paternal uncle 
 Al-Mansur Abu Ja'far Abdullah Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 714-775 754 775 Brother of As-Saffah 
 Al-Mahdi Abu Abdullah Muhammad 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 744/5-785 775 785 Son of Al-Mansur 
 Al-Hadi Abu Mohammad Musa Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 764-786 785 786 Son of Al-Mahdi 
 Ar-Rashid Abu Ja'far Harun 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 763/766-809 786 809 son of Al-Mahdi 
 Al-Amin Abu Abdullah Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 787-813 809 813 Son of Harun al-Rashid Killed by Al-Ma'mun 
 Al-Ma'mun Abu'l-Abbas Abdullah 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 786-833 813 833 Son of Harun al-Rashid 
 Al-Mu'tasim Abu Ishaq Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 795-842 833 842 son of Harun al-Rashid 
 Al-Wathiq Abu Ja'far Harun Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 816-847 842 847 Son of Al-Mu'tasim 
 Al-Mutawakkil Abu'l-Fazl Ja'far Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 821-861 847 861 Son of Al-Mu'tasim Killed by Al-Muntasir 
 Al-Muntasir Abu Ja'far Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 837-862 861 862 Son of Al-Mutawakkil 
 Al-Musta'in Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 836-866 862 866 Son of Muhammad son of Al-Mu'tasim Deposed and later killed 
 Al-Mu'tazz Abu Abdullah Zubayr Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 847-869 866 869 Son of Al-Mutawakkil Deposed and later killed 
 Al-Muhtadi Abu Ishaq Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin ??-870 869 870 Son of Al-Wathiq 
 Al-Mu'tamid Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 844-892 870 892 Son of Al-Mutawakkil 
 Al-Mu'tadid Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 854/861-902 892 902 Son of Talha al-Muwaffaq son of Al-Mutawakkil 
 Al-Muktafi Abu Mohammad Ali Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 877/8-908 902 908 son of Al-Mu'tadid 
 Al-Muqtadir (First reign) Abul-Fazl Ja'far 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 895-932 908 929 Son of Al-Mu'tadid Briefly deposed. 
 Al-Qahir (First reign) Abu Mansur Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 899-950 929 929 Son of Al-Mu'tadid Forced to resign the throne in the face of public protest 
 Al-Muqtadir (Second reign) Abul-Fazl Ja'far 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 895-932 929 932 Son of Al-Mu'tadid 
 Al-Qahir (Second reign) Abu Mansur Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 932 934 Son of Al-Mu'tadid Deposed and blinded 
 Abu'l-Abbas Ar-Radi Muhammad Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 907-940 934 940 Son of Al-Muqtadir De facto power in the hands of Ibn Ra'iq 936-938 
 Al-Muttaqi Abu Ishaq Ibrahim 80px Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 908-968 940 944 Son of Al-Muqtadir De facto power in the hands of Bajkam 940-941, Ibn Ra'iq 941-942, Nasir al-Dawla 942-943 & Tuzun 943-944, who deposed and blinded him. 
 Al-Mustakfi Abu'l-Qasim Abdullah Caliph, Amir al-Mu'minin 905-949 944 946 Son of Al-Muktafi De facto power in the hands of Tuzun 944-945 & Abu Jafar 945-946. Deposed and blinded by Mu'izz al-Dawla 
 

==Saffarid dynasty (8611003)==
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Kunya Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Saffarid Dynasty (8611003) 
 Ya'qub as-Saffar 80px Emir 840  879 861 879 Son of al-Layth Died of sickness 
 Amr Emir ?902 879 901 Son of al-Layth Captured by the Samanids, later executed on 20 April 902 in Baghdad 
 Abu'l-Hasan Tahir Emir ?? 901 908 Son of Muhammad, son of Amr Imprisoned in Baghdad 
 Al-Layth Emir ?928 909 910 Son of Ali, son of al-Layth Dies of natural causes as a prisoner in Baghdad in 928 
 Muhammad Emir ?? 910 911 Son of Ali, son of al-Layth Imprisoned in Baghdad 
 Abu Hafs Amr Emir 902  ? 912 913 Son of Ya'qub Overthrown by the Samanids 
 Abu Ja'far Ahmad 80px Emir June 21, 906  March 31, 963 923 963 Son of Muhammad, son of Amr Killed by Abul-Abbas and a Turkic Ghilman 
 Abu Ahmad Khalaf 80px Emir November 937  March 1009 963 1003 Son of Ahmad ibn Muhammad Overthrown by the Ghaznavids in 1003, dies as exile in 1009 
 

==Buyid Empire (9341062)==
The Buyid Empire was divided into a number of separate emirates, of which the most important were Fars, Ray, and Iraq. Generally, one of the emirs held a sort of primus inter pares supremacy over the rest, which would be marked by titles like Amir al-umara and Shahanshah.
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Buyids of Fars (9331062) 
 Imad al-Dawla Abu'l-Hasan Ali Emir, Amir al-umara 891  949 934 949 Son of Buya Also Senior Buyid Emir (934-949) 
 Adud al-Dawla Fanna Khusraw 80px Emir, Shahanshah 936983 949 983 Son of Rukn al-Dawla and nephew of Imad al-Dawla Senior Buyid Emir (976-983) and Emir of Iraq (978-983) 
 Sharaf al-Dawla Abu'l-Fawaris Shirdil Emir, Amir al-umara 962989 983 989 Son of Adud al-Dawla Also Senior Buyid Emir and Emir of Iraq (987-989) 
 Samsam al-Dawla Abu Kalijar Marzuban Emir, King 964998 989 998 son of Adud al-Dawla Also Emir of Iraq and self-proclaimed Senior Buyid Emir (983-986) 
 Baha' al-Dawla Abu Nasr Firuz 80px Emir, King, Shahanshah 9711012 998 1012 Son of Adud al-Dawla Also Emir of Iraq (988-1012) and Senior Buyid Emir (997-1012) 
 Sultan al-Dawla Abu Shuja Emir 9921024 1012 1024 Son of Baha' al-Dawla Also Emir of Iraq and Senior Buyid Emir (1012-1021) 
 Abu Kalijar Marzuban 80px Emir, Shahanshah ?1011  1048 1024 1048 Son of Sultan al-Dawla Also Emir of Kerman (1028-1048), Senior Buyid Emir (1037-1048) and Emir of Iraq (1044-1048) 
 Abu Mansur Fulad Sutun Emir ?1062 1048 1054 Son of Abu Kalijar Lost Fars to Abu Sa'd Khusrau Shah 
 Abu Sa'd Khusrau Shah Emir ?? 1051 1054 Son of Abu Kalijar Lost Fars to Abu Mansur Fulad Sutun 
 Abu Mansur Fulad Sutun Emir ?1062 1054 1062 Son of Abu Kalijar Killed by the Shabankara tribal chief Fadluya 
 Buyids of Rey, Isfahan, and Hamadan (9351038) 
 Rukn al-Dawla Abu Ali Hasan 80px Emir, Amir al-umara 898976 935 976 Son of Buya Also Senior Buyid Emir (949-976) 
 Fakhr al-Dawla (First reign) Abu'l-Hasan Ali Emir 952997 976 980 Son of Rukn al-Dawla 
 Mu'ayyad al-Dawla Abu Mansur 80px Emir 941983 976 983 Son of Rukn al-Dawla Also Emir of Hamadan (976983), Jibal (977983), Tabaristan (980983), and Gorgan (981983) 
 Fakhr al-Dawla (Second reign) Abu'l-Hasan Ali Emir, King, Shahanshah 983997 976 997 Son of Rukn al-Dawla Also Emir of Hamadan & Tabaristan (984-997) and Senior Buyid Emir (991-997) 
 Majd al-Dawla Abu Taleb Rostam 80px Emir 9931029 997 1029 Son of Fakhr al-Dawla Only in Rey, briefly self-proclaimed Senior Buyid Emir 
 Shams al-Dawla Abu Taher 80px Emir ?1021 997 1021 Son of Fakhr al-Dawla Only in Isfahan and Hamaedan, briefly self-proclaimed Senior Buyid Emir 
 Sama' al-Dawla Abu'l-Hasan Ali Emir ?1023 1021 1023 Son of Shams al-Dawla Only in Hamadan, Deposed by Kakuyids 
 Buyids of Iraq and Khuzistan (9451055) 
 Mu'izz al-Dawla Abu'l-Husayn Ahmad Emir, Amir al-umara 915966 945 966 Son of Buya 
 Izz al-Dawla Abu Mansur Bakhtiyar Emir, Amir al-umara 943979 966 979 Son of Mu'izz al-Dawla Self-proclaimed Senior Buyid Emir (976-978) 
 Adud al-Dawla Fanna Khusraw 80px Emir, Shahanshah 937983 977 983 Son of Rukn al-Dawla Also Emir of Fars (949-983) and Senior Buyid Emir (976-983) 
 Samsam al-Dawla Abu Kalijar Marzban Emir, King 964998 983 987 Son of Adud al-Dawla Also self-proclaimed Senior Buyid Emir (983-986) and Emir of Fars & Kerman (989-998) 
 Sharaf al-Dawla Abu'l-Fawaris Shirdil Emir, Amir al-umara 962989 987 989 Son of Adud al-Dawla Also Emir of Fars (983-989) and Senior Buyid Emir (987-989) 
 Baha' al-Dawla Abu Nasr Firuz 80px Emir 9701012 989 1012 Son of Adud al-Dawla Also Senior Buyid Emir (997-1012) and Emir of Fars (999-1012) 
 Sultan al-Dawla Abu Shuja Emir 9921024 1012 1021 Son of Baha' al-Dawla Also Senior Buyid Emir (1012-1021) and Emir of Fars (1012-1024) 
 Musharrif al-Dawla Abu 'Ali Emir, Shahanshah, King 10021025 1021 1025 Son of Baha' al-Dawla Closest thing to Senior Buyid Emir (1024-1025) 
 Jalal al-Dawla Abu Tahir Jalal al-Dawla Emir 9941043 1027 1043 Son of Baha' al-Dawla 
 Abu Kalijar Marzuban 80px Emir, Shahanshah ?1011  1048 1043 1048 Son of Sultan al-Dawla Also Emir of Fars (1024-1048), Emir of Kerman (1028-1048) and Senior Buyid Emir (1037-1048) 
 Al-Malik al-Rahim Abu Nasr Khusrau Firuz Emir ?1058 1048 1055 Son of Abu Kalijar Also Senior Buyid Emir (1051-1055). Deposed by Tughril of the Seljuqs 
 

==Great Seljuq Empire (10291194)==
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 House of Seljuq (10291191) 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Torl I Abu Talib Mohammad Beg, Sultan 9951063 1029 1063 Son of Mikha'il son of Seljuq 
 Adud ad-Dawla Alp Arslan Abu Shuja Mohammad 80px Sultan 10391072 1063 1072 Son of Chaghri Beg Dawud brother of Torl I 
 Jalal ad-Dawla wa'd-Din Malik Shah I Abu'l-Fath Hasan 80px Sultan 10551092 1072 1092 Son of Alp Arslan Killed by Assassins 
 Nasir ad-Dawla wa'd-Din Abu'l-Qasim Mahmud I Sultan 10861094 1092 1094 Son of Malik Shah I 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Abu'l-Muzaffar Barkiyaruq Sultan 10801105 1094 1105 Son of Malik Shah I 
 Ghiyath ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Abu Shuja Muhammad I Tapar Sultan 10821118 1105 1118 Son of Malik Shah I 
 Muglith ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Mahmud II Sultan 11041131 1118 1131 Son of Muhammad I Dominated by his uncle Sanjar and killed in a rebellion against him. 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Abu Talib Toghrul II Sultan 11091134 1132 1134 Son of Muhammad I Ruled only in Iraq, dominated by his uncle Ahmed Sanjar 
 As-Salatin Muizz ad-Duny wa'd-Dn Abu'l-Harith Ahmed Sanjar Sultan 10871157 1097 1157 Son of Malik Shah I Ruled in Khorasan, dominating a series of nephews in Iraq. 
 Ghiyath ad-Dawla wa'd-Din Abu'l-Fath Mas'ud Sultan 11091152 1134 1152 Son of Muhammad I Ruled over the western portion of the empire. Preoccupations in the east meant Sanjar was unable to dominate him. 
 Mugith ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(First reign) Malik Shah II Sultan 11281160 1152 1153 Son of Mahmud II Deposed by Khass Bey 
 Ghiyath ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Abu Shuja Muhammad II Sultan 11281160 1153 1160 Son of Mahmud II Rule contested with his uncle Sulayman Shah (1153-1155) 
 Mu'izz ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(First reign) Abu'l-Harith Sulayman Shah Sultan 11181162 1153 1155 Son of Muhammad I Rule contested with his nephew Muhammad II 
 Mugith ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(Second reign) Malik Shah II Sultan 11281160 1160 1160 Son of Mahmud II Deposed by the people of Isfahan after 16 days. 
 Mu'izz ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(Second reign) Abu'l-Harith Sulayman Shah Sultan 11181162 1160 1161 Son of Muhammad I Deposed by Inanj, Lord of Reyy and the court officials 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din Arslan Sultan 11341176 1161 1176 Son of Toghrul II De facto power in the hands of Ildeniz (1160-1174) and his son Pahlavan (1174-1176) 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(First reign) Abu Talib Toghrul III Sultan ?1194 1176 1194 Son of Arslan De facto power in the hands of Pahlavan (1176-1186) and Qizil Arslan (1186-1188). Deposed by Qizil Arslan in 1191. 
 Sanjar II Sultan 1189 1191 Son of Sulayman Shah De facto power in the hands of Qizil Arslan (1189-1191). Deposed by Qizil Arslan in 1191. 
 Atabegs of Azerbaijan (1191) 
 Qizil Arslan Sultan ?1191 1191 1191 Son of Ildeniz Held de facto power (1186-1188). Deposed Qizil Arslan in 1191, declared himself Sultan and died an hour before his coronation. 
 House of Seljuq (11911194) 
 Rukn ad-Dunya wa'd-Din(Second reign) Abu Talib Toghrul III Sultan ?1194 1176 1194 Son of Arslan Killed by Khwarazm Shah Tekish 
 

== Khwarezmid Empire (11531231) ==
An empire built from Khwarezm, covering part of Iran and neighbouring Central Asia.
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Khwarezmid Empire (11531231) 
 Ala ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Abul-Muzaffar Atsiz Sultan 1097/11051156 1153 1156 son of Muhammad I of Khwarazm Ruling in Khwrazm from 1127 
 Taj ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Abul-Fath Il-Arslan Sultan ?1171 1156 1172 son of Atsiz 
 Ala ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Abul-Muzaffar Tekish Sultan ?1200 1172 1200 son of Il-Arslan With opposition from Sultan shah 
 Ala ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Abul-Fath Muhammad Sanjar 80px Shah ?1220 1200 1220 son of Tekish Eliminated by the Mongols 
 Jalal ad-Dunya wa ad-Din Abul-Muzaffar Mingburnu 80px Jalal od-Din, Sultan ?1231 1220 1231 son of Muhammad Reign largely guerilla warfare against the Mongol conquerors 
 

== Mongol Empire (12301357) ==
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Great Khans (12211256) 
 Genghis Temujin 80px Khan 11621227 1221 1227 Son of Yesugei Baghatur Ruling in Mongolia from 1206 
 Tolui 80px Khan 11921232 25 August 1227 13 September 1229 Son of Genghis Regent 
 gedei 80px Khan c. 1186  11 December 1241 13 September 1229 11 December 1241 Son of Genghis 
 Tregene 80px Khatun ?? 1242 1246 Wife of gedei Regent 
 Gyk 80px Khan c. 12061248 1246 1248 Son of gedei and Tregene 
 Oghul Qaimish Khatun ?1251 1248 1251 Wife of Gyk Regent 
 Mngke 80px Khan 10 January 1209  11 August 1259 1 July 1251 11 August 1259 Son of Tolui 
 Ilkhanate (12561357) 
 Hulagu 80px Khan, Ilkhan c. 1217  8 February 1265 1256 8 February 1265 Son of Tolui 
 Abaqa 80px Khan, Ilkhan 12341282 1265 1 April 1282 Son of Hulagu 
 Ahmad Nicholas Tekuder 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1284 1282 1284 Son of Hulagu Killed by Arghun 
 Arghun 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan c. 1258  7 March 1291 1284 7 March 1291 Son of Abaqa 
 Gaykhatu 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1295 1291 1295 Son of Abaqa Killed by general Taghachar 
 Baydu 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1295 1295 1295 Son of Taraqai son of Hulagu Executed by Ghazan 
 Mahmud Ghazan 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan 5 November 1271 11 May 1304 1295 1304 Son of Arghun 
 Muhammad Khodabandeh ljait 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan, 1280  16 December 1316 1304 16 December 1316 Son of Arghun 
 Abu Sa'id Ala' ad-Din Bahadur 80px Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan 2 June 1305  1 December 1335 1316 1 December 1335 Son of ljait 
 Arpa Ke'un Mu'izz ad-Din Mahmud Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1336 1335 10 April 1336 Son of Suseh son of Munkqan son of Malik-Temur son of Ariq Bke son of Tolui Killed in battle by Ali Padshah 
 Nasir ad-Din Musa Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1337 12 April 1336 1337 Son of Ali son of Baydu Puppet of Ali Padshah, fled after being defeated by the Jalayirid Hasan Buzurg 
 Togha Temr Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?1353 1335 1353 Son of Sudi son of Bababahathor son of Abokan son of Amakan son of Tur son of Jujiqisar son of Yesugei Baghatur In opposition to Jalayirid and Chupanid candidates, killed by the Sarbadar Yahya Karawi 
 Muzaffar ad-Din Muhammad Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan, ?1338 1336 1338 Son of Yul Qotloq son of Il Temur son of Ambarji son of Mengu Temur son of Hulagu Puppet of Hasan Buzurg, executed by the Chupanid Hasan Kucek 
 Sati beg Khatun c.1300  after 1345 1338 1339 Daughter of ljait Puppet of Hasan Kucek, who deposed her. 
 Izz ad-Din Jahan Temr Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan, ?? 1339 1340 Son of Ala-Fireng son of Gaykhatu Puppet of Hasan Buzurg, who deposed him for Togha Temr. 
 Suleiman Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?? May 1339 1345 Husband of Sati beg and son of Yusef Shah son of Soga son of Yeshmut son of Hulagu Puppet of Hasan Kucek, fled to Diyarbakr in the disorder after his death. 
 Anushirwan Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?? 1344 1356 ? Puppet of the Chupanid Malek Ashraf 
 Luqman Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?? 1353 1388 Son of Togha Temr Puppet of Timur 
 Ghazan II Khan, Ilkhan, Sultan ?? 1356 1357 ? Puppet of Malek Ashraf 
 

==Rival Dynasties (13321501)==
For more comprehensive lists of kings and sub-kings of this Era see:
*Muslim dynasties of Iran

=== Sarbadars (13321386) ===

Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Sarbadars (1332 - 1386) 
 Abd al-Razzaq ibn Fazlullah Amir ??-1338 1337 1338 Revolted against Togha Temr, stabbed to death by his brother 
 Wajih ad-Din Masud ibn Fazlullah Amir ??-1344 1338 1344 brother of Abd al-Razzaq Captured by the Paduspanids and executed. 
 Muhammad Aytimur (13431346) Amir ??-1346 1344 1346 Unrelated to predecessors Overthrown and executed 
 Kulu Isfendiyar Amir ??-c.1347 1346 c.1347 Unrelated to predecessors 
 Shams al-Din ibn Fazl Allah Amir ??-?? c.1347 1347 brother of Abd al-Razzaq Forced to abdicate by successor 
 Khwaja Shams al-Din 'Ali Amir ??-1351/1352 1347 1351/1352 Unrelated to predecessors Assassinated by a disgruntled official 
 Yahya Karawi Amir ??-1355/1356 1351/1352 1355/1356 Unrelated to predecessors Eliminated Togha Temr, assassinated. 
 Zahir al-Din Karawi Amir ??-1355/1356 1355/1356 1355/1356 Nephew of Yahya Karawi Deposed by vizier 
 Haidar Qassab Amir ??-1356 1355/1356 1356 Unrelated to predecessors Assassinated by a Turkish slave 
 Lutf Allah Amir ??-1357/1358 or 1361 1356 1357/1358 or 1361 Son of Wajih ad-Din Masud Deposed and executed by his vizier 
 Hasan al-Damghani Amir ??-1361/1362 1357/1358 or 1361 1361/1362 Unrelated to predecessors Overthrown by Dervish rebels 
 Khwaja 'Ali-yi Mu'ayyad ibn Masud Amir ??-?? 1361/1362 1376/1377 Unrelated to predecessors 
 Rukn ad-Din Amir 1376/1377 1376/1377 Unrelated to predecessors Installed by Dervish rebels. 
 Khwaja 'Ali-yi Mu'ayyad ibn Masud Amir ??-?? 1376/1377 1381 Unrelated to predecessors Restored, became vassal of Tamerlane in 1381 
 

===Chupanids (13351357)===

Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Chupanids (13351357) 
 Hassan Kuchak Amir c.1319December 15, 1343 July 16, 1338 December 15, 1343 Son of Timurtash son of Chupan Ruled on behalf of his Il-Khanate puppets Sati Beg and Suleiman Khan. 
 Yagi Basti Amir ?-1344 1343 1344 Son of Chupan Assassinated by his co-ruler Malek Ashraf. 
 Surgan Amir c.1320-? 1343 1345 Son of Chupan and Sati Beg Driven out by his co-ruler Malek Ashraf. 
 Malek Ashraf Amir ?-1357 1343 1357 Brother of Hassan Kuchak Ruled on behalf of his Il-Khanate puppets Anushirwan. Hung by Jani Beg of the Golden Horde. 
 Temrtas Amir ?-1360 1360 1360 Son of Malek Ashraf Short-lived puppet of the Golden Horde. 

=== Jalayirids (13351432) ===

Throne name Original name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Jalayirids (13351432) 
 Taj-ud-Din Hasan Buzurg Ulus Beg ?-1356 1336 1356 Son-in-law of Chupan Ruled through Ilkhanate puppets Muhammad Khan and Jahan Temr. 
 Mu'izz-ud-dunya wa'd-Din Shaikh Uvais Bahadur Khan c.1337-1374 1356 1374 Son of Hasan Buzurg 
 Hasan Shaikh ?-1374 1374 1374 Son of Shaikh Uvais Killed by the Amirs 
 Jalal-ud-Din Husain I (13741382) Shaikh ?-1382 1374 1382 Son of Shaikh Uvais Executed by his rebellious brother Ahmed 
 Bayazid Shaikh ?-? 1382 1384 Son of Shaikh Uvais In opposition to Husain and Ahmed 
 Ghiyath ud-Din Ahmad Sultan ?-1410 1383 1410 Son of Shaikh Uvais In exile 1393-4, 1400-2, 1403-5. Killed in battle by Qara Yusuf 
 Ala ud-Dunya Shah Walad Sultan ?-1411 1410 1411 Son of Ali, son of Uvais 
 Mahmud Sultan ?-1425 1411 1411 Son of Shah Walad Under regency of Tandu Khatun 
 Uvais Sultan ?-1421 1415 1421 Son of Shah Walad 
 Muhammad Sultan ?-1421 1421 1421 Son of Shah Walad 
 Mahmud Sultan ?-1425 1421 1425 Son of Shah Walad Second reign 
 Hussain ?-1432 1425 1432 Son of Ala-ud-Dawlah, son of Ahmed Defeated by Kara Koyunlu 
 

=== Injuids (13351357) ===

 name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 Injuids (13351357) 
 Sharaf ad-Din Mahmud Shah ?-1325 1304 1335 Highly autonomous master of the Ilkhanate royal estates (the inj), removed by Abu Sa'id, executed by Arpa Ke'un. 
 Ghiyath ad-Din Kai-Khusrau Amir ?-1338/9 1335 1338/9 Son of Mahmud Shah 
 Jalal ad-Din Mas'ud Shah Amir ?-1342 1338 1342 Son of Mahmud Shah In opposition to Kai-Khusrau. Jalayirid partisan. Assassinated by Chupanids. 
 Shams ad-Din Muhammad Amir ?-1339/40 1339/40 1339/40 Son of Mahmud Shah In opposition to Mas'ud Shah. Murdered by his Chupanid supporter. 
 Shaikh Abu Ishaq Amir ?-? 1343 1357 Son of Mahmud Shah Defeated by & executed by the Muzaffarids 
 

===Muzaffarids (13141393)===
# Mubariz ad-Din Muhammad ibn al-Muzaffar, Emir 13141358
# Abu'l Fawaris Jamal ad-Din Shah Shuja (at Yazd, 1353 at Shiraz), 13351364 with...
# Qutb Al-Din Shah Mahmud (at Isfahan) ( d. 1375), 13581366
# Abu'l Fawaris Djamal ad-Din Shah Shuja (at Yazd, 1353 at Shiraz), 13661384
# Mujahid ad-Din Zain Al-Abidin 'Ali, 13841387
#* In 1387 Timur captured Isfahan.
# Imad ad-Din Sultan Ahmad (at Kerman), 13871391 with...
# Mubariz ad-Din Shah Yahya (at Shiraz), 13871391 and...
# Sultan Abu Ishaq (in Sirajan), 13871391
# Shah Mansur (at Isfahan), 13911393

===Kara Koyunlu (13751468)===
# Qara Muhammad Turmush ibn Bairam Khwaja, 1378/9c. 1388
# Abu Nasr Qara Yusuf Nuyan ibn Muhammad, c. 13881399/1400 and 1405/61420/1
# Qara Iskander ibn Yusuf, 1420/11436
# Muzaffar al-Din Jahan Shah ibn Yusuf, 1436  10 November 1467
# Hasan Ali ibn Jahan Shah, November 1467  1468

===Ak Koyunlu (13781508)===
# Kara Ylk Osman, 1378/9 to 1435/6
# Hamza, 1435/6 to 1444/5
# Nur al-Din Ali ibn Qara Ylk, 1435/6 to 1438
# Muizz al-Din Jihangir ibn Ali ibn Qara Ylk, 1444/5 to 1453/4
# Uzun Hasan ibn Ali, 1453/4 to 1478/9
# Khalil ibn Uzun Hasan, 1478/9 to 1479/80
# Yaqub ibn Uzun Hasan, 1479/80 to 1490/1
# Baisonqur ibn Yaqub, 1490/1 to 1491/2
# Rustam ibn Maqsud, 1491/2 to 1496/7
# Ahmad Gvde ibn Muhammad, 1496/7 to 1497/8
# Murad ibn Yaqub, 1497/8 to 1499/1500
# Alwand ibn Yusuf, 1499/1500 to 1500/01
# Muhammad Mirza ibn Yusuf, 1499/1500 to 1500/01
# Muhammad Mirza ibn Yusuf, 1500/01 to 1501/2
# Murad ibn Yaqub, 1501/2 to 1508 (second term)

===Timurid Empire (13701507)===

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Reign began Reign ended Family Relations Note 
 Timurid Empire (13701449) 
 1 Timur Tarmashirin Khan Barlas 80px Emir, Beg, Khan, Mirza, Gurkani 9 April 1336  18 February 1405 1370 18 February 1405 Son of Muhammad Taraghai 
 2 Pir Muhammad Pir Muhammad Khan bin Jahangir Emir, Khan c. 1374  22 February 1407 18 February 1405 22 February 1407 Grandson of Timur 
 3 Khalil Sultan Khalil Sultan bin Miran Shah 80px Emir, Sultan, Shah c. 1384  4 November 1411 18 February 1405 13 May 1409 Grandson of Timur 
 4 Shahrukh Mirza Shahrukh Mirza 80px Mirza 30 August 1377  12 March 1447 18 February 1405 12 March 1447 Son of Timur 
 5 Ulugh Beg Mirza Muhammad Traghay Mirza, Sultan 22 March 1394  27 October 1449 12 March 1447 27 October 1449 Son of Shahrukh Mirza 
 Division of the Timurid Empire (14491507) 

Rulers in Transoxiana:
# Abd al-Latif ibn Muhammad Taraghay Ulughbek, son of Ulugh Beg, 14491450
# 'Abdullah Mirza, grandson of Shah Rukh, 14501451
# Abu Sa'id ibn Muhammad, grandson of Miran Shah, 14511469, conquered Khurasan in 1459

Rulers in Khurasan:
# Babur Ibn-Baysunkur, grandson of Shah Rukh, 14491457
# Shah Mahmud, son of Babur, 1457
# Ibrahim, 1457
# Jahan Shah, leader of the Black Sheep Turcomans, 14571458

Abu Sa'id, agreed to divide Iran with the Black Sheep Turcomans under Jahan Shah, but the White Sheep Turcomans under Uzun Hassan defeated and killed first Jahan Shah and then Abu Sa'id.

After Abu Sa'id's death a fourth era of fragmentation follows. While the White Sheep Turcomans dominated in the western parts until the ascent of the Safavid dynasty, the Timurides could maintain their rule in Samarkand and Herat.

Rulers in Samarkand:
# Sultan Ahmad, son Abu Sa'id, 14691494
# Sultan Mahmud, son of Abu Sa'id, 14941495
# Masud, 1495
# Sultan Baysunghur, 14951497
# Sultan Ali Mirza 14951500

Conquered by the Uzbeks

Rulers in Herat:
# Sultan Mahmud, son of Abu Sa'id, 1469
# Husayn Bayqarah, 14691506
# Badi' al-Zaman, son of Husayn, 15061507, fled to the court of Ismail I

Conquered by the Uzbeks, later recaptured by the Safavids

== Safavid dynasty (15011786)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 1 Ismail I 80px Shah, Sultan 14871524 7 November 1502 23 May 1524 son of Sultan Heidar 
 2 Tahmasp I 80px Shah, Sahib-i-Qiran, Sultan bar Salatin 15141576 23 May 1525 25 May 1576 son of Ismail I 
 3 Ismail II 80px Shah 15371577 25 May 1576 24 November 1577 son of Tahmasp I Poisoned (?) 
 4 Mohammad I 80px Khodabandeh, Ashraf, Soltan 15321596 25 May 1576 1 October 1587 son of Tahmasp I Deposed 
 5 Abbas I 80px Shahanshah, Sultan, Great 15711629 1 October 1587 19 January 1629 son of Mohammad I 
 6 Safi Sam Mirza 80px Shah, Mirza 16111642 19 January 1629 12 May 1642 son of Mohammd Baqer (Safi) Mirza son of Abbas I 
 7 Abbas II 80px Shah 16321666 12 May 1642 26 October 1666 son of Safi 
 8 Suleiman I Safi Mirza 80px Shah, Hakem-ol Hokama 16451694 26 October 1666 29 July 1694 son of Abbas II 
 9 Sultan Husayn 80px Shah, Sultan, Sadr-ol Hakem 16681726 29 July 1694 11 September 1722 son of Suleiman I Deposed & then killed by Mahmud Hotaki 
 Afghan Conquest 
 1 Mahmud Hotaki 80px Shah 1697?1725 23 October 1722 22 April 1725 son of Sultan Husayn Recognised as Shah of Persia after the Siege of Isfahan 
 2 Ashraf Hotaki 80px Shah ?1730 22 April 1725 5 October 1729 brother of Mahmud Hotaki Ruled in opposition to Tahmasp II and lost control of Persia after the Battle of Damghan 
 Safavid restoration 
 10 Tahmasp II 80px Shah 17041740 11 September 1722 16 April 1732 son of Sultan Husayn Ruled in opposition to Mahmud Hotaki, later deposed & then killed by Nader 
 11 Abbas III Shah 17301739 16 April 1732 22 January 1736 son of Tahmasp II Under control of Nader. Deposed & then killed by Nader 

== Afsharid dynasty The Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 7, 1991, p. 960. (17361796)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 15 Nader Shah Nadhar Qoli Khan 80px Shah, Sultan, Hakem-ol Hokama, Hazrat-e Ashraf 16981747 22 January 1736 19 June 1747 son of Imam Qoli Beig Afshar Before crowning his title was Tahmasp Qoli Khan. Killed 
 17 Adil Shah Ali Qoli Beig Shah 1719/201749 19 June 1747 29 July 1748 son of Mohammad Ebrahim Khan brother of Nader Deposed, blinded & then killed by Ebrahim 
 18 Ebrahim Afshar Mohammd Ali Beig Shah 17241749 29 July 1748 3 September 1748 son of Mohammad Ebrahim Khan brother of Nader Deposed & then killed by Shahrukh Afshar 
 19 Shahrukh Afshar Shah 17341796 3 September 1748 1796 son of Reza Qoli Mirza son of Nader. His mother was Fatemeh Soltan Beigom daughter of Sultan Husayn I Safavi Deposed & blinded by Suleiman II (1749), restored (1750) 
 

== Zand dynasty The Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 7, 1991, p. 961. (17511794)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 22 Karim Khan Mohammad Karim 80px Khan, Vakil e-Ra'aayaa 17051779 1751 6 March 1779 son of Inaq Khan & Bay Agha 
 24 Mohammad Ali Khan Khan 17601779 6 March 1779 19 June 1779 son of Karim 
 25 Abol Fath Khan Khan 17551787 6 March 1779 22 August 1779 son of Karim 
 26 Zaki Khan Khan ?22 August 1779 6 March 1779 22 August 1779 son of Budaq Khan & Bay Agha 
 27 Sadiq Khan Zand Mohammad Sadeq Khan ?1782 22 August 1779 14 March 1781 son of Inaq Khan & Bay Agha 
 28 Ali Murad Khan Khan 17201785 14 March 1781 11 February 1785 son of Allah Morad (Qeytas) Khan Zand Hazareh 
 29 Jafar Khan Khan ?1789 18 February 1785 23 January 1789 son of Sadeq 
 31 Sayed Murad Khan Khan ?1789 23 January 1789 10 May 1789 son of Khoda Morad Khan Zand Hazareh 
 32 Lotf Ali Khan 80px Khan 17691794 23 January 1789 20 March 1794 son of Ja'far Deposed, blinded & then killed by Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar 
 

== Qajar dynasty The Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 7, 1991, p. 962. (17941925)==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 33 Mohammad Khan Qajar Agha Mohammad Khan 80px Khan, Shah, Khaqan 17421797 20 March 1794 17 June 1797 Son of Mohammad Hassan Khan Qajar Killed 
 34 Fath-Ali Shah Qajar Baba Khan 80px Shah, Khaqan, Soltane Saheb Qaran 17721834 17 June 1797 23 October 1834 son of Hosein Qoli Khan Jahansuz brother of Mohammad 
 35 Mohammad Shah Qajar 80px Shah, Khaqan 18081848 23 October 1834 5 September 1848 son of Abbas Mirza Nayeb os-Saltaneh son of Fat'h Ali 
 36 Naser al-Din Shah Qajar 80px Shah, Khaqan, Soltane Saheb Qaran, Qebleye alam 18311896 5 October 1848 1 May 1896 son of Mohammad and Mahd-e Olia Killed 
 37 Mozaffar al-Din Shah Qajar 80px Shah, Khaqan 18531907 1 May 1896 3 January 1907 son of Naser ed-Din 
 38 Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar 80px Shah 18721925 3 January 1907 16 July 1909 son of Mozaffar ed-Din Deposed 
 39 Ahmad Shah Qajar 80px Shah 18981930 16 July 1909 15 December 1925 son of Mohammd Ali Deposed 
 

== Pahlavi dynasty (19251979) ==

Throne Name Original Name Portrait Title Born-Died Entered office Left office Family Relations Note 
 40 Reza Shah 80px Alahazrat, Homayoun, Shahanshah, Sardar Sepah 18781944 15 December 1925 16 September 1941 Son of Abbas Ali Deposed during the Anglo-Soviet invasion 
 41 Mohammad Reza Shah 80px Alahazrat, Homayoun, Shahanshah, Ariamehr, Bozorg Arteshtaran, Khodaygan 19191980 16 September 1941 11 February 1979 son of Reza Shah Deposed during the Iranian Revolution 
 

==Notes and references==

==Bibliography==

* Assar, G.R.F., "Genealogy & Coinage of the Early Parthian Rulers. I", Parthica, 6, 2004, pp. 6993.
* Assar, G.R.F., "Genealogy & Coinage of the Early Parthian Rulers, II a revised stemma", Parthica, 7, 2005, pp. 2963.
* Assar, G.R.F., "Moses of Choren & the Early Parthian Chronology", Electrum, vol. 11, 2006, pp. 6186.
* Assar, G.R.F., "A Revised Parthian Chronology of the Period 165-91 B.C.", Electrum, vol. 11, 2006, pp. 87158.
* Assar, G.R.F., "A Revised Parthian Chronology of the Period 91-55 B.C.", Parthica, 8, 2006, pp. 55104.
* Briant, Pierre, "From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of the Persian Empire", 2002.
* Cameron, George, "History of Early Iran", Chicago, 1936 (repr., Chicago, 1969; tr. E.-J. Levin, Lhistoire de lIran antique, Paris, 1937; tr. H. Anusheh,     , Tehran, 1993)
* Dyakonov, I. M., "Istoriya Midii ot drevenshikh vremen do kontsa IV beka de e.E" (The history of Media from ancient times to the end of the 4th century BCE), Moscow and Leningrad, 1956; tr. Karim Kevarz as Tri-e Md, Tehran, 1966.
* Dandamaev, Muhammad A., "Persien unter den ersten Achmeniden (6. Jahrhundert v. Chr.)", tr. Heinz-Dieter Pohl, Wiesbaden, 1976.
* Ghashghai, H.R., "The successors of Mithridates II", Bulletin of Ancient Iranian History (UCLA), vol. 5, March 2009.(in Persian)
* Henkelman, wouter. Defining Neo-Elamite History. ARTA, 2003.
* Hinz, W., "The Lost World of Elam", London, 1972 (tr. F. Firuznia,   , Tehran, 1992)
* Josephus Flavius, Antiquities of the Jews.
* Justi, Ferdinand, "Iranisches Namenbuch", Tehran, Asatir, 2003.
* Legrain, Leon, "Historical Fragments", Philadelphia, The University of Pennsylvania Museum Publications of the Babylonian Section, vol. XIII, 1922.
* Majidzadeh, Yusef, "History and civilization of Elam", Tehran, Iran University Press, 1991.
* Majidzadeh, Yusef, "History and civilization of Mesopotamia", Tehran, Iran University Press, 1997, vol.1.
* Miroschedji, P. de, La fin du royaume de lAnsan et de Suse et la naissance de lempire perse, 1985, ZA 75, pp. 265306.
* Nldeke, Theodor, "Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden. Aus der arabischen Chronik des Tabari bersetzt" (1879)
* Olmstead, A. T., "History of the Persian Empire", Chicago, 1948
* Plutarch, Lives.
* Polybius, The Histories.
* Potts, D. T., The Archaeology of Elam, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
* Reade, Julian E. Elam after the Assyrian Sack of Susa in 647 B.C. NABU, 2000.
* Tacitus, The Annals.
* Tavernier, Jan. Some Thoughts on Neo-Elamite Chronology. ARTA, 2004.
* The Cambridge Ancient History (CAH)
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 1, THE LAND OF IRAN, Cambridge University Press, 1968.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 2, THE MEDIAN AND ACHAEMENIAN PERIODS, Cambridge University Press, 1985.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 3(I), THE SELEUCID, PARTHIAN AND SASANIAN PERIODS, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 3(II), THE SELEUCID, PARTHIAN AND SASANIAN PERIODS, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 4, THE PERIOD FROM THE ARAB INVASION TO THE SALJUQS, Cambridge University Press, 1975.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 5, THE SALJUQ AND MONGOL PERIODS, Cambridge University Press, 1968.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 6, THE TIMURID AND SAFAVID PERIODS, Cambridge University Press, 1986.
* The Cambridge History of Iran (CHI), vol. 7, FROM NADIR SHAH TO THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC, Cambridge University Press, 1991.
* Vallat, Francois. Elam: The History of Elam. Encyclopdia Iranica, vol. VIII pp. 301313. London/New York, 1998.
* Vallat, Francois. Shutruk-Nahunte, Shutur-Nahunte et l'imbroglio neo-elamite. NABU, 1995.
* Vallat, Francois. Le royaume elamite de SAMATI. NABU, 1996.
* Vallat, Francois. Les pretendus fonctionnaires Unsak des texts neo-elamites et achemenides. ARTA, 2002.
* Vallat, Francois. Le royaume elamite de Zamin et les 'Letters de Nineveh'. Iranica Antique, 33, 1998. pp. 95106.
* www.parthia.com

==See also==
*Iranian monarchy
*Supreme Leader of Iran
*History of Iran
*Persian Empire
*List of ancient Persians
*Shahzada
*Shahbanu

 
 

Persia
*


[[Homology]]

Homology may refer to:

* Homology (anthropology), analogy between human beliefs, practices or artifacts owing to genetic or historical connections
* Homology (biology), any characteristic of biological organisms that is derived from a common ancestor.
* Homology (chemistry), the relationship between compounds in a homologous series
* Homology (mathematics), a procedure to associate a sequence of abelian groups or modules with a given mathematical object
* Homology modeling, a method of protein structure prediction
* Homology (psychology), behavioral characteristics that have common origins in either evolution or development
* Homology (sociology), a structural 'resonance' between the different elements making up a socio-cultural whole

Homologous may refer to:
* Homologous chromosomes, chromosomes in a biological cell that pair up (synapse) during meiosis
* Homologous genes, DNA sequences or organs, biological features related by evolutionary ancestry; see Homology (biology)
* Homologous behaviors, behaviors typical of species that share a common ancestor that was characterized by that behavior OR behaviors in an individual that share common origins in development; see Homology (psychology) 
* Homologous desensitization, a receptor decreases its response to a signalling molecule when that agonist is in high concentration
* Homologous recombination, genetic recombination in which nucleotide sequences are exchanged between molecules of DNA
* Homologous series (chemistry), a series of organic compounds having different quantities of a repeated unit
* Homologous temperature, the temperature of a material as a fraction of its absolute melting point

Homological may refer to:
*Homological word, a word expressing a property which it possesses itself
*Homological algebra, a branch of mathematics

Homologation may refer to:
*Homologation, from the ancient Greek "to agree", to indicate the approval of a sanctioning body
*Homologation (motorsport), the process in motorsports where the sanctioning body approves a racing model for official use
*Homologation reaction is a chemical reaction which produces the next logical member of a homologous series



[[Henry J. Heinz]]

Henry John Heinz (October 11, 1844  May 14, 1919) was an American businessman of German descent who founded the H. J. Heinz Company. Heinz Field, which is the home of the Pittsburgh Steelers NFL team, is named in his honor.

==H. J. Heinz Company==
The company continued to grow, and in 1888 Heinz bought out his other two partners and reorganized the company as the H. J. Heinz Company, the name it carries to the present day. Its famous slogan, "57 varieties", was introduced by Heinz in 1896. The reason for "57" is unclear. Heinz said he chose "5" because it was his lucky number and the number "7" was his wife's lucky number. 

H. J. Heinz was incorporated in 1905, and Heinz served as its first president, remaining in the position for the rest of his life. Under his tutelage, the company was noted for fair treatment of workers and for pioneering safe and sanitary food preparation. He provided his employees with free medical care, recreation facilities such as gyms, swimming pools, and gardens; and educational opportunities such as libraries, free concerts, and lectures. Heinz led a successful lobbying effort in favor of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906. During World War I, he worked with the Food Administration. 

He was a director in many financial institutions, and was chairman of a committee to devise ways of protecting Pittsburgh from floods. 

At the time of Heinz's death in Pittsburgh at the age of 74, the H. J. Heinz Company had over twenty food processing plants, and also included seed farms and container factories. Heinz was the grandfather of H. J. Heinz II, great-grandfather of U.S. Senator H. John Heinz III of Pennsylvania in the United States and great-great grandfather of Henry John Heinz IV, Andre Thierstein Heinz and Christopher Drake Heinz.

==Personal life==
Heinz was a devout Methodist. At the beginning of his will he wrote: "I desire to set forth, at the very beginning of this Will, as the most important item in it, a confession of my faith in Jesus Christ as my Savior." When he visited England, his "tourist stops" included the grave of John Bunyan, Isaac Watts, and John Wesley. He visited a chapel that John Wesley founded, where he later wrote, "I felt I was upon holy ground."

Heinz was married to Sarah Sloan Young Heinz in 1869 and had four children: 

* Clarence Heinz
* Howard Covode Heinz (1877-1941)
* Clifford Heinz (1883-1935)
* Irene Heinz Givens

A bronze statue of Heinz by Emil Fuchs was dedicated on October 11, 1924 at the Heinz Company building Pittsburgh, http://siris-artinventories.si.edu/ipac20/ipac.jsp?session=P38T9M2547577.232&profile=ariall&source=~!siartinventories&view=subscriptionsummary&uri=full=3100001~!26771~!14&ri=1&aspect=Keyword&menu=search&ipp=20&spp=20&staffonly=&term=fuchs&index=.AW&uindex=&aspect=Keyword&menu=search&ri=1 

==See also==
*German inventors and discoverers

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* Henry Heinz and Brand Creation in the Late Nineteenth Century: Making Markets for Processed Food by Nancy F. Koehn. The Business History Review, Vol. 73 (Autumn, 1999), pp. 349393.



[[H. J. Heinz Company]]

The H. J. Heinz Company, also known as the Heinz Company and commonly known as Heinz and famous for its "57 Varieties" slogan and its ketchup, is a United States food processing company with world headquarters in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

The H. J. Heinz Company manufactures thousands of food products in plants on six continents, and markets these products in more than 200 countries and territories. The company claims to have 150 number-one or number two-brands worldwide. Heinz ranked first in ketchup in the US with a market share in excess of 50%; Ore-Ida label held more than 50% of the frozen-potato sector.

On February 14, 2013, Heinz agreed to be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital for $23 Billion. 

==History==

===19th-century origins===
Heinz trade card from the 19th century, promoting various products. Features the Heinz pickle.

Founder Henry J. Heinz began packing foodstuffs on a small scale at Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1869. There he founded Heinz Noble & Company with a friend, L. Clarence Noble, and began marketing horseradish. The company went bankrupt in 1875, but the following year Heinz founded another company, F & J Heinz, with his brother John Heinz and a cousin Frederick Heinz. One of this company's first products was tomato ketchup.

The company continued to grow, and in 1888 Heinz bought out his other two partners and reorganized the company as the H. J. Heinz Company. Its slogan, "57 varieties", was introduced by Heinz in 1896. Inspired by an advertisement he saw while riding an elevated train in New York City (a shoe store boasting "21 styles"), Heinz picked the number more or less at random because he liked the sound of it, selecting 7 specifically because, as he put it, of the "psychological influence of that figure and of its enduring significance to people of all ages."

===20th century===
H. J. Heinz was incorporated in 1905, and Heinz served as its first president, remaining in the position for the rest of his life. Under his leadership, the company pioneered processes for sanitary food preparation, leading a successful lobbying effort in favor of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906. During World War I, he worked with the Food Administration. 

In 1969, Tony O'Reilly joined the company's UK subsidiary, soon becoming its managing director; he 
moved to Pittsburgh in 1971 when he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the North America and Pacific region, and by 1973, R. Burt Gookin and Jack Heinz made him COO and President. He became CEO in 1979 and chairman in 1987, succeeding Jack and becoming the first non-family member to hold that post. 
Heinz Oven-Baked Beans newspaper ad from 1919.
Between 1981 and 1991, Heinz returned 28% annually, doubling the Standard & Poor's average annual return for those years. By 2000, the consolidation of grocery store chains, the spread of retailers like Walmart, and growth of private-label brands caused competition for shelf space, and put price pressure on the company's products. The decline was also attributed to an inadequate response to broad demographic changes in the United States, particularly the growth in population among Hispanic Americans and African Americans. 

Tony O'Reilly left Heinz in 1998 after issues with the company's performance, and challenges from corporate governance groups and pension funds including CalPERS. Business Week, September 15, 1997, Lead cover story: "The CEO and the Board" He was succeeded by his deputy, William R. Johnson. 

===21st century===
Billionaire Nelson Peltz initiated a proxy battle during 2006, culminating in a vote to place Peltz's nominees on the Board, which, depending on how many seats the dissident group received after the final vote tally, would displace some of the current board members. After the final vote, 2 out of the 5 nominees joined the Heinz Board. The new members of the board were Nelson Peltz and Matthew Craig Walsh.

In June 2008, Heinz began an advertising campaign in the UK for their new 'New York Deli Mayo' products. The advertisement featured a family with the mother replaced by a male New York deli worker. The advert ended with the father and the 'mother' kissing. This drew 200 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority. On June 24, 2008 Heinz took the decision to withdraw the advertisement, which was initially supposed to run for five weeks. A spokesperson for Heinz stated that the reason for the withdrawal was recognition of the fact that some of its customers had concerns about the advertisement's content. 

Withdrawing the advert caused further controversy with Heinz being accused of homophobia. The gay rights group Stonewall called for a boycott of the company's products. Some have expressed surprise that Heinz has responded to what they view as a small number of complainants, relative to the United Kingdom's 3.6 million gay and lesbian consumers. MP Diane Abbott called the decision to withdraw the advert 'ill-considered' and 'likely to offend the gay community' in an Early Day Motion on June 25. 

On February 14, 2013, it was announced that Heinz would be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital for $23 billion. Including debt assumption the transaction is valued at $28 billion. According to Heinz, the deal is the largest in food industry history. Berkshire Hathaway and 3G will each own half of Heinz with 3G running the company. Berkshire and 3G paid $72.50 a share. The acquisition was completed in June of that year. Berkshire and 3G immediately named former chief executive of Burger King Worldwide Inc, Bernardo Hees, as the CEO. 

On August 13, 2013, Heinz announced it was cutting 600 jobs in North America. 

On October 25, 2013, fast-food chain McDonalds announced it would end its 40-year relationship with Heinz, after CEO Hees took office. Investment company 3G Capital which at the time partially owns Heinz also owns a portion of McDonald's competitor, Burger King. 

==Brands==

 * ABC * Bagel Bites * Classico * Complan * Daddies * Delimex * Farex * Greenseas * HP Sauce * Diana Sauce * Heinz * Jack Daniel's sauces (under license) * Lea & Perrins * Ore-Ida * T.G.I. Friday's (under license) * Wattie's * Weight Watchers (under license) * Wyler's 

== International presence==

=== United States ===
The company's world headquarters are in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where the company has been located since 1890, and the company's "keystone" logo is based on that of Pennsylvania, the "keystone state". A majority of its ketchup is produced in Fremont, Ohio. Heinz Field was named after the Heinz company in 2001. Heinz opened a pickle factory in Holland, Michigan, in 1897, and it is the largest such facility in the world.

Heinz has factories in the following locations:
Arizona (Phoenix),
California (Chatsworth, Escalon, Irvine, San Diego),
Jacksonville, Florida,
Pocatello, Idaho,
Iowa (Cedar Rapids, Muscatine),
Fort Myers, Florida,
Newburyport, Massachusetts,
Ohio (Mason, Massillon),
Ontario, Oregon, and
Florence, South Carolina.

In 2000, seven retailersincluding Walmart, Albertsons, and Safeway comprised half of the company's sales by volume. 

===Australia===
Heinz-Watties factory in Wagga Wagga, New South Wales.
Heinz Australia's head office is located in Melbourne. Products include canned baked beans in tomato sauce (popularized in the "beanz meanz Heinz" advertising campaign), spaghetti in a similar sauce, and canned soup, condensed soup, and "ready to eat" soups.

Heinz manufactures "Big Red" tomato sauce, and a number of flavored baked bean varieties, as well as canned meals. Not all products are produced in Australia, products such as Heinz ready to eat microwave bowl soups are imported into Australia. Heinz also markets the Wattie's brand of canned foods, which are made in New Zealand.

On October 6, 2008, Heinz announced plans to acquire Golden Circle which "manufactures more than 500 products, including canned fruit and vegetables, fruit juices, drinks, cordials and jams." 

On May 27, 2011, Heinz announced it would close its factory in Girgarre, Victoria and downsize its factories in Northgate (Brisbane), and Wagga Wagga, with loss of more than 300 jobs. Heinz has other factories in Echuca and Mill Park. 

On January 6, 2012, Heinz closed its tomato sauce factory in Girgarre as announced in May. 146 workers lost their jobs. A local group was seeking to purchase the factory and start its own production, with offers of financial assistance from investors, The group's first offer for the site was rejected by Heinz. Girgarre was the second last tomato sauce factory in Australia, and its closing brought an end to Heinzs' 70 years of Australian tomato processing operations. 

=== Canada ===
Heinz was established in Canada in 1909 in a former tobacco factory in Leamington, Ontario (Tomato Capital of Canada). Most products shipped from Leamington have English and French labels for distribution throughout Canada, but a substantial amount of product is sent to the US. Ketchup is the main product produced there, but the factory also produces Canada Fancy (Grade A) tomato juice, mustard, vinegar, baby food, BBQ sauces, canned pastas, beans, pasta sauces, gravies and soups. Heinz Canada is also the major supplier of single serving and flexible packaging condiments for most fast food chains in Canada. Leamington, Ontario is the largest tomato processing region per acreage in the world. The Leamington plant usually processes more than 250,000 tons of tomatoes per year. With its unique combination of climate and rich soil, Leamington is one of the best areas for growing vegetables in the world. Heinz Canada's head office is in North York, Ontario and it also has operations in St. Marys, Ontario; Calgary, Alberta; and Montreal, Quebec.

It was announced on 14 November 2013 that the Leamington, ON facility, the second largest in the company, would start winding down operations and close sometime in May 2014 and ketchup processing operations will be consolidated at their US locations. Over 800 local jobs will be lost due to losing the town's largest employer. A local effort began in an attempt to save the 105 year old Leamington plant which included a Facebook page https://www.facebook.com/heinzfactoryemployeehelpgroup and on February 27, 2014 a letter of intent was signed by the Highbury Canco Corporation to acquire and operate the facility. http://www.ctvnews.ca/business/heinz-announces-deal-to-keep-leamington-ont-plant-in-operation-1.1706270 On April 11, 2014 it was reported that Highbury Canco Corporation has received a one-year license to process tomatoes at the facility. http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/windsor/highbury-canco-can-process-tomatoes-in-leamington-heinz-plant-1.2606570 

=== India ===
Heinz Ketchup is available in India in two varieties, the standard Tomato Ketchup and Tomato Chilli Sauce. 

Indian taste preferences vary from region to region, making it necessary for Western brands like Heinz to work on Indian interpretations of ketchups for sale in the country. Vijayraghavan, Kala. Heinz braces up for aggressive marketing. The Economic Times. January 7, 2010. 

Heinz acquired the former foods division of Glaxo India and gained the Complan, Glucon D, Glucon C, Sampriti Ghee, and Nycil products and brands.

=== Netherlands ===
Heinz sells many products in the Netherlands; the Elst factory in Gelderland is the primary production facility for Heinz sauces for Western Europe. In 2006, production of both HP Sauce and Daddies was transferred from Birmingham, West Midlands to Elst as a result of the acquisition of HP Foods and the subsequent closure of the Aston factory. Subsequently, Heinz suffered severe supply issues for the ex-HP Foods brands as the Elst factory struggled to integrate production, resulting in significant negative coverage from UK retailers. Heinz was forced to begin bottling sauce in Spain, shipping ready-made sauce from Elst, to get product back into supply. 

=== Philippines ===
In the Philippines, Heinz was distributed by NutriAsia.

As of March 2006, Heinz and NutriAsia have ended their joint-venture partnership and Heinz products are now distributed by Getz Bros.

=== United Kingdom ===

The Heinz Monument, in the centre of Cape Cornwall, commemorating its purchase for the nation by H. J. Heinz Company.
Heinz is the leading seller of baked beans in the UK, with its beans product lines referred to as Heinz Baked Beans.

The UK headquarters is in Hayes, London. After opening its first overseas office in London in 1896, the company opened its first UK factory in Peckham, south London in 1905. This was followed by a factory at Harlesden, north-west London in 1919; this factory, which was bombed twice in World War 2, remained in production until 2000. Production was started at a former munitions factory at Standish near Wigan in 1946, before the new factory at Kitt Green, near Wigan, opened in 1959. Heinz also has an infant food factory in Kendal, Cumbria. The site specializes in baby milks, previously under the brand of Farley's, but now manufactures under the name Heinz Nurture. It currently has around 200 employees.

Heinz produces oriental foods sold under the Amoy brand, used under license from Ajinomoto Co. Inc., Tokyo, Japan.

In 2001, the Food Standards Agency of the Government of the United Kingdom found Heinz canned baked beans products to be contaminated with the hormone disruptor bisphenol. Friends of the Earth: Press Release: hormone disruptor found in can linings] 

In June 2009, a company PR stunt announced they had introduced the prototype of the world's smallest, portable microwave, the "Beanzawave". The microwave would be targeted at office workers and students and can be powered by a computer via a USB port. The size of the microwave is good for heating up coffee or tea or small items. It is also good for heating up Heinz's hot snack line, Snap Pots, for which it was created. The prototype was designed by microwave expert, Gordon Andrews and industrial designer, Stephen Frazer. 

In 2013, the Kitt Green facility was listed as one among the worlds top five manufacturing units. (among other by Discovery Channel worlds top five largest factories:Reliances Jamnagar Refinery, Volkswagen s car plant, Kitt Green Foods plant, NASAs Kennedy Space Center, POSCO s steel plant). It is Europe's largest food factory and turns over more than 1 billion cans every year. 

===China===
On 22 February 2013, Sanquan Food, a Chinese frozen food company, signed a contract to purchase LongFong Food, a subsidiary of Heinz Company in China. With this sale, Heinz (China) will focus on infant foods and sauces in emerging markets such as China. Heinz Hong Kong Limited is the regional office serving for operations in Hong Kong, China and Taiwan.

== See also ==

* Heinz Field
* Heinz Sandwich Spread
* Heinz Tomato Ketchup

== Notes ==

==References==
* Condon, Richard (1959). The Manchurian Candidate. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-515-09441-2 (The Berkeley Publishing Group paperback edition).
* Dienstag, Eleanor Foa (1994). In Good Company: 125 Years at the Heinz Table. Warner Books.

==External links==

*Heinz History
*
*Historic Pittsburgh  Electronic version of Heinz's biography pp. 147
*Cecil Adams' The Straight Dope
*Company Website ("Company Info" section of the site, briefly running through H. J. Heinz's history)
*Heinz French website
*Heinz India website
*

 



[[Huffman coding]]

Huffman tree generated from the exact frequencies of the text "this is an example of a huffman tree". The frequencies and codes of each character are below. Encoding the sentence with this code requires 135 bits, as opposed to 288 bits if 36 characters of 8 bits were used. (This assumes that the code tree structure is known to the decoder and thus does not need to be counted as part of the transmitted information.)

Char Freq Code 
 space 7 111 
 a 4 010 
 e 4 000 
 f 3 1101 
 h 2 1010 
 i 2 1000 
 m 2 0111 
 n 2 0010 
 s 2 1011 
 t 2 0110 
 l 1 11001 
 o 1 00110 
 p 1 10011 
 r 1 11000 
 u 1 00111 
 x 1 10010 

In computer science and information theory, a Huffman code is an optimal prefix code found using the algorithm developed by David A. Huffman while he was a Ph.D. student at MIT, and published in the 1952 paper "A Method for the Construction of Minimum-Redundancy Codes". The process of finding and/or using such a code is called Huffman coding, and is a common technique in entropy encoding, including in lossless data compression. The algorithm's output can be viewed as a variable-length code table for encoding a source symbol (such as a character in a file). Huffman's algorithm derives this table based on the estimated probability or frequency (weight) of occurrence for each possible value of the source symbol. As in other entropy encoding methods, more common symbols are generally represented using fewer bits than less common symbols. Huffman's method can be efficiently implemented, finding a code in linear time to the number of input weights if these weights are sorted. However, although optimal among methods encoding symbols separately, Huffman coding is not always optimal among all compression methods.

== History ==

In 1951, David A. Huffman and his MIT information theory classmates were given the choice of a term paper or a final exam. The professor, Robert M. Fano, assigned a term paper on the problem of finding the most efficient binary code. Huffman, unable to prove any codes were the most efficient, was about to give up and start studying for the final when he hit upon the idea of using a frequency-sorted binary tree and quickly proved this method the most efficient. see Ken Huffman (1991) 

In doing so, the student outdid his professor, who had worked with information theory inventor Claude Shannon to develop a similar code. By building the tree from the bottom up instead of 
the top down, Huffman avoided the major flaw of the suboptimal Shannon-Fano coding.

== Terminology ==

Huffman coding uses a specific method for choosing the representation for each symbol, resulting in a prefix code (sometimes called "prefix-free codes", that is, the bit string representing some particular symbol is never a prefix of the bit string representing any other symbol). Huffman coding is such a widespread method for creating prefix codes that the term "Huffman code" is widely used as a synonym for "prefix code" even when such a code is not produced by Huffman's algorithm.

== Problem definition ==

=== Informal description ===
;Given: A set of symbols and their weights (usually proportional to probabilities).
;Find: A prefix-free binary code (a set of codewords) with minimum expected codeword length (equivalently, a tree with minimum weighted path length from the root).

=== Formalized description ===
Input.
Alphabet , which is the symbol alphabet of size . 
Set , which is the set of the (positive) symbol weights (usually proportional to probabilities), i.e. . 

Output.
Code , which is the set of (binary) codewords, where is the codeword for .

Goal.
Let be the weighted path length of code . Condition: for any code .

=== Samples ===

 Input (A, W) Symbol (a'i) a b c d e Sum 
 Weights (w'i) 0.10 0.15 0.30 0.16 0.29 = 1 
 Output C Codewords (c'i) 010 011 11 00 10 
 Codeword length (in bits)(l'i) 3 3 2 2 2 
 Weighted path length(l'i w'i ) 0.30 0.45 0.60 0.32 0.58 L(C) = 2.25 
 Optimality Probability budget(2-l'i) 1/8 1/8 1/4 1/4 1/4 = 1.00 
 Information content (in bits)(log2 w'i)  3.32 2.74 1.74 2.64 1.79 
 Entropy(w'i log2 w'i) 0.332 0.411 0.521 0.423 0.518 H(A) = 2.205 

For any code that is biunique, meaning that the code is uniquely decodeable, the sum of the probability budgets across all symbols is always less than or equal to one. In this example, the sum is strictly equal to one; as a result, the code is termed a complete code. If this is not the case, you can always derive an equivalent code by adding extra symbols (with associated null probabilities), to make the code complete while keeping it biunique.

As defined by Shannon (1948), the information content h (in bits) of each symbol ai with non-null probability is

:

The entropy H (in bits) is the weighted sum, across all symbols a'i with non-zero probability w'i, of the information content of each symbol:

:

(Note: A symbol with zero probability has zero contribution to the entropy, since So for simplicity, symbols with zero probability can be left out of the formula above.)

As a consequence of Shannon's source coding theorem, the entropy is a measure of the smallest codeword length that is theoretically possible for the given alphabet with associated weights. In this example, the weighted average codeword length is 2.25 bits per symbol, only slightly larger than the calculated entropy of 2.205 bits per symbol. So not only is this code optimal in the sense that no other feasible code performs better, but it is very close to the theoretical limit established by Shannon.

Note that, in general, a Huffman code need not be unique, but it is always one of the codes minimizing .

== Basic technique ==

===Compression===
}
The standard way to represent a signal made of 4 symbols is by using 2 bits/symbol, but the entropy of the source is 1.74 bits/symbol. If this Huffman code is used to represent the signal, then the average length is lowered to 1.85 bits/symbol; it is still far from the theoretical limit because the probabilities of the symbols are different from negative powers of two.

The technique works by creating a binary tree of nodes. These can be stored in a regular array, the size of which depends on the number of symbols, . A node can be either a leaf node or an internal node. Initially, all nodes are leaf nodes, which contain the symbol itself, the weight (frequency of appearance) of the symbol and optionally, a link to a parent node which makes it easy to read the code (in reverse) starting from a leaf node. Internal nodes contain symbol weight, links to two child nodes and the optional link to a parent node. As a common convention, bit '0' represents following the left child and bit '1' represents following the right child. A finished tree has up to leaf nodes and internal nodes. A Huffman tree that omits unused symbols produces optimal code lengths.

The process essentially begins with the leaf nodes containing the probabilities of the symbol they represent, then a new node whose children are the 2 nodes with smallest probability is created, such that the new node's probability is equal to the sum of the children's probability. With the previous 2 nodes merged into one node (thus not considering them anymore), and with the new node being now considered, the procedure is repeated until only one node remains, the Huffman tree.

The simplest construction algorithm uses a priority queue where the node with lowest probability is given highest priority:

# Create a leaf node for each symbol and add it to the priority queue.
# While there is more than one node in the queue:
## Remove the two nodes of highest priority (lowest probability) from the queue
## Create a new internal node with these two nodes as children and with probability equal to the sum of the two nodes' probabilities.
## Add the new node to the queue.
# The remaining node is the root node and the tree is complete.

Since efficient priority queue data structures require O(log n) time per insertion, and a tree with n leaves has 2n1 nodes, this algorithm operates in O(n log n) time, where n is the number of symbols.

If the symbols are sorted by probability, there is a linear-time (O(n)) method to create a Huffman tree using two queues, the first one containing the initial weights (along with pointers to the associated leaves), and combined weights (along with pointers to the trees) being put in the back of the second queue. This assures that the lowest weight is always kept at the front of one of the two queues:

#Start with as many leaves as there are symbols.
#Enqueue all leaf nodes into the first queue (by probability in increasing order so that the least likely item is in the head of the queue).
#While there is more than one node in the queues:
##Dequeue the two nodes with the lowest weight by examining the fronts of both queues.
##Create a new internal node, with the two just-removed nodes as children (either node can be either child) and the sum of their weights as the new weight.
##Enqueue the new node into the rear of the second queue.
#The remaining node is the root node; the tree has now been generated.

Although this algorithm may appear "faster" complexity-wise than the previous algorithm using a priority queue, this is not actually the case because the symbols need to be sorted by probability before-hand, a process that takes O(n log n) time in itself.

In many cases, time complexity is not very important in the choice of algorithm here, since n here is the number of symbols in the alphabet, which is typically a very small number (compared to the length of the message to be encoded); whereas complexity analysis concerns the behavior when n grows to be very large.

It is generally beneficial to minimize the variance of codeword length. For example, a communication buffer receiving Huffman-encoded data may need to be larger to deal with especially long symbols if the tree is especially unbalanced. To minimize variance, simply break ties between queues by choosing the item in the first queue. This modification will retain the mathematical optimality of the Huffman coding while both minimizing variance and minimizing the length of the longest character code.

Here's an example of optimized Huffman coding using the French subject string "j'aime aller sur le bord de l'eau les jeudis ou les jours impairs". Note that original Huffman coding tree structure would be different from the given example:

center

===Decompression===
Generally speaking, the process of decompression is simply a matter of translating the stream of prefix codes to individual byte values, usually by traversing the Huffman tree node by node as each bit is read from the input stream (reaching a leaf node necessarily terminates the search for that particular byte value). Before this can take place, however, the Huffman tree must be somehow reconstructed. In the simplest case, where character frequencies are fairly predictable, the tree can be preconstructed (and even statistically adjusted on each compression cycle) and thus reused every time, at the expense of at least some measure of compression efficiency. Otherwise, the information to reconstruct the tree must be sent a priori. A naive approach might be to prepend the frequency count of each character to the compression stream. Unfortunately, the overhead in such a case could amount to several kilobytes, so this method has little practical use. If the data is compressed using canonical encoding, the compression model can be precisely reconstructed with just bits of information (where is the number of bits per symbol). Another method is to simply prepend the Huffman tree, bit by bit, to the output stream. For example, assuming that the value of 0 represents a parent node and 1 a leaf node, whenever the latter is encountered the tree building routine simply reads the next 8 bits to determine the character value of that particular leaf. The process continues recursively until the last leaf node is reached; at that point, the Huffman tree will thus be faithfully reconstructed. The overhead using such a method ranges from roughly 2 to 320 bytes (assuming an 8-bit alphabet). Many other techniques are possible as well. In any case, since the compressed data can include unused "trailing bits" the decompressor must be able to determine when to stop producing output. This can be accomplished by either transmitting the length of the decompressed data along with the compression model or by defining a special code symbol to signify the end of input (the latter method can adversely affect code length optimality, however).

== Main properties ==
The probabilities used can be generic ones for the application domain that are based on average experience, or they can be the actual frequencies found in the text being compressed.
This requires that a frequency table must be stored with the compressed text. See the Decompression section above for more information about the various techniques employed for this purpose.

=== Optimality ===

Although Huffman's original algorithm is optimal for a symbol-by-symbol coding (i.e., a stream of unrelated symbols) with a known input probability distribution, it is not optimal when the symbol-by-symbol restriction is dropped, or when the probability mass functions are unknown. Also, if symbols are not independent and identically distributed, a single code may be insufficient for optimality. Other methods such as arithmetic coding and LZW coding often have better compression capability: Both of these methods can combine an arbitrary number of symbols for more efficient coding, and generally adapt to the actual input statistics, useful when input probabilities are not precisely known or vary significantly within the stream. However, these methods have higher computational complexity. Also, both arithmetic coding and LZW were historically a subject of some concern over patent issues. However, as of mid-2010, the most commonly used techniques for these alternatives to Huffman coding have passed into the public domain as the early patents have expired.

However, the limitations of Huffman coding should not be overstated; it can be used adaptively, accommodating unknown, changing, or context-dependent probabilities. In the case of known independent and identically distributed random variables, combining symbols ("blocking") reduces inefficiency in a way that approaches optimality as the number of symbols combined increases. Huffman coding is optimal when each input symbol is a known independent and identically distributed random variable having a probability that is an the inverse of a power of two.

Prefix codes tend to have inefficiency on small alphabets, where probabilities often fall between these optimal points. The worst case for Huffman coding can happen when the probability of a symbol exceeds 21 = 0.5, making the upper limit of inefficiency unbounded. These situations often respond well to a form of blocking called run-length encoding; for the simple case of Bernoulli processes, Golomb coding is a provably optimal run-length code.

For a set of symbols with a uniform probability distribution and a number of members which is a power of two, Huffman coding is equivalent to simple binary block encoding, e.g., ASCII coding. This reflects the fact that compression is not possible with such an input.

== Variations ==
Many variations of Huffman coding exist, some of which use a Huffman-like algorithm, and others of which find optimal prefix codes (while, for example, putting different restrictions on the output). Note that, in the latter case, the method need not be Huffman-like, and, indeed, need not even be polynomial time. An exhaustive list of papers on Huffman coding and its variations is given by "Code and Parse Trees for Lossless Source Encoding".

=== n-ary Huffman coding ===
The n-ary Huffman algorithm uses the {0, 1, ... , n  1} alphabet to encode message and build an n-ary tree. This approach was considered by Huffman in his original paper. The same algorithm applies as for binary (n equals 2) codes, except that the n least probable symbols are taken together, instead of just the 2 least probable. Note that for n greater than 2, not all sets of source words can properly form an n-ary tree for Huffman coding. In this case, additional 0-probability place holders must be added. This is because the tree must form an n to 1 contractor; for binary coding, this is a 2 to 1 contractor, and any sized set can form such a contractor. If the number of source words is congruent to 1 modulo n-1, then the set of source words will form a proper Huffman tree.

=== Adaptive Huffman coding ===
A variation called adaptive Huffman coding involves calculating the probabilities dynamically based on recent actual frequencies in the sequence of source symbols, and changing the coding tree structure to match the updated probability estimates. It is used rarely in practice, since the cost of updating the tree makes it slower than optimized adaptive arithmetic coding, that is more flexible and has a better compression.

=== Huffman template algorithm ===
Most often, the weights used in implementations of Huffman coding represent numeric probabilities, but the algorithm given above does not require this; it requires only that the weights form a totally ordered commutative monoid, meaning a way to order weights and to add them. The Huffman template algorithm enables one to use any kind of weights (costs, frequencies, pairs of weights, non-numerical weights) and one of many combining methods (not just addition). Such algorithms can solve other minimization problems, such as minimizing , a problem first applied to circuit design.

=== Length-limited Huffman coding/minimum variance huffman coding ===
Length-limited Huffman coding is a variant where the goal is still to achieve a minimum weighted path length, but there is an additional restriction that the length of each codeword must be less than a given constant. The package-merge algorithm solves this problem with a simple greedy approach very similar to that used by Huffman's algorithm. Its time complexity is , where is the maximum length of a codeword. No algorithm is known to solve this problem in linear or linearithmic time, unlike the presorted and unsorted conventional Huffman problems, respectively.

=== Huffman coding with unequal letter costs ===
In the standard Huffman coding problem, it is assumed that each symbol in the set that the code words are constructed from has an equal cost to transmit: a code word whose length is N digits will always have a cost of N, no matter how many of those digits are 0s, how many are 1s, etc. When working under this assumption, minimizing the total cost of the message and minimizing the total number of digits are the same thing.

Huffman coding with unequal letter costs is the generalization without this assumption: the letters of the encoding alphabet may have non-uniform lengths, due to characteristics of the transmission medium. An example is the encoding alphabet of Morse code, where a 'dash' takes longer to send than a 'dot', and therefore the cost of a dash in transmission time is higher. The goal is still to minimize the weighted average codeword length, but it is no longer sufficient just to minimize the number of symbols used by the message. No algorithm is known to solve this in the same manner or with the same efficiency as conventional Huffman coding.

=== Optimal alphabetic binary trees (Hu-Tucker coding) ===
In the standard Huffman coding problem, it is assumed that any codeword can correspond to any input symbol. In the alphabetic version, the alphabetic order of inputs and outputs must be identical. Thus, for example, could not be assigned code , but instead should be assigned either or . This is also known as the Hu-Tucker problem, after the authors of the paper presenting the first linearithmic solution to this optimal binary alphabetic problem, which has some similarities to Huffman algorithm, but is not a variation of this algorithm. These optimal alphabetic binary trees are often used as binary search trees.

=== The canonical Huffman code ===

If weights corresponding to the alphabetically ordered inputs are in numerical order, the Huffman code has the same lengths as the optimal alphabetic code, which can be found from calculating these lengths, rendering Hu-Tucker coding unnecessary. The code resulting from numerically (re-)ordered input is sometimes called the canonical Huffman code and is often the code used in practice, due to ease of encoding/decoding. The technique for finding this code is sometimes called Huffman-Shannon-Fano coding, since it is optimal like Huffman coding, but alphabetic in weight probability, like Shannon-Fano coding. The Huffman-Shannon-Fano code corresponding to the example is , which, having the same codeword lengths as the original solution, is also optimal.

== Applications ==
Arithmetic coding can be viewed as a generalization of Huffman coding, in the sense that they produce the same output when every symbol has a probability of the form 1/2k; in particular it tends to offer significantly better compression for small alphabet sizes. Huffman coding nevertheless remains in wide use because of its simplicity and high speed. Intuitively, arithmetic coding can offer better compression than Huffman coding because its "code words" can have effectively non-integer bit lengths, whereas code words in Huffman coding can only have an integer number of bits. Therefore, there is an inefficiency in Huffman coding where a code word of length k only optimally matches a symbol of probability 1/2k and other probabilities are not represented as optimally; whereas the code word length in arithmetic coding can be made to exactly match the true probability of the symbol.

Huffman coding today is often used as a "back-end" to some other compression methods.
DEFLATE (PKZIP's algorithm) and multimedia codecs such as JPEG and MP3 have a front-end model and quantization followed by Huffman coding (or variable-length prefix-free codes with a similar structure, although perhaps not necessarily designed by using Huffman's algorithm).

==See also==
*Adaptive Huffman coding
*Canonical Huffman code
*Data compression
*Huffyuv
*LempelZivWelch
*Modified Huffman coding - used in fax machines
*Shannon-Fano coding
*Varicode

== Notes ==

== References==
* For Java Implementation see: GitHub:Glank
* D.A. Huffman, "A Method for the Construction of Minimum-Redundancy Codes", Proceedings of the I.R.E., September 1952, pp 10981102. Huffman's original article.
* Ken Huffman. Profile: David A. Huffman, Scientific American, September 1991, pp. 5458
* Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to Algorithms, Second Edition. MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 2001. ISBN 0-262-03293-7. Section 16.3, pp. 385392.

== External links ==

* Huffman Coding with c Algorithm 
* Huffman Encoding process animation
* Huffman Encoding & Decoding Animation
* n-ary Huffman Template Algorithm
* Huffman Tree visual graph generator
* Sloane A098950 Minimizing k-ordered sequences of maximum height Huffman tree
* A quick tutorial on generating a Huffman tree
* Pointers to Huffman coding visualizations
* Explanation of Huffman coding with examples in several languages
* Interactive Huffman Tree Construction
* A C program doing basic Huffman coding on binary and text files
* zipFileMaker C++ code
* Efficient implementation of Huffman codes for blocks of binary sequences



[[High-density lipoprotein]]

High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is one of the five major groups of lipoproteins, which, in order of molecular size, largest to smallest, are chylomicrons, very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and HDL. Lipoprotein molecules enable the transportation of lipids (fats), such as cholesterol, phospholipids, and triglycerides, within the water around cells (extracellular fluid), including the bloodstream.

Because of the high cost of directly measuring HDL and LDL protein particles, blood tests are commonly performed for the surrogate value, HDL-C, i.e. the cholesterol associated with ApoA-1/HDL particles. In healthy individuals, about 30% of blood cholesterol, along with other fats, is carried by HDL. This is often contrasted with the amount of cholesterol estimated to be carried within low-density lipoprotein particles, LDL, and called LDL-C. HDL particles remove fats and cholesterol from cells, including within artery wall atheroma, and transport it back to the liver for excretion or re-utilization; thus the cholesterol carried within HDL particles (HDL-C) is sometimes called "good cholesterol" (despite being the same as cholesterol in LDL particles). Those with higher levels of HDL-C tend to have fewer problems with cardiovascular diseases, while those with low HDL-C cholesterol levels (especially less than 40 mg/dL or about 1 mmol/L) have increased rates for heart disease. Higher native HDL levels are correlated with better cardiovascular health; however, it does not appear that further increasing one's HDL improves cardiovascular outcomes. 

==Structure and function==
HDL is the smallest of the lipoprotein particles. It is the densest because it contains the highest proportion of protein to lipids. Its most abundant apolipoproteins are apo A-I and apo A-II. The liver synthesizes these lipoproteins as complexes of apolipoproteins and phospholipid, which resemble cholesterol-free flattened spherical lipoprotein particles; the complexes are capable of picking up cholesterol, carried internally, from cells by interaction with the ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1). A plasma enzyme called lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) converts the free cholesterol into cholesteryl ester (a more hydrophobic form of cholesterol), which is then sequestered into the core of the lipoprotein particle, eventually causing the newly synthesized HDL to assume a spherical shape. HDL particles increase in size as they circulate through the bloodstream and incorporate more cholesterol and phospholipid molecules from cells and other lipoproteins, for example by the interaction with the ABCG1 transporter and the phospholipid transport protein (PLTP).

HDL transports cholesterol mostly to the liver or steroidogenic organs such as adrenals, ovary, and testes by both direct and indirect pathways. HDL is removed by HDL receptors such as scavenger receptor BI (SR-BI), which mediate the selective uptake of cholesterol from HDL. In humans, probably the most relevant pathway is the indirect one, which is mediated by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). This protein exchanges triglycerides of VLDL against cholesteryl esters of HDL. As the result, VLDLs are processed to LDL, which are removed from the circulation by the LDL receptor pathway. The triglycerides are not stable in HDL, but are degraded by hepatic lipase so that, finally, small HDL particles are left, which restart the uptake of cholesterol from cells.

The cholesterol delivered to the liver is excreted into the bile and, hence, intestine either directly or indirectly after conversion into bile acids. Delivery of HDL cholesterol to adrenals, ovaries, and testes is important for the synthesis of steroid hormones.

400px
Several steps in the metabolism of HDL can participate in the transport of cholesterol from lipid-laden macrophages of atherosclerotic arteries, termed foam cells, to the liver for secretion into the bile. This pathway has been termed reverse cholesterol transport and is considered as the classical protective function of HDL toward atherosclerosis.

However, HDL carries many lipid and protein species, several of which have very low concentrations but are biologically very active. For example, HDL and its protein and lipid constituents help to inhibit oxidation, inflammation, activation of the endothelium, coagulation, and platelet aggregation. All these properties may contribute to the ability of HDL to protect from atherosclerosis, and it is not yet known which are the most important. In addition, a small subfraction of HDL lends protection against the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei brucei. This HDL subfraction, termed trypanosome lytic factor (TLF), contains specialized proteins that, while very active, are unique to the TLF molecule. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23059119 

In the stress response, serum amyloid A, which is one of the acute-phase proteins and an apolipoprotein, is under the stimulation of cytokines (IL-1, IL-6), and cortisol produced in the adrenal cortex and carried to the damaged tissue incorporated into HDL particles. At the inflammation site, it attracts and activates leukocytes. In chronic inflammations, its deposition in the tissues manifests itself as amyloidosis.

It has been postulated that the concentration of large HDL particles more accurately reflects protective action, as opposed to the concentration of total HDL particles. This ratio of large HDL to total HDL particles varies widely and is measured only by more sophisticated lipoprotein assays using either electrophoresis (the original method developed in the 1970s) or newer NMR spectroscopy methods (See also: NMR and spectroscopy), developed in the 1990s.

===Subfractions===
Five subfractions of HDL have been identified. From largest (and most effective in cholesterol removal) to smallest (and least effective), the types are 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b, and 3c. HDL, HDL2, and HDL3 subfractions, and the risk of acute myocardial infarction. A prospective population study in eastern Finnish men. 
Major Lipids in body
The lipids are a heterogeneous group of compounds which are relatively insoluble in water and soluble in non polar solvents. TC, TG, and phospholipids are the major lipids in the body. They are transpoted as complexes of lipid and proteins known as lipoproteins.
TGs: TGs are formed by combining glycerol with three molecules of fatty acid. TGs, as major components of VLDL and chylomicrons, play an important role in metabolism.When the body requers fatty acids as an energy source, the hormone glucagon signals the breakdown of the TGs by lipase to release free fatty acids (FFA). TGs are water insoluble, non-polar neutral fats. These are not the structural components of biological membranes.TGs synthesis and storage mostly occurs in liver and adipose tissue. FFA and glycerol must be activated prior to the synthesis of TGs into acylCoA glycerol -3-phosphate respectively.
Cholesterol: The name cholesterol originates from the Greek chole- (bile) andstereos (solid), and the chemical suffix-ol for an alcohol. It is an essential structural component of cell membrane, where it is required to establish proper membrane permeability and fluidity. In addition, cholesterol is an important component for the manufacture of bile acids, steroid hormones, and vitamin D. Although cholesterol is an important and necessary molecule, a high level of serum cholesterol is an indicator for diseases such as heart disease. About 20-25% of total daily cholesterol production occurs in the liver.
Phospholipids: Phospholipids are TGs that are covalently bonded to aphosphate group by an ester linkage. Phospholipids perform important functions including regulating membrane permeability and in maintaining electron transport chain in mitochondria. They participate in the reverse cholesterol transport and thus help in the removal of cholesterol from the body. They are involved in signal transmission across membranes and they act as detergents and help in solubilization of cholesterol.
Lipoprotein:
These contists of a central core of a hydrophobic lipid (including TGs and cholesteryl estsrs) encased in a hydrophilic coat of polar phospholipid, free cholesterol and apolipoprotein. There are four main goals of lipoprotein, differing in the relative proportion of the core lipids and in the type of apoprotein.
 Chylomicrons
 VLDL-C particiles
 IDL-C particles
 LDL-C particles
 HDL-C particle
 Lipoprotein (a) 

==Epidemiology==
Men tend to have noticeably lower HDL levels, with smaller size and lower cholesterol content, than women. Men also have an increased incidence of atherosclerotic heart disease. Alcohol consumption tends to raise HDL levels, and moderate alcohol consumption is associated with lower cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. Recent studies confirm the fact that HDL has a buffering role in balancing the effects of the hypercoagulable state in type 2 diabetics and decreases the high risk of cardiovascular complications in these patients. Also, the results obtained in this study revealed that there was a significant negative correlation between HDL and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). 

Epidemiological studies have shown that high concentrations of HDL (over 60 mg/dL) have protective value against cardiovascular diseases such as ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction. Low concentrations of HDL (below 40 mg/dL for men, below 50 mg/dL for women) increase the risk for atherosclerotic diseases.

Data from the landmark Framingham Heart Study showed that, for a given level of LDL, the risk of heart disease increases 10-fold as the HDL varies from high to low. On the converse, however, for a fixed level of HDL, the risk increases 3-fold as LDL varies from low to high. 

Even people with very low LDL levels are exposed to increased risk if their HDL levels are not high enough. 

==Estimating HDL via associated cholesterol==
Clinical laboratories formerly measured HDL cholesterol by separating other lipoprotein fractions using either ultracentrifugation or chemical precipitation with divalent ions such as Mg2+, then coupling the products of a cholesterol oxidase reaction to an indicator reaction. The reference method still uses a combination of these techniques. Most laboratories now use automated homogeneous analytical methods in which lipoproteins containing apo B are blocked using antibodies to apo B, then a colorimetric enzyme reaction measures cholesterol in the non-blocked HDL particles. HPLC can also be used. Subfractions (HDL-2C, HDL-3C) can be measured and have clinical significance. The measurement of apo-A reactive capacity can be used to measure HDL cholesterol but is thought to be less accurate.

===Recommended ranges===
The American Heart Association, NIH and NCEP provides a set of guidelines for fasting HDL levels and risk for heart disease. 
 
 
 

 Level mg/dL Level mmol/L Interpretation 
 <40 for men, <50 for women 60 >1.55 High HDL level, optimal condition considered protective against heart disease 

High LDL with low HDL level is an additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease. ASHWOOD, E. R., BURTIS, C. A., & BRUNS, D. E. (2008). Tietz fundamentals of clinical chemistry. (6th ed., p. 415). St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier. 

==Measuring HDL concentration and sizes==
As technology has reduced costs and clinical trials have continued to demonstrate the importance of HDL, methods for directly measuring HDL concentrations and size (which indicates function) at lower costs have become more widely available and increasingly regarded as important for assessing individual risk for progressive arterial disease and treatment methods.

===Electrophoresis measurements===
Since the HDL particles have a net negative charge and vary by size, electrophoresis measurements have been utilized since the 1960s to both indicate the number of HDL particles and additionally sort them by size. Larger HDL particles are carrying more cholesterol.

===NMR measurements===
The newest methodology for measuring HDL particles, available clinically since the late 1990s liposcience.com uses nuclear magnetic resonance fingerprinting of the particles to measure both concentration and sizes. This methodology was pioneered by researcher Jim Otvos and the North Carolina State University academic research spinoff company liposcience.com and dramatically reduced the cost of HDL measurements.

====Optimal total and large HDL concentrations====
The HDL particle concentrations are typically categorized by event rate percentiles based on the people participating and being tracked in the MESA mesa-nhlbi.org trial, a medical research study sponsored by the United States National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

 class="wikitable"
|+ Total HDL particle Table
! MESA Percentile
! Total HDL particles mol/L
! Interpretation
|-
| >75%
| >34.9
| Those with highest (Optimal) total HDL particle concentrations & lowest rates of cardiovascular disease events
|-
| 5075%
| 30.534.5
| Those with moderately high total HDL particle concentrations & moderate rates of cardiovascular disease events
|-
| 2550%
| 26.730.5
| Those with lower total HDL particle concentrations & Borderline-High rates of cardiovascular disease
|-
| 025%
| 75%
| >7.3
| Those with highest (Optimal) Large HDL particle concentrations & lowest rates of cardiovascular disease events
|-
| 5075%
| 4.87.3
| Those with moderately high Large HDL particle concentrations & moderate rates of cardiovascular disease events
|-
| 2550%
| 3.14.8
| Those with lower Large HDL particle concentrations & Borderline-High rates of cardiovascular disease
|-
| 025%
| 75%) and the highest concentrations of large HDL particles. Multiple additional measures, including LDL particle concentrations, small LDL particle concentrations, VLDL concentrations, estimations of insulin resistance and standard cholesterol lipid measurements (for comparison of the plasma data with the estimation methods discussed above) are routinely provided in clinical testing.

==Memory==
Fasting serum lipids have been associated with short term verbal memory. In a large sample of middle aged adults, low HDL cholesterol was associated with poor memory and decreasing levels over a five year follow-up period were associated with decline in memory. 

==Increasing HDL levels==

===Diet and lifestyle===
Certain changes in lifestyle may have a positive impact on raising HDL levels: 
* Decreased intake of simple carbohydrates. http://www.ajcn.org/content/77/5/1146.full 
* Weight loss 
* niacin (vitamin B3, aka nicotinic acid) supplementation 
* Aerobic exercise 
* Smoking cessation 
* Mild to moderate alcohol intake 
* Addition of soluble fiber to diet Hermansen K, et al. "Effects of soy and other natural products on LDL:HDL ratio and other lipid parameters: a literature review.", "National Institutes of Health", 2003 JanFeb. Retrieved 2011 May 31. 
* Consumption of omega-3 fatty acids such as fish oil or flax oil 
* Increased intake of cis-unsaturated fats 
* Consumption of medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) such as caproic acid, caprylic acid, capric acid, and lauric acid.
* Removal of trans fatty acids from the diet 

Consumption of cannabis (or marijuana) has been speculated to have a positive impact on the HDL-C level. However, a study performed in 4635 patients demonstrated no effect on the HDL-C levels (P=0.78) mean (standard error) HDL-C values in control subjects (never used), past users and current users were 53.4 (0.4), 53.9 (0.6) and 53.9 (0.7) mg/dL, respectively. 

Most saturated fats increase HDL cholesterol to varying degrees and also raise total and LDL cholesterol. Thijssen, M.A. and R.P. Mensink. (2005). Fatty Acids and Atherosclerotic Risk. In Arnold von Eckardstein (Ed.) Atherosclerosis: Diet and Drugs. Springer. pp. 171172. ISBN 978-3-540-22569-0. A high-fat, adequate-protein, low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet may have similar response to taking niacin (vitamin B3) as described below (lowered LDL and increased HDL) through beta-hydroxybutyrate coupling the Niacin receptor 1. 

===Drugs===
While higher HDL levels are correlated with cardiovascular health, no increase in HDL has been proven to improve health. In other words, while high HDL levels might correlate with better cardiovascular health, specifically increasing one's HDL might not increase cardiovascular health. 
Pharmacological therapy to increase the level of HDL cholesterol includes use of fibrates and niacin. Fibrates have not been proven to have an effect on overall deaths from all causes, despite their effects on lipids. 

Niacin (vitamin B3) increases HDL by selectively inhibiting hepatic diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2, reducing triglyceride synthesis and VLDL secretion through a receptor HM74 otherwise known as niacin receptor 2 and HM74A / GPR109A, niacin receptor 1.

Pharmacologic (1- to 3-gram/day) niacin doses increase HDL levels by 1030%, making it the most powerful agent to increase HDL-cholesterol. A randomized clinical trial demonstrated that treatment with niacin can significantly reduce atherosclerosis progression and cardiovascular events. However, niacin products sold as "no-flush", i.e. not having side-effects such as "niacin flush", do not contain free nicotinic acid and are therefore ineffective at raising HDL, while products sold as "sustained-release" may contain free nicotinic acid, but "some brands are hepatotoxic"; therefore the recommended form of niacin for raising HDL is the cheapest, immediate-release preparation. Both fibrates and niacin increase artery toxic homocysteine, an effect that can be counteracted by also consuming a multivitamin with relatively high amounts of the B-vitamins, however multiple European trials of the most popular B-vitamin cocktails, trial showing 30% average reduction in homocysteine, while not showing problems have also not shown any benefit in reducing cardiovascular event rates. A 2011 niacin study was halted early because patients adding niacin to their statin treatment showed no increase in heart health, but did experience an increase in the risk of stroke. http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2011/05/28/136678665/study-boosting-good-cholesterol-with-niacin-did-not-cut-heart-risks?ps=sh_sthdl 

In contrast, while the use of statins is effective against high levels of LDL cholesterol, most have little or no effect in raising HDL cholesterol. However, several statins - rosuvastatin and pitavastatin - have been demonstrated to significantly raise HDL levels. As statins are associated with side effects like myopathy which causes sore muscles, patients who experience these side effects may need to be given a lower dose of statin to control cholesterol. 

Cannabis In unadjusted analyses, past and current marijuana use were associated with lower levels of fasting insulin, glucose, HOMA-IR, BMI, and hemoglobin A1c but either current or past marijuana use was not associated with higher HDL-C levels. 

Lovaza has been shown to increase HDL-C. http://us.gsk.com/products/assets/us_lovaza.pdf However, the best evidence to date suggests it has no benefit for primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Omega-3 fatty acid#Cardiovascular disease 

Magnesium supplements raise HDL-C. 

Apo-A1 Milano, the most effective proven HDL agent, is in commercial production by a Canadian company, Sembiosys, but as of 2010 may still be several years away from clinical availability.

==See also==
*Asymmetric dimethylarginine
*Cardiovascular disease
*Cholesteryl ester storage disease
*Endothelium
*Lipid profile
*Low-density lipoprotein
*Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency

==References==
;Notes

==External links==
*Adult Treatment Panel III Full Report  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
*ATP III Update 2004  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
*HDL: The good, but complex, cholesterol  Harvard Heart Letter
* HDL Cholesterol at Lab Tests Online



[[Honolulu]]

Honolulu (; The Free Dictionary: Honolulu Dictionary Reference: Honolulu , () ) is the state capital and the most populous city in the U.S. state of Hawaii. It is the county seat of the City and County of Honolulu. Hawaii is a major tourist destination and Honolulu, situated on the island of Oahu, is the main gateway to Hawaii and a major gateway into the United States. The city is also a major hub for international business, military defense, as well as famously being host to a diverse variety of east-west and Pacific culture, cuisine, and traditions.

Honolulu is both the westernmost and the southernmost major American city. For statistical purposes, the U.S. Census Bureau recognizes the approximate area commonly referred to as "City of Honolulu" (not to be confused with the "City and County") as a census county division (CCD). Honolulu is a major financial center of the islands and of the Pacific Ocean. The population of Honolulu CCD was 390,738 at the 2010 census, while the population of the consolidated city and county was 953,207.

In the Hawaiian, Honolulu means "sheltered bay" or "place of shelter"; alternatively, it means "calm port". The old name is said to be Kou, a district roughly encompassing the area from Nuuanu Avenue to Alakea Street and from Hotel Street to Queen Street which is the heart of the present downtown district. The city has been the capital of the Hawaiian islands since 1845 and gained historical recognition following the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan near the city on December 7, 1941.

==History==

Evidence of the first settlement of Honolulu by the original Polynesian migrants to the archipelago comes from oral histories and artifacts. These indicate that there was a settlement where Honolulu now stands in the 11th century. However, after Kamehameha I conquered Oahu in the Battle of Nuuanu at Nuuanu Pali, he moved his royal court from the Island of Hawaii to Waikk in 1804. His court relocated in 1809 to what is now downtown Honolulu. The capital was moved back to Kailua-Kona in 1812.

In 1794, Captain William Brown of Great Britain was the first foreigner to sail into what is now Honolulu Harbor. More foreign ships followed, making the port of Honolulu a focal point for merchant ships traveling between North America and Asia.

In 1845, Kamehameha III moved the permanent capital of the Hawaiian Kingdom from Lahaina on Maui to Honolulu. He and the kings that followed him transformed Honolulu into a modern capital, erecting buildings such as St. Andrew's Cathedral, Iolani Palace, and Aliilani Hale. At the same time, Honolulu became the center of commerce in the islands, with descendants of American missionaries establishing major businesses in downtown Honolulu. 

Despite the turbulent history of the late 19th century and early 20th century, such as the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy in 1893, Hawaii's subsequent annexation by the United States in 1898, followed by a large fire in 1900, and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, Honolulu remained the capital, largest city, and main airport and seaport of the Hawaiian Islands. 

An economic and tourism boom following statehood brought rapid economic growth to Honolulu and Hawaii. Modern air travel brings, as of 2007, 7.6 million visitors annually to the islands, with 62.3% entering at Honolulu International Airport. Today, Honolulu is a modern city with numerous high-rise buildings, and Waikk is the center of the tourism industry in Hawaii, with thousands of hotel rooms. The UK consulting firm Mercer, in a 2009 assessment "conducted to help governments and major companies place employees on international assignments", ranked Honolulu 29th worldwide in quality of living; the survey factored in political stability, personal freedom, sanitation, crime, housing, the natural environment, recreation, banking facilities, availability of consumer goods, education, and public services including transportation. 

==Geography==
Astronaut photograph of western Honolulu, HNL Airport, and Pearl Harbor taken from the International Space Station
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of 177.2 km2. 156.7 km2 of it is land, and 20.5 km2 of it (11.56%) is water. 

The closest location on the mainland to Honolulu is the Point Arena Lighthouse in California, at 2045 nmi. Microsoft Streets and Trips 2007 Software, Copyright 2006 by Microsoft Corp. et al. (Nautical vessels require some additional distance to circumnavigate Makapuu Point.) However, part of the Aleutian Islands of Alaska are slightly closer to Honolulu than the mainland.

===Neighborhoods, boroughs, and districts===
Honolulu as seen from the International Space Station
Downtown at Bishop and King streets, with First Hawaiian Center (left) and Bankoh Center (right)

* Downtown Honolulu is the financial, commercial, and governmental center of Hawaii. On the waterfront is Aloha Tower, which for many years was the tallest building in Hawaii. Currently the tallest building is the 438 ft tall First Hawaiian Center, located on King and Bishop Streets. The downtown campus of Hawaii Pacific University is also located there.
* The Arts District Honolulu in downtown/Chinatown is on the eastern edge of Chinatown. It is a 12-block area bounded by Bethel & Smith Streets and Nimitz Highway and Beretania Street  home to numerous arts and cultural institutions. It is located within the Chinatown Historic District, which includes the former Hotel Street Vice District. 
* The Capitol District is the eastern part of Downtown Honolulu. It is the current and historic center of Hawaii's state government, incorporating the Hawaii State Capitol, Iolani Palace, Honolulu Hale (City Hall), State Library, and the statue of King Kamehameha I, along with numerous government buildings.
* Kakaako is a light-industrial district between Downtown and Waikk that has seen a large-scale redevelopment effort in the past decade. It is home to two major shopping areas, Ward Warehouse and Ward Centre. The John A. Burns School of Medicine, part of the University of Hawaii at Manoa is also located there. A Memorial to the Ehime Maru Incident victims is built at Kakaako Waterfront Park.
* Ala Moana is a district between Kakaako and Waikk and the home of Ala Moana Center, the "World's largest open air shopping center" and the largest shopping mall in Hawaii. Ala Moana Center boasts over 300 tenants and is a very popular location among tourists. Also in Ala Moana is the Honolulu Design Center and Ala Moana Beach Park, the second largest park in Honolulu.
* Waikk is the tourist district of Honolulu, located between the Ala Wai Canal and the Pacific Ocean next to Diamond Head. Numerous hotels, shops, and nightlife opportunities are located along Kalakaua and Kuhio Avenues. It is a popular location for visitors and locals alike and attracts millions of visitors every year. A majority of the hotel rooms on Oahu are located in Waikk.
* Manoa and Makiki are residential neighborhoods located in adjacent valleys just inland of downtown and Waikk. Manoa Valley is home to the main campus of the University of Hawaii. President Barack Obama lived in Makiki with his maternal grandparents until graduating from Punahou School, apart from four years in Indonesia with his mother and stepfather.
* Nuuanu and Pauoa are upper-middle-class residential districts located inland of downtown Honolulu. The National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific is located in Punchbowl Crater fronting Pauoa Valley.
* Palolo and Kaimuki are neighborhoods east of Manoa and Makiki, inland from Diamond Head. Palolo Valley parallels Manoa and is a residential neighborhood. Kaimuki is primarily a residential neighborhood with a commercial strip centered on Waialae Avenue running behind Diamond Head. Chaminade University is located in Kaimuki.
* Waialae and Kahala are upper-class districts of Honolulu located directly east of Diamond Head, where there are many high-priced homes. Also found in these neighborhoods are the Waialae Country Club and the five-star Kahala Hotel & Resort.
* East Honolulu includes the residential communities of ina Haina, Niu Valley, and Hawaii Kai. These are considered upper-middle-class neighborhoods. The upscale gated communities of Waialae iki and Hawaii Loa Ridge are also located here.
* Kalihi and Palama are working-class neighborhoods with a number of government housing developments. Lower Kalihi, toward the ocean, is a light-industrial district.
* Salt Lake and Aliamanu are (mostly) residential areas built in extinct tuff cones along the western end of the Honolulu District, not far from the Honolulu International Airport.
* Moanalua is two neighborhoods and a valley at the western end of Honolulu, and home to Tripler Army Medical Center.

===Climate===
Honolulu experiences a tropical semi-arid climate (Kppen classification Bsh), with a mostly dry summer season, due to a rain shadow effect. 
Temperatures vary little throughout the months, with average high temperatures of 80  and average lows of 65  throughout the year. Temperatures reach or exceed 90 F on an average 38 days annually, This is comparable to Washington, D.C. despite being slightly warmer during the summer, see . with lows in the upper 50s F (1415 C) occurring once or twice a year. The highest recorded temperature was 95 F during a heat wave in September 1998. The highest recorded temperature in the state was also recorded later that day in Ni'ihau. The lowest recorded temperature was 52 F on February 16, 1902, and January 20, 1969.

Annual average rainfall is 17.05 in, which mainly occurs during the winter months of October through early April, with very little rainfall during the summer. Honolulu has an average of 278 sunny days and 90 wet days per year. Although Honolulu is known to have a wet and dry season, it is unnoticeable. This is mainly because light showers fall in the summer while heavier rain falls during the winter. Yet, both seasons experience the same amount of rainy days.

Although the city is situated in the upper tropics, hurricanes are quite rare. The last recorded hurricane that hit the area was Category 4 Hurricane Iniki in 1992. Tornadoes are also uncommon and usually strike once every 15 years. Waterspouts off the coast are also uncommon, hitting about once every five years. 

Honolulu falls under the USDA 12a Plant Hardiness zone. |source 1 = 

+Average Sea Temperature http://www.seatemperature.org/north-america/united-states/honolulu-january.htm 
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
 76.5 F 75.9 F 75.7 F 76.9 F 77.9 F 78.7 F 78.9 F 79.5 F 80.4 F 79.8 F 78.5 F 77 F 

==Demographics==

The Hawaii State Capitol
DFS Galleria in Waikk

The population of Honolulu was 390,738 according to the 2010 U.S. Census. Of those, 192,781 (49.3%) were male and 197,957 (50.7%) were female. The median age for males was 40.0 and 43.0 for females; the overall median age was 41.3. Approximately 84.7% of the total population was 16 years and over; 82.6% were 18 years and over, 78.8% were 21 years and over, 21.4% were 62 years and over, and 17.8% were 65 years and over. 

In terms of race and ethnicity, 54.8% were Asian, 17.9% were White, 1.5% were Black or African American, 0.2% were American Indian or Alaska Native, 8.4% were Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 0.8% were from "some other race", and 16.3% were from two or more races. Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 5.4% of the population. In 1970, the Census Bureau reported Honolulu's population as 33.9% white and 53.7% Asian and Pacific Islander. 

Asian Americans represent the majority of Honolulu's population. The Asian ethnic groups are Japanese (19.9%), Filipinos (13.2%), Chinese (10.4%), Koreans (4.3%), Vietnamese (2.0%), Asian Indians (0.3%), Laotians (0.3%), Thais (0.2%), Cambodians (0.1%), and Indonesians (0.1%). People solely of Native Hawaiian ancestry made up just 3.2% of the population. Samoan Americans made up 1.5% of the population, Marshallese people make up 0.5% of the city's population, and Tongan people comprise 0.3% of its population. People of Guamanian or Chamorro descent made up 0.2% of the population and numbered 841 residents. 

==Economy==
Honolulu viewed from Diamond Head crater.

The largest city and airport in the Hawaiian Islands, Honolulu acts as a natural gateway to the islands' large tourism industry, which brings millions of visitors and contributes $10 billion annually to the local economy. Honolulu's location in the Pacific also makes it a large business and trading hub, particularly between the East and the West. Other important aspects of the city's economy include military defense, research and development, and manufacturing. 

Among the companies based in Honolulu are:

* Alexander & Baldwin
* Bank of Hawaii
* Central Pacific Bank
* First Hawaiian Bank
* Hawaii Medical Service Association
* Hawaii Pacific Health
* Hawaiian Electric Industries
* Matson Navigation Company
* The Queen's Health Systems

Go! Mokulele, "Contact Us." Mesa Air Group. Retrieved on February 23, 2010. Hawaiian Airlines, Island Air, and Aloha Air Cargo are headquartered in the city. "Locations." Aloha Air Cargo. Retrieved on May 21, 2009. "Honolulu CDP, HI." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on May 21, 2009. Prior to its dissolution, Aloha Airlines was headquartered in the city. "Aloha Airlines, Inc." BusinessWeek. Retrieved on May 21, 2009. At one time Mid-Pacific Airlines had its headquarters on the property of Honolulu International Airport. "World Airline Directory." Flight International. May 16, 1981. 1452. "Head Office: Honolulu International Airport, Hawaii, USA." 

In 2009, Honolulu had a 4.5% increase in the average price of rent, maintaining it in the second most expensive rental market ranking among 210 U.S. metropolitan areas. 

Since no national bank chains have any branches in Hawaii, many visitors and new residents use different banks. First Hawaiian Bank is the largest and oldest bank in Hawaii and their headquarters are at the First Hawaiian Center, the tallest building in the State of Hawaii.

==Cultural institutions==
With symbolic native-styled architectural features, First Hawaiian Center is the tallest building in Hawaii and home to a Contemporary Museum gallery

===Natural museums===
The Bishop Museum is the largest of Honolulu's museums. It is endowed with the state's largest collection of natural history specimens and the world's largest collection of Hawaiiana and Pacific culture artifacts. The Honolulu Zoo is the main zoological institution in Hawaii while the Waikiki Aquarium is a working marine biology laboratory. The Waikiki Aquarium is partnered with the University of Hawaii and other universities worldwide. Established for appreciation and botany, Honolulu is home to several gardens: Foster Botanical Garden, Liliuokalani Botanical Garden, Walker Estate, among others.

===Performing arts===
Established in 1900, the Honolulu Symphony is the oldest US symphony orchestra west of the Rocky Mountains. Other classical music ensembles include the Hawaii Opera Theatre. Honolulu is also a center for Hawaiian music. The main music venues include the Hawaii Theatre, the Neal Blaisdell Center Concert Hall and Arena, and the Waikiki Shell.

Honolulu also includes several venues for live theater, including the Diamond Head Theatre.

===Visual arts===
Various institutions for the visual arts are located in Honolulu.

The Honolulu Museum of Art is endowed with the largest collection of Asian and Western art in Hawaii. It also has the largest collection of Islamic art, housed at the Shangri La estate. The museum hosts a film and video program dedicated to arthouse and world cinema in the museum's Doris Duke Theatre, named for the museum's historic patroness Doris Duke.

The Contemporary Museum is the only contemporary art museum in the state. It has two locations: main campus in Makiki and a multi-level gallery in downtown Honolulu at the First Hawaiian Center.

The Hawaii State Art Museum (also downtown) boasts pieces by local artists as well as traditional Hawaiian art. The museum is administered by the Hawaii State Foundation on Culture and the Arts.

Honolulu also annually holds the Hawaii International Film Festival (HIFF). It showcases some of the best films from producers all across the Pacific Rim and is the largest "East meets West" style film festival of its sort in the United States.

===Tourist attractions===
Diamond Head viewed from Round Top Drive

* Ala Moana Center
* Aloha Tower
* Bishop Museum
* Diamond Head
* Hanauma Bay
* Honolulu Museum of Art
* Honolulu Zoo
* Iolani Palace
* Lyon Arboretum
* National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific
* USS Arizona Memorial
* Waikiki Aquarium
* Waikiki Beach
* Waikiki Trolley

==Sports==
Honolulu's climate lends itself to year-round activities. In 2004, Men's Fitness magazine named Honolulu the fittest city in the United States. Honolulu has three large road races:
* The Great Aloha Run is held annually on Presidents' Day.
* The Honolulu Marathon, held annually on the second Sunday in December, draws more than 20,000 participants each year, about half to two thirds of them from Japan.
* The Honolulu Triathlon is an Olympic distance triathlon event governed by USA Triathlon. Held annually in May since 2004, there is an absence of a sprint course.

Ironman Hawaii was first held in Honolulu, it was the first ever Ironman and is also the World Champs.

Fans of spectator sports in Honolulu generally support the football, volleyball, basketball, rugby union, rugby league and baseball programs of the University of Hawaii at Manoa. High school sporting events, especially football, are especially popular.

Honolulu has no professional sports teams. It was the home of the Hawaii Islanders (Pacific Coast League, 19611987), The Hawaiians (World Football League, 19741975), Team Hawaii (North American Soccer League, 1977), and the Hawaiian Islanders (af2, 20022004).

The NCAA football Hawaii Bowl is played in Honolulu. Honolulu has also hosted the NFL's annual Pro Bowl each February since 1980, though the 2010 Pro Bowl was played in Miami. In 2011, the 2011 Pro Bowl returned once again to Honolulu. From 1993 to 2008, Honolulu hosted Hawaii Winter Baseball, featuring minor league players from Major League Baseball, Nippon Professional Baseball, Korea Baseball Organization, and independent leagues.

===Venues===

Venues for spectator sports in Honolulu include:
* Les Murakami Stadium at UH-Manoa (baseball)
* Neal Blaisdell Center Arena (basketball)
* Stan Sheriff Center at UH-Manoa (basketball and volleyball)

Aloha Stadium, a venue for American football and soccer, is located in Halawa near Pearl Harbor, just outside Honolulu. "Halawa CDP, Hawaii." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on May 21, 2009. 

==Government==
Completed in 1928, Honolulu Hale is the city and county seat
Kirk Caldwell was elected mayor of Honolulu County on November 6, 2012, and has begun serving as the county's 14th mayor on January 2, 2013. The municipal offices of the City and County of Honolulu, including Honolulu Hale, the seat of the city and county, are located in the Capitol District, as are the Hawaii state government buildings. 

The Capitol District is within the Honolulu census county division (CCD), the urban area commonly regarded as the "City" of Honolulu. The Honolulu CCD is located on the southeast coast of Oahu between Makapuu and Halawa. The division boundary follows the Koolau crestline, so Makapuu Beach is in the Koolaupoko District. On the west, the division boundary follows Halawa Stream, then crosses Red Hill and runs just west of Aliamanu Crater, so that Aloha Stadium, Pearl Harbor (with the USS Arizona Memorial), and Hickam Air Force Base are actually all located in the island's Ewa CCD. 

The Hawaii Department of Public Safety operates the Oahu Community Correctional Center, the jail for the island of Oahu, in Honolulu CCD. 

The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Honolulu. The main Honolulu Post Office is located by the international airport at 3600 Aolele Street. "Post Office Location  Honolulu." United States Postal Service. Retrieved on May 21, 2009. Federal Detention Center, Honolulu, operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, is in the CDP. "FDC Honolulu Contact Information." Federal Bureau of Prisons. Retrieved on December 30, 2009. 

===Diplomatic missions on the island===
Several countries have diplomatic facilities in Honolulu, due to its strategically important position in the mid-Pacific. They include consulates of Japan, "Visa & Travel." Consulate-General of Japan in Honolulu. Accessed August 17, 2008. South Korea, "Location." Consulate-General of South Korea in Honolulu. Retrieved on January 10, 2009. Philippines, "Other Philippine Missions in the U.S.." Consulate-General of the Philippines in Chicago. Retrieved on January 10, 2009. Federated States of Micronesia, "Department of Foreign Affairs, Overseas Embassies, Consulates, and Missions." Department of Foreign Affairs (Federated States of Micronesia). Retrieved on January 10, 2009. Australia, "Australian Consulate-General in Honolulu, United States of America." Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Retrieved on January 10, 2009. and the Marshall Islands. "Foreign Mission." Republic of the Marshall Islands. Retrieved on January 28, 2009. 

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===

Colleges and universities in Honolulu include Honolulu Community College, Kapiolani Community College, the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Chaminade University, and Hawaii Pacific University. UH Manoa houses the main offices of the University of Hawaii System. Magin, Janis L. "Land deals could breathe new life into Moiliili." Pacific Business News. Sunday July 1, 2007. 1. Retrieved on October 5, 2011. "Dobelle at that time had even suggested moving the University of Hawaii system offices from the Manoa campus to office space in Moiliili, something the current administration is not actively considering." 

===Public primary and secondary schools===
Hawaii Department of Education operates public schools in Honolulu. Public high schools within the CDP area include Wallace Rider Farrington, Kaiser, Kaimuki, Kalani, Moanalua, William McKinley, and Theodore Roosevelt. 

===Private primary and secondary schools===
Private schools include Academy of the Pacific, Damien Memorial School, Hawaii Baptist Academy, Iolani School, Kamehameha Schools, Maryknoll School, Mid-Pacific Institute, La Pietra, Punahou School, Sacred Hearts Academy, St. Andrew's Priory School, Saint Francis School, Saint Louis School, the Education Laboratory School, Saint Patrick School, Trinity Christian School, and Varsity International School.

===Public libraries===
Hawaii State Public Library System operates public libraries. The Hawaii State Library in the CDP serves as the main library of the system, while the Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, also in the CDP area, serves handicapped and blind people. 

Branches in the CDP area include Aiea, Aina Haina, Ewa Beach, Hawaii Kai, Kahuku, Kailua, Kaimuki, Kalihi-Palama, Kaneohe, Kapolei, Liliha, Manoa, McCully-Moiliili, Mililani, Moanalua, Wahiawa, Waialua, Waianae, Waikiki-Kapahulu, Waimanalo, and Waipahu. 

==Media==

Honolulu is served by one daily newspaper (the Honolulu Star-Advertiser), Honolulu Magazine, several radio stations and television stations, among other media. Local news agency and CNN-affiliate Hawaii News Now broadcasts and is headquartered out of Honolulu.

Honolulu and the island of Oahu has also been the location for many film and television projects, including Hawaii Five-0 and Lost.

==Transportation==

===Air===
Honolulu International Airport old control tower
8R "Reef Runway" of Honolulu International Airport
Aerial view of H-1 (looking east) from Honolulu Airport heading into downtown Honolulu

Located at the western end of the CDP, Honolulu International Airport (HNL) is the principal aviation gateway to the state of Hawaii. Kalaeloa Airport is primarily a commuter facility used by unscheduled air taxis, general aviation and transient and locally based military aircraft.

===Highways===
Honolulu has been ranked as having the nations worst traffic congestion, beating former record holder Los Angeles. Drivers waste on average over 58 hours per year on congested roadways. The following freeways, part of the Interstate Highway System serve Honolulu:

* 30px Interstate H-1, which, coming into the city from the west, passes Hickam Air Force Base and Honolulu International Airport, runs just north of Downtown and continues eastward through Makiki and Kaimuki, ending at Waialae/Kahala. H-1 connects to Interstate H-2 from Wahiawa and Interstate H-3 from Kaneohe, west of the CDP.
* 30px Interstate H-201also known as the Moanalua Freeway and sometimes numbered as its former number, Hawaii State Rte. 78connects two points along H-1: at Aloha Stadium and Fort Shafter. Close to H-1 and Aloha Stadium, H-201 has an exchange with the western terminus of Interstate H-3 to the windward side of Oahu (Kaneohe). This complex of connecting ramps, some directly between H-1 and H-3, is in Halawa.
* H2 - connects H1 with the Mililani area in the center of the island.
* H3 - connects H1 with the Kaneohe (windward) side of the island.

Other major highways that link Honolulu proper with other parts of the Island of Oahu are:
* Pali Highway, State Rte. 61, crosses north over the Koolau range via the Pali Tunnels to connect to Kailua and Kaneohe on the windward side of the Island.
* Likelike Highway, State Rte. 63, also crosses the Koolau to Kaneohe via the Wilson Tunnels.
* Kalanianaole Highway, State Rte. 72, runs eastward from Waialae/Kahala to Hawaii Kai and around the east end of the island to Waimanalo Beach.
* Kamehameha Highway, State Rts. 80, 83, 99 and 830, runs westward from near Hickam Air Force Base to Aiea and beyond, eventually running through the center of the island and ending in Kaneohe.

Like most major American cities, the Honolulu metropolitan area experiences heavy traffic congestion during rush hours, especially to and from the western suburbs of Kapolei, 'Ewa Beach, Aiea, Pearl City, Waipahu, and Mililani.

There is a Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP). 

===Public transport===

====Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation====
In November 2010, voters approved a charter amendment to create a public transit authority to oversee the planning, construction, operation and future extensions to Honolulu's future rail system (see below). Operations began on July 1, 2011. The Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation (HART) currently includes a 10-member board of directors; three members appointed by the mayor, three members selected by the Honolulu City Council, and the city and state transportation directors. 

====Bus====

Established by former Mayor Frank F. Fasi as the replacement for the Honolulu Rapid Transit Company (HRT), Honolulu's TheBus system has been twice honored by the American Public Transportation Association bestowing the title of "America's Best Transit System" for 19941995 and 20002001. TheBus operates 107 routes serving Honolulu and most major cities and towns on Oahu. TheBus comprises a fleet of 531 buses, and is run by the non-profit corporation Oahu Transit Services in conjunction with the city Department of Transportation Services. Honolulu is ranked 4th for highest per-capita use of mass transit in the United States. National Transit Database, Top Transit Cities (2006) 

====Rail====

Currently, there is no urban rail transit system in Honolulu, although electric street railways were operated in Honolulu by the now-defunct Honolulu Rapid Transit Company prior to World War II. Predecessors to the Honolulu Rapid Transit Company were the Honolulu Rapid Transit and Land Company (began 1903) and Hawaiian Tramways (began 1888). 

The City and County of Honolulu is currently constructing a 20 mi rail transit line that will connect Honolulu with cities and suburban areas near Pearl Harbor and in the Leeward and West Oahu regions. The Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project is aimed at alleviating traffic congestion for West Oahu commuters while being integral in the westward expansion of the metropolitan area. The project, however, has been criticized by opponents of rail for its cost, delays, and potential environmental impacts, but the line is expected to have large ridership.

==Notable people==
The following are notable people who were born in Honolulu, and/or current and former residents of Honolulu:

* Barack Obama, 44th and current President of the United States (2009present) 
* Neil Abercrombie, 7th and current Governor of Hawaii 
* Daniel Akaka, United States Senator, first Native Hawaiian senator in the United States 
* David Amerson, football player, North Carolina State and Washington Redskins cornerback
* Judi Andersen, Miss Hawaii USA 1978, Miss USA 1978
* George Ariyoshi, 3rd Governor of Hawaii, the first Asian American governor in the United States 
* Sarah Wayne Callies, actress 
* Tia Carrere, singer, actress 
* Byron Chamberlain, former football player in the National Football League 
* Mark Dacascos, actor, martial artist 
* Ron Darling, baseball pitcher, broadcaster 
* Lauren Graham, actress and producer 
* Kyla Ross, Olympic gold medalist gymnast and member of the Fierce Five
* Kelly Hu, Miss Hawaii Teen USA 1985, Miss Teen USA 1985 
* Melody Miyuki Ishikawa, singer
* Nicole Kidman, actress 
* Daniel Dae Kim, actor 
* Darren Kimura, businessman, founder of Sopogy
* Lois Lowry, author 
* Bruno Mars, singer and songwriter 
* Janel Parrish, actress (plays Mona in Pretty Little Liars), musician, and model
* Bette Midler, singer and actress 
* Timothy Olyphant, actor 
* Pierre Omidyar, eBay, creator and founder 
* B.J. Penn, UFC lightweight and welterweight champion
* Hironobu Sakaguchi, video game director, writer and producer 
* Nicole Scherzinger, singer, dancer, model 
* Jake Shimabukuro, ukulele virtuoso 
* Thomas Tamas, sport shooter 
* Manti Teo, football player for Notre Dame and San Diego Chargers
* Macel Wilson, Miss Hawaii USA 1962, Miss USA 1962
* Tanya Wilson, Miss Hawaii USA 1972, Miss USA 1972
* Milt Wilcox, MLB pitcher for Detroit Tigers

===Deceased===
* Queen Liliuokalani, last reigning Queen of the Hawaiian Islands 
* Bernice Pauahi Bishop, Hawaiian princess, philanthropist, alii, and Kamehameha descendant 
* Charles Reed Bishop businessman, philanthropist, founder of the Bishop Museum 
* John A. Burns, 2nd Governor of Hawaii 
* Alexander Cartwright, "Father of Baseball" 
* Joseph Campbell, writer, lecturer 
* James Dole, developer of the Pineapple industry in Hawaii, namesake of the Dole Food Company 
* Sanford B. Dole, lawyer, jurist, the President of the Republic of Hawaii, and the 1st Territorial Governor of Hawaii 
* Amelia Earhart, American aviation pioneer and author 
* Hiram Fong, United States Senator, namesake of the Senator Fong's Plantation & Gardens in Kaneohe 
* Willi Hennig, biologist
* Daniel Inouye, Medal of Honor recipient, United States Senator, President pro tempore 
* Princess Kaiulani, crown princess, heir to the throne of the Kingdom of Hawaii 
* King Kalakaua, last reigning king of the Kingdom of Hawaii 
* Duke Kahanamoku, Olympic gold medalist, surfer, actor 
* Israel Kamakawiwoole, Hawaiian musician 
* King Lunalilo, King to the Kingdom of Hawaii 
* Ferdinand Marcos, former President of the Philippines 
* Megan McClung, first female United States Marine Corps officer killed in combat during the Iraq War 
* Ed Parker, martial artist, author 
* Syngman Rhee, 1st President of South Korea 
* Robert Louis Stevenson, novelist, poet, essayist and travel writer 
* Sun Yat-sen, "Father of the Nation" of the Republic of China, and the "forerunner of democratic revolution" in the People's Republic of China 
* Donald Sur, composer and musicologist
* Lorrin A. Thurston lawyer, politician in Honolulu early 1900s 

==Twin towns  Sister cities==

Honolulu is twinned with:
* Naples, Italy
* Sintra, Portugal
* City of San Fernando, Philippines
* Hiroshima, Japan
* Seoul, South Korea 

==See also==
* List of cities with the most high-rise buildings
* List of tallest buildings in Honolulu

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

* City & County of Honolulu official site
* Hawaii Visitors and Convention Bureau

 



[[Percolozoa]]

The Percolozoa are a group of colourless protozoa, including many that can transform between amoeboid, flagellate, and encysted stages.

==Terminology and classification==
These are collectively referred to as schizopyrenids, amoeboflagellates, or vahlkampfids. They also include the acrasids, a group of social amoebae that aggregate to form sporangia. The entire group is usually called the Heterolobosea, but this may be restricted to members with amoeboid stages.

One Heterolobosea classification system is as follows: 
* Order Schizopyrenida
** Family Vahlkampfiidae
** Family Gruberellidae
* Order Acrasida
** Family Acrasidae
Pleurostomum flabellatum has recently been added to Heterolobosea. 

==Characteristics==
Most Percolozoa are found as bacterivores in soil, freshwater, and on feces. There are a few marine and parasitic forms, including the species Naegleria fowleri, which can become pathogenic in humans and is mostly fatal. The group is closely related to the Euglenozoa, and share with them the unusual though not unique characteristic of having mitochondria with discoid cristae. The presence of a ventral feeding groove in the flagellate stage, as well as other features, suggests that they are part of the excavate group.

The amoeboid stage is roughly cylindrical, typically around 20-40 m in length. They are traditionally considered lobose amoebae, but are not related to the others and unlike them do not form true lobose pseudopods. Instead, they advance by eruptive waves, where hemispherical bulges appear from the front margin of the cell, which is clear. The flagellate stage is slightly smaller, with two or four anterior flagella anterior to the feeding groove.

Usually the amoeboid form is taken when food is plentiful, and the flagellate form is used for rapid locomotion. However, not all members are able to assume both forms. The genera Percolomonas, Lyromonas, and Psalteriomonas are known only as flagellates, while Vahlkampfia, Pseudovahlkampfia, and the acrasids do not have flagellate stages. As mentioned above, under unfavourable conditions, the acrasids aggregate to form sporangia. These are superficially similar to the sporangia of the dictyostelids, but the amoebae only aggregate as individuals or in small groups and do not die to form the stalk.

==History==
The Heterolobosea were first defined by Page and Blanton in 1985 

 as a class of amoebae, and so only included those forms with amoeboid stages. Cavalier-Smith created the phylum Percolozoa for the extended group, together with the enigmatic flagellate Stephanopogon. 
 

Cavalier-Smith maintained the Heterolobosea as a class for amoeboid forms. He has defined Percolozoa as "Heterolobosea plus Percolatea classis nov." 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Tree of Life Heterolobosea

*

[[History of India]]

The history of India begins with evidence of human activity of Homo sapiens, as long as 75,000 years ago, or with earlier hominids including Homo erectus from about 500,000 years ago. G. Bongard-Levin, A History of India (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1979) p. 11. 

The Indus Valley Civilization, which spread and flourished in the northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent from c. 3300 to 1300 BCE in present-day Pakistan and northwest India, was the first major civilization in South Asia. Romila Thapar, A History of India (Penguin Books: New York, 1966) p. 23. A sophisticated and technologically advanced urban culture developed in the Mature Harappan period, from 2600 to 1900 BCE. Romila Thapar, A History of India, p. 24. This civilization collapsed at the start of the second millennium BCE and was later followed by the Iron Age Vedic Civilization, which extended over much of the Indo-Gangetic plain and which witness the rise of major polities known as the Mahajanapadas. In one of these kingdoms, Magadha, Mahavira and Gautama Buddha were born in the 6th or 5th century BCE and propagated their Shramanic philosophies.

Most of the subcontinent was conquered by the Maurya Empire during the 4th and 3rd centuries BCE. Various parts of India were ruled by numerous Middle kingdoms for the next 1,500 years, among which the Gupta Empire stands out. This period, witnessing a Hindu religious and intellectual resurgence, is known as the classical or "Golden Age of India". During this period, aspects of Indian civilization, administration, culture, and religion (Hinduism and Buddhism) spread to much of Asia, while kingdoms in southern India had maritime business links with the Roman Empire from around 77 CE. During this period Indian cultural influence spread over many parts of Southeast Asia which led to the establishment of Indianized kingdoms in Southeast Asia. The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia: From early times to c. 1800, Band 1 by Nicholas Tarling p.281 

7th-11th centuries saw the Tripartite struggle between the Pala Empire, Rashtrakuta Empire, and Gurjara Pratihara Empire centered around Kannauj. Southern India saw the rule of the Chalukya Empire, Chola Empire, Pallava Empire, Pandyan Empire, and Western Chalukya Empire. The early medieval period Indian mathematics influenced the development of mathematics and astronomy in the Arab world and the Hindu numerals were introduced. Essays on Ancient India by Raj Kumar p.199 

Muslim rule started in some parts of north India in the 13th century when the Delhi Sultanate was established in 1206 CE. The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought: page 340 The Delhi Sultanate ruled the major part of northern India in the early 14th century, but declined in the late 14th century, which saw the emergence of several powerful Hindu states like the Vijayanagara Empire, Gajapati Kingdom, Ahom Kingdom and Mewar dynasty. In the 16th century Mughal rule came from Central Asia to cover most of the northern parts of India. The Mughal Empire suffered a gradual decline in the early 18th century, which provided opportunities for the Maratha Empire, Sikh Empire and Mysore Kingdom to exercise control over large areas in the subcontinent. A History of State and Religion in India by Ian Copland, Ian Mabbett, Asim Roy, Kate Brittlebank, Adam Bowles: p. 161 History of Mysore Under Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sultan by Joseph Michaud p.143 

Beginning in the late 18th century and over the next century, large areas of India were annexed by the British East India Company. Dissatisfaction with Company rule led to the Indian Rebellion of 1857, after which the British provinces of India were directly administered by the British Crown and witnessed a period of both rapid development of infrastructure and economic stagnation. During the first half of the 20th century, a nationwide struggle for independence was launched with the leading party involved being the Indian National Congress which was later joined by Muslim League as well.

The subcontinent gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1947, after the British provinces were partitioned into the dominions of India and Pakistan and the princely states all acceded to one of the new states.

== Prehistoric era==

===Stone Age===

Bhimbetka rock painting, Madhya Pradesh, India (c. 30,000 years old)
Stone age (5000 BCE) writings of Edakkal Caves in Kerala, India.

Isolated remains of Homo erectus in Hathnora in the Narmada Valley in central India indicate that India might have been inhabited since at least the Middle Pleistocene era, somewhere between 500,000 and 200,000 years ago. Tools crafted by proto-humans that have been dated back two million years have been discovered in the northwestern part of the subcontinent. The ancient history of the region includes some of South Asia's oldest settlements and some of its major civilisations. The earliest archaeological site in the subcontinent is the palaeolithic hominid site in the Soan River valley. Soanian sites are found in the Sivalik region across what are now India, Pakistan, and Nepal. Parth R. Chauhan. Distribution of Acheulian sites in the Siwalik region. An Overview of the Siwalik Acheulian & Reconsidering Its Chronological Relationship with the Soanian  A Theoretical Perspective. 

The Mesolithic period in the Indian subcontinent was followed by the Neolithic period, when more extensive settlement of the subcontinent occurred after the end of the last Ice Age approximately 12,000 years ago. The first confirmed semipermanent settlements appeared 9,000 years ago in the Bhimbetka rock shelters in modern Madhya Pradesh, India. Early Neolithic culture in South Asia is represented by the Bhirrana findings (7500 BCE) in Haryana, India & Mehrgarh findings (7000 BCE onwards) in Balochistan, Pakistan. Indus Valley 2,000 years older than thought. Hindustan Times (4 November 2012). Retrieved on 12 July 2013. 

Traces of a Neolithic culture have been alleged to be submerged in the Gulf of Khambat in India, radiocarbon dated to 7500 BCE. However, the one dredged piece of wood in question was found in an area of strong ocean currents. Neolithic agriculture cultures sprang up in the Indus Valley region around 5000 BCE, in the lower Gangetic valley around 3000 BCE, and in later South India, spreading southwards and also northwards into Malwa around 1800 BCE. The first urban civilisation of the region began with the Indus Valley Civilisation. 

===Bronze Age===

"Priest King" of Indus Valley Civilisation
The Bronze Age in the Indian subcontinent began around 3300 BCE with the early Indus Valley Civilisation. It was centred on the Indus River and its tributaries which extended into the Ghaggar-Hakra River valley, See map on page 263 the Ganges-Yamuna Doab, Indian Archaeology, A Review. 1958-1959. Excavations at Alamgirpur. Delhi: Archaeol. Surv. India, pp. 5152. Gujarat, and southeastern Afghanistan. 

The civilisation is primarily located in modern-day India (Gujarat, Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan provinces) and Pakistan (Sindh, Punjab, and Balochistan provinces). Historically part of Ancient India, it is one of the world's earliest urban civilisations, along with Mesopotamia and Ancient Egypt. Inhabitants of the ancient Indus river valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and handicraft (carneol products, seal carving), and produced copper, bronze, lead, and tin.

The Mature Indus civilisation flourished from about 2600 to 1900 BCE, marking the beginning of urban civilisation on the subcontinent. The civilisation included urban centres such as Dholavira, Kalibangan, Ropar, Rakhigarhi, and Lothal in modern-day India, and Harappa, Ganeriwala, and Mohenjo-daro in modern-day Pakistan. The civilisation is noted for its cities built of brick, roadside drainage system, and multistoried houses.

==Vedic period (1750 BCE - 500 BCE)==
Archaeological cultures associated with Indo-Iranian migrations (after EIEC). The Andronovo, BMAC and Yaz cultures have often been associated with Indo-Iranian migrations. The GGC, Cemetery H, Copper Hoard and PGW cultures are candidates for cultures associated with Indo-Aryan movements.
A map of North India in the late Vedic period.
Scheme of Indo-European migrations from ca. 4000 to 1000 BCE according to the Kurgan hypothesis. The magenta area corresponds to the assumed Urheimat (Samara culture, Sredny Stog culture). The red area corresponds to the area which may have been settled by Indo-European-speaking peoples up to ca. 2500 BCE; the orange area to 1000 BCE.

The Vedic period is characterised by Indo-Aryan culture associated with the texts of Vedas, sacred to Hindus, which were orally composed in Vedic Sanskrit. The Vedas are some of the oldest extant texts in India. G. Bongard-Levin, A History of India: Part 1 (Progressive Books: Moscow, 1979) p. 51. The Vedic period lasted from about 1750 to 500 BCE, Romila Thapar, A History of India: Part 1, pp. 29-30. contributed the foundations of Hinduism and other cultural aspects of Indian subcontinent. In terms of culture, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age in this period. 

===Vedic society===
Historians have analysed the Vedas to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain. Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent from the north-west. Vedic people believed in the transmigration of the soul, and the peepul tree and cow were sanctified by the time of the Atharva Veda. Singhal, K. C; Gupta, Roshan. The Ancient History of India, Vedic Period: A New Interpretation. Atlantic Publishers and Distributors. ISBN 8126902868. P. 150-151. Many of the concepts of Indian philosophy espoused later like Dharma, Karma etc. trace their root to the Vedas. *Day, Terence P. (1982). The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature. Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. P. 42-45. ISBN 0-919812-15-5. 
The swastika is a major element of Hindu iconography.

Early Vedic society consisted of largely pastoral groups, distinct to Harappan urbanisation having been abandoned. India: Reemergence of Urbanisation. Retrieved on 12 May 2007. After the time of the Rigveda, Aryan society became increasingly agricultural and was socially organised around the four varnas, or social classes. In addition to the Vedas, the principal texts of Hinduism, the core themes of the Sanskrit epics Ramayana and Mahabharata are said to have their ultimate origins during this period. The Mahabharata remains, today, the longest single poem in the world. Romila Thapar, A History of India Part 1, p. 31. The events of Mahabharata happened in a later period than Ramayana. In fact, there are references of Ramayana in Mahabharata. Romila Thapar, A History of India Part 1, p. 32. The early Indo-Aryan presence probably corresponds, in part, to the Ochre Coloured Pottery culture in archaeological contexts. 

===Sanskritization===

Since Vedic times, "people from many strata of society throughout the subcontinent tended to adapt their religious and social life to Brahmanic norms", a process sometimes called Sanskritization. Encyclopedia Brittanica, Other sources: the process of "Sanskritization". It is reflected in the tendency to identify local deities with the gods of the Sanskrit texts. 

The Kuru kingdom M. Witzel, Early Sanskritization. Origins and development of the Kuru State. B. Klver (ed.), Recht, Staat und Verwaltung im klassischen Indien. The state, the Law, and Administration in Classical India. Mnchen : R. Oldenbourg 1997, 27-52 = Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies, vol. 1,4, December 1995, corresponds to the Black and Red Ware and Painted Grey Ware cultures and to the beginning of the Iron Age in northwestern India, around 1000 BCE, as well as with the composition of the Atharvaveda, the first Indian text to mention iron, as , literally "black metal." The Painted Grey Ware culture spanned much of northern India from about 1100 to 600 BCE. The Vedic Period also established republics such as Vaishali, which existed as early as the 6th century BCE and persisted in some areas until the 4th century CE. The later part of this period corresponds with an increasing movement away from the previous tribal system towards the establishment of kingdoms, called mahajanapadas.

=="Second urbanisation" (800-200 BCE)==
During the time between 800 and 200 BCE the Shramana-movement formed, from which originated Jainism and Buddhism. In the same period the first Upanishads were written. After 500 BCE, the so-called "Second urbanisation" started, with new urban settlements arising at the Ganges plain, especially the Central Ganges plain. The Central Ganges Plain, where Magadha gained prominence, forming the base of the Mauryan Empire, was a distinct cultural area, with new states arising after 500 BCE R. Champakalakshmi, The beginning of the historical period, c. 500150 bce, Encyclopedia Britannica during the so-called "Second urbanisation". It was influenced by the Vedic culture, but differed markedly from the Kuru-Panchala region. It "was the area of the earliest known cultivation of rice in South Asia and by 1800 BCE was the location of an advanced neolithic population associated with the sites of Chirand and Chechar". In this region the Shramanic movements flourished, and Jainism and Buddhism originated.

===Mahajanapadas (600-300 BCE)===
The Mahajanapadas were the sixteen most powerful kingdoms and republics of the era, located mainly across the fertile Indo-Gangetic plains, there were a number of smaller kingdoms stretching the length and breadth of Ancient India.

In the later Vedic Age, a number of small kingdoms or city states had covered the subcontinent, many mentioned in Vedic, early Buddhist and Jaina literature as far back as 500 BCE. sixteen monarchies and "republics" known as the MahajanapadasKashi, Kosala, Anga, Magadha, Vajji (or Vriji), Malla, Chedi, Vatsa (or Vamsa), Kuru, Panchala, Matsya (or Machcha), Shurasena, Assaka, Avanti, Gandhara, and Kambojastretched across the Indo-Gangetic Plain from modern-day Afghanistan to Bengal and Maharastra. This period saw the second major rise of urbanism in India after the Indus Valley Civilisation. 

Many smaller clans mentioned within early literature seem to have been present across the rest of the subcontinent. Some of these kings were hereditary; other states elected their rulers. The educated speech at that time was Sanskrit, while the languages of the general population of northern India are referred to as Prakrits. Many of the sixteen kingdoms had coalesced to four major ones by 500/400 BCE, by the time of Gautama Buddha. These four were Vatsa, Avanti, Kosala, and Magadha. 

===Upanishads and Shramana movements===
Nalanda is considered one of the first great universities in recorded history. It was the centre of Buddhist learning and research in the world from 450 to 1193 CE.

The 9th and 8th centuries BCE witnessed the composition of the earliest Upanishads. Upanishads form the theoretical basis of classical Hinduism and are known as Vedanta (conclusion of the Vedas). The older Upanishads launched attacks of increasing intensity on the ritual. Anyone who worships a divinity other than the Self is called a domestic animal of the gods in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. The Mundaka launches the most scathing attack on the ritual by comparing those who value sacrifice with an unsafe boat that is endlessly overtaken by old age and death. 

Increasing urbanisation of India in 7th and 6th centuries BCE led to the rise of new ascetic or shramana movements which challenged the orthodoxy of rituals. Mahavira (c. 549477 BCE), proponent of Jainism, and Buddha (c. 563-483), founder of Buddhism were the most prominent icons of this movement. Shramana gave rise to the concept of the cycle of birth and death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation. Flood, Gavin. Olivelle, Patrick. 2003. The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Malden: Blackwell. pg. 273-4. "The second half of the first millennium BCE was the period that created many of the ideological and institutional elements that characterize later Indian religions. The renouncer tradition played a central role during this formative period of Indian religious history. ... Some of the fundamental values and beliefs that we generally associate with Indian religions in general and Hinduism in particular were in part the creation of the renouncer tradition. These include the two pillars of Indian theologies: samsara - the belief that life in this world is one of suffering and subject to repeated deaths and births (rebirth); moksa/nirvana - the goal of human existence....." Buddha found a Middle Way that ameliorated the extreme asceticism found in the Sramana religions. Laumakis, Stephen. An Introduction to Buddhist philosophy. 2008. p. 4 

Around the same time, Mahavira (the 24th Tirthankara in Jainism) propagated a theology that was to later become Jainism. Mary Pat Fisher (1997) In: Living Religions: An Encyclopedia of the World's Faiths I.B.Tauris : London ISBN 1-86064-148-2 - Jainism's major teacher is the Mahavira, a contemporary of the Buddha, and who died approximately 526 BCE. Page 114 However, Jain orthodoxy believes the teachings of the Tirthankaras predates all known time and scholars believe Parshva, accorded status as the 23rd Tirthankara, was a historical figure. The Vedas are believed to have documented a few Tirthankaras and an ascetic order similar to the shramana movement. Mary Pat Fisher (1997) In: Living Religions: An Encyclopedia of the World's Faiths I.B.Tauris : London ISBN 1-86064-148-2 - "The extreme antiquity of Jainism as a non-vedic, indigenous Indian religion is well documented. Ancient Hindu and Buddhist scriptures refer to Jainism as an existing tradition which began long before Mahavira." Page 115 

===Magadha Empire===

Magadha () formed one of the sixteen Mah-Janapadas (Sanskrit: "Great Countries") or kingdoms in ancient India. The core of the kingdom was the area of Bihar south of the Ganges; its first capital was Rajagriha (modern Rajgir) then Pataliputra (modern Patna). Magadha expanded to include most of Bihar and Bengal with the conquest of Licchavi and Anga respectively, followed by much of eastern Uttar Pradesh and Orissa. The ancient kingdom of Magadha is heavily mentioned in Jain and Buddhist texts. It is also mentioned in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, Puranas. A state of Magadha, possibly a tribal kingdom, is recorded in Vedic texts much earlier in time than 600BCE.

The earliest reference to the Magadha people occurs in the Atharva-Veda where they are found listed along with the Angas, Gandharis, and Mujavats. Hinduism was the only roots in Magadha; two of India's greatest empires, the Maurya Empire and Gupta Empire, originated from Magadha. These empires saw advancements in ancient India's science, mathematics, astronomy, religion, and philosophy and were considered the Indian "Golden Age". The Magadha kingdom included republican communities such as the community of Rajakumara. Villages had their own assemblies under their local chiefs called Gramakas. Their administrations were divided into executive, judicial, and military functions.

===Persian and Greek conquests===

Asia in 323 BCE, the Nanda Empire and Gangaridai Empire in relation to Alexander's Empire and neighbors.

In 530 BCE Cyrus the Great, King of the Persian Achaemenid Empire crossed the Hindu-Kush mountains to seek tribute from the tribes of Kamboja, Gandhara and the trans-India region (modern Afghanistan and Pakistan). By 520 BCE, during the reign of Darius I of Persia, much of the northwestern subcontinent (present-day eastern Afghanistan and Pakistan) came under the rule of the Persian Achaemenid Empire. The area remained under Persian control for two centuries. During this time India supplied mercenaries to the Persian army then fighting in Greece. 

Under Persian rule the famous city of Takshashila became a centre where both Vedic and Iranian learning were mingled. Romila Thapar, A History of India, p. 59. The impact of Persian ideas was felt in many areas of Indian life. Persian coinage and rock inscriptions were adopted by India. However, Persian ascendency in northern India ended with Alexander the Great's conquest of Persia in 327 BCE. Carl Roebuck, The World of Ancient Times (Charles Scribner's Sons Publishing: New York, 1966) p. 357. 

By 326 BCE, Alexander the Great had conquered Asia Minor and the Achaemenid Empire and had reached the northwest frontiers of the Indian subcontinent. There he defeated King Porus in the Battle of the Hydaspes (near modern-day Jhelum, Pakistan) and conquered much of the Punjab. Alexander's march east put him in confrontation with the Nanda Empire of Magadha and the Gangaridai Empire of Bengal. His army, exhausted and frightened by the prospect of facing larger Indian armies at the Ganges River, mutinied at the Hyphasis (modern Beas River) and refused to march further East. Alexander, after the meeting with his officer, Coenus, and learning about the might of Nanda Empire, was convinced that it was better to return.

The Persian and Greek invasions had important repercussions on Indian civilisation. The political systems of the Persians were to influence future forms of governance on the subcontinent, including the administration of the Mauryan dynasty. In addition, the region of Gandhara, or present-day eastern Afghanistan and northwest Pakistan, became a melting pot of Indian, Persian, Central Asian, and Greek cultures and gave rise to a hybrid culture, Greco-Buddhism, which lasted until the 5th century CE and influenced the artistic development of Mahayana Buddhism.

===Maurya Empire (322185 BCE)===

The Maurya Empire under Ashoka the Great.
Ashokan pillar at Vaishali, 3rd century BCE.

The Maurya Empire (322185 BCE), ruled by the Mauryan dynasty, was a geographically extensive and powerful political and military empire in ancient India.It was the first empire to unify India into one state. The empire was established by Chandragupta Maurya in Magadha, which is now Bihar. The empire flourished under the reign of Ashoka the Great. 

At its greatest extent, it stretched to the north to the natural boundaries of the Himalayas and to the east into what is now Assam. To the west, it reached beyond modern Pakistan, annexing Balochistan and much of what is now Afghanistan, including the modern Herat and Kandahar provinces. The empire was expanded into India's central and southern regions by the emperors Chandragupta and Bindusara, but it excluded extensive unexplored tribal and forested regions near Kalinga which were subsequently taken by Ashoka. the Maurya Empire is regarded largest empire ruled by any Indian Ruler.

Ashoka ruled the Maurya Empire for 37 years from 268 BCE until he died in 232 BCE. During that time, Ashoka pursued an active foreign policy aimed at setting up a unified state. However, Ashoka became involved in a war with the state of Kalinga which is located on the western shore of the Bay of Bengal. This war forced Ashoka to abandon his attempt at a foreign policy which would unify the Maurya Empire. 

During the Mauryan Empire slavery developed rapidly and a significant amount of written records on slavery are found. The Mauryan Empire was based on a modern and efficient economy and society. However, the sale of merchandise was closely regulated by the government. Although there was no banking in the Mauryan society, usury was customary with loans made at the recognized interest rate of 15% per annum.

Ashoka's reign propagated Buddhism. In this regard Ashoka established many Buddhist monuments. Indeed, Ashoka put a strain on the economy and the government by his strong support of Buddhism. towards the end of his reign he "bled the state coffers white with his generous gifts to promote the promulgation of Buddha's teaching. As might be expected, this policy caused considerable opposition within the government. This opposition rallied around Sampadi, Ashoka's grandson and heir to the throne. Religious opposition to
Ashoka also arose among the orthodox Brahmanists and the adherents of Jainism. 

Chandragupta's minister Chanakya wrote the Arthashastra, one of the greatest treatises on economics, politics, foreign affairs, administration, military arts, war, and religion produced in Asia. Archaeologically, the period of Mauryan rule in South Asia falls into the era of Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW). The Arthashastra and the Edicts of Ashoka are primary written records of the Mauryan times. The Lion Capital of Asoka at Sarnath, is the national emblem of India.

Asokha pillar is in Nepal.

==Epic and Early Puranic Period - Early Classical Period & Golden Age (ca. 200 BCE700 CE)==

File:SungaEmpireMap.jpg|Ancient India during the rise of the Sunga and Satavahana empires.
File:Kharavela-Kingdom.GIF|The Kharavela Empire, now in Odisha.
File:Kushanmap.jpg|Kushan Empire and Western Satraps of Ancient India in the north along with Pandyans and Early Cholas in southern India.
File:Gupta.png|Gupta Empire

The time between 200 BCE and ca. 1100 CE is the "Classical Age" of India. It can be divided in various sub-periods, depending on the chosen periodisation. The Gupta Empire (4th-6th century) is regarded as the "Golden Age" of Hinduism, but a host of kingdoms ruled over India in these centuries.

The Satavahana dynasty, also known as the Andhras, ruled in southern and central India after around 230 BCE. Satakarni, the sixth ruler of the Satvahana dynasty, defeated the Sunga Empire of north India. Afterwards, Kharavela, the warrior king of Kalinga, Agrawal, Sadananda (2000): r Khravela, Sri Digambar Jain Samaj, Cuttack ruled a vast empire and was responsible for the propagation of Jainism in the Indian subcontinent. 

The Kharavelan Jain empire included a maritime empire with trading routes linking it to Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Borneo, Bali, Sumatra, and Java. Colonists from Kalinga settled in Sri Lanka, Burma, as well as the Maldives and Maritime Southeast Asia. The Kuninda Kingdom was a small Himalayan state that survived from around the 2nd century BCE to the 3rd century CE.

The Kushanas migrated from Central Asia into northwestern India in the middle of the 1st century CE and founded an empire that stretched from Tajikistan to the middle Ganges. The Western Satraps (35-405 CE) were Saka rulers of the western and central part of India. They were the successors of the Indo-Scythians and contemporaries of the Kushans who ruled the northern part of the Indian subcontinent and the Satavahana (Andhra) who ruled in central and southern India.

Different dynasties such as the Pandyans, Cholas, Cheras, Kadambas, Western Gangas, Pallavas, and Chalukyas, dominated the southern part of the Indian peninsula at different periods of time. Several southern kingdoms formed overseas empires that stretched into Southeast Asia. The kingdoms warred with each other and the Deccan states for domination of the south. The Kalabras, a Buddhist dynasty, briefly interrupted the usual domination of the Cholas, Cheras, and Pandyas in the south.

===Southern India===
During this period the southern peninsular of India was at first ruled by the Satavahana dynasty and by the 3 Tamil kingdoms the Chola dynasty, Pandyan Dynasty and Chera dynasty. The Tamil Sangam literature flourished during this period. After the collapse of the Satavahana Dynasty in the 3rd century the Vakataka dynasty, the Pallava dynasty, the Western Ganga dynasty and the Kadamba dynasty emerged and dominated the major part of southern peninsular of India until the 6th century. In the 6th century the famous Chalukya dynasty was established and dominated the major part of southern India until the 8th century.

===Sunga Empire===

The Sunga Empire() or Shunga Empire was an ancient Indian dynasty from Magadha that controlled vast areas of the Indian Subcontinent from around 187 to 78 BCE. The dynasty was established by Pusyamitra Sunga, after the fall of the Maurya Empire. Its capital was Pataliputra, but later emperors such as Bhagabhadra also held court at Besnagar, modern Vidisha in Eastern Malwa. 
Pushyamitra Sunga ruled for 36 years and was succeeded by his son Agnimitra. There were ten Sunga rulers. The empire is noted for its numerous wars with both foreign and indigenous powers. They fought battles with the Kalingas, Satavahanas, the Indo-Greeks, and possibly the Panchalas and Mathuras.
Art, education, philosophy, and other forms of learning flowered during this period including small terracotta images, larger stone sculptures, and architectural monuments such as the Stupa at Bharhut, and the renowned Great Stupa at Sanchi. The Sunga rulers helped to establish the tradition of royal sponsorship of learning and art. The script used by the empire was a variant of Brahmi and was used to write the Sanskrit language. 
The Sunga Empire played an imperative role in patronizing Indian culture at a time when some of the most important developments in Hindu thought were taking place.

===Northwestern hybrid cultures===
The founder of the Indo-Greek Kingdom, Demetrius I "the Invincible" (205171 BCE).

The northwestern hybrid cultures of the subcontinent included the Indo-Greeks, the Indo-Scythians, the Indo-Parthians, and the Indo-Sassinids. The first of these, the Indo-Greek Kingdom, was founded when the Greco-Bactrian king Demetrius invaded the region in 180 BCE, extending his rule over various parts of present-day Afghanistan and Pakistan. Lasting for almost two centuries, the kingdom was ruled by a succession of more than 30 Greek kings, who were often in conflict with each other.

The Indo-Scythians were a branch of the Indo-European Sakas (Scythians) who migrated from southern Siberia, first into Bactria, subsequently into Sogdiana, Kashmir, Arachosia, and Gandhara, and finally into India. Their kingdom lasted from the middle of the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century BCE.

Yet another kingdom, the Indo-Parthians (also known as the Pahlavas), came to control most of present-day Afghanistan and northern Pakistan, after fighting many local rulers such as the Kushan ruler Kujula Kadphises, in the Gandhara region. The Sassanid empire of Persia, who was contemporaneous with the Gupta Empire, expanded into the region of present-day Balochistan in Pakistan, where the mingling of Indian culture and the culture of Iran gave birth to a hybrid culture under the Indo-Sassanids.

===Satavahana Dynasty===

The tavhana Empire (, Maharashtri: , ) was a royal Indian dynasty based from Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh as well as Junnar (Pune) and Prathisthan (Paithan) in Maharashtra. The territory of the empire covered much of India from 230 BCE onward. 
Stavhanas started out as feudatories to the Mauryan dynasty, but declared independence with its decline. They are known for their patronage of Hinduism and Buddhism which resulted in Buddhist monuments from Ellora (a UNESCO World Heritage Site) to Amaravati. The Stavhanas were one of the first Indian states to issue coins struck with their rulers embossed. They formed a cultural bridge and played a vital role in trade as well as the transfer of ideas and culture to and from the Indo-Gangetic Plain to the southern tip of India.
They had to compete with the Sunga Empire and then the Kanva dynasty of Magadha to establish their rule. Later, they played a crucial role to protect a huge part of India against foreign invaders like the Sakas, Yavanas and Pahlavas. In particular their struggles with the Western Kshatrapas
went on for a long time. The great rulers of the Satavahana Dynasty Gautamiputra Satakarni and Sri Yajna Stakarni were able to defeat the foreign invaders like the Western Kshatrapas and to stop their expansion. In the 3rd century CE the empire was split into smaller states.

===Kushan Empire===

The Kushan Empire expanded out of what is now Afghanistan into the northwest of the subcontinent under the leadership of their first emperor, Kujula Kadphises, about the middle of the 1st century CE. By the time of his grandson, Kanishka, (whose era is thought to have begun c. 127 CE), they had conquered most of northern India, at least as far as Saketa and Pataliputra, in the middle Ganges Valley, and probably as far as the Bay of Bengal. Sims-Williams and Cribb (19951996), pp. 175-176. 

They played an important role in the establishment of Buddhism in India and its spread to Central Asia and China. By the 3rd century, their empire in India was disintegrating; their last known great emperor being Vasudeva I (c. 190-225 CE).

===Roman trade with India===

Coin of the Roman emperor Augustus found at the Pudukottai, South India.
Roman trade with India started around 1 CE, during the reign of Augustus and following his conquest of Egypt, which had been India's biggest trade partner in the West.

The trade started by Eudoxus of Cyzicus in 130 BCE kept increasing, and according to Strabo (II.5.12. "At any rate, when Gallus was prefect of Egypt, I accompanied him and ascended the Nile as far as Syene and the frontiers of Ethiopia, and I learned that as many as one hundred and twenty vessels were sailing from Myos Hormos to India, whereas formerly, under the Ptolemies, only a very few ventured to undertake the voyage and to carry on traffic in Indian merchandise." Strabo II.5.12. Source ), by the time of Augustus, up to 120 ships set sail every year from Myos Hormos on the Red Sea to India. So much gold was used for this trade, and apparently recycled by the Kushans for their own coinage, that Pliny the Elder (NH VI.101) complained about the drain of specie to India:

The maritime (but not the overland) trade routes, harbours, and trade items are described in detail in the 1st century CE Periplus of the Erythraean Sea.

===Gupta rule - Golden Age===

Queen Kumaradevi and King Chandragupta I, depicted on a coin of their son Samudragupta, 335380 CE.
Classical India refers to the period when much of the Indian subcontinent was reunited under the Gupta Empire (c. 320&ndash;550 CE). This period has been called the Golden Age of India and was marked by extensive achievements in science, technology, engineering, art, continental debate: an intra- and inter-Dharmic dialectic|dialectic], literature, logic, mathematics, astronomy, religion, and philosophy that crystallized the elements of what is generally known as Hindu culture. The Hindu-Arabic numerals, a positional numeral system, originated in India and was later transmitted to the West through the Arabs. Early Hindu numerals had only nine symbols, until 600 to 800 CE, when a symbol for zero was developed for the numeral system. The peace and prosperity created under leadership of Guptas enabled the pursuit of scientific and artistic endeavors in India. 

The high points of this cultural creativity are magnificent architecture, sculpture, and painting. The Gupta period produced scholars such as Kalidasa, Aryabhata, Varahamihira, Vishnu Sharma, and Vatsyayana who made great advancements in many academic fields. Science and political administration reached new heights during the Gupta era. Strong trade ties also made the region an important cultural centre and established it as a base that would influence nearby kingdoms and regions in Burma, Sri Lanka, Maritime Southeast Asia, and Indochina.

The Gupta period marked a watershed of Indian culture: the Guptas performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimize their rule, but they also patronized Buddhism, which continued to provide an alternative to Brahmanical orthodoxy. The military exploits of the first three rulersChandragupta I (c. 319&ndash;335), Samudragupta (c. 335&ndash;376), and Chandragupta II (c. 376&ndash;415) brought much of India under their leadership. They successfully resisted the northwestern kingdoms until the arrival of the Hunas, who established themselves in Afghanistan by the first half of the 5th century, with their capital at Bamiyan. Iaroslav Lebedynsky, "Les Nomades", p172.
 However, much of the Deccan and southern India were largely unaffected by these events in the north. Early History of India, p 339, Dr V. A. Smith; See also Early Empire of Central Asia (1939), W. M. McGovern. Ancient India, 2003, p 650, Dr V. D. Mahajan; History and Culture of Indian People, The Age of Imperial Kanauj, p 50, Dr R. C. Majumdar, Dr A. D. Pusalkar. 

===Vakataka Dynasty===

The Vkaka Empire() was a royal Indian dynasty that originated from the Deccan in the mid-third century CE. Their state is believed to have extended from the southern edges of Malwa and Gujarat in the north to the Tungabhadra River in the south as well as from the Arabian Sea in the western to the edges of Chhattisgarh in the east. They were the most important successors of the Satavahanas in the Deccan and contemporaneous with the Guptas in northern India.

===Empire of Harsha===

Harsha Vardhana (Sanskrit: ) (c. 590647), commonly called Harsha, was an Indian emperor who ruled northern India from 606 to 647 from his capital Kannauj. He was the son of Prabhakara Vardhana and the younger brother of Rajya Vardhana, a king of Thanesar, Haryana. At the height of his power his kingdom spanned the Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Bengal, Odisha and the entire Indo-Gangetic plain north of the Narmada River.

After the downfall of the prior Gupta Empire in the middle of the 6th century, North India reverted to small republics and small monarchical states ruled by Gupta rulers. Harsha was a convert to Buddhism. He united the small republics from Punjab to central India, and their representatives crowned Harsha king at an assembly in April 606 giving him the title of Maharaja when he was merely 16 years old. Harsha belonged to Kanojia. RN Kundra & SS Bawa, History of Ancient and Meddieval India He brought all of northern India under his control. International Dictionary of Historic Places: Asia and Oceania by Trudy Ring, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Boda p.507 The peace and prosperity that prevailed made his court a center of cosmopolitanism, attracting scholars, artists and religious visitors from far and wide. The Chinese traveler Xuan Zang visited the court of Harsha and wrote a very favorable account of him, praising his justice and generosity. 

===Chalukya Empire===

The Chalukya Empire ( ) was an Indian royal dynasty that ruled large parts of southern and central India between the 6th and the 12th centuries. During this period, they ruled as three related yet individual dynasties. The earliest dynasty, known as the "Badami Chalukyas", ruled from Vatapi (modern Badami) from the middle of the 6th century. The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakesi II. The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone in the history of South India and a golden age in the history of Karnataka. The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas. A Southern India based kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada rivers. The rise of this empire saw the birth of efficient administration, overseas trade and commerce and the development of new style of architecture called "Chalukyan architecture".

==Medieval and Late Puranic Period - Late-Classical Age (5001500 CE)==

Chola Empire under Rajendra Chola c. 1030 C.E.
The Kanauj Triangle was the focal point of empires - the Rashtrakutas of Deccan, the Gurjara Pratiharas of Malwa, and the Palas of Bengal.

The "Late-Classical Age" in India began after the end of the Gupta Empire and the collapse of the Harsha Empire in the 7th century CE, and ended with the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in the south in the 16th century, due to pressure from Islamic invaders to the north.

This period produced some of India's finest art, considered the epitome of classical development, and the development of the main spiritual and philosophical systems which continued to be in Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. King Harsha of Kannauj succeeded in reuniting northern India during his reign in the 7th century, after the collapse of the Gupta dynasty. His kingdom collapsed after his death.

North Western Indian Buddhism weakened in the 6th century after the White Hun invasion, who followed their own religions such as Tengri, and Manichaeism. Muhammad bin Qasim's invasion of Sindh(modern Pakistan) in 711 CE witnessed further decline of Buddhism. The Chach Nama records many instances of conversion of stupas to mosques such as at Nerun Schimmel, Annemarie Schimmel, Religionen - Islam in the Indian Subcontinent, Brill Academic Publishers, 1 January 1980, ISBN 978-90-04-06117-0, pg. 4 

In 7th century CE, Kumrila Bhaa formulated his school of Mimamsa philosophy and defended the position on Vedic rituals against Buddhist attacks. Scholars note Bhaa's contribution to the decline of Buddhism. Sheridan, Daniel P. "Kumarila Bhatta", in Great Thinkers of the Eastern World, ed. Ian McGready, New York: Harper Collins, 1995, pp. 198-201. ISBN 0-06-270085-5. His dialectical success against the Buddhists is confirmed by Buddhist historian Tathagata, who reports that Kumrila defeated disciples of Buddhapalkita, Bhavya, Dharmadasa, Dignaga and others. Arnold, Daniel Anderson. Buddhists, Brahmins, and Belief: Epistemology in South Asian Philosophy of religion, p. 4. Columbia University Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0-231-13281-7. 

Ronald Inden writes that by 8th century CE symbols of Hindu gods "replaced the Buddha at the imperial centre and pinnacle of the cosmo-political system, the image or symbol of the Hindu god comes to be housed in a monumental temple and given increasingly elaborate imperial-style puja worship". Inden, Ronald. "Ritual, Authority, And Cycle Time in Hindu Kingship." In JF Richards, ed., Kingship and Authority in South Asia. New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1998, p.67, 55 Although Buddhism did not disappear from India for several centuries after the eighth, royal proclivities for the cults of Vishnu and Shiva weakened Buddhism's position within the sociopolitical context and helped make possible its decline. Holt, John. The Buddhist Visnu. Columbia University Press, 2004, p.12,15 

=== Northern India ===
From the 8th to the 10th century, three dynasties contested for control of northern India: the Gurjara Pratiharas of Malwa, the Palas of Bengal, and the Rashtrakutas of the Deccan. During this period, Indian rulers in spite for internal struggle, were able to avert the Islamic conquest of India, for example: In Battle of Rajasthan, alliance of Gurjar Emperor Nagabhata I of the Pratihara Dynasty with the south Indian Emperor Vikramaditya II of the Chalukya dynasty and many small kingdoms defeated armies of Umayyad Caliphate, thus maintaining kingdom of Hindu rulers till the end of millennium in India

The Sena dynasty would later assume control of the Pala Empire, and the Gurjara Pratiharas fragmented into various states. These were the first of the Rajput states, a series of kingdoms which managed to survive in some form for almost a millennium, until Indian independence from the British. The first recorded Rajput kingdoms emerged in Rajasthan in the 6th century, and small Rajput dynasties later ruled much of northern India. One Gurjar Rajput of the Chauhan clan, Prithvi Raj Chauhan, was known for bloody conflicts against the advancing Islamic sultanates. The Shahi dynasty ruled portions of eastern Afghanistan, northern Pakistan, and Kashmir from the mid-7th century to the early 11th century.

=== Southern India ===
The Chalukya dynasty ruled parts of southern and central India from Badami in Karnataka between 550 and 750, and then again from Kalyani between 970 and 1190. The Pallavas of Kanchipuram were their contemporaries further to the south. With the decline of the Chalukya empire, their feudatories, the Hoysalas of Halebidu, Kakatiyas of Warangal, Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri, and a southern branch of the Kalachuri, divided the vast Chalukya empire amongst themselves around the middle of 12th century.

The Chola Empire at its peak covered much of the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia. Rajaraja Chola I conquered all of peninsular south India and parts of Sri Lanka in the 11th century. Rajendra Chola I's navies went even further, occupying coasts from Burma to Vietnam, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Lakshadweep (Laccadive) islands, Sumatra, and the Malay Peninsula in Southeast Asia and the Pegu islands. Later during the middle period, the Pandyan Empire emerged in Tamil Nadu, as well as the Chera Kingdom in parts of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. By 1343, last of these dynasties had ceased to exist, giving rise to the Vijayanagar empire.

The ports of south India were engaged in the Indian Ocean trade, chiefly involving spices, with the Roman Empire to the west and Southeast Asia to the east. Miller, J. Innes. (1969). The Spice Trade of The Roman Empire: 29 B.C. to A.D. 641. Oxford University Press. Special edition for Sandpiper Books. 1998. ISBN 0-19-814264-1. Search for India's ancient city. BBC News. Retrieved on 22 June 2007. Literature in local vernaculars and spectacular architecture flourished until about the beginning of the 14th century, when southern expeditions of the sultan of Delhi took their toll on these kingdoms. The Hindu Vijayanagar Empire came into conflict with the Islamic Bahmani Sultanate, and the clashing of the two systems caused a mingling of the indigenous and foreign cultures that left lasting cultural influences on each other.

===Rashtrakuta Empire (8th-10th century)===

At its peak the Rashtrakuta Empire ruled from the Ganges River and Yamuna River doab in the north to Cape Comorin in the south, a fruitful time of political expansion, architectural achievements and famous literary contributions. General Studies History 4 Upsc by Reddy p. B.11 The early kings of this dynasty were Hindu but the later kings were strongly influenced by Jainism. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen p.380 During their rule, Jain mathematicians and scholars contributed important works in Kannada and Sanskrit. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen p.380-381 Amoghavarsha was the most famous king of this dynasty and wrote Kavirajamarga, a landmark literary work in the Kannada language. Architecture reached a milestone in the Dravidian style, the finest example of which is seen in the Kailasanath Temple at Ellora. Other important contributions are the sculptures of Elephanta Caves in modern Maharashtra as well as the Kashivishvanatha temple and the Jain Narayana temple at Pattadakal in modern Karnataka, all of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The Arab traveler Suleiman described the Rashtrakuta Empire as one of the four great Empires of the world. A Brief History of India by Alain Danilou p.170 The Rashtrakuta period marked the beginning of the golden age of southern Indian mathematics. The great south Indian mathematician Mahvra (mathematician) lived in the Rashtrakuta Empire and his text had a huge impact on the medieval south Indian mathematicians who lived after him. The Britannica Guide to Algebra and Trigonometry by William L. Hosch p.105 

===Pala Empire (8th-12th century)===

The Pala Empire (Bengali:   Pal Samrajy) was an Indian imperial power, during the Classical period of India, that existed from 7501174 CE. It was ruled by a Buddhist dynasty from Bengal in the eastern region of the Indian subcontinent, all the rulers bearing names ending with the suffix Pala (Modern Bengali:  pl), which means protector. The Palas were often described by opponents as the Lords of Gauda. The Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism. Gopala was the first ruler from the dynasty. The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala. Dharmapala extended the empire into the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. The Pala Empire can be considered as the golden era of Bengal. Never had the Bengali people reached such height of power and glory to that extent. The rulers of the Pala Empire supported the Universities of Vikramashila and Nalanda which became the premier seats of learning in Asia. The Nalanda University which is considered one of the first great universities in recorded history, reached its height under the patronage of the Pala Empire.

===Chola Empire (9th-13th century)===

Medieval Cholas rose to prominence during the middle of the 9th century C.E. and established the greatest empire South India had seen. History of Ancient India: Earliest Times to 1000 A. D. by Radhey Shyam Chaurasia p.237 They successfully united the South India under their rule and through their naval strength extended their influence in the Southeast Asian countries such as Srivijaya. The Dancing Girl: A History of Early India by Balaji Sadasivan p.129 Under Rajaraja Chola I and his successors Rajendra Chola I, Rajadhiraja Chola, Virarajendra Chola and Kulothunga Chola I the dynasty became a military, economic and cultural power in South Asia and South-East Asia. Kulke and Rothermund, p 115 Keay, p 215 The power of the new empire was proclaimed to the eastern world by the expedition to the Ganges which Rajendra Chola I undertook and by the occupation of cities of the maritime empire of Srivijaya in Southeast Asia, as well as by the repeated embassies to China. K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, A History of South India, p 158 
They dominated the political affairs of Lanka for over two centuries through repeated invasions and occupation. They also had continuing trade contacts with the Arabs in the west and with the Chinese empire in the east. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian Relations by Tansen Sen p.229 Rajaraja Chola I and his equally distinguished son Rajendra Chola I gave political unity to the whole of Southern India and established the Chola Empire as a respected sea power. History of Asia by B.V. Rao p.297 Under the Cholas, the South India reached new heights of excellence in art, religion and literature. In all of these spheres, the Chola period marked the culmination of movements that had begun in an earlier age under the Pallavas. Monumental architecture in the form of majestic temples and sculpture in stone and bronze reached a finesse never before achieved in India. Indian Civilization and Culture by Suhas Chatterjee p.417 

===Western Chalukya Empire===

The Western Chalukya Empire (Kannada: pachima chlukya smrjya) ruled most of the western Deccan, South India, between the 10th and 12th centuries. A Comprehensive History of Medieval India: by Farooqui Salma Ahmed,Salma Ahmed Farooqui p.24 Vast areas between the Narmada River in the north and Kaveri River in the south came under Chalukya control. During this period the other major ruling families of the Deccan, the Hoysalas, the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuri, were subordinates of the Western Chalukyas and gained their independence only when the power of the Chalukya waned during the later half of the 12th century. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen p.403-405 
The Western Chalukyas developed an architectural style known today as a transitional style, an architectural link between the style of the early Chalukya dynasty and that of the later Hoysala empire. Most of its monuments are in the districts bordering the Tungabhadra River in central Karnataka. Well known examples are the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi, the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti, the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali and the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi. World Heritage Monuments and Related Edifices in India, Band 1 by Al Jvd p.132-134 This was an important period in the development of fine arts in Southern India, especially in literature as the Western Chalukya kings encouraged writers in the native language of Kannada, and Sanskrit like the philosopher and statesman Basava and the great mathematician Bhskara II. History of Kannada Literature by E.P. Rice p.32 Bilhana by Prabhakar Narayan Kawthekar p.29 

===The Islamic Sultanates===

Gol Gumbaz at Bijapur, has the second largest pre-modern dome in the world after the Byzantine Hagia Sophia.

After conquering Persia, the Arab Umayyad Caliphate incorporated parts of what is now Afghanistan and Pakistan around 720. The Muslim rulers were keen to invade India, a rich region with a flourishing international trade and the only known diamond mines in the world. http://www.indianscience.org/essays/22-%20E--Gems%20&%20Minerals%20F.pdf In 712, Arab Muslim general Muhammad bin Qasim conquered most of the Indus region in modern day Pakistan for the Umayyad empire, incorporating it as the "As-Sindh" province with its capital at Al-Mansurah, 72 km north of modern Hyderabad in Sindh, Pakistan. After several wars, the Hindu Rajas defeated the Arabs at the Battle of Rajasthan, halting their expansion and containing them at Sindh in Pakistan. History The north Indian Emperor Nagabhata of the Pratihara Dynasty and the south Indian Emperor Vikramaditya II of the Chalukya dynasty defeated the Arab invaders in the early 8th century and protected whole India. Many short-lived Islamic kingdoms (sultanates) under foreign rulers were established across the north western subcontinent (Afghanistan and Pakistan) over a period of a few centuries. Additionally, Muslim trading communities flourished throughout coastal south India, particularly on the western coast where Muslim traders arrived in small numbers, mainly from the Arabian peninsula. This marked the introduction of a third Abrahamic Middle Eastern religion, following Judaism and Christianity, often in puritanical form. Later, the Bahmani Sultanate and Deccan sultanates, founded by Turkic rulers, flourished in the south.

The Vijayanagara Empire rose to prominence by the end of the 13th century as a culmination of attempts by the southern powers to ward off Islamic invasions. The empire dominated all of Southern India and fought off invasions from the five established Deccan Sultanates. The empire reached its peak during the rule of Krishnadevaraya when Vijayanagara armies were consistently victorious. From the notes of Portuguese traveler Domingo Paes about Krishnadevaraya: A king who was perfect in all things (Hampi, A Travel Guide 2003, p. 31.) The empire annexed areas formerly under the Sultanates in the northern Deccan and the territories in the eastern Deccan, including Kalinga, while simultaneously maintaining control over all its subordinates in the south. It lasted until 1646, though its power declined after a major military defeat in 1565 by the Deccan sultanates. As a result, much of the territory of the former Vijaynagar Empire were captured by Deccan Sultanates, and the remainder was divided into many states ruled by Hindu rulers.

===Delhi Sultanate===
Qutub Minar is the world's tallest brick minaret, commenced by Qutb-ud-din Aybak of the Slave dynasty.

In the 12th and 13th centuries, Turks and Afghans invaded parts of northern India and established the Delhi Sultanate in the former Hindu holdings. Battuta's Travels: Delhi, capital of Muslim India The subsequent Slave dynasty of Delhi managed to conquer large areas of northern India, approximately equal in extent to the ancient Gupta Empire, while the Khilji dynasty conquered most of central India but were ultimately unsuccessful in conquering and uniting the subcontinent. The Sultanate ushered in a period of Indian cultural renaissance. The resulting "Indo-Muslim" fusion of cultures left lasting syncretic monuments in architecture, music, literature, religion, and clothing. It is surmised that the language of Urdu (literally meaning "horde" or "camp" in various Turkic dialects) was born during the Delhi Sultanate period as a result of the intermingling of the local speakers of Sanskritic Prakrits with immigrants speaking Persian, Turkic, and Arabic under the Muslim rulers. The Delhi Sultanate is the only Indo-Islamic empire to enthrone one of the few female rulers in India, Razia Sultana (12361240).

Timur defeats the Sultan of Delhi, Nasir Al-Din Mahmum Tughluq, in the winter of 1397-1398
A Turco-Mongol conqueror in Central Asia, Timur (Tamerlane), attacked the reigning Sultan Nasir-u Din Mehmud of the Tughlaq Dynasty in the north Indian city of Delhi. Timur - conquest of India The Sultan's army was defeated on 17 December 1398. Timur entered Delhi and the city was sacked, destroyed, and left in ruins, after Timur's army had killed and plundered for three days and nights. He ordered the whole city to be sacked except for the sayyids, scholars, and the other Muslims; 100,000 war prisoners were put to death in one day. 

===Vijayanagara Empire (14th-16th century)===
Main articles: Vijayanagara Empire

The Empire was established in 1336 by Harihara I and his brother Bukka Raya I of Sangama Dynasty. History of Classical Sanskrit Literature: by M. Srinivasachariar p.211 The empire rose to prominence as a culmination of attempts by the southern powers to ward off Islamic invasions by the end of the 13th century. Decisive Battles India Lost (326 B. C. to 1803 A. D.) by Jaywant Joglekar p.69 The empire is named after its capital city of Vijayanagara, whose ruins surround present day Hampi, now a World Heritage Site in Karnataka, India. South India by Amy Karafin,Anirban Mahapatra p.32 The empire's legacy includes many monuments spread over South India, the best known of which is the group at Hampi. The previous temple building traditions in South India came together in the Vijayanagara Architecture style. The mingling of all faiths and vernaculars inspired architectural innovation of Hindu temple construction, first in the Deccan and later in the Dravidian idioms using the local granite. South Indian mathematics flourished under the protection of the Vijayanagara Empire in Kerala. The south Indian mathematician Madhava of Sangamagrama founded the famous Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics in the 14th century which produced a lot of great south Indian mathematicians like Parameshvara, Nilakantha Somayaji and Jyehadeva in medieval south India. History of Science and Philosophy of Science by Pradip Kumar Sengupta p.91 Efficient administration and vigorous overseas trade brought new technologies such as water management systems for irrigation. Medieval India: From Sultanat to the Mughals-Delhi Sultanat (1206-1526 by Satish Chandra p.188-189 The empire's patronage enabled fine arts and literature to reach new heights in Kannada, Telugu, Tamil and Sanskrit, while Carnatic music evolved into its current form. Art History, Volume II: 1400-present by Boundless p.243 The Vijayanagara Empire created an epoch in South Indian history that transcended regionalism by promoting Hinduism as a unifying factor. The empire reached its peak during the rule of Sri Krishnadevaraya when Vijayanagara armies were consistently victorious. The empire annexed areas formerly under the Sultanates in the northern Deccan and the territories in the eastern Deccan, including Kalinga, while simultaneously maintaining control over all its subordinates in the south. World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia by Marshall Cavendish Corporation p.337 Many important monuments were either completed or commissioned during the time of Krishna Deva Raya.
Extent of the Mughal Empire in 1700.
Taj Mahal, built by the Mughals

==Mughal Empire==

In 1526, Babur, a Timurid descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan from Fergana Valley (modern day Uzbekistan), swept across the Khyber Pass and established the Mughal Empire, covering modern day Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and Bangladesh. The Islamic World to 1600: Rise of the Great Islamic Empires (The Mughal Empire) However, his son Humayun was defeated by the Afghan warrior Sher Shah Suri in the year 1540, and Humayun was forced to retreat to Kabul. After Sher Shah's death, his son Islam Shah Suri and the Hindu king Samrat Hem Chandra Vikramaditya, who had won 22 battles against Afghan rebels and forces of Akbar, from Punjab to Bengal and had established a secular Hindu rule in North India from Delhi till 1556. Akbar's forces defeated and killed Hemu in the Second Battle of Panipat on 6 November 1556.

The Maharana of Mewar submitting to Prince Khurram, later known as Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, c. 1615.
The Mughal dynasty ruled most of the Indian subcontinent by 1600; it went into a slow decline after 1707. The Mughals suffered several blows due to invasions from Marathas and Afghans, causing the Mughal dynasty to be reduced to puppet rulers by 1757. The remnants of the Mughal dynasty were finally defeated during the Indian Rebellion of 1857, also called the 1857 War of Independence. This period marked vast social change in the subcontinent as the Hindu majority were ruled over by the Mughal emperors, most of whom showed religious tolerance, liberally patronising Hindu culture. The famous emperor Akbar, who was the grandson of Babar, tried to establish a good relationship with the Hindus. However, later emperors such as Aurangazeb tried to establish complete Muslim dominance, and as a result several historical temples were destroyed during this period and taxes imposed on non-Muslims. During the decline of the Mughal Empire, several smaller states rose to fill the power vacuum and themselves were contributing factors to the decline. In 1737, the Maratha general Bajirao of the Maratha Empire invaded and plundered Delhi. Under the general Amir Khan Umrao Al Udat, the Mughal Emperor sent 8,000 troops to drive away the 5,000 Maratha cavalry soldiers. Baji Rao, however, easily routed the novice Mughal general and the rest of the imperial Mughal army fled. In 1737, in the final defeat of Mughal Empire, the commander-in-chief of the Mughal Army, Nizam-ul-mulk, was routed at Bhopal by the Maratha army. This essentially brought an end to the Mughal Empire. In 1739, Nader Shah, emperor of Iran, defeated the Mughal army at the huge Battle of Karnal. After this victory, Nader captured and sacked Delhi, carrying away many treasures, including the Peacock Throne. Iran in the Age of the Raj 

The Mughals were perhaps the richest single dynasty to have ever existed. During the Mughal era, the dominant political forces consisted of the Mughal Empire and its tributaries and, later on, the rising successor states - including the Maratha Empire - which fought an increasingly weak Mughal dynasty. The Mughals, while often employing brutal tactics to subjugate their empire, had a policy of integration with Indian culture, which is what made them successful where the short-lived Sultanates of Delhi had failed. Akbar the Great was particularly famed for this. Akbar declared "Amari" or non-killing of animals in the holy days of Jainism. He rolled back the jizya tax for non-Muslims. The Mughal emperors married local royalty, allied themselves with local maharajas, and attempted to fuse their Turko-Persian culture with ancient Indian styles, creating a unique Indo-Saracenic architecture. It was the erosion of this tradition coupled with increased brutality and centralization that played a large part in the dynasty's downfall after Aurangzeb, who unlike previous emperors, imposed relatively non-pluralistic policies on the general population, which often inflamed the majority Hindu population.

===Post-Mughal period===

Political map of Indian subcontinent in 1758. The Maratha Empire (orange) was the last Hindu empire of India.

==== Maratha Empire ====

The post-Mughal era was dominated by the rise of the Maratha suzerainty as other small regional states (mostly late Mughal tributary states) emerged, and also by the increasing activities of European powers (see colonial era below). There is no doubt that the single most important power to emerge in the long twilight of the Mughal dynasty was the Maratha Empire. The Maratha kingdom was founded and consolidated by Shivaji, a Maratha aristocrat of the Bhonsle clan who was determined to establish Hindavi Swarajya (self-rule of Hindu people). By the 18th century, it had transformed itself into the Maratha Empire under the rule of the Peshwas (prime ministers). Gordon explains how the Maratha systematically took control over the Malwa plateau in 1720-1760. They started with annual raids, collecting ransom from villages and towns while the declining Mughal Empire retained nominal control. However, in 1737, the Marathas defeated a Mughal army in their capital, Delhi itself, and as a result, the Mughal emperor ceded Malwa to them. The Marathas continued their military campaigns against Mughals, Nizam, Nawab of Bengal and Durrani Empire to further extend their boundaries. They built an efficient system of public administration known for its attention to detail. It succeeded in raising revenue in districts that recovered from years of raids, up to levels previously enjoyed by the Mughals. The cornerstone of the Maratha rule in Malwa rested on the 60 or so local tax collectors (kamavisdars) who advanced the Maratha ruler '(Peshwa)' a portion of their district revenues at interest. Stewart N. Gordon, "The Slow Conquest: Administrative Integration of Malwa into the Maratha Empire, 1720-1760," Modern Asian Studies, January 1977, 11#1 pp 1-40 By 1760, the domain of the Marathas stretched across practically the entire subcontinent. The defeat of Marathas by British in three Anglo-Maratha Wars brought end to the empire by 1820. The last peshwa, Baji Rao II, was defeated by the British in the Third Anglo-Maratha War.

====Sikh Empire (North-west)====
Harmandir Sahib or The Golden Temple is culturally the most significant place of worship for the Sikhs.

The Punjabi kingdom, ruled by members of the Sikh religion, was a political entity that governed the region of modern-day Punjab. The empire, based around the Punjab region, existed from 1799 to 1849. It was forged, on the foundations of the Khalsa, under the leadership of Maharaja Ranjit Singh (17801839) from an array of autonomous Punjabi Misls. He consolidated many parts of northern India into a kingdom. He primarily used his highly disciplined Sikh army that he trained and equipped to be the equal of a European force. Ranjit Singh proved himself to be a master strategist and selected well qualified generals for his army. In stages, he added the central Punjab, the provinces of Multan and Kashmir, the Peshawar Valley, and the Derajat to his kingdom. This came in the face of the powerful British East India Company. Gulcharan Singh, "Maharaja Ranjit Singh and the Principles of War," USI Journal, July 1981, Vol. 111 Issue 465, pp 184-192 At its peak, in the 19th century, the empire extended from the Khyber Pass in the west, to Kashmir in the north, to Sindh in the south, running along Sutlej river to Himachal in the east. This was among the last areas of the subcontinent to be conquered by the British. The first and second Anglo-Sikh war marked the downfall of the Sikh Empire.

====Other kingdoms====
There were several other kingdoms which ruled over parts of India in the later medieval period prior to the British occupation. However, most of them were bound to pay regular tribute to the Marathas. The Rediscovery of India: A New Subcontinent Cite: "Swarming up from the Himalayas, the Marathas now ruled from the Indus and Himalayas in the north to the south tip of the peninsula. They were either masters directly or they took tribute." The rule of Wodeyar dynasty which established the Kingdom of Mysore in southern India in around 1400 CE by was interrupted by Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan in the later half of 18th century. Under their rule, Mysore fought a series of wars sometimes against the combined forces of the British and Marathas, but mostly against the British, with Mysore receiving some aid or promise of aid from the French.

The Nawabs of Bengal had become the de facto rulers of Bengal following the decline of Mughal Empire. However, their rule was interrupted by Marathas who carried six expeditions in Bengal from 1741 to 1748 as a result of which Bengal became a vassal state of Marathas.

Hyderabad was founded by the Qutb Shahi dynasty of Golconda in 1591. Following a brief Mughal rule, Asif Jah, a Mughal official, seized control of Hyderabad and declared himself Nizam-al-Mulk of Hyderabad in 1724. It was ruled by a hereditary Nizam from 1724 until 1948. Both Mysore and Hyderabad became princely states in British India.

Around the 18th century, the modern state of Nepal was formed by Gurkha rulers.

==Colonial era (1500-1947)==

In 1498, Vasco da Gama successfully discovered a new sea route from Europe to India, which paved the way for direct Indo-European commerce. From: Oliver J. Thatcher, ed., The Library of Original Sources (Milwaukee: University Research Extension Co., 1907), Vol. V: 9th to 16th Centuries, pp. 26-40. The Portuguese soon set up trading posts in Goa, Daman, Diu and Bombay. The next to arrive were the Dutch, the Britishwho set up a trading post in the west coast port of Surat in 1619and the French. The internal conflicts among Indian kingdoms gave opportunities to the European traders to gradually establish political influence and appropriate lands. Although these continental European powers controlled various coastal regions of southern and eastern India during the ensuing century, they eventually lost all their territories in India to the British islanders, with the exception of the French outposts of Pondichry and Chandernagore, the Dutch port of Travancore, and the Portuguese colonies of Goa, Daman and Diu.

===Company rule in India===

Map of India in 1857 at the end of Company rule.
In 1617 the British East India Company was given permission by Mughal Emperor Jahangir to trade in India. From: James Harvey Robinson, ed., Readings in European History, 2 Vols. (Boston: Ginn and Co., 1904-1906), Vol. II: From the opening of the Protestant Revolt to the Present Day, pp. 333335. Gradually their increasing influence led the de jure Mughal emperor Farrukh Siyar to grant them dastaks or permits for duty-free trade in Bengal in 1717. The Nawab of Bengal Siraj Ud Daulah, the de facto ruler of the Bengal province, opposed British attempts to use these permits.

The First Carnatic War extended from 1746 until 1748 and was the result of colonial competition between France and Britain, two of the countries involved in the War of Austrian Succession. Following the capture of a few French ships by the British fleet in India, French troops attacked and captured the British city of Madras located on the east coast of India on 21 September 1746. Among the prisoners captured at Madras was Robert Clive himself. The war was eventually ended by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle which ended the War of Austrian Succession in 1748.

In 1749, the Second Carnatic War broke out as the result of a war between a son, Nasir Jung, and a grandson, Muzaffer Jung, of the deceased Nizam-ul-Mulk of Hyderabad to take over Nizam's throne in Hyderabad. The French supported Muzaffer Jung in this civil war. Consequently, the British supported Nasir Jung in this conflict.

Meanwhile, however, the conflict in Hyderabad provided Chanda Sahib with an opportunity to take power as the new Nawab of the territory of Arcot. In this conflict, the French supported Chanda Sahib in his attempt to become the new Nawab of Arcot. The British supported the son of the deposed incumbent Nawab, Anwaruddin Muhammad Khan, against Chanda Sahib. In 1751, Robert Clive led a British armed force and captured Arcot to reinstate the incumbent Nawab. The Second Carnatic War finally came to an end in 1754 with the Treaty of Pondicherry.

In 1756, the Seven Years' War broke out between the great powers of Europe, and India became a theatre of action, where it was called the Third Carnatic War. Early in this war, armed forces under the French East India Company captured the British base of Calcutta in north-eastern India. However, armed forces under Robert Clive later recaptured Calcutta and then pressed on to capture the French settlement of Chandannagar in 1757. This led to the Battle of Plassey on 23 June 1757, in which the Bengal Army of the East India Company, led by Robert Clive, defeated the French-supported Nawab's forces. This was the first real political foothold with territorial implications that the British acquired in India. Clive was appointed by the company as its first 'Governor of Bengal' in 1757. This was combined with British victories over the French at Madras, Wandiwash and Pondichry that, along with wider British successes during the Seven Years War, reduced French influence in India. Thus as a result of the three Carnatic Wars, the British East India Company gained exclusive control over the entire Carnatic region of India. Lawrence James, Raj: The Making and Unmaking of British India (1997) pp 30-44 The British East India Company extended its control over the whole of Bengal. After the Battle of Buxar in 1764, the company acquired the rights of administration in Bengal from Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II; this marked the beginning of its formal rule, which within the next century engulfed most of India and extinguished the Moghul rule and dynasty. 
The East India Company monopolized the trade of Bengal. They introduced a land taxation system called the Permanent Settlement which introduced a feudal-like structure in Bengal, often with zamindars set in place. By the 1850s, the East India Company controlled most of the Indian sub-continent, which included present-day Pakistan and Bangladesh. Their policy was sometimes summed up as Divide and Rule, taking advantage of the enmity festering between various princely states and social and religious groups. H. V. Bowen, The Business of Empire: The East India Company and Imperial Britain, 1756-1833 (2008) 

The Hindu Ahom Kingdom of North-east India first fell to Burmese invasion and then to British after Treaty of Yandabo in 1826.

=== The rebellion of 1857 and its consequences ===

Viceroy Lord Canning meets Maharaja Ranbir Singh of Jammu and Kashmir, 9 March 1860
The Indian rebellion of 1857 was a large-scale rebellion by soldiers employed by the British East India in northern and central India against the Company's rule. The rebels were disorganized, had differing goals, and were poorly equipped, led, and trained, and had no outside support or funding. They were brutally suppressed and the British government took control of the Company and eliminated many of the grievances that caused it. The government also was determined to keep full control so that no rebellion of such size would ever happen again. Christopher Hibbert, The Great Mutiny: India 1857 (1980) 

In the aftermath, all power was transferred from the East India Company to the British Crown, which began to administer most of India as a number of provinces; the John Company's lands were controlled directly, while it had considerable indirect influence over the rest of India, which consisted of the Princely states ruled by local royal families. There were officially 565 princely states in 1947, but only 21 had actual state governments, and only three were large (Mysore, Hyderabad and Kashmir). They were absorbed into the independent nation in 1947-48. Wilhelm von Pochhammer, India's road to nationhood: a political history of the subcontinent (1981) ch 57 

===British Raj (1858-1947)===

The British Indian Empire at its greatest extent (in a map of 1909). The princely states under British suzerainty are in yellow.

====Reforms====
Lord Curzon (Viceroy 1899-1905) took control of higher education and then split the large province of Bengal into a largely Hindu western half and "Eastern Bengal and Assam," a largely Muslim eastern half. The British goal was efficient administration but the people of Bengal were outraged at the apparent "divide and rule" strategy. When the Liberal party in Britain came to power in 1906 he was removed. The new Viceroy Gilbert Minto and the new Secretary of State for India John Morley consulted with Congress leader Gopal Krishna Gokhale. The Morley-Minto reforms of 1909 provided for Indian membership of the provincial executive councils as well as the Viceroy's executive council. The Imperial Legislative Council was enlarged from 25 to 60 members and separate communal representation for Muslims was established in a dramatic step towards representative and responsible government. Bengal was reunified in 1911. S. A. Wolpert, Morley and India, 1906-1910, (1967) Meanwhile the Muslims for the first time began to organise, setting up the All India Muslim League in 1906. It was not a mass party but was designed to protect the interests of the aristocratic Muslims, especially in the north west. It was internally divided by conflicting loyalties to Islam, the British, and India, and by distrust of Hindus. Satya Narayan Mishra, "Muslim Backwardness and Birth of the Muslim League," Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, January 2007, Vol. 55 Issue 1/2, pp 71-83 

====Famines====
During the British Raj, famines in India, often attributed to failed government policies, were some of the worst ever recorded, including the Great Famine of 187678 in which 6.1 million to 10.3 million people died Davis, Mike. Late Victorian Holocausts. 1. Verso, 2000. ISBN 1-85984-739-0 pg 7 and the Indian famine of 18991900 in which 1.25 to 10 million people died. Davis, Mike. Late Victorian Holocausts. 1. Verso, 2000. ISBN 1-85984-739-0 pg 173 The Third Plague Pandemic in the mid-19th century killed 10 million people in India. Plague. World Health Organisation. Despite persistent diseases and famines, the population of the Indian subcontinent, which stood at about 125 million in 1750, had reached 389 million by 1941. Reintegrating India with the World Economy. Peterson Institute for International Economics. 

===The Indian independence movement===

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Bombay, 1944.
The numbers of British in India were small, yet they were able to rule two-thirds of the subcontinent directly and exercise considerable leverage over the princely states that accounted for the remaining one-third of the area. There were 674 of the these states in 1900, with a population of 73 million, or one person in five. In general, the princely states were strong supporters of the British regime, and the Raj left them alone. They were finally closed down in 1947-48. Lawrence James, Raj: The Making and Unmaking of British India (2000) pp 322-40 

The first step toward Indian self-rule was the appointment of councillors to advise the British viceroy, in 1861; the first Indian was appointed in 1909. Provincial Councils with Indian members were also set up. The councillors' participation was subsequently widened into legislative councils. The British built a large British Indian Army, with the senior officers all British, and many of the troops from small minority groups such as Gurkhas from Nepal and Sikhs. The civil service was increasingly filled with natives at the lower levels, with the British holding the more senior positions. Anil Chandra Banerjee, A Constitutional History of India 1600-1935 (1978) p 171-3 

From 1920 leaders such as Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi began highly popular mass movements to campaign against the British Raj using largely peaceful methods. Some others adopted a militant approach that sought to overthrow British rule by armed struggle; revolutionary activities against the British rule took place throughout the Indian sub-continent. The Gandhi-led independence movement opposed the British rule using non-violent methods like non-cooperation, civil disobedience and economic resistance. These movements succeeded in bringing independence to the new dominions of India and Pakistan in 6 August 1947.

==Independence and partition (1947-present)==

Along with the desire for independence, tensions between Hindus and Muslims had also been developing over the years. The Muslims had always been a minority within the subcontinent, and the prospect of an exclusively Hindu government made them wary of independence; they were as inclined to mistrust Hindu rule as they were to resist the foreign Raj, although Gandhi called for unity between the two groups in an astonishing display of leadership. The British, extremely weakened by the Second World War, promised that they would leave and participated in the formation of an interim government. The British Indian territories gained independence in 1947, after being partitioned into the Union of India and Dominion of Pakistan. Following the controversial division of pre-partition Punjab and Bengal, rioting broke out between Sikhs, Hindus and Muslims in these provinces and spread to several other parts of India, leaving some 500,000 dead. Also, this period saw one of the largest mass migrations ever recorded in modern history, with a total of 12 million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims moving between the newly created nations of India and Pakistan (which gained independence on 15 and 14 August 1947 respectively). In 1971, Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan and East Bengal, seceded from Pakistan.

==Historiography==
In recent decades there have been four main schools of historiography regarding India: Cambridge, Nationalist, Marxist, and subaltern. The once common "Orientalist" approach, with its the image of a sensuous, inscrutable, and wholly spiritual India, has died out in serious scholarship. Gyan Prakesh, "Writing Post-Orientalist Histories of the Third World: Perspectives from Indian Historiography" Comparative Studies in Society and History (1990), 32 : pp 383-408 

The "Cambridge School," led by Anil Seal, Anil Seal, The Emergence of Indian Nationalism: Competition and Collaboration in the Later Nineteenth Century (1971) Gordon Johnson, Gordon Johnson, Provincial Politics and Indian Nationalism: Bombay and the Indian National Congress 1880-1915 (2005) Richard Gordon, and David A. Washbrook, Rosalind O'Hanlon and David Washbrook, eds. Religious Cultures in Early Modern India: New Perspectives (2011) downplays ideology. Aravind Ganachari, "Studies in Indian Historiography: 'The Cambridge School,'" Indica, March 2010, 47#1, pp 70-93 

The Nationalist school has focused on Congress, Gandhi, Nehru and high level politics. It highlighted the Mutiny of 1857 as a war of liberation, and Gandhi's 'Quit India' begun in 1942, as defining historical events. More recently, Hindu nationalists have created a version of history for the schools to support their demands for "Hindutva" ("Hinduness") in Indian society. Latha Menon, "Coming to Terms with the Past: India," History Today, August 2004, 54#8 pp 28-30 

The Marxists have focused on studies of economic development, landownership, and class conflict in precolonial India and of deindustrialization during the colonial period. The Marxists portrayed Gandhi's movement as a device for the bourgeois elite to harness popular, potentially revolutionary forces for its own ends. Amiya Kumar Bagchi, "Writing Indian History in the Marxist Mode in a Post-Soviet World," Indian Historical Review, January 1993, Vol. 20 Issue 1/2, pp 229-244, 

The "subaltern school," was begun in the 1980s by Ranajit Guha and Gyan Prakash. Gyan Prakash, "Subaltern studies as postcolonial criticism," American Historical Review, December 1994, 99#5 pp 1475-1500 It focuses attention away from the elites and politicians to "history from below," looking at the peasants using folklore, poetry, riddles, proverbs, songs, oral history and methods inspired by anthropology. It focuses on the colonial era before 1947 and typically emphasizes caste and downplays class, to the annoyance of the Marxist school. John Roosa, "When the Subaltern Took the Postcolonial Turn," Journal of the Canadian Historical Association, 2006, Vol. 17 Issue 2, pp 130-147 

==See also==

*Ancient India
*Chronology of Indian history
*Economic history of India
*History of the Republic of India
*Indian maritime history
*Linguistic history of the Indian subcontinent
*Military history of India
*The Cambridge History of India

==Gallery==

Image:Magnificent Chowmahalla Palace.jpg|Chowmahalla palace at Old City in Hyderabad
Image: Charminar-Pride of Hyderabad.jpg|Charminar at Old City in Hyderabad

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==

===Published sources===

* 
* 

===Web-sources===

==Further reading==
* Bandyopadhyay, Sekhar. From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India (2010)
* Basham, A. L., ed. The Illustrated Cultural History of India (Oxford University Press, 2007)
* Brown, Judith M. Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy (2nd ed. 1994) online
* Danilou, Alain (2003). A Brief History of India ISBN 0-89281-923-5
* Guha, Ramachandra. India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy (2007), 890pp; since 1947
* James, Lawrence. Raj: The Making and Unmaking of British India (2000)
* 
* Kulke, Hermann and Dietmar Rothermund. A History of India. (4th ed 2004) online
* Mcleod, John. The History of India (2002) excerpt and text search
* Mansingh, Surjit The A to Z of India (2010), a concise historical encyclopedia
* Metcalf, Barbara D. and Thomas R. Metcalf. A Concise History of Modern India (2006) 
* Peers, Douglas M. India under Colonial Rule: 1700-1885 (2006), 192pp
* Richards, John F. The Mughal Empire (The New Cambridge History of India) (1996) 
* Rothermund, Dietmar. An Economic History of India: From Pre-Colonial Times to 1991 (1993)
* Sharma, R.S., India's Ancient Past, (Oxford University Press, 2005)
* Sarkar, Sumit. Modern India, 1885-1947 (2002)
* Singhal, D.P. A History of the Indian People. (1983)
* Smith, Vincent. The Oxford History of India (3rd ed. 1958), old-fashioned
* Spear, Percival. The History of India (1958 and later editions) online edition
* Stein, Burton. A History of India (1998) 
* Tapan, Habib, and Irfan Raychaudhuri, eds. The Cambridge Economic History of India; Volume 1: c. 1200 - c. 1750 (1984), essays by scholars
**Dharma Kumar and Meghnad Desai, eds. The Cambridge Economic History of India: Volume 2, c.1751-c.1970 (2nd ed. 2010), 1114pp of scholarly articles
* Thapar, Romila. Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 (2004) excerpt and text search
* Thompson, Edward, and G.T. Garratt. Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India (1934) 690 pages; scholarly survey, 1599-1933 excerpt and text search
* Tomlinson, B. R. The Economy of Modern India, 1860-1970 (The New Cambridge History of India) (1996)
* Wolpert, Stanley. A New History of India. (6th ed. 1999)

===Historiography===
* 
* Bayly, C. A. "State and Economy in India over Seven Hundred Years," Economic History Review, (November 1985), 38#4 pp 583596, online
* Bose, Mihir. "India's Missing Historians: Mihir Bose Discusses the Paradox That India, a Land of History, Has a Surprisingly Weak Tradition of Historiography," History Today 57#9 (2007) pp 34+. online
* Elliot, Henry Miers; John Dowson (186777). The History of India, as told by its own historians. The Muhammadan Period. London: Trbner and Co.

==Online sources==
* The Imperial Gazetteer of India (26 vol, 190831), highly detailed description of all of India in 1901. online edition

==External links==
* History of India
* 

 



[[Highlander (franchise)]]

Highlander is a film and television franchise that began with a 1986 fantasy movie starring Christopher Lambert, who plays Connor MacLeod, the Highlander. Born in Glenfinnan, in the Scottish Highlands in the 16th century, MacLeod is one of a number of Immortals. There have been five Highlander movies, two television series, an animated series, an animated movie, an animated flash-movie series, ten original novels, seventeen comic book issues, and various licensed merchandise.

==Films==
===Highlander===
The first of what became a series of films, Highlander, directed by Russell Mulcahy, was released on March 7, 1986, with the tagline "There Can Be Only One." The film features a number of flashback scenes establishing Connor MacLeod of the Clan MacLeod's early history, and builds up to his final destiny among the last of the mysterious Immortals. Through a mentor and fellow Immortal &mdash; Juan Snchez Villa-Lobos Ramrez, played by Sean Connery &mdash; he learns of the existence of other Immortals, who occur spontaneously throughout history. An Immortal can die only after being beheaded, and Immortals battle one another in ritual single combat to the death, until the "Gathering," when the few remaining Immortals will fight until only one remains to take "The Prize". The Gathering occurs in modern-day (1985) New York City, when the Highlander, who has fallen in love again despite trying to cut himself off from humanity, narrowly defeats his powerful and evil enemy, The Kurgan, whom he has encountered repeatedly over the previous centuries, and who has slain Ramrez and many others. The movie was originally titled Shadow Clan in the earliest drafts of the film. Upon its release, the film was not a financial success and was panned by critics. However, it gained a strong cult following, was a hit internationally, and is regarded by many as the best movie in the series. 

The original orchestral score was composed by Michael Kamen, but the soundtrack includes several songs by Queen, like "Princes of the Universe", which were also used in the Highlander television series title sequence. Queen wrote many of the songs specifically to match the mood of the scenes when the songs were played, notably Brian May's "Who Wants to Live Forever", concerning the doomed love of Connor and his wife Heather.

Box office-wise, the movie only took in $2,453,021 in its opening weekend and ended up grossing $5,735,847. However, the movie had more success internationally, taking in $12,885,193.

===Highlander II: The Quickening===
, directed by Russell Mulcahy, was released on November 1, 1991. The film mainly takes place in 2024, with flashbacks to events in 1999, and also a very distant past on the planet Zeist. MacLeod designs an energy shield to protect the Earth after its ozone layer began to disintegrate, but the Shield's heavy red clouds and blocking of natural sunlight have plunged mankind into despair. The Shield has also fallen under the control of the Shield Corporation, which taxes heavily for its services in the pursuit of profit. Meanwhile, MacLeod has physically aged into a frail old man &mdash; his mortality part of winning the Prize &ndash; and expects that he will eventually die of natural causes. After he kills one of the Immortals from Zeist sent to kill him, he becomes young and Immortal again, much to his dismay. He then joins with Louise Marcus (Virginia Madsen), who had led a group of terrorists who try to dismantle the Shield.

This film offers an alternative origin for the Immortals, who are depicted as aliens exiled to Earth from Zeist. In direct contradiction to the original film, Ramrez and MacLeod were friends before their exile from Zeist. In the original, they first met in Scotland in 1541, with no mention of Zeist whatsoever. This was a primary reason the movie immediately met with harsh criticism. Hicks, Chris. "Highlander II: The Quickening." Deseret News. 

Russell Mulcahy was disappointed with the movie as originally released, and later made his own "Renegade Version" director's cut with a proper sequencing of various scenes, and the filmmakers' explanation for why the movie turned out as it originally did. One of Mulcahy's most dynamic alterations was the relabeling of the Zeist footage as a flashback to an ancient, technologically-advanced civilization on Earth, much more in line with the later continuity of the first film and the later TV series. Highlander II: To Be or Not to Be a Sequel? 1997. DVD. Republic Pictures. In 2004, a Special Edition was released, featuring several distinct alterations, including new computer-generated visual effects throughout the film. Highlander II: Seduced by Argentina. Dir. Jonathan Gaines. 2004. DVD. Lions Gate Entertainment. 

===Highlander III: The Sorcerer===
 (alternatively titled Highlander: The Final Dimension) was first released on November 25, 1994. 
The third movie contradicts both the second film and the television series, acting as a stand-alone sequel to the original movie. Highlander III: The Final Dimension MacLeod battles a warrior who missed the original Gathering, because he was buried deep in a Japanese cave that is holy ground, isolating him from the supposedly final contest of the first film. Kane (played by Mario Van Peebles) is a master of the "power of illusion," which allows him to create false imagery to deceive his enemies. Connor, who has lived with his adopted son John for years with the belief that he is the final Immortal, must return to New York and finish the job he started back in 1985. Along the way, he finds a new love, Dr. Alex Johnson (Deborah Unger). The movie was a box office flop. Critics and fans claim that it was little more than a carbon copy of the first film.

===Highlander: Endgame===
, first released on September 1, 2000, was an attempt to merge characters from both the original film and from the Highlander TV series. Flipside Movie Emporium: Highlander: Endgame Movie Review The story follows Duncan MacLeod as he confronts Jacob Kell, a renegade Immortal who has assembled a group of fellow warriors, as well as an impressive body-count. Kell, who holds a centuries-old grudge against the elder Connor MacLeod, has slain Connor's dearest loved ones, and he does not follow the traditions of single combat. Connor has spent a decade trying to escape the Game in a hidden Watcher fortress known as the Sanctuary, but he and Duncan are forced to confront this new threat that neither one of them alone can succeed against. As the two MacLeods will not break the single-combat tradition, Connor convinces Duncan to decapitate him, thus gaining the power that he needs to defeat Kell. This directly contradicts Highlander 2: The Quickening, in which Connor McLeod, is seen in the future, as an old man. However, Highlander 2 also features a method whereby one Immortal can resurrect another so it does not necessarily create a paradox. 

Critical reaction to Highlander: Endgame was negative. It holds a 12% "rotten" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 52 reviews, Rotten Tomatoes entry on Highlander: Endgame, retrieved January 15, 2010. higher than Highlander II and Highlander III, both of which hold ratings of 5% or lower, Rotten Tomatoes entry on Highlander 2, retrieved January 15, 2010. Rotten Tomatoes entry on Highlander 3, retrieved January 15, 2010. and a score of 21 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 16 reviews. Metacritic entry on Highlander: Endgame, retrieved January 15, 2010. 

The film was not a financial success, managing to garner only $15m of its $25m budget. The film opened at #3, grossing $5,067,331 in the opening weekend. It went on to gross $12,811,858 domestically and gather $3,031,750 from foreign markets for a worldwide total of $15,843,608. However, it was a commercial hit when it was released on DVD. This prompted the producers to release the director's cut version of the film, whose reception was far better than the theatrical in that new and edited footage was added, along with better special effects and audio tracks.

===Highlander: The Source===
 is the fifth and final installment of the Highlander film series, which premiered on the Sci Fi Channel on September 15, 2007. Sci-Fi Network To Air The Next Highlander Film The film follows Duncan MacLeod and a group of fellow Immortals seeking the source of immortality. Highlander: The Source The film retcons the meaning of the Game and the phrase, "There can be only one."

Critical reaction to Highlander: The Source was universally negative. The Sci-Fi Movie Page gave it only one and a half stars out of a possible five. Sci-Fi Movie Page review of Highlander 5 

===Reboot===
On May 20, 2008, The Hollywood Reporter announced that Summit Entertainment is planning a remake of the original 1986 Highlander film. The script for the new film will be penned by writers Art Marcum and Matt Holloway, who both worked on the Iron Man film. Peter Davis will produce the new film. "There Can Be Only One Highlander Remake.". Coming Soon.Net Justin Lin the director of Fast Five signed on to direct the remake. Fast & Furious Director To Remake Highlander Live For Film has announced the film was originally entitled Highlander: The Reckoning, Highlander reboot  Vinnie Jones as the Kurgan?  www.liveforfilms.com however also acknowledged that sequels in the Highlander franchise had generally not been well received.

On March 2010, producer Neal H. Moritz stated in an interview that "Were staying true to the mythologies as a whole of the Highlander series. Now there are certain things between all the different Highlanders that conflict with each other, but were trying to stay true to the core of what we believe Highlander is and its a movie thats going to be made for the fans of Highlander but also for people who are new to the franchise." He also expressed interest in incorporating the music of Queen in the new film, just as the original did. 

On February 9, 2011, it was announced that Melissa Rosenberg was "in negotiations to come on board the Highlander reboot to work on that script." TWILIGHT Screenwriter Melissa Rosenberg to Tackle HIGHLANDER Script 

In an interview with MTV in May 2011, Justin Lin commented on the film. "I feel like right now, Highlander is in pretty good shape, but I still have to see all the other things come together for us to go make it. However in August, Lin dropped out of the film due to commitments to other projects. 

28 Weeks Later director Juan Carlos Fresnadillo signed on to direct the remake, replacing previous director Justin Lin. Vinnie Jones and Ray Stevenson are rumored to be considered for the role of The Kurgan. In June 2012, Ryan Reynolds was confirmed to play Connor MacLeod in the remake. However, in December 2012, Fresnadillo left the project due to creative differences and On June 17, 2013, Reynolds also dropped out of the film. Reynolds Exits 'Highlander' Reboot at Summit (Exclusive) On June 28, 2013, David Abramowitz who wrote the TV series will polish the film's script. The film remains in developmental limbo as of 2013. On October 28, 2013, Summit has hired Snow White and the Huntsman visual effects supervisor and second unit director Cedric Nicolas-Troyan to direct the reboot. Summit Sets Cedric Nicolas-Troyan To Helm Highlander Feature Reboot 

==Spin-offs==
===Live-action television===
In 1992, a television spin-off was developed, entitled . It was shown in syndication from October 3, 1992 to May 16, 1998. The series was an offshoot of the 1986 feature film but with one major difference: Immortals still exist post-1985.

Adrian Paul starred as Duncan MacLeod, another immortal from the same clan. The series also starred Alexandra Vandernoot, Stan Kirsch, Amanda Wyss, Jim Byrnes, Philip Akin, Michel Modo, Lisa Howard, Elizabeth Gracen and Peter Wingfield. Over its six year run, the series had guest stars including Joan Jett, Vanity, Roger Daltrey, Richard Moll, Traci Elizabeth Lords, Sheena Easton, "Rowdy" Roddy Piper, Nia Peeples, Rae Dawn Chong, Eric McCormack, Sandra Bernhard and Ron Perlman.

The show was co-produced in syndication by international partners including Gaumont, RTL Plus (Germany), Rysher Distribution (United States), Reteitalia Productions (Italy), Amuse Video (Japan) and TF1 (France). The series had high ratings internationally. However, the ratings fell during the show's sixth season, which ended its six year run in 1998.

The television series had its own spin-off after using its sixth year as a casting call. starred Elizabeth Gracen, reprising her role as the popular character Amanda Darieux. It lasted one season due to low ratings and the change in the marketing of syndicated shows.

In 2008, Reunion, a reunion special was filmed starring Peter Wingfield, Elizabeth Gracen, and Jim Byrnes reprising their roles. The 17 minute special was a low budget project 10 years after the series (or between the fourth and fifth movies). Filming took place at producer Peter Davis's beach home with the actors volunteering in their roles. The plot involved the characters discussing Methos' plans to get married and settle down with a mortal woman and her son.

===Animation===
A 1994 animated series, , was set in the far future, and featured the character of Quentin MacLeod, voiced by Miklos Perlus.

A 1994 animated movie, "" Highlander: The Adventure Begins (Video 1994) - IMDb was a straight to video release that sets up the backstory for the animated series.

In 2007, an anime film, was released, featuring the immortal Colin MacLeod in the year 2187. Sci-Fi Channel. http://www.scifi.com/sfw/anime/sfw15995.html 

===Other releases===
A number of Highlander Novels were released, including a novelization of the first film by Garry Kilworth and a line of books based on the Series by various authors.

The Highlander comic book series from Dynamite Entertainment, featuring the creative team of Brandon Jerwa, Michael Avon Oeming (Red Sonja) and artist Lee Moder, are also set around the universe of the television series.

Big Finish Productions have the licence to produce Highlander audio dramas. The format (like many of their other ranges) is one actor reading the script with another playing one other important part. The first four audios star Adrian Paul as Duncan MacLeod and were released monthly from June 2009. The stories themselves are set after .

==Merchandise==
*The Best of Highlander: The Book by Maureen Russell.
*Highlander: The Original Scores, a compact disc set featuring music from the first three films. http://www.thelogbook.com/disc/e-h/highfilm.html 
* &mdash; a 1995 video game based on , developed for the Atari Jaguar CD. Highlander: The Last of the MacLeods for Jaguar - MobyGames 
*Highlander Video Game &mdash; a MMORPG video game has been announced, but after years of work was cancelled in pre-production. &ndash; Game announcement 
* &mdash; an action game published by Eidos Interactive. Officially cancelled on December 10, 2010.

==See also==
*List of Highlander cast members
*List of Highlander characters

==References==

==External links==
*Highlander Official web site
* Highlander comics/comic publisher Dynamite Entertainment
*Unofficial Highlander WWW and Mailing list Archive Site
*Highlander Worldwide fan club web site
* Highlander Remake Script Review

 



[[List of ships called HMS Hood]]

Three ships of the Royal Navy have been named HMS Hood after several members of the Hood family, who were notable Navy officers:

* was a 91-gun second-rate ship of the line, originally laid down as HMS Edgar, but renamed in 1848 and launched in 1859. She was used for harbour service from 1872 and was sold in 1888.
* was a modified launched in 1891 and sunk as a blockship in 1914.
* was an launched in 1918 and sunk in 1941 by the German battleship and heavy cruiser in the Battle of the Denmark Strait.



[[Houston Astros]]

The Houston Astros are a professional baseball team located in Houston, Texas. The team is a member of the Western Division of Major League Baseball's American League, having moved in 2013 after spending their first 51 seasons in the National League. The Astros have played their home games at Minute Maid Park since 2000. 

The Astros were established as the Houston Colt .45s in . The current name was adopted three years later when they moved into the Astrodome, the world's first domed sports stadium. The name reflects Houston's role as the center of the U.S. Space Program.

The Astros have one World Series appearance, in 2005 against the Chicago White Sox, in which they lost.

==Franchise history==

===Major League Baseball comes to Texas===

From 1888 until 1961, Houston's professional baseball club was the minor league Houston Buffaloes. Although expansion from the National League eventually brought a Major League team to Texas in 1962, Houston officials had been making efforts to do so for years prior. There were four men chiefly responsible for bringing Major League Baseball to Houston: George Kirksey and Craig Cullinan, who had led a futile attempt to purchase the St. Louis Cardinals in 1952; R.E. "Bob" Smith, a prominent oilman and real estate magnate in Houston who was brought in for his financial resources; and Judge Roy Hofheinz, a former Mayor of Houston and Harris County Judge who was recruited for his salesmanship and political style. They formed the Houston Sports Association as their vehicle for attaining a big league franchise for the city of Houston. 

Given MLB's refusal to consider expansion, Kirksey, Cullinan, Smith, and Hofheinz joined forces with would-be owners from other cities and announced the formation of a new league to compete with the established National and American Leagues. They called the new league the Continental League. Wanting to protect potential new markets, both existing leagues chose to expand from eight teams to ten. However, plans eventually fell through for the Houston franchise after the Houston Buffaloes owner, Marty Marion, could not come to an agreement with the HSA to sell the team. To make matters worse, the Continental League as a whole folded in August 1960.

However, on October 17, 1960, the National League granted an expansion franchise to the Houston Sports Association in which their team could begin play in the 1962 season. According to the Major League Baseball Constitution, the Houston Sports Association was required to obtain territorial rights from the Houston Buffaloes in order to play in the Houston area, and again negotiations began to purchase the team. Eventually, the Houston Sports Association succeeded in purchasing the Houston Buffaloes, at this point majority-owned by William Hopkins, on January 17, 1961. The Buffs played one last minor league season as the top farm team of the Chicago Cubs in 1961 before being succeeded by the city's NL club.

The new Houston team was named the Colt .45s after a "Name The Team" contest was won by William Irving Neder. The Colt .45 was well known as "the gun that won the west." 
The colors selected were navy blue and orange. The first team was a group of scrubs formed mostly through an expansion draft after the 1961 season. The Colt .45s and their expansion cousins, the New York Mets, took turns choosing players left unprotected by the other National League franchises.

Many of those associated with the Houston Buffaloes organization were allowed by the ownership to continue in the major league. Manager Harry Craft, who had joined Houston in 1961, remained in the same position for the team until the end of the 1964 season. General manager Spec Richardson also continued with the organization as business manager, but was later promoted again to the same position with the Astros from 1967 until 1975. Although most players for the major league franchise were obtained through the 1961 Major League Baseball expansion draft, Buffs players J.C. Hartman, Pidge Browne, Jim Campbell, Ron Davis, Dave Giusti, and Dave Roberts were chosen to continue as major league ball players.

Similarly, the radio broadcasting team remained with the new Houston major league franchise. Loel Passe worked alongside Gene Elston as a color commentator until he retired from broadcasting in 1976. Elston continued with the Astros until 1986.

The Colt .45s began their existence playing at Colt Stadium. Colt Stadium, however, was just a temporary field until Judge Hofheinz could build an indoor stadium.

===19621964: The Colt .45s===
Colt .45s logo, 19621964
The Colt .45s started their inaugural season on April 10, 1962, against the Chicago Cubs with Harry Craft as the Colt .45s' manager. Bob Aspromonte scored the first run for the Colt .45s on an Al Spangler triple in the first inning. They started the season with a three-game sweep of the Cubs but eventually finished eighth among the National League's ten teams. The team's best pitcher, Richard "Turk" Farrell, lost 20 games despite an ERA of 3.02. A starter for the Colt .45s, Farrell was primarily a relief pitcher prior to playing for Houston. He was selected to both All-Star Games in 1962. 

The 1963 season saw more young talent mixed with seasoned veterans. Jimmy Wynn, Rusty Staub, and Joe Morgan all made their major league debuts in the 1963 season. However, Houston's position in the standings did not improve. In fact, the Colt .45s finished in ninth place with a 6696 record. The team was still building, trying to find that perfect mix to compete. The 1964 campaign began on a sad note. Pitcher Jim Umbricht died of cancer at the age of 33 just before Opening Day. Umbricht was the only Colt .45s pitcher to post a winning record in Houston's first two seasons. He was so well liked by players and fans that the team retired his jersey number, 32, in 1965. 

Just on the horizon, the structure of the new domed stadium was more prevalent and it would soon change the way that baseball was watched in Houston and around the league.

===19651970: The Great Indoors===
Astros logo, 19651974 with the Astrodome

With Judge Roy Hofheinz now the sole owner of the franchise and the new venue complete, the Colt .45s moved into their new domed stadium, the Astrodome, in 1965. The name honored Houston's position as location of the nation's space program. The Colt .45s were renamed the Astros. The new park, coined the "Eighth Wonder of the World", did little to help the play on the field. While several "indoor" firsts were accomplished, the team still finished ninth in the standings. The attendance was high not because of the team accomplishments, but because people came from miles around to see the Astrodome.

Just as the excitement was settling down over the Astrodome, the 1966 season found something new to put the domed stadium in the spotlight once again  the field. Grass would not grow in the new park, since the roof panels had been painted to reduce the glare that was causing players on both the Astros and the visiting teams to miss routine pop flies. A new artificial turf was created called "AstroTurf" and Houston would be involved in yet another change in the way the game was played. Ballparksofbaseball.com 

With new manager Grady Hatton the Astros started the 1966 season strong. By May they were in second place in the National League and looked like a team that could contend. Joe Morgan was named as a starter on the All-Star Team. The success did not last as they lost Jimmy Wynn for the season after he crashed into an outfield fence in Philadelphia and Morgan had broken his knee cap. 1967 saw first baseman Eddie Mathews join the Astros. The slugger hit his 500th home run while in Houston. He would be traded late in the season and Doug Rader would be promoted to the big leagues. Rookie Wilson pitched a no-hitter on June 18, the first pitched in team history. Wynn also provided some enthusiasm in 1967. The 5 ft 9 in Wynn was becoming known not only for how often he hit home runs, but also for how far he hit them. Wynn set club records with 37 home runs, and 107 RBIs. It was also in 1967 that Wynn hit his famous home run onto Interstate 75 in Cincinnati. Jimmy Wynn Statistics  Baseball-Reference.com As the season came to a close, the Astros found themselves again in ninth place and with a winning percentage below .500. The team looked good on paper, but could not make it work on the field.

April 15, 1968 saw a pitching duel for the ages. The Astros' Don Wilson and the Mets' Tom Seaver faced each other in a pitching duel that lasted six hours. Seaver went ten innings, allowing no walks and just two hits. Wilson went nine innings, allowing five hits and three walks. After the starters exited, eleven relievers (seven for the Mets and four for the Astros) tried to end the game. The game finally ended in the 24th inning when Aspromonte hit a shot toward Mets shortstop Al Weis. Weis had been perfect all night at short, but he was not quick enough to make the play. The ball zipped into left field, allowing Norm Miller to score. 

With baseball expansion and trades, the Astros had dramatically changed in 1969. Aspromonte was sent to the Braves and Staub was traded to the expansion Montreal Expos, in exchange for outfielder Jesus Alou and first baseman Donn Clendenon. However, Clendenon refused to report to Houston, electing to retire and take job with a pen manufacturing company. The Astros asked Commissioner Bowie Kuhn to void the trade, but he refused. Instead, he awarded Jack Billingham and a left-handed relief pitcher to the Astros to complete the trade. Cuellar was traded to the Baltimore Orioles for Curt Blefary. Other new players included catcher Johnny Edwards, infielder Denis Menke, and pitcher Denny Lemaster. Wilson continued to pitch brilliantly and on May 1 threw the second no-hitter of his career. In that game, he struck out 18 batters, tying what was then the all-time single-game mark. He was just 24 years of age and was second to only Sandy Koufax for career no-hit wins. Wilson's no-hitter lit the Astros' fire after a miserable month of April, and six days later the team tied a major league record by turning seven double plays in a game. By May's end the Astros had put together a ten-game winning streak. The Houston infield tandem of Menke and Joe Morgan continued to improve, providing power at the plate and great defense. Morgan had 15 homers and stole 49 bases while Menke led the Astros with 90 RBIs. The Menke/Morgan punch was beginning to come alive, and the team was responding to Walker's management style. The Astros dominated the season series against their expansion twins, the New York Mets, that season. In one game at New York, Denis Menke and Jimmy Wynn hit grand slams in the same inning, against a Mets team that would go on to win the World Series that same year. The Astros finished the 1969 season with a record of 81 wins, 81 losses, marking their first season of .500 ball.

In 1970, the Astros were expected to be a serious threat in the National League West. In June, 19-year-old Csar Cedeo was called up and immediately showed signs of being a superstar. The Dominican outfielder batted .310 after being called up. Not to be outdone, Denis Menke batted .304 and Jess Alou batted .306. The Astros' batting average was up by 19 points compared to the season before. The team looked good, but the Astros' ERA was up. Larry Dierker and Don Wilson had winning records, but the pitching staff as a whole had an off season. Houston finished in fourth place in 1970.

===19711974: The boys in orange===
The fashion trends of the 1960s had started taking root in baseball. Long hair and loud colors were starting to appear on team uniforms, including the Astros'. In 1971 the Astros made some changes to their uniform: they kept the same style they had in previous seasons, but inverted the colors. What was navy blue was now orange and what was orange was now a lighter shade of blue. The players' last names were added to the back of the jerseys. In 1972, the uniform fabric was also changed to what was at the time revolutionizing the industry  polyester. Belts were replaced by elastic waistbands, and jerseys zipped up instead of having buttons. The uniforms became popular with fans, but would last only until 1975, when the Astros would shock baseball and the fashion world. 

The uniforms were about the only thing that did change in 1971. The acquisition of Roger Metzger from the Chicago Cubs in the off-season moved Menke to first base and Bob Watson to the outfield. The Astros got off to a slow start and the pitching and hitting averages were down. Larry Dierker was selected to the All-Star game in 1971, but due to an arm injury he could not make it. Csar Cedeo led the club with 81 RBIs and the league with 40 doubles, but batted just .264 and had 102 strikeouts in his second season with the Astros. Pitcher J. R. Richard made his debut in September of the 1971 season against the Giants.

====The big trade====

In November 1971 the Astros and Cincinnati Reds made one of the most blockbuster trades in the history of the sport, and helped create The Big Red Machine of the 1970s, with the Reds getting the better end of the deal. Houston sent second baseman Joe Morgan, infielder Denis Menke, pitcher Jack Billingham, outfielder Csar Gernimo and prospect Ed Armbrister to Cincinnati for first baseman Lee May, second baseman Tommy Helms and infielder Jimmy Stewart. The trade left Astros fans and the baseball world scratching their heads as to why General Manager Spec Richardson would give up so much for so little. The Reds, on the other hand, would shore up many problems. They had an off year in 1971, but were the National League Pennant winner in 1972. 

The Astros' acquisition of Lee May added more power to the lineup in 1972. May, Wynn, Rader and Cedeo all had 20 or more home runs and Watson hit 16. Cedeo also led the Astros with a .320 batting average, 55 stolen bases and made spectacular plays on the field. Cedeo made his first All-Star game in 1972 and became the first Astros player in team history to hit for the cycle in August versus the Reds. The Astros finished the strike-shortened season at 84-69, their first winning season. 

Astros fans had hoped for more of the same in 1973, but it was not to be. The Astros run production was down, even though the same five sluggers the year before were still punching the ball out of the park. Lee May led the Astros with 28 home runs and Cesar Cedeo batted .320 with 25 home runs. Bob Watson hit the .312 mark and drove in 94 runs. Doug Rader and Jimmy Wynn both had 20 or more home runs. However, injuries to their pitching staff limited the Astros to an 8280 fourth-place finish. The Astros again finished in fourth place the next year under new manager Preston Gmez. 

===19751979: The rainbow era===
Astros logo, 19751993 with the Astrodome
With the $38 million deficit of the Astrodome, control of the Astrodomain was passed from Judge Roy Hofheinz to GE Credit and Ford Motor Credit. This included the Astros. The creditors were just interested in preserving asset value of the team, so any money spent had to be found or saved somewhere else. Tal Smith returned to the Astros from the New York Yankees to find a team that needed a lot of work and did not have a lot of money. However, there would be some bright spots that would prove to be good investments in the near future.

The year started on a sad note. Pitcher Don Wilson was found dead in the passenger seat of his car on January 5, 1975. Cause of death was asphyxiation by carbon monoxide. Wilson was 29 years old. Wilson's number 40 was retired on April 13, 1975. 

The 1975 season saw the introduction of the Astros' new uniforms. Many teams were going away from the traditional uniform and the Astros were no exception. The uniforms had multishade stripes of orange, red and yellow in front and in back behind a large dark blue star over the midsection. The same stripes run down the pant legs. Players numbers not only appeared on the back of the jersey, but also on the pant leg. The bright stripes were meant to appear as a fiery trail like a rocket sweeping across the heavens. The uniforms were panned by critics, but the public liked them and versions started appearing at the high school and little league level. The uniform was so different from what other teams wore that the Astros wore it both at home and on the road until 1980. 

Besides the bright new uniforms there were some other changes. Lee May was traded to Baltimore for much talked about rookie second baseman Rob Andrews and utility player Enos Cabell. In Baltimore, Cabell was stuck behind third baseman Brooks Robinson, but he took advantage of his opportunity in Houston and became their everyday third baseman. Cabell would go on to become a big part of the team's success in later years. With May gone, Bob Watson was able to move to first base and was a bright spot in the line up, batting .324 with 85 RBI.

The two biggest moves the Astros made in the offseason were the acquisitions of Joe Niekro and Jos Cruz. The Astros bought Niekro from the Braves for almost nothing. Niekro had bounced around the big leagues with minimal success. His older brother Phil Niekro had started teaching Joe how to throw his knuckleball and Joe was just starting to use it when he came to the Astros. Niekro won six games, saved four games and had an ERA of 3.07. Jos Cruz was also a steal, in retrospect, from the Cardinals. Cruz became a fixture in the Astros' outfield for several years and would eventually have his number 25 retired.

Despite high expectations, 1975 was among the Astros' worst in franchise history. Their record of 6497 was far worse than even the expansion Colt .45's, but not as bad as the 2011 Astros (56106) and the 2012 Astros (55107). It was the worst record in baseball and manager Preston Gmez was fired late in the season and replaced by Bill Virdon. The Astros played .500 ball under Virdon in the last 34 games of the season. With Virdon as the manager the Astros improved greatly in 1976 finishing in third place with an 8082 record. A healthy Csar Cedeo was a key reason for the Astros' success in 1976. Bob Watson continued to show consistency and led the club with a .313 average and 102 RBI. Jos Cruz became Houston's everyday left fielder and hit .303 with 28 stolen bases. 1976 saw the end of Larry Dierker's playing career as an Astro, but before it was all over he would throw a no-hitter and win the 1,000th game in the Astrodome. [http://larrydierker.com/index.asp?id=7 ] The Astros finished in third place again in 1977 with a record of 8181. 

One of the big problems the Astros had in the late 1970s was that they were unable to compete in the free agent market. Ford Motor Credit Company was still in control of the team and was looking to sell the Astros, but they were not going to spend money on better players. Most of the talent was either farm grown or bought on the cheap.

The 1979 season would prove to be a big turnaround in Astros history. During the offseason, the Astros made an effort to fix some of their problem areas. They traded Floyd Bannister to Seattle for shortstop Craig Reynolds and acquired catcher Alan Ashby from Toronto for pitcher Mark Lemongello. Reynolds and Ashby were both solid in their positions and gave Houston some much needed consistency. The season started with a boost from pitcher Ken Forsch, who threw a no-hitter the Braves the second game of the season. In May 1979, New Jersey shipping tycoon Dr. John McMullen had agreed to buy the Astros. Now with an investor in charge, the Astros would be more likely to compete in the free agent market. 

The Astros were playing great baseball throughout the season. Jos Cruz and Enos Cabell both stole 30 bases. Joe Niekro had a great year with 21 wins and 3.00 ERA. J. R. Richard won 18 games and set a new personal strikeout record at 313. Joe Sambito came into his own with 22 saves as the Astros closer. Things were going as they should for a team that could win the west. The Astros and Reds battled the final month of the season. The Reds pulled ahead of the Astros by a game and a half. Later that month they split a pair and the Reds kept the lead. That would be how it would end. The Astros finished with their best record to that point at 8973 and 1 games behind the NL winner Reds. 

With Dr. McMullen as sole owner of the Astros, the team would now benefit in ways a corporation could not give them. The rumors of the Astros moving out of Houston started to crumble and the Astros were now able to compete in the free-agent market. McMullen showed the city of Houston that he too wanted a winning team, signing nearby Alvin, Texas native Nolan Ryan to the first million-dollar-a-year deal. Ryan had four career no-hitters already and had struck out 383 in one season. 

===1980: On the brink===
Joe Morgan, who regretted leaving the Astros, returned in 1980. Now back in Houston with two MVP awards and two World Series rings, Morgan wanted to help make the Astros a pennant winner.

1980 saw one of the best pitching staff the Astros ever had, with the fastball of Ryan, the knuckleball of Joe Niekro and the terrifying 6 ft 8 in frame of J. R. Richard. Teams felt lucky to face Ken Forsch, who was a double-digit winner in the previous two seasons. Richard became the first Astros pitcher to start an All-Star game. After a medical examination three days later, Richard was told to rest his arm and he collapsed during a July 30 workout. He had suffered a stroke after a blood clot in the arm apparently moved to his neck and cut off blood flow to the brain. Surgery was done to save his life, but the Astros had lost their ace pitcher after a 104 start with a stingy 1.89 ERA. Richard attempted a comeback, but would never again pitch a big league game. 

After the loss of Richard and some offensive struggles, the Astros slipped to third place in the division behind the Dodgers and the Reds. They bounced back to first with a ten-game winning streak, but the Dodgers had regained a two-game lead when they arrived in Houston on September 9. The Astros won the first two games of that series and the two teams were tied for the division lead. The Astros held a three game lead over the Dodgers with three games left in the season against the Dodgers. The Dodgers swept the series games, forcing a one-game playoff the next day. The Astros would however win the one-game playoff 7-1, and advance to their first post-season.

The team would face the Philadelphia Phillies in the 1980 National League Championship Series. The Phillies sent out Steve Carlton in game one of the NLCS after a six-hour flight the night before. The Phillies would win the opener after the Astros got out to a 1-0 third-inning lead. Ken Forsch pitched particularly strong fourth and fifth innings, but Greg Luzinski hit a sixth-inning two-run bomb to the 300 level seats of Veterans Stadium. The Phillies added an insurance run on the way to a 31 win. Houston bounced back to win games two and three. Game four went into extra innings, with the Phillies taking the lead and the win in the tenth inning. Pete Rose started a rally with a one-out single, then Luzinski doubled off the left field wall and Rose bowled over catcher Bruce Bochy to score the go-ahead run. The Phillies got an insurance run on the way to tying the series. 

Rookie Phillies pitcher Marty Bystrom was sent out by Philadelphia manager Dallas Green to face veteran Nolan Ryan in Game Five. The rookie gave up a run in the first inning, then held the Astros at bay until the sixth inning. An Astros lead was lost when Bob Boone hit a two-out single in the second, but the Astros tied the game in the sixth with an Alan Ashby single scoring Denny Walling. Houston took a 52 lead in the seventh, however the Phillies came back with five runs in the inning. The Astros came back against Tug McGraw with four singles and two two-out runs. Now in extra innings, Garry Maddox doubled in Del Unser with one out to give the Phillies an 87 lead. The Astros failed to score in the bottom of the tenth. 

It must be noted that Howard Cosell was announcing the play by play on TV, and the fans in the Astrodome were so loud in their chant of "Hou..Ston..As...tros", that the TV cameras literally shook to the beat and Cosell could not hear himself speak. Cosell was not pleased.

At the beginning of the series with the Phillies, KILT AM radio announced that the Astros number one fan Astroman would live on top of the Domed Stadium and would not come down until the Astros won the World Series. Over the next 10 days Astroman, played by KILT salesman Denver Griffith lived on top of the Astrodome in a six man tent. On top of the Astrodome was also a telephone hot line back to KILT radio where Griffith as Astroman would give interviews throughout the day. Astroman was completely cut off and could only get food and drink by lowering a rope with a basket the 18 stories from the top of the Astrodome to the center of the playing field. At one point Griffith got so desperate for food and drink that his mother had to intervene and interrupt an Oilers practice so that the needed supplies could be delivered. Every night a local TV station would sign off with a shot of Astroman on top of the Astrodome waving to a circling news chopper.

===19811985===
Astros starting pitcher Nolan Ryan in 1983
A 1981 player strike ran between June 12 and August 10. Ultimately, the strike would help the Astros get into the playoffs. Nolan Ryan and Bob Knepper picked up steam in the second half of the season. Ryan threw his fifth no-hitter on September 26 and finished the season with a 1.69 ERA. Knepper finished with an ERA of 2.18. In the wake of the strike, Major League Baseball took the winners of each "half" season and set up a best-of-five divisional playoff. The Reds won more games than any other team in the National League, but they won neither half of the strike-divided season. The Astros finished 6149 overall, which would have been third in the division behind the Reds and the Dodgers. Advancing to the playoffs as winners of the second half, Houston beat Los Angeles in their first two playoff games at home, but the Dodgers took the next three in Los Angeles to advance to the NLCS.

By 1982, only four players and three starting pitchers remained from the 1980 squad. The Astros were out of pennant contention by August and began rebuilding for the near future. Bill Virdon was fired as manager and replaced by original Colt .45 Bob Lillis. Don Sutton asked to be traded and was sent to the Milwaukee Brewers for cash and the team gained three new prospects, including Kevin Bass. Minor league player Bill Doran was called up in September. Bass also got a look in the outfield. The Astros finished fourth in the west, but new talent was starting to appear. 

Before the 1983 season, the Astros traded Danny Heep to the Mets for pitcher Mike Scott, a 28-year-old who had struggled with New York. Art Howe sat out the 1983 season with an injury, forcing Phil Garner to third and Ray Knight to first. Doran took over at second, becoming the everyday second baseman for the next seven seasons. The Astros finished third in the National League West. The 1984 season started off badly when shortstop Dickie Thon was hit in the head by a pitch and was lost for the season. In September, the Astros called up rookie Glenn Davis after he posted impressive numbers in AAA. The Astros finished in second place. In 1985, Mike Scott learned a new pitch, the split-finger fastball. Scott, who was coming off of a 511 season, had found his new pitch and would become one of Houston's most celebrated hurlers. In June, Davis made the starting lineup at first base, adding power to the team. In September, Joe Niekro was traded to the Yankees for two minor league pitchers and lefty Jim Deshaies. The Astros finished in fourth place in 1985. 

===1986: Lighting a fire===
After finishing fourth in 1985, the Astros fired general manager Al Rosen and manager Bob Lillis. The former was supplanted by Dick Wagner, the man whose Reds defeated the Astros to win the 1979 NL West title. The latter was replaced by Hal Lanier who, like his manager mentor in St. Louis, Whitey Herzog, had a hard-nosed approach to managing and espoused a playing style that focused on pitching, defense, and speed rather than home runs to win games. This style of baseball, known as Whiteyball, took advantage of stadiums with deep fences and artificial turf, both of which were characteristics of the Astrodome. Lanier's style of baseball took Houston by storm. Before Lanier took over, fans were accustomed to Houston's occasional slow starts, but with Lanier leading the way, Houston got off to a hot start, winning 13 of their first 19 contests. 

Prior to the start of the season the Astros acquired outfielder Billy Hatcher from the Cubs for Jerry Mumphrey. Lainer also made a change in the pitching staff, going with a three-man rotation to start the season. This allowed Lanier to keep his three starters (Nolan Ryan, Bob Knepper, and Mike Scott) sharp and to slowly work in rookie hurler Jim Deshaies. Bill Doran and Glenn Davis held down the right side of the field but Lainer rotated the left side. Denny Walling and Craig Reynolds faced the right-handed pitchers while Phil Garner and Dickie Thon batted against left-handers. Lainer knew the Astros had talent and he put it to work. 

The Astrodome was host to the 1986 All-Star Game in which Astros Mike Scott, Kevin Bass, Glenn Davis, and Dave Smith represented the host field. The Astros kept pace with the NL West after the All-Star break. They went on a streak of five straight come-from-behind wins. Houston swept a key 3-game series over the San Francisco Giants in late September to clinch the division title. Mike Scott took the mound in the final game of the series and pitched a no-hitter - the only time in MLB history that any division was clinched via a no-hitter. Scott would finish the season with an 1810 record and a Cy Young Award. 

The 1986 National League Championship Series against the New York Mets was noted for great drama and is considered one of the best postseason series ever. In Game 3, the Astros were ahead at Shea Stadium, 54, in the bottom of the 9th when closer Dave Smith gave up a two-run home run to Lenny Dykstra, giving the Mets a dramatic 65 win.

However, the signature game of the series was Game 6. Needing a win to get to Mike Scott (who had been dominant in the series) in Game 7, the Astros jumped off to a 30 lead in the first inning but neither team would score again until the 9th inning. In the 9th, starting pitcher Bob Knepper would give up two runs, and once again the Astros would look to Dave Smith to close it out. However, Smith would walk Gary Carter and Darryl Strawberry, giving up a sacrifice fly to Ray Knight, tying the game. Despite having the go-ahead runs on base, Smith was able to escape the inning without any further damage.

There was no scoring until the 14th inning when the Mets would take the lead on a Wally Backman single and an error by left fielder Billy Hatcher. The Astros would get the run back in the bottom of the 14th when Hatcher (in a classic goat-to-hero-conversion-moment) hit one of the most dramatic home runs in NLCS history, off the left field foul pole. In the 16th inning, Darryl Strawberry doubled to lead off the inning and Ray Knight drove him home in the next at-bat. The Mets would score a total of three runs in the inning to take what appeared an insurmountable 74 lead. With their season on the line, the Astros would nonetheless rally for two runs to come to within 76. Kevin Bass came up with the tying and winning runs on base; however Jesse Orosco would strike him out, ending the game. At the time the 16-inning game held the record for the longest in MLB postseason history. The Mets won the series, 4-2.

===19871990: Out with the old, in with the new===
After the 1986 season came and went, the team had difficulty finding success again. Hometown favorites Nolan Ryan and Jos Cruz moved on and the team entered a rebuilding phase. Craig Biggio debuted in June 1988, joining new prospects Ken Caminiti and Gerald Young. Biggio would become the everyday catcher by 1990. A trade acquiring Jeff Bagwell in exchange for Larry Andersen would become one of the biggest deals in Astros history. Glenn Davis was traded to Baltimore for Curt Schilling, Pete Harnisch and Steve Finley in 1990.

===19901999: Fine tuning===
The early 1990s were marked by the Astros' growing discontent with their home, the Astrodome. After the Astrodome was renovated for the primary benefit of the NFL's Houston Oilers (who shared the Astrodome with the Astros since the 1960s), the Astros began to grow increasingly disenchanted with the facility. Faced with declining attendance at the Astrodome and the inability of management to obtain a new stadium, in the off-season Astros management announced its intention to sell the team and move the franchise to the Washington, D.C. area. However, the move was not approved by other National League owners, thus compelling the Astros to remain in Houston. Shortly thereafter, McMullen (who also owned the NHL's New Jersey Devils) sold the team to Texas businessman Drayton McLane in 1993, who committed to keeping the team in Houston.

Shortly after McLane's arrival, which coincided with the maturation of Bagwell and Biggio, the Astros began to show signs of consistent success. After finishing second in their division in 1994 (in a strike year), 1995, and 1996, the Astros won consecutive division titles in 1997, 1998, and 1999. In the 1998 season, the Astros set a team record with 102 victories. However, each of these titles was followed by a first-round playoff elimination, in 1998 by the San Diego Padres and in 1997 and 1999 against the Atlanta Braves. The manager of these title teams was Larry Dierker, who had previously been a broadcaster and pitcher for the Astros. During this period, Bagwell, Biggio, Derek Bell, and Sean Berry earned the collective nickname "The Killer Bs". In later seasons, the name came to include other Astros, especially Lance Berkman. 

Coinciding with the change in ownership, the team switched uniforms and team colors after the season in order to go for a new, more serious image. The team's trademark rainbow uniforms were retired, and the team's colors changed to midnight blue and metallic gold. The "Astros" font on the team logo was changed to a more aggressive one, and the team's traditional star logo was changed to a stylized, "flying" star with an open left end. It marked the first time since the team's inception that orange was not part of the team's colors. Despite general agreement that the rainbow uniforms identified with the team had become tired (and looked too much like a minor league team according to the new owners), the new uniforms and caps were never especially popular with many Astros fans.
Astros logo, 19941999
Final Astros regular season game (in the Astrodome) on October 3, 1999
Off the field, in 1994, the Astros hired one of the first African American general managers, former franchise player Bob Watson. Watson would leave the Astros after the 1995 season to become general manager of the New York Yankees and helped to lead the Yankees to a World Championship in 1996. He would be replaced by Gerry Hunsicker, who until 2004 would continue to oversee the building of the Astros into one of the better and most consistent organizations in the Major Leagues.

However, in 1996, the Astros again nearly left Houston. By the mid-1990s, McLane (like McMullen before him) wanted his team out of the Astrodome and was asking the city to build the Astros a new stadium. When things did not progress quickly toward that end, he put the team up for sale. He had nearly finalized a deal to sell the team to businessman William Collins, who planned to move them to Northern Virginia. However, Collins was having difficulty finding a site for a stadium himself, so Major League owners stepped in and forced McLane to give Houston another chance to grant his stadium wish. Houston voters responded positively via a stadium referendum and the Astros stayed put.

===2000-2004: New stadium===
Astros logo, 2000-2012
The 2000 season saw a move to a new stadium. Originally called Enron Field, the stadium was to feature a functional retractable roof, a particularly useful feature with unpredictable Houston weather. The ballpark also featured more intimate surroundings than the Astrodome. In 2002, naming rights were purchased by Houston-based Minute Maid, after Enron went bankrupt. The park was built on the grounds of the old Union Station. A locomotive moves across the outfield and whistles after home runs, paying homage to a Houston history which had eleven railroad company lines running through the city by 1860. The ballpark also contains quirks such as "Tal's Hill", which is a hill in deep center field on which a flagpole stands, all in fair territory. A similar feature was located in Crosley Field. Over the years, many highlight reel catches have been made by center fielders running up the hill to make catches. With the change in location also came a change in attire. Gone were the blue and gold uniforms of the 1990s in favor a more "retro" look with pinstripes, a traditional baseball font, and the colors of brick red, sand and black. The "shooting star" logo was modified but still retained its definitive look.

The Astros moved into Minute Maid Park in 2000
After two fairly successful seasons without a playoff appearance, the Astros were early favorites to win the 2004 NL pennant. They added star pitcher Andy Pettitte to a roster that already included standouts like Lance Berkman and Jeff Kent as well as veterans Bagwell and Biggio. Roger Clemens, who had retired after the season with the New York Yankees, agreed to join former teammate Pettitte on the Astros for 2004. The one-year deal included unique conditions, such as the option for Clemens to stay home in Houston on select road trips when he wasn't scheduled to pitch. Despite the early predictions for success, the Astros had a mediocre 4444 record at the All-Star break. A lack of run production and a poor record in close games were major issues. After being booed at the 2004 All-Star Game held in Houston, manager Jimy Williams was fired and replaced by Phil Garner, a star on the division-winning 1986 Astros. The Astros enjoyed a 4626 record in the second half of the season under Garner and earned the NL wild card spot. The Astros defeated the Braves 3-2 in the Division Series, but would lose the National League Championship Series to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games. Clemens earned a record seventh Cy Young Award in 2004. Additionally, the mid-season addition of Carlos Beltrn in a trade with the Kansas City Royals helped the Astros tremendously in their playoff run. Despite midseason trade rumors, Beltrn would prove instrumental to the team's hopes, hitting eight home runs in the postseason. Though he had asserted a desire to remain with the Astros, Beltrn signed a long-term contract with the New York Mets on January 9, 2005.

===2005: First World Series in Texas===

In 2005, the Astros started poorly and found themselves with a 15-30 record in late May. The Houston Chronicle had written them off with a tombstone emblazened with "RIP 2005 Astros". However, from that low point until the end of July, Houston went 4217 and found themselves in the lead for an NL wild card spot. July saw the best single month record in the club's history at 22-7. Offensive production had increased greatly after a slow start in the first two months. The Astros had also developed an excellent pitching staff, anchored by Roy Oswalt (2012, 2.94), Andy Pettitte (179, 2.39), and Roger Clemens (138 with a league-low ERA of only 1.87). The contributions of the other starters - Brandon Backe (108, 4.76) and rookie starters Ezequiel Astacio (36, 5.67) and Wandy Rodrguez (1010, 5.53) - were less remarkable, but enough to push the Astros into position for a playoff run. The Astros won a wild card berth on the final day of the regular season, becoming the first team since the world champion 1914 Boston Braves to qualify for the postseason after being 15 games under .500.

The Astros won the National League Division Series against the Atlanta Braves, 3-1, with a game four that set postseason records for most innings (18), most players used by a single team (23), and longest game time (5 hours and 50 minutes). Trailing by a score of 6-1, Lance Berkman hit an eighth inning grand slam to narrow the score to 6-5. In the bottom of the ninth, catcher Brad Ausmus, hit a game tying home run that allowed the game to continue in extra innings. In the bottom of the tenth inning, Luke Scott hit a blast to left field that had home run distance, but was inches foul. This game remained scoreless for the next eight innings. In the top of the fifteenth inning, Roger Clemens made only his second career relief appearance, pitching three shutout innings, notably striking out Julio Franco, at the time the oldest man in MLB at 47 years old. In the bottom of the eighteenth inning, Clemens came to bat again, indicating that he would be pitching in the nineteenth inning, if it came to that. Clemens struck out, swinging so hard that he injured a rib-cage muscle that would ultimately end the 2005 season for him. The next batter, Chris Burke, hit a home run to left field for the Astros win, 76. Oddly enough, a fan in the "Crawford Boxes" in left field had previously caught Berkman's grand slam and this same fan caught Burke's home run. The National League Championship Series featured a rematch of the 2004 NLCS. The Astros lost the first game in St. Louis, but would win the next three games, with Roy Oswalt getting the win. Though the Astros were poised to close out the series in Game Five in Houston, Brad Lidge gave up a monstrous two-out three-run home run to Albert Pujols, forcing the series to a sixth game in St. Louis, where the Astros clinched a World Series appearance. Roy Oswalt was named NLCS MVP, having gone 20 with a 1.29 ERA in the series. Current honorary NL President William Y. Giles presented the league champion Astros with the Warren C. Giles Trophy. Warren Giles, William's father and President of the National League from to , had awarded an MLB franchise to the city of Houston in 1960.

The Astros faced the Chicago White Sox in the World Series. Chicago had been considered the slight favorite but would win all four games, the first two at U.S. Cellular Field in Chicago and the final two in Houston. Game 3 marked the first World Series game held in the state of Texas, and was the longest game in World Series history, lasting 5 hours and 41 minutes.

This World Series was marked by a controversy involving the Minute Maid Park roof. The White Sox owner insisted that since his team played in the open (they had no roof), the Astros must play with the roof open, which mitigated the intensity and enthusiasm of the cheering Astros fans.

===2006-2010: The decline===
In the 2006 offseason, the team signed Preston Wilson and moved Berkman to first base, ending the long tenure of Jeff Bagwell. The Astros renewed the contract with Clemens and traded two minor league prospects to the Tampa Bay Devil Rays for left-handed hitter Aubrey Huff. By August, Preston Wilson complained about his playing time after the return of Luke Scott from AAA Round Rock. The Astros released Wilson and he was signed by St. Louis. A dramatic season end included wins in 10 of their last 12 games, but the Astros missed a playoff appearance when they lost the final game of the season to the Atlanta Braves.

On October 31, the Astros declined a contract option on Jeff Bagwell for 2007, ending his 15-year Astros career and leading to his retirement. Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte filed for free agency. On December 12, the Astros traded Willy Taveras, Taylor Buchholz, and Jason Hirsh to the Colorado Rockies for Rockies pitchers Jason Jennings and Miguel Asencio. A trade with the White Sox, involving the same three Astros in exchange for Jon Garland, had been nixed a few days earlier when Buchholz reportedly failed a physical. In the end, Taveras continued to develop and Hirsh had a strong 2007 rookie campaign, while Jennings was often injured and generally ineffective.

Astros' outfielder Orlando Palmeiro, 2007
On April 28, 2007, the Astros purchased the contract of top minor league prospect Hunter Pence. He debuted that night, getting a hit and scoring a run. By May 2007, the Astros had suffered one of their worst recent losing streaks (10 games). On June 28, second baseman Craig Biggio became the 27th MLB player to accrue 3,000 career hits. Biggio needed three hits to reach 3,000 and on that night he had five hits. That night, Carlos Lee hit a towering walk-off grand slam in the eleventh inning. Lee later quipped to the newsmedia that "he had hit a walk-off grand slam and he got second billing", considering Biggio's achievement. On July 24, Biggio announced that he would retire at the end of the season. He hit a grand slam in that night's game which broke a 33 tie and led to an Astros win. In Biggio's last at bat, he grounded out to Chipper Jones of the Atlanta Braves.

On September 20, Ed Wade was named General Manager. In his first move, he traded Jason Lane to the Padres on September 24. On September 30, Craig Biggio retired after twenty years with the team. In November, the Astros traded RHP Brad Lidge and SS Eric Bruntlett to the Philadelphia Phillies for OF Michael Bourn, RHP Geoff Geary, and minor leaguer Mike Costanzo. Utility player Mark Loretta accepted Houston's salary arbitration and Kazuo Matsui finalized a $16.5 million, three-year contract with the team. In December the Astros traded OF Luke Scott, RHP Matt Albers, RHP Dennis Sarfate, LHP Troy Patton, and minor-league 3B Mike Costanzo, to the Baltimore Orioles for SS Miguel Tejada. On December 14, they sent infielder Chris Burke, RHP Juan Gutirrez, and RHP Chad Qualls to the Arizona Diamondbacks for RHP Jos Valverde. On December 27, the Astros came to terms on a deal with All-star, Gold Glove winner Darin Erstad.

In January and February 2008, the Astros signed Brandon Backe, Ty Wigginton, Dave Borkowski and Shawn Chacn to one-year deals. The starting rotation would feature Roy Oswalt and Brandon Backe as numbers one and two. Wandy Rodrguez, Chacn and Chris Sampson rounded out the bottom three slots in the rotation. Woody Williams had retired after a 04 spring training and Jason Jennings was now with Texas. On the other side of the roster, the Astros would start without Kazuo Matsui, who was on a minor league rehab assignment after a spring training injury.

The Astros regressed in 2008 and 2009, finishing with records of 8675 and 7488, respectively. Manager Cecil Cooper was fired after the 2009 season.

===2010Present: 100-loss seasons and move to the American League West, Rebuild===

The 2010 season was the first season as Astros manager for Brad Mills, who was previously the bench coach of the Boston Red Sox. The Astros struggled throughout a season that was marked by trade-deadline deals that sent long time Astros to other teams. On July 29, the Astros' ace starting pitcher, Roy Oswalt, was dealt to the Philadelphia Phillies for J. A. Happ and two minor league players. On July 31, outfielder Lance Berkman was traded to the New York Yankees for minor leaguers Jimmy Paredes and Mark Melancon. The Astros finished with a record of 76-86.

On July 30, 2011, the Astros traded OF Hunter Pence, the team's 2010 leader in home runs, to the Philadelphia Phillies. On July 31, they traded OF Michael Bourn to the Atlanta Braves. On September 17, the Astros clinched their first 100-loss season in franchise history, On September 28, the Astros ended the season with an 80 home loss to the St. Louis Cardinals. Cardinals pitcher Chris Carpenter pitched a complete game, two-hit shutout in the game, enabling the Cardinals to win the National League Wild Card. The Astros finished with a record of 56106, the worst single-season record in franchise history (a record which would be broken the following season).

In November 2010, Drayton McLane announced that the Astros were being put up for sale. McLane stated that because the Astros were one of the few franchises in Major League Baseball with only one family as the owners, he was planning his estate. McLane was 75 years old as of November 2011. In March 2011, local Houston businessman Jim Crane emerged as the front-runner to purchase the franchise. In the 1980s, Crane founded an air freight business which later merged with CEVA Logistics, and later founded Crane Capital Group. McLane and Crane had a previous handshake agreement for the franchise in 2008, but Crane abruptly changed his mind and broke off discussions. Crane also attempted to buy the Chicago Cubs in 2008 and the Texas Rangers during their 2010 bankruptcy auction. Crane came under scrutiny because of previous allegations of discriminatory hiring practices regarding women and minorities, among other issues. This delayed MLB's approval process. During the summer of 2011, a frustrated Crane hinted that the delays might threaten the deal. In October 2011, Crane met personally with MLB Commissioner Bud Selig, in a meeting that was described as "constructive". 

On November 15, 2011, it was announced that Crane had agreed to move the franchise to the American League for the 2013 season. The move was part of an overall divisional realignment of MLB, with the National and American leagues each having 15 teams in three geographically balanced divisions. Crane was given a $70 million concession by MLB for agreeing to the switch; the move was a condition for the sale to the new ownership group. Two days later, the Astros were officially sold to Crane after the other owners unanimously voted in favor of the sale. It was also announced that 2012 would be the last season for the Astros in the NL. After over fifty years of the Astros being a part of the National League, this move was unpopular with many Astros fans. 

Astros second baseman Jos Altuve in 2013
In 2012, the Astros were eliminated from the playoffs before September 5. On September 27, the Astros named Bo Porter to be the manager for the 2013 season.

And, on October 3, the Astros ended over 50 years of NL play with a 54 loss to the Chicago Cubs. Winning only 20 road games during the entire season, the Astros finished with a 55107 record, the worst record in all of Major League Baseball for the 2012 season, and surpassing the 2011 season for the worst record in Astros history.

On November 2, 2012, the Astros unveiled their new look in preparation for their move to the American League for the 2013 season. The uniform is navy blue and orange, going back to the original 1960s team colors, as well as debuting a new version of the classic navy blue hat with a white "H" over an orange star. 

On November 6, 2012, the Astros hired former Cleveland Indians director of baseball operations David Stearns as the team's new assistant general manager. The Astros would also go on to hire former St Louis Cardinals front office executive Jeff Luhnow as their general manager. His analytics and reliance on scouts blends the science with the art of baseball and have accounted for the success that the Cardinals have had winning multiple championships over recent years.

The Houston Astros played their first game as an American League team on March 31, 2013, where they were victorious over their in-state division rivals, the Texas Rangers, with a score of 82.

When the Astros were in the National League, their "permanent rival" for interleague play had been the Texas Rangers. Starting in 2013, with their move to the American League, their new permanent interleague rival is the Colorado Rockies.

On September 29, the Astros completed their first year in the American League, losing 51 in a 14 inning game to the New York Yankees. The Astros finished the season with a 51111 record (a franchise worst) with a season ending 15 game losing streak, again surpassing their worst record from last season. This marks three consecutive years that the Astros have lost more than 100 games in a single season. They also became the first team to have the first overall pick in the draft three years in a row.

==Achievements==

List of Houston Astros Seasons
===Franchise Record===

 Team Name Games Wins Losses Ties W-L% 
 Colt .45's (1962-1964) 486 196 286 2 .403 
 NL Astros (1965-2012) 7652 3803 3846 3 .497 
 AL Astros (2013-present) 227 80 147 0 .352 
 Overall Total 8365 4079 4281 5 .488 
 Playoff Record 12(56) 21 35 0 .375 

data source: http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/HOU/

===Awards===

;Darryl Kile Award
:See: Houston Astros award winners and league leaders#Darryl Kile Award
Two awards are presented each year, one to a Houston Astro and one to a St. Louis Cardinal, each of whom exemplifies Kile's virtues of being "a good teammate, a great friend, a fine father and a humble man." The winner is selected by each local chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America. Darryl Kile Award. Baseball Almanac. Retrieved 2010-07-02. 

===Team records===

===Retired numbers===

While not officially retired, the Astros have not reissued number 57 since 2002, when former Astros pitcher Darryl Kile died as an active player with the St. Louis Cardinals. In addition, the Astros have not issued the number 17 since Lance Berkman was traded in 2010. The number 42 is retired by MLB in honor of Jackie Robinson

==Hall of Fame==

===Baseball Hall of Fame members===

===Ford C. Frick Award recipients===

==Current roster==

==Minor league affiliations==

 Level Team League Location 
 AAA Oklahoma City RedHawks Pacific Coast League Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
 AA Corpus Christi Hooks Texas League Corpus Christi, Texas 
 Advanced A Lancaster JetHawks California League Lancaster, California 
 A Quad Cities River Bandits Midwest League Davenport, Iowa 
 Short Season A Tri-City ValleyCats New YorkPenn League Troy, New York 
 Rookie Greeneville Astros Appalachian League Greeneville, Tennessee 
 GCL Astros Gulf Coast League Kissimmee, Florida 
 DSL Astros Dominican Summer League Boca Chica, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic 

==Radio and television==

, the Astros' new flagship radio station is KBME, Sportstalk 790AM (a Fox Sports Radio affiliate), leaving KTRH, 740AM after a partnership with them since 1999 (both stations are owned by Clear Channel Communications). This change suddenly made it difficult for listeners outside of Houston itself to hear the Astros, as KTRH runs fifty kilowatts of power day and night, and KBME runs only five kilowatts. As a result, KTRH is audible across much of Central, East, and South Texas, whereas KBME can only be heard in Houston, especially after dark. Milo Hamilton, a veteran voice who was on the call for Hank Aaron's 715th career home run in 1974, retired at the end of the 2012 season, after broadcasting play-by-play for the Astros since 1985. Dave Raymond and Brett Dolan shared play-by play duty for road games, while Raymond additionally worked as Hamilton's color analyst (while Hamilton called home games only for the past few seasons before his retirement); they were not retained and instead brought in Robert Ford and Steve Sparks to begin broadcasting for the 2013 season. Robert Ford, Steve Sparks Announced As Astros Radio Team - The Crawfish Boxes 

Spanish language radio play-by-play is handled by Francisco Romero, and his play-by-play partner is Alex Trevio, a former backup catcher for the club.

During the 2012 season Astros games on television were announced by Bill Brown and Jim Deshaies. Until the 2012 season, Astros games were broadcast on television by Fox Sports Houston, with select games shown on broadcast TV by KTXH. As part of a ten-year, $1 billion deal with Comcast that includes a majority stake jointly held by the Astros and the Houston Rockets, Houston Astros games will move to the new Comcast SportsNet Houston at the beginning of the 2013 season. On September 27, 2013 CSN Houston filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy and surprising the Astros who own the largest stake. CSN Houston bankruptcy filing surprises Astros - Sports Update 

The 2014 television team will consist of Bill Brown and Alan Ashby.

==Uniforms==

File:Houston Astros home uniform, 2013.gif|Houston Astros home uniform, 2013-current
File:Houston Astros away uniform, 2013.gif|Houston Astros away uniform, 2013-current

==Mascots==

Orbit, Houston Astros mascot from 19901999, 2013present
Orbit is the name given to Major League Baseball's Houston Astros mascot, a lime-green outer-space creature wearing an Astros jersey with antennae extending into baseballs. Orbit was the team's official mascot from the 1990 through the 1999 seasons until the 2000 season, where Junction Jack was introduced as the team's mascot with the move from the Astrodome to then Enron Field. Orbit returned on November 2, 2012 at the unveiling of the Astros new look for their 2013 debut in the American League. The name Orbit pays homage to Houston's association with NASA and nickname Space City. 

The Astros had been represented by a trio of rabbit mascots named Junction Jack, Jesse and Julie from 2000 through 2012.

==References==
;General
* A Six-Gun Salute: An Illustrated History of the Houston Colt .45s, by Robert Reed (Rowman-Littlefield Publishing, Boston, 1999)
;In-line citations

==External links==

* 
* Houston Astros news from the Houston Chronicle
* Astros team page on Baseball-Reference.com
* Houston Astros Video on ESPN Video Archive
* Houston Astros history

 
 

 



[[Hal Clement]]

Harry Clement Stubbs (May 30, 1922  October 29, 2003) better known by the pen name Hal Clement, was an American science fiction writer and a leader of the hard science fiction subgenre. He also painted astronomically oriented artworks under the name George Richard. 

In 1998 Clement was inducted by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame and named the 17th SFWA Grand Master by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (presented in 1999). 

==Biography==

Stubbs was born in Somerville, Massachusetts and died in Milton, Massachusetts.

He went to Harvard, graduating with a B.S. in astronomy in 1943. While there he wrote his first published story, "Proof", which appeared in the June 1942 issue of Astounding Science Fiction, edited by John W. Campbell; three more appeared in later 1942 numbers. His further educational background includes an M.Ed. (Boston University 1946) and M.S. in chemistry (Simmons College 1963).

During World War II Clement was a pilot and copilot of a B-24 Liberator and flew 35 combat missions over Europe with the 68th Bomb Squadron, 44th Bomb Group, based in England with 8th Air Force. After the war, he served in the United States Air Force Reserve, and retired with the rank of colonel. He taught chemistry and astronomy for many years at Milton Academy in Milton, Massachusetts. 

From 1949 to 1953, Clement's first three novels were two-, three-, and four-part Astounding serials under Campbell: Needle (Doubleday, 1950), Iceworld (Gnome Press, 1953), and Mission of Gravity (1954), his best-known novel, published by Doubleday's Science Fiction Book Club (established 1953). The latter novel features a land and sea expedition across the superjovian planet Mesklin to recover a stranded scientific probe. The natives of Mesklin are centipede-like intelligent beings about 50 centimeters long. Various episodes hinge on the fact that Mesklin's fast rotational speed causes it to be considerably deformed from the spherical, with effective surface gravity that varies from approximately 3 gn at the equator to approximately 700 gn at the poles.

Clement's article "Whirligig World" describes his approach to writing a science fiction story:
"Writing a science fiction story is fun, not work. ... the fun ... lies in treating the whole thing as a game. ... he rules must be quite simple. They are; for the reader of a science-fiction story, they consist of finding as many as possible of the author's statements or implications which conflict with the facts as science currently understands them. For the author, the rule is to make as few such slips as he possibly can ... Certain exceptions are made to allow travel faster than the speed of light, but fair play demands that all such matters be mentioned as early as possible in the story ..."

Clement was a frequent guest at science fiction conventions, especially in the eastern United States, where he usually presented talks and slide shows about writing and astronomy. 

Clement died in Milton Hospital at the age of 81. He died in his sleep, most likely due to complications of diabetes.

==Awards and honors==

Clement has been honored several times for his cumulative contributions including 1998 Hall of Fame induction, when Clement and Frederik Pohl were the fifth and sixth living persons honored, and the 1999 SFWA Grand Master Award. 

For the 1945 short story "Uncommon Sense" he received a 50-year Retro Hugo Award at the 1996 World Science Fiction Convention. Mission of Gravity, first published as a serial during 1953, was named best foreign novel by the Spanish Science Fiction Association in 1994 and it was a finalist for a 50-year Retro Hugo Award in 2004. 

The Hal Clement Award for Young Adults for Excellence in Children's Science Fiction Literature is presented in his memory at Worldcon each year. Guidelines, Golden Duck Awards, SuperConDuckTivity. 

Wayne Barlowe illustrated two of Clement's fictional species, the Abyormenites and the Mesklinites, in his Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials.

==Planets==

Compared with contemporary science fiction authors like Isaac Asimov or Poul Anderson, Clement was parsimonious in naming fictional planets. Those that he created as settings include a number of notably unusual worlds. They include:

* Abyormen  A planet circling a dwarf star (Theer), which in turn circles a blue giant. This produces a hot and a cold season, each of 65 years' duration. The native intelligent life forms undergo a seasonal mass death. From Cycle of Fire.
* Dhrawn  A high-gravity world settled by Mesklinites in Star Light.
* Habranha - A planet that is tidally locked with its sun, such that the far side is a mix of solid CO2, solid methane, and ice, and the other side completely ocean, in Fossil.
* Hekla  An ice-age planet in Cold Front (short story, Astounding July 1946).
* Kaihapa  An uninhabited ocean planet, twin of Kainui, in Noise.
* Kainui  An inhabited ocean planet in Noise.
* Mesklin  A planet with ultra-high gravity (up to 700 g) in Mission of Gravity. Clement later corrected his model of Mesklin and determined that the maximum surface gravity would be "only 250 gravities".
* Sarr  An extremely hot planet with an atmosphere of gaseous sulfur, and little liquid (the natives occasionally need to drink a bit of molten copper chloride), in Iceworld
* Tenebra  A high-gravity world with a corrosive atmosphere in Close to Critical.
* Enigma 88 - A small planet near  Carinae in Still River. The interior of the object is honeycombed with caves, due to evaporation of accreted ice-rich planetoids. Unusually for Clement, Enigma's structure is not fully consistent with the laws of physics.

==Works==

*Needle (1950), ISBN 0-380-00635-9
*Iceworld (1953), ISBN 0-345-25805-3
*Mission of Gravity (1954), ISBN 0-345-31622-3
*The Ranger Boys in Space (1956) (for children)
*Cycle of Fire (1957), ISBN 0-345-24368-4
*Close to Critical (1958), ISBN 0-345-24508-3 (magazine publication in 1958, book in 1964)
*Natives of Space, (1965) Three Novelettes
*Small Changes (1969) Short story collection (reprinted in paperback as Space Lash)
*Star Light (1971), ISBN 0-345-02361-7 (sequel to Mission of Gravity)
*Ocean on Top (1973), ISBN 1-4510-1057-5
*Through the Eye of a Needle (1978), ISBN 0-345-25850-9 (sequel to Needle)
*The Nitrogen Fix (1980), ISBN 0-441-58116-1
*Still River (1987), ISBN 0-345-32916-3
*Fossil (1993), ISBN 0-88677-573-6
*Half Life (1999), ISBN 0-312-86920-7
*The Essential Hal Clement, Volume 1: Trio for Slide Rule and Typewriter (1999), ISBN 1-886778-06-X
*The Essential Hal Clement, Volume 2: Music of Many Spheres (2000), ISBN 1-886778-07-8
*The Essential Hal Clement, Volume 3: Variations on a Theme by Sir Isaac Newton (2000), ISBN 1-886778-08-6
*Heavy Planet (2002), ISBN 0-7653-0368-X (collection of Mesklin stories)
*Noise (2003), ISBN 0-7653-0857-6

==See also==
 

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* Past Masters: A Logic Named Clement (or Open the Pod Bay Doors, Hal) by Bud Webster at Galactic Central



[[Halldr Laxness]]

Halldr Kiljan Laxness (; born Halldr Gujnsson; 23 April 1902  8 February 1998) was a twentieth-century Icelandic writer. Throughout his career Laxness wrote poetry, newspaper articles, plays, travelogues, short stories, and novels. Major influences on his writings include August Strindberg, Sigmund Freud, Sinclair Lewis, Upton Sinclair, Bertolt Brecht and Ernest Hemingway. Halldr Gumundsson, The Islander: a Biography of Halldr Laxness. McLehose Press/Quercus, London, translated by Philip Roughton, 2008, pp. 49, 117, 149, 238, 294 He received the 1955 Nobel Prize in Literature; he is the only Icelandic Nobel laureate.

==Early years==
Laxness was born under the name Halldr Gujnsson (following the tradition of Icelandic patronymics) in Reykjavk in 1902, the son of Gujn Helgason and Sigrur Halldrsdttir. In 1905 his family moved from Reykjavk to Laxnes (Mosfellsveit, now part of Mosfellsbr, the rural part outside of the town center http://www.gljufrasteinn.is/en/about_gljufrasteinn/how_to_get_there/ ), about 15 km northeast of the capital. He soon started to read books and write stories. At the age of 14 his first article was published in the newspaper Morgunblai under the name "H.G." His first book, the novel Barn nttrunnar (Child of Nature), was published in 1919. Gumundsson, p. 33 At the time of its publication he had already begun his travels on the European continent. Gumundsson, p. 34 

==1920s==
In 1922, Laxness joined the Abbaye St. Maurice et St. Maur in Clervaux, Luxembourg. The monks followed the rules of Saint Benedict of Nursia. Laxness was baptized and confirmed in the Catholic Church early in 1923. Following his confirmation, he adopted the surname Laxness (in honor of the homestead where he had been raised) and added the name Kiljan (an Icelandic spelling of the Irish martyr Saint Killian).

Inside the walls of the abbey, he practiced self-study, read books, and studied French, Latin, theology and philosophy. While there, he composed the story Undir Helgahnjk, published in 1924. Soon after his baptism, he became a member of a group which prayed for reversion of the Nordic countries back to Catholicism. Laxness wrote of his experiences in the book Vefarinn mikli fr Kasmr: "The essential feature of Vefarinn mikli is the witches' brew of ideas presented in a stylistic furioso of style." Hallberg, Peter, Halldr Laxness. Twayne Publishers, New York, translated by Rory McTurk, 1971, pp.35, 38 The novel, published in 1927, "... created a sensation in Iceland and was hailed by Kristjn Albertsson as the epoch-making book it really was. In the future Laxness was always in the vanguard of stylistic development..." Einarsson, Stefn A History of Icelandic Literature, New York: Johns Hopkins for the American Scandinavian Foundation, 1957, p. 291 OCLC 264046441 

"Laxness's religious period did not last long; during a visit to America he became attracted to socialism." Halldr Laxness biography. nobelprize.org Partly under the influence of Upton Sinclair, whom he befriended in California, "... Laxness joined the socialist bandwagon... with a book Alubkin (The Book of the People, 1929) of brilliant burlesque and satirical essays... one of a long series in which he discussed his many travel impressions (Russia, Western Europe, South America), unburdened himself of socialistic satire and propaganda, and wrote of the literature and the arts, essays of prime importance to an understanding of his own art..." Einarsson, pp. 292, 31617 
Laxness lived in the United States and attempted to write screenplays for Hollywood films between 1927 and 1929. Einarsson, p. 317 

==1930s==
By the 1930s he "had become the apostle of the younger generation" and was attacking "viciously" the Christian spiritualism of Einar Hjrleifsson Kvaran, an influential writer who had also been considered for the Nobel Prize. Einarsson, pp. 2634 
"... with Salka Valka (193132) began the great series of sociological novels, often coloured with socialist ideas, continuing almost without a break for nearly twenty years. This was probably the most brilliant period of his career, and it is the one which produced those of his works that have become most famous. But Laxness never attached himself permanently to a particular dogma." Sveinn Hoskuldsson, "Scandinavica", 1972 supplement, pp. 12 

Salka Valka was published in English in 1936, receiving a glowing review from the Evening Standard: "No beauty is allowed to exist as ornamentation in its own right in these pages; but the work is replete from cover to cover with the beauty of its perfection." Gumundsson, p.229 

Halldr's next novel was Sjlfsttt flk (Independent People, 1934, 1935) which was described by Jane Smiley as ".. one of the best books of the twentieth century." Jane Smiley, Independent People, Vintage International, 1997, cover 

This was followed by Heimsljs (World Light, 1937, 1938, 1939, 1940) described in the words of Magnus Magnusson as a book "... which has been consistently regarded by many critics as his most important work.". Magnus Magnusson, World Light, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1969, p. viii 

He also traveled to the Soviet Union and wrote approvingly of the Soviet system and culture. Gumundsson, p.182 

==1940s==
Laxness translated Ernest Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms into Icelandic in 1941, with controversial neologisms. Gumundsson, p.279 

Laxness published a sprawling three-part historical novel slandsklukkan (Iceland's Bell, 194346).

In 1946 Independent People was released as a Book of the Month Club selection in the United States, selling over 450,000 copies. Chay Lemoine (2007-02-09) HALLDR LAXNESS AND THE CIA. 

In response to the establishment of a permanent US military base in Keflavk, he wrote the satire Atmstin (The Atom Station), an action which, in part, may have caused his blacklisting in the United States. Chay Lemoine (2010-11-18). The View from Here, No. 8. icenews.is "The demoralization of the occupation period is described... nowhere as dramatically as in Halldr Kiljan Laxness' Atmstin (1948)... he portrays postwar society in Reykjavk, completely torn from its moorings by the avalanche of foreign gold". Einarsson, p. 330 

==1950s==
Halldr Laxness by Einar Hkonarson, 1984

In 1953 Laxness was awarded the Soviet-sponsored World Peace Council Literary Prize. Gumundsson, p. 340 

An adaptation of his novel Salka Valka was filmed by Sven Nykvist in 1954. Gumundsson, p. 351 

In 1955, Laxness was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, "for his vivid epic power which has renewed the great narrative art of Iceland":"His chief literary works belong to the genre... narrative prose fiction. In the history of our literature Laxness is mentioned beside Snorri Sturluson and the author of the "Njals saga", and his place in world literature is among writers such as Cervantes, Zola, Tolstoy, and Hamsun... He is the most prolific and skillful essayist in Icelandic literature both old and new..." 

In the presentation address for the Nobel prize E. Wesen stated:"He is an excellent painter of Icelandic scenery and settings. Yet this is not what he has conceived of as his chief mission. 'Compassion is the source of the highest poetry. Compassion with Asta Sollilja on earth,' he says in one of his best books... And a social passion underlies everything Halldr Laxness has written. His personal championship of contemporary social and political questions is always very strong, sometimes so strong that it threatens to hamper the artistic side of his work. His safeguard then is the astringent humour which enables him to see even people he dislikes in a redeeming light, and which also permits him to gaze far down into the labyrinths of the human soul." Presentation address for the Nobel prize by E. Wesen, 1955 
In his acceptance speech for the Nobel prize he spoke of:"... the moral principles she grandmother instilled in me: never to harm a living creature; throughout my life, to place the poor, the humble, the meek of this world above all others; never to forget those who were slighted or neglected or who had suffered injustice, because it was they who, above all others, deserved our love and respect..." acceptance speech for the Nobel prize, 1955 
Laxness grew increasingly disenchanted with the Soviets after their military action in Hungary in 1956. Gumundsson, p. 375 

In 1957 Halldr and his wife (Auur Sveinsdttir) (1918-2012) went on a world tour, stopping in: New York City, Washington, D.C., Chicago, Madison, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Peking, Bombay, Cairo and Rome. Gumundsson, pp. 380384 

Major works in this decade were Gerpla (The Happy Warriors, 1952), Brekkukotsannll (The Fish Can Sing, 1957), and Paradsarheimt (Paradise Reclaimed, 1960).

==1960s==
In the sixties Laxness was very active in the Icelandic theatre, writing and producing plays of which The Pigeon Banquet (Dfnaveislan, 1966) was the most successful. Modern Nordic Plays, Iceland, p. 23, Sigurur Magnsson (ed.), Twayne: New York, 1973 

He published the "visionary novel" Susan Sontag, p.xv, introduction to Under the Glacier, Vintage International: New York, 2005 Kristnihald undir Jkli (Under the Glacier / Christianity at the Glacier) in 1968.

Laxness was awarded the Sonning Prize in 1969.

==Later years==
Laxness continued to write through the 1970s and 1980s while living in Gljfrasteinn, an estate located outside of Reykjavk. His wife, Auur Sveinsdttir, assumed the duties of personal secretary and business manager. As he grew older he began to suffer from Alzheimer's disease and eventually moved into a nursing home where he died at the age of 95. He was married twice, and had four children. His house in Gljfrasteinn is now a museum operated by the Icelandic government. About Gljfrasteinn  EN  Gljfrasteinn. Gljufrasteinn.is. Retrieved on 2012-07-29 

==Legacy==
His daughter Gun Halldrsdttir is an award-winning filmmaker. Her first work, a popular magical-realist film adaptation of Kristnihald undir jkli (Under the Glacier) Under the Glacier (1989) . imdb.com screened at film festivals and repertory cinemas around the world for many years. In 1999 she directed an adaptation of the Laxness story ngfrin ga og Hsi (The Honour of the House), which was submitted for Academy Award consideration for best foreign film. The Honour of the House (1999). imdb.com 

His grandson is a hip-hop artist known in Iceland as Dri DNA. Halldr Laxness. NNDB. com 

Interest in Laxness increased in the 21st century in English-speaking countries with the re-publishing of several novels and the publication of Iceland's Bell (2003) and The Great Weaver from Kashmir (2008) in new translations by Philip Roughton. The man who brought Iceland in from the cold  Los Angeles Times. Latimes.com (2008-11-23). Retrieved on 2012-07-29 

A biography of Laxness by Halldr Gumundsson, The Islander: a Biography of Halldr Laxness, won the Icelandic literary prize for best work of non-fiction in 2004.

In 2005 the Icelandic National Theatre premiered a play by lafur Haukur Smonarson, called Halldr  Hollywood (Halldr in Hollywood) about the years that Laxness spent in the United States.

==Bibliography==
Works by Laxness

===Novels===
* 1919: Barn nttrunnar (Child of Nature)
* 1924: Undir Helgahnk (Under the Holy Mountain)
* 1927: Vefarinn mikli fr Kasmr (The Great Weaver from Kashmir)
* 1931: Salka Valka (Part I)   vnviur hreini
* 1932: Salka Valka (Part II)  Fuglinn  fjrunni
* 1933: ngfrin ga og Hsi (The Honour of the House) appeared in the book Ftatak manna: sj ttir
* 1934: Sjlfsttt flk (Part I, Independent People)  Landnmsmaur slands (Icelandic Pioneers)
* 1935: Sjlfsttt flk (Part II)  Erfiir tmar (Hard Times)
* 1937: Heimsljs (Part I, World Light)  Ljs heimsins (later named Kraftbirtngarhljmur gudmsins)
* 1938: Heimsljs (Part II, The Palace of the Summerland)  Hll sumarlandsins
* 1939: Heimsljs (Part III, The Poet's House)  Hs skldsins
* 1940: Heimsljs (Part IV, The Beauty of the Sky)  Fegur himinsins
* 1943: slandsklukkan (Part I, Iceland's Bell)  slandsklukkan
* 1944: slandsklukkan (Part II, The Bright Maiden)  Hi ljsa man
* 1946: slandsklukkan (Part III, Fire in Copenhagen)  Eldur  Kaupinhafn
* 1948: Atmstin (The Atom Station)
* 1952: Gerpla (The Happy Warriors)
* 1957: Brekkukotsannll (The Fish Can Sing)
* 1960: Paradsarheimt (Paradise Reclaimed)
* 1968: Kristnihald undir Jkli (Under the Glacier / Christianity at the Glacier)
* 1970: Innansveitarkronika (A Parish Chronicle)
* 1972: Gusgjafaula (A Narration of God's Gifts)

===Stories===
* 1923: Nokkrar sgur
* 1933: Ftatak manna
* 1935: rur gamli halti
* 1942: Sj tframenn
* 1954: ttir (collection)
* 1964: Sjstafakveri
* 1981: Vi Heygarshorni
* 1987: Sagan af brauinu dra
* 1992: Jn  Brauhsum
* 1996: Fugl  garstaurnum og fleiri smsgur
* 1999: ngfrin ga og Hsi
* 2000: Smsgur
* 2001: Krvilla  Vestfjrum og fleiri sgur

===Plays===
* 1934: Straumrof
* 1950: Snfrur slandssl (from the novel slandsklukkan)
* 1954: Silfurtngli
* 1961: Strompleikurinn
* 1962: Prjnastofan Slin
* 1966: Dfnaveislan
* 1970: a (from the novel Kristnihald undir Jkli)
* 1972: Noranstlkan (from the novel Atmstin)

===Poetry===
* 1925: nglngurinn  skginum
* 1930: Kvakver

===Travelogues and Essays===
* 1925: Kalsk vihorf (Catholic View)
* 1929: Alubkin (The Book of the People)
* 1933:  Austurvegi (In the Baltic)
* 1938: Gerska fintri (The Russian Adventure)

===Memoirs===
* 1952: Heiman eg fr
* 1975:  tninu heima, part I
* 1976: ngur eg var, part II
* 1978: Sjmeistarasagan, part III
* 1980: Grikklandsri, part IV
* 1987: Dagar hj mnkum

==References==

==External links==

* The Halldr Laxness Museum website 
* Nobel Prize website 
* Petri Liukkonen's biography 
* Dennis Haarsager's biography 
* Laxness in Translation (English translations reviewed) 



[[Harmonic oscillator]]

In classical mechanics, a harmonic oscillator is a system that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring force, F, proportional to the displacement, x:
:
where k is a positive constant.

If F is the only force acting on the system, the system is called a simple harmonic oscillator, and it undergoes simple harmonic motion: sinusoidal oscillations about the equilibrium point, with a constant amplitude and a constant frequency (which does not depend on the amplitude).

If a frictional force (damping) proportional to the velocity is also present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a damped oscillator. Depending on the friction coefficient, the system can:

* Oscillate with a frequency smaller than in the non-damped case, and an amplitude decreasing with time (underdamped oscillator).
* Decay to the equilibrium position, without oscillations (overdamped oscillator).

The boundary solution between an underdamped oscillator and an overdamped oscillator occurs at a particular value of the friction coefficient and is called "critically damped."

If an external time dependent force is present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a driven oscillator.

Mechanical examples include pendula (with small angles of displacement), masses connected to springs, and acoustical systems. Other analogous systems include electrical harmonic oscillators such as RLC circuits. The harmonic oscillator model is very important in physics, because any mass subject to a force in stable equilibrium acts as a harmonic oscillator for small vibrations. Harmonic oscillators occur widely in nature and are exploited in many manmade devices, such as clocks and radio circuits. They are the source of virtually all sinusoidal vibrations and waves.

== Simple harmonic oscillator ==

Simple harmonic motion
A simple harmonic oscillator is an oscillator that is neither driven nor damped. It consists of a mass m, which experiences a single force, F, which pulls the mass in the direction of the point x=0 and depends only on the mass's position x and a constant k. Balance of forces (Newton's second law) for the system is

:

Solving this differential equation, we find that the motion is described by the function

:

where 

:

The motion is periodic, repeating itself in a sinusoidal fashion with constant amplitude, A. In addition to its amplitude, the motion of a simple harmonic oscillator is characterized by its period T, the time for a single oscillation or its frequency f = , the number of cycles per unit time. The position at a given time t also depends on the phase, , which determines the starting point on the sine wave. The period and frequency are determined by the size of the mass m and the force constant k, while the amplitude and phase are determined by the starting position and velocity.

The velocity and acceleration of a simple harmonic oscillator oscillate with the same frequency as the position but with shifted phases. The velocity is maximum for zero displacement, while the acceleration is in the opposite direction as the displacement.

The potential energy stored in a simple harmonic oscillator at position x is

:

== Damped harmonic oscillator ==

Dependence of the system behavior on the value of the damping ratio 
A damped harmonic oscillator, which slows down due to friction
Another damped harmonic oscillator
In real oscillators, friction, or damping, slows the motion of the system. Due to frictional force, the velocity decreases in proportion to the acting frictional force. While simple harmonic motion oscillates with only the restoring force acting on the system, damped harmonic motion experiences friction. In many vibrating systems the frictional force Ff can be modeled as being proportional to the velocity v of the object: 1=Ff = cv, where c is called the viscous damping coefficient.

Balance of forces (Newton's second law) for damped harmonic oscillators is then

:

This is rewritten into the form

:

where 

: is called the 'undamped angular frequency of the oscillator' and

: is called the 'damping ratio'.

Step-response of a damped harmonic oscillator; curves are plotted for three values of 1= = 1 = 0. Time is in units of the decay time 1= = 1/(0).

The value of the damping ratio  critically determines the behavior of the system. A damped harmonic oscillator can be:
*Overdamped ( > 1): The system returns (exponentially decays) to steady state without oscillating. Larger values of the damping ratio  return to equilibrium slower.
*Critically damped ( = 1): The system returns to steady state as quickly as possible without oscillating. This is often desired for the damping of systems such as doors.
*Underdamped ( < 1): The system oscillates (with a slightly different frequency than the undamped case) with the amplitude gradually decreasing to zero. The angular frequency of the underdamped harmonic oscillator is given by
:

The Q factor of a damped oscillator is defined as 
:

Q is related to the damping ratio by the equation 

== Driven harmonic oscillators == 

Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators further affected by an externally applied force F(t). 

Newton's second law takes the form

:

It is usually rewritten into the form

:

This equation can be solved exactly for any driving force, using the solutions z(t) which satisfy the unforced equation:

:

and which can be expressed as damped sinusoidal oscillations,

:

in the case where   1. The amplitude A and phase  determine the behavior needed to match the initial conditions.

===Step input===

In the case  < 1 and a unit step input with x(0) = 0:

:

the solution is:

:

with phase  given by

:

The time an oscillator needs to adapt to changed external conditions is of the order  = 1/(0). In physics, the adaptation is called relaxation, and  is called the relaxation time.

In electrical engineering, a multiple of  is called the settling time, i.e. the time necessary to ensure the signal is within a fixed departure from final value, typically within 10%. The term overshoot refers to the extent the maximum response exceeds final value, and undershoot refers to the extent the response falls below final value for times following the maximum response.

===Sinusoidal driving force===
Steady state variation of amplitude with frequency and damping of a driven simple harmonic oscillator. 
 

In the case of a sinusoidal driving force:

:

where is the driving amplitude and is the driving frequency for a sinusoidal driving mechanism. This type of system appears in AC driven RLC circuits (resistor-inductor-capacitor) and driven spring systems having internal mechanical resistance or external air resistance.

The general solution is a sum of a transient solution that depends on initial conditions, and a steady state that is independent of initial conditions and depends only on the driving amplitude , driving frequency, , undamped angular frequency , and the damping ratio .

The steady-state solution is proportional to the driving force with an induced phase change of :

:

where

:
is the absolute value of the impedance or linear response function and
:

is the phase of the oscillation relative to the driving force, if the arctan value is taken to be between -180 degrees and 0 (that is, it represents a phase lag, for both positive and negative values of the arctan's argument).

For a particular driving frequency called the resonance, or resonant frequency , the amplitude (for a given ) is maximum. This resonance effect only occurs when , i.e. for significantly underdamped systems. For strongly underdamped systems the value of the amplitude can become quite large near the resonance frequency.

The transient solutions are the same as the unforced () damped harmonic oscillator and represent the systems response to other events that occurred previously. The transient solutions typically die out rapidly enough that they can be ignored.

== Parametric oscillators ==

A parametric oscillator is a driven harmonic oscillator in which the drive energy is provided by varying the parameters of the oscillator, such as the damping or restoring force.
A familiar example of parametric oscillation is "pumping" on a playground swing. 
A person on a moving swing can increase the amplitude of the swing's oscillations without any external drive force (pushes) being applied, by changing the moment of inertia of the swing by rocking back and forth ("pumping") or alternately standing and squatting, in rhythm with the swing's oscillations. The varying of the parameters drives the system. Examples of parameters that may be varied are its resonance frequency and damping . 

Parametric oscillators are used in many applications. The classical varactor parametric oscillator oscillates when the diode's capacitance is varied periodically. The circuit that varies the diode's capacitance is called the "pump" or "driver". In microwave electronics, waveguide/YAG based parametric oscillators operate in the same fashion. The designer varies a parameter periodically to induce oscillations.

Parametric oscillators have been developed as low-noise amplifiers, especially in the radio and microwave frequency range. Thermal noise is minimal, since a reactance (not a resistance) is varied. Another common use is frequency conversion, e.g., conversion from audio to radio frequencies. For example, the Optical parametric oscillator converts an input laser wave into two output waves of lower frequency ().

Parametric resonance occurs in a mechanical system when a system is parametrically excited and oscillates at one of its resonant frequencies. Parametric excitation differs from forcing, since the action appears as a time varying modification on a system parameter. This effect is different from regular resonance because it exhibits the instability phenomenon.

==Universal oscillator equation==
The equation 
:

is known as the universal oscillator equation since all second order linear oscillatory systems can be reduced to this form. This is done through nondimensionalization.

If the forcing function is f(t) = cos(t) = cos(tc) = cos(), where  = t'c, the equation becomes

:

The solution to this differential equation contains two parts, the "transient" and the "steady state".

=== Transient solution ===
The solution based on solving the ordinary differential equation is for arbitrary constants c1 and c2

The transient solution is independent of the forcing function.

=== Steady-state solution ===
Apply the "complex variables method" by solving the auxiliary equation below and then finding the real part of its solution:
:

Supposing the solution is of the form

:

Its derivatives from zero to 2nd order are
:

Substituting these quantities into the differential equation gives

:

Dividing by the exponential term on the left results in

:

Equating the real and imaginary parts results in two independent equations
:

==== Amplitude part ====
Bode plot of the frequency response of an ideal harmonic oscillator.
Squaring both equations and adding them together gives
:

Therefore,
:

Compare this result with the theory section on resonance, as well as the "magnitude part" of the RLC circuit. This amplitude function is particularly important in the analysis and understanding of the frequency response of second-order systems.

==== Phase part ====
To solve for , divide both equations to get
:

This phase function is particularly important in the analysis and understanding of the frequency response of second-order systems.

=== Full solution ===
Combining the amplitude and phase portions results in the steady-state solution
:

The solution of original universal oscillator equation is a superposition (sum) of the transient and steady-state solutions

:

For a more complete description of how to solve the above equation, see linear ODEs with constant coefficients.

==Equivalent systems==
Harmonic oscillators occurring in a number of areas of engineering are equivalent in the sense that their mathematical models are identical (see universal oscillator equation above). Below is a table showing analogous quantities in four harmonic oscillator systems in mechanics and electronics. If analogous parameters on the same line in the table are given numerically equal values, the behavior of the oscillators&mdash;their output waveform, resonant frequency, damping factor, etc.&mdash;are the same. 

Translational Mechanical Torsional Mechanical Series RLC Circuit Parallel RLC Circuit 
 Position Angle Charge Flux linkage 
 Velocity Angular velocity Current Voltage 
 Mass Moment of inertia Inductance Capacitance 
 Spring constant Torsion constant Elastance Susceptance 
 Damping Rotational friction Resistance Conductance 
 Drive force Drive torque Voltage Current 
 Undamped resonant frequency : 
 
 Differential equation: 
 

== Application to a conservative force ==
The problem of the simple harmonic oscillator occurs frequently in physics, because a mass at equilibrium under the influence of any conservative force, in the limit of small motions, behaves as a simple harmonic oscillator. 

A conservative force is one that has a potential energy function. The potential energy function of a harmonic oscillator is:

:

Given an arbitrary potential energy function , one can do a Taylor expansion in terms of around an energy minimum () to model the behavior of small perturbations from equilibrium.

:

Because is a minimum, the first derivative evaluated at must be zero, so the linear term drops out:

:

The constant term V(x0) is arbitrary and thus may be dropped, and a coordinate transformation allows the form of the simple harmonic oscillator to be retrieved:

:

Thus, given an arbitrary potential energy function with a non-vanishing second derivative, one can use the solution to the simple harmonic oscillator to provide an approximate solution for small perturbations around the equilibrium point.

==Examples==
===Simple pendulum===
A simple pendulum exhibits simple harmonic motion under the conditions of no damping and small amplitude.

Assuming no damping and small amplitudes, the differential equation governing a simple pendulum is

:

The solution to this equation is given by:

:

where is the largest angle attained by the pendulum. The period, the time for one complete oscillation, is given by divided by whatever is multiplying the time in the argument of the cosine ( here).

:

===Pendulum swinging over turntable===
Simple harmonic motion can in some cases be considered to be the one-dimensional projection of two-dimensional circular motion. Consider a long pendulum swinging over the turntable of a record player. On the edge of the turntable there is an object. If the object is viewed from the same level as the turntable, a projection of the motion of the object seems to be moving backwards and forwards on a straight line orthogonal to the view direction, sinusoidally like the pendulum.

===Spring/mass system===
Springmass system in equilibrium (A), compressed (B) and stretched (C) states. 

When a spring is stretched or compressed by a mass, the spring develops a restoring force. Hooke's law gives the relationship of the force exerted by the spring when the spring is compressed or stretched a certain length:

:

where F is the force, k is the spring constant, and x is the displacement of the mass with respect to the equilibrium position. The minus sign in the equation indicates that the force exerted by the spring always acts in a direction that is opposite to the displacement (i.e. the force always acts towards the zero position), and so prevents the mass from flying off to infinity.

By using either force balance or an energy method, it can be readily shown that the motion of this system is given by the following differential equation: 

:

...the latter being Newton's second law of motion.

If the initial displacement is A, and there is no initial velocity, the solution of this equation is given by:
:

Given an ideal massless spring, is the mass on the end of the spring. If the spring itself has mass, its effective mass must be included in .

====Energy variation in the springdamping system====
In terms of energy, all systems have two types of energy, potential energy and kinetic energy. When a spring is stretched or compressed, it stores elastic potential energy, which then is transferred into kinetic energy. The potential energy within a spring is determined by the equation 

When the spring is stretched or compressed, kinetic energy of the mass gets converted into potential energy of the spring. By conservation of energy, assuming the datum is defined at the equilibrium position, when the spring reaches its maximum potential energy, the kinetic energy of the mass is zero. When the spring is released, it tries to return to equilibrium, and all its potential energy converts to kinetic energy of the mass.

==See also==
*Anharmonic oscillator
*Critical speed
*Effective mass (spring-mass system)
*Normal mode
*Parametric oscillator
*Phasor
*Q factor
*Quantum harmonic oscillator
*Radial harmonic oscillator

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Harmonic Oscillator from The Chaos Hypertextbook
* A Java applet of harmonic oscillator with damping proportional to velocity or damping caused by dry friction



[[Heathers]]

Heathers is a 1988 film starring Winona Ryder and Christian Slater. The film portrays four girls  three of whom are named Heather  in a clique at a fictional Ohio high school. 

The film brought director Michael Lehmann and producer Denise Di Novi the 1990 Independent Spirit Award for Best First Feature. Daniel Waters also gained recognition for his screenplay, which won a 1990 Edgar Award. Heathers (1988) - Awards The film was a U.S. box office failure, Heathers (1988) - Box office / business but went on to become a cult classic, with high rentals and sales business. In 2006, it was ranked #5 on Entertainment Weekly's list of the "50 Best High School Movies" and in 2008, it was ranked #412 on Empires list of "The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time". 

==Plot==
The most dominant clique at Westerburg High School consists of three wealthy and beautiful girls with the same first name: the leader, Heather Chandler (Walker), the bookish bulimic Heather Duke (Doherty), and the weak-willed cheerleader Heather McNamara (Falk). Though they are the most popular students, the Heathers are both feared and hated. They recently invited 17-year-old Veronica Sawyer (Ryder) to join their group, by association making her a very popular girl as well. However, as the movie begins, Veronica has had enough of their behavior and longs to return to her old life and her nerdy friends.

At school, a rebellious outsider named Jason "J.D." Dean (Slater) pulls a gun on school bullies Kurt Kelly (Fenton) and Ram Sweeney (Labyorteaux) and fires blanks at them. Veronica finds herself fascinated by this dark and quirky newcomer. When Veronica embarrasses Heather Chandler at a frat party by refusing sex and throwing up, Heather vows to destroy her reputation. Later, J.D. shows up at Veronica's house and they end up having sex after an impromptu game of strip croquet. Veronica tells J.D. she wants to make Heather puke her guts out. The next morning, Veronica and J.D. break into Heather's house. J.D. serves Heather a liquid he claims is a hangover cure but is actually drain cleaner, killing her. Although initially shaken by their act, J.D. regains his composure and urges Veronica to forge a dramatic suicide note in Heather's handwriting.

The school and community look on Heather's apparent suicide as a tragic decision made by a popular but troubled teenager. Heather Duke soon steps into Heather Chandler's former role as clique leader and begins wearing a red scrunchie that had belonged to Chandler as a symbol of her new status.

Several days later, Kurt and Ram spread a rumor about Veronica giving them oral sex. To get even, J.D. proposes that Veronica lure them into the woods with the promise to "make the rumors true," then shoot them with what he promises are nonfatal "Ich lge" German bullets that only break the skin but do no real damage. Afterwards they would humiliate Kurt and Ram by planting "gay" materials, such as a Joan Crawford photo and mineral water, on their unconscious bodies. However, JD is lying; the bullets are in fact real. At the rendezvous in the woods, JD shoots Ram but Veronica misses Kurt, who runs away. Seeing Ram dead on the ground, Veronica to her horror realizes that the bullets are real after all. J.D. chases Kurt back towards Veronica, who panics and shoots him dead. J.D. plants the "gay" materials beside the boys, and a forged suicide note stating the two were lovers participating in a suicide pact. At their funeral, the boys are made into martyrs against homophobia.

These fake suicides prompt an epidemic of similar attempts. Martha Dunnstock, an obese, incessantly bullied student known as "Martha Dumptruck", pins a suicide note to her chest and walks into traffic. She survives but is badly injured and is mocked for trying to "act popular." Meanwhile, Heather McNamara calls a popular radio show while Veronica and Heather Duke are listening and talks of the depression in her life. The next day, Heather Duke tells the entire school about Heather McNamara's radio call. The humiliated McNamara attempts to take her life by overdosing on pills in the girls' bathroom, but is saved by Veronica.

Veronica finally decides she's had enough and breaks up with J.D. He later climbs into her room with a revolver to kill her, but finds Veronica hanging from a noose. Thinking she's dead, he talks about his plan to blow up the school during a pep rally. A petition he has been circulating via Heather Duke, to get the band Big Fun to perform on campus, was actually a mass suicide note. Most of the students had already signed, so the mass murder would appear to be a mass suicide instead. However, unbeknownst to J.D., Veronica faked the hanging by rigging herself with a harness around her waist.

Now clued in to J.D.'s plot to blow up the entire student body, she confronts him in the boiler room below the gym where he is rigging timed explosives. She shoots him when he refuses to stop the bomb. As J.D. collapses, he stabs the timer and it stops. Veronica walks outside to find the severely injured J.D. with the bomb strapped to his chest, which he detonates as Veronica looks on impassively with an unlit cigarette hanging from her lips. As the bomb explodes, J.D. is killed while the blast singes Veronica and lights her cigarette.

As the students rush outside to find out what happened, Veronica confronts Heather Duke. Veronica relieves Heather of the red scrunchie, saying "Heather my love, there's a new sheriff in town." Free at last of the Heathers' toxic influence, she invites Martha Dunnstock to hang out on prom night and watch movies with her.

==Cast==
* Winona Ryder as Veronica Sawyer, the student of Westerburg High School.
* Christian Slater as Jason "J.D." Dean, Veronica's boyfriend whose true colors is to kill people despite Veronica's objections
* Shannen Doherty as Heather Duke, the mean girl who replaces Heather Chandler as the "queen bee" leader of the Heathers.
* Lisanne Falk as Heather McNamara, member of the Heathers.
* Kim Walker as Heather Chandler, original leader of the Heathers.
* Penelope Milford as Pauline Fleming
* Glenn Shadix as Father Ripper
* Lance Fenton as Kurt Kelly
* Patrick Labyorteaux as Ram Sweeney
* Jeremy Applegate as Peter Dawson
* Jon Matthews as Rodney
* Carrie Lynn as Martha "Dumptruck" Dunnstock
* Phill Lewis as Dennis
* Rene Estevez as Betty Finn
* Jennifer Rhodes as Veronica Sawyer's Mother
* Bill Cort as Mr. Sawyer
* Kirk Scott as Big Bud Dean
* Mark Carlton as Mr. Kelly
* John Ingle as Principal Gowan

==Production==
Daniel Waters wanted his screenplay to go to director Stanley Kubrick, not only out of profound admiration for Kubrick but also from a perception that "Kubrick was the only person that could get away with a three-hour film". (The cafeteria scene opening Heathers was written as an homage to the barracks scene opening Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket.) After a number of failed attempts to get the script to Kubrick made Waters realize the futility of the enterprise, he decided to give the script to Michael Lehmann, who then took it on with Denise Di Novi. Many actors and actresses turned down the project because of its dark subject matter. Early choices for Veronica and J.D. were Jennifer Connelly, who turned down the role, and Brad Pitt. Pitt auditioned for the role of J.D. but the filmmakers rejected him because they thought he came across as "too nice" and therefore would not be credible. Winona Ryder, who was 16 at the time of filming and badly wanted the part, begged Waters to cast her. Eventually she was given the role with Christian Slater being signed shortly thereafter. Heather Graham, then 17, was cast as Heather McNamara, but her mother wouldn't allow her to do the film so Lisanne Falk was given the role instead. Principal photography took place from 17 February 1988 - 19 March 1988. 

==Soundtrack==
The film uses two versions of the song "Que Sera, Sera", the first by singer Syd Straw and another over the end credits by Sly and the Family Stone. On the film's DVD commentary, Di Novi mentions that the filmmakers wanted to use the original Doris Day version of the song, but Day would not lend her name to any project using profanity. Di Novi also notes that, when her father was a session musician for Day, he and the other musicians had to put money in a "swear jar" when they cursed.

The song "Teenage Suicide (Don't Do It)" by the fictional band Big Fun was written and produced for the film by musician Don Dixon, and performed by the ad hoc group "Big Fun", which consisted of Dixon, Mitch Easter, Angie Carlson and Marti Jones. The song is included on Dixon's 1992 greatest hits album (If) I'm A Ham, Well You're A Sausage.

The film's electronic score was composed and performed by David Newman and a soundtrack CD was subsequently released.

==Home media==
Heathers was first released onto VHS in 1989, where it received strong sales and rentals, and is where it first became well known after being unsuccessful at the box office. It was released again on laserdisc on September 16, 1996 with restored stereo sound. This widescreen edition was digitally transferred from Trans Atlantic Pictures interpositive print under the supervision of cinematographer Francis Kenny. The sound was mastered from the magnetic sound elements. The film was first released onto DVD on March 30, 1999, in a barebones edition.

In 2001, a multi-region special edition DVD was released from Anchor Bay Entertainment in Dolby Digital 5.1. The DVD was released in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Europe to high sales. In 2004, a limited edition DVD set was released, and only 15,000 were produced. The set contained an audio commentary with director Michael Lehmann, producer Denise Di Novi and writer Daniel Waters, a 30-minute documentary titled Swatch Dogs and Diet Cokeheads, featuring interviews with Ryder, Slater, Doherty, Falk, Lehmann, Waters, Di Novi, Director of Photography Francis Kenny and Editor Norman Hollyn. It also includes a theatrical trailer, screenplay excerpt, original ending, biographies, 10-page full-color fold-out with photos and liner notes, an 8 cm "Heathers Rules!" ruler, and a 48-page full-color "yearbook style" booklet with rare photos.

On July 1, 2008, a new 20th anniversary special edition DVD set was released from Anchor Bay to coincide with the DVD of writer Waters' new film Sex and Death 101. The DVD features a new documentary, Return to Westerburg High. On November 18, 2008, Anchor Bay released a Blu-ray with all the special features from the 20th Anniversary DVD and a soundtrack in Dolby TrueHD 5.1.

==Release==

===Box Office===
The film was a commercial failure and grossed $1,108,462 domestically over 5 weeks in theaters for a budget of 3 million dollars.

===Critical reception===
The film was acclaimed by critics and audiences. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 95% of critics gave the film a positive review based on a sample of 43 reviews. At the website Metacritic, which uses a normalized rating system, the film earned a favorable rating of 73/100 based on 19 reviews by mainstream critics. 

Desson Thomson of the Washington Post wrote, "Wickedly funny. In fact, Heathers may be the nastiest, cruelest fun you can have without actually having to study law or gird leather products. If movies were food, Heathers would be a cynic's chocolate binge." Robert Ebert gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4 and wrote that the film "...is a morbid comedy about peer pressure in high school, about teenage suicide and about the deadliness of cliques that not only exclude but also maim and kill."

==Sequel==
On June 2, 2009, Entertainment Weekly reported that Ryder had claimed that there will be a sequel to Heathers with Christian Slater coming back "as a kind of Obi-Wan character". Michael Lehmann, the director of the original film, however, has denied development of a sequel, saying "Winona's been talking about this for years  she brings it up every once in a while and Dan Waters and I will joke about it, but as far as I know there's no script and no plans to do the sequel." 

==Television series==
In August 2009, Sony Pictures Television announced that Heathers was to be adapted for television to air on Fox. Mark Rizzo was hired to write the series, and Jenny Bicks was to co-produce with Lakeshore Entertainment. It was described as a modernized version of the original story, and all characters from the film were expected to be scripted into the adaptation. 

On September 12, 2012 it was announced that the television network Bravo would begin developing a Heathers reboot in the medium of a television series. It was to pick up 20 years later when Veronica returned home to Sherwood, Ohio with her teenage daughter, who had to contend with the next generation of mean girls, all named "Ashley". They were to all be the daughters of the surviving two Heathers. Neither Winona Ryder or Christian Slater were attached to the project. 

In August 2013, Bravo declined to order the series. 

==Musical==

In 2010 Heathers was adapted into a stage musical directed by Andy Fickman. Fickman also worked on the musical Reefer Madness, a parody of the anti-marijuana propaganda film of the same name which was turned into a feature film on Showtime. The Heathers musical, which opens with a number depicting Veronica's acceptance into the Heathers' clique, has received several readings in workshops in Los Angeles, and a three-show concert presentation at Joe's Pub in New York City on September 1314, 2010. The cast of the Joe's Pub concert included Annaleigh Ashford as Veronica, Jenna Leigh Green as Heather Chandler, and Jeremy Jordan as J.D. The score does, in fact, include a rousing number called "My Dead Gay Son."

The musical will be playing at off-Broadways New World Stages this spring with performances beginning March 15, 2014 and an opening night set for March 31. 

The cast for the Off-Broadway production are Barrett Wilbert Weed as Veronica Sawyer, Jessica Keenan Wynn as Heather Chandler, Ryan McCartan as JD, Alice Lee as Heather Duke and Elle McLemore as Heather McNamara. 

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Federation of Expellees]]

The Federation of Expellees or Bund der Vertriebenen (BdV) is a non-profit organization formed on 27 October 1957 to represent the interests of ethnic Germans who either fled their homes in parts of Central and Eastern Europe, or were forcibly expelled following World War II, and their families.

Since 1998, the president of the Federation has been Erika Steinbach, a Christian Democratic Union of Germany politician.

==Historical background==

It is estimated that in the aftermath of World War II between 13 and 16 million ethnic Germans fled or were expelled from parts of Central and Eastern Europe, including the former eastern territories of Germany (parts of present-day Poland), the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Hungary, Croatia, Serbia (mostly from the Vojvodina region), the Kaliningrad Oblast of Russia (formerly the northern part of East Prussia), Lithuania, Romania and other East European countries. 

The Federation of Expellees was formed on 27 October 1957. Before its founding, the Bund der Heimatvertriebenen (League of Expellees and Deprived of Rights), formed in 1950, represented the interests of displaced German expellees. 

From 1959 to 1964, the first president of the Federation was Hans Krger, a former Nazi judge and activist. dw-world.de: League of German Expellees Unwilling to Investigate Own Past, 14 August 2006. After the war Krger was a West German politician of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), was a Member of Parliament from 1957 to 1965, served as Federal Minister for Displaced Persons, Refugees and War Victims for 4 months in 1963-64 in the First Cabinet of Ludwig Erhard. He stepped down from cabinet and other positions in 1964 amid controversy about his war-time background. Krger was succeeded as president by Wenzel Jaksch in 1964 who held the position until his untimely death in 1966. Biography at spd-wiesbaden.de 

===German laws concerning the expellees===
Between 1953, when the Federal Expellee Law was passed, and 1991 the West German government passed several laws dealing with German expellees. The most notable of these is the "Law of Return" which granted German citizenship to any ethnic German. Several additions were later made to these laws.

The German Law of Return declared refugee status to be inheritable. According to the Federal Expellee Law, Par. 7/2. "the spouse and the descendants" of an expellee are to be treated as if they were expellees themselves, regardless of whether they had been personally displaced. The Federation of Expellees has steadily lobbied to preserve the inheritability clause.

==Recent developments==
Previous West German governments, especially those led by the Christian Democratic Union, had shown more rhetorical support for the territorial claims made on behalf of German refugees and expellees. Although the Social Democrats showed strong support for the expellees, especially under Kurt Schumacher and Erich Ollenhauer, Social Democrats in more recent decades have generally been less supportive &mdash; and it was under Willy Brandt that West Germany recognized the Oder-Neisse line as the eastern German border with Poland under his policy of Ostpolitik. In reality, accepting the internationally recognized boundary made it more possible for eastern Germans to visit their lost homelands. 

In 1989-1990 the West German government realized they had an opportunity to reunify the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet created German Democratic Republic. But they believed that if this was to be achieved, it had to be done quickly. One of the potential complications was the claim to the historical eastern territories of Germany; unless this was renounced, some foreign governments might not agree to German reunification. The West German government under the CDU accepted the 1990 Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany (Two Plus Four Agreement), which officially re-established the sovereignty of both German states. A condition of this agreement was that Germany accept the post-World War II frontiers. Upon reunification in 1990, the constitution was amended to state that Germany's territory had reached its full extent. Article 146 was amended so that Article 23 of the current constitution could be used for reunification. Once the five "reestablished federal states" in the east had been united with the west, the Basic Law was amended again to show that there were no other parts of Germany, which existed outside of the unified territory, that had not acceded.

==Present position==
When in government, both CDU and SPD have tended to favor improved relations with Central and Eastern Europe, even when this conflicts with the interests of the displaced people. The issue of the eastern border and the return of the Heimatvertriebene to their ancestral homes are matters which the current German government, German constitutional arrangements and German treaty obligations have virtually closed.

The refugees' claims were unanimously rejected by the affected countries and became a source of mistrust between Germany, Poland and the Czech Republic. These governments argue that the expulsion of Germans and related border changes were not enacted by the Polish or Czech governments, but rather were ordered by the Potsdam Conference. Furthermore, the nationalization of private property by Poland's former communist government did not apply only to Germans but was enforced on all people, regardless of ethnic background. A further complication is that many of the current Polish population in historical eastern Germany are themselves expellees (or descendants of expellees) who were driven from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union and were forced to leave their homes and property behind as well. 

Some Germans had settled in Poland after 1939, and treating these ex-colonists as expellees, Erika Steinbach included, under German law of these ex-colonists as expellees, adds to the controversy. However, the vast majority of expelled Germans were descended from families who had lived in Eastern Europe for many centuries, while the majority of German colonists in Nazi-occupied Poland were Baltic and other East European Germans themselves displaced by the Nazi-Soviet population transfers.

In 2000 the Federation of Expellees also initiated the formation of the Center Against Expulsions (). Chairwoman of this Center is Erika Steinbach, who headed it together with former SPD politician Prof. Dr. Peter Glotz (died 2005).

In February 2009, the Polish newspaper Polska wrote that over one third of the Federation top officials were former Nazi activists, and based this on an article published by the German magazine Der Spiegel in 2006. The German paper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung wrote that Der Spiegel said this not in respect to the Federation of Expellees, but in respect to a predecessor organization that was dissolved in 1957. Stefan Dietrich, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Erika Steinbach, Polnisches Feindbild, 16 March 2009 "Dafr fehlen uns die Mittel", Spiegel, 14.08.2006 

Recently Erika Steinbach, the chair of the Federation of Expellees, has rejected any compensation claims. The vice president of the Federation Rudi Pawelka is however a chairman of the supervisory board of the Prussian Trust.

A European organisation for expellees has been formed: EUFV. Headquarters is Trieste, Italy. 

==Organization==
The expellees are organized in 21 regional associations (Landsmannschaften), according to the areas of origin of its members, 16 state organizations (Landesverbnde) according to their current residence, and 5 associate member organizations. It is the single representative federation for the approximately 15 million Germans who after fleeing, being expelled, evacuated or emigrating, found refuge in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Federation claims to have 1.3 million members, and to be a political force of some influence in Germany. http://www.bund-der-vertriebenen.de/derbdv/struktur-1.php3 This figure was disputed in January 2010 by the German news service DDP, which reported an actual membership of 550,000. Reported by ARD News service in January 2010.(The figure of 550,000 does not include the State of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) The news report mentioned that an expert in the area of Expellees Prof. Matthias Stickler of the University Wrzburg as saying that a decline in BdV membership is understandable because it mirrors the death of the generation of that era" According to Erika Steinbach only 100,000 of the members contribute financially. http://www.dradio.de/dlf/sendungen/hintergrundpolitik/1099348/ 

The current president of the federation is the German politician Erika Steinbach (CDU), who also is a member of the German Parliament.

The federation helps its members to integrate into German society. Many of the members assist the societies of their place of birth.

===Charter of the German Expellees===

The Charter of the German Expellees () of August 5, 1950, announced their belief in requiring that "the right to the homeland is recognized and carried out as one of the fundamental rights of mankind given by God", while renouncing revenge and retaliation in the face of the "unending suffering" (unendliche Leid) of the previous decade, and supporting the unified effort to rebuild Germany and Europe. The charter has been criticised for avoiding mentioning Nazi atrocities of Second World War and Germans who were forced to emigrate due to Nazi repressions. Zwizek Wypdzonych w systemie politycznym RFN i jego wpyw na stosunki polsko-niemieckie 1982-1992 Beata Ociepka page 235 Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Wrocawskiego, 1997 Critics argue that the Charter presents the history of German people as starting from the expulsions, while ignoring events like the Holocaust. Professor Micha Brumlik pointed out that one third of signatories were former devoted Nazis and many actively helped in realisation of Hitler's goals; Ralph Giordano wrote in Hamburger Abendblatt "the Charter doesn't contain a word about Hitler, Auschwitz and Buchenwald. Not to mention any sign of apologies for the suffering of the murdered people", "avoids mentioning the reasons for expulsions" and called the document "example of German art of crowding out the truth (...) The fact that the charter completely ignores the reasons for the expulsions deprives it of any value". Karta Wypdzonych: pojednanie czy relatywizacja? Deutsche Welle 

==Criticism==
The Federation has been always accused (e.g. by the GDR and Poland) to have Nazi roots. A recent study confirms the stereotype: 13 members of the first council of the Federation had Nazi past. Studie zu Nazi-Vergangenheit der Vertriebenenfunktionre 

The large Polish daily newspaper Rzeczpospolita reported that during BdV meetings in 2003, publications using hate-language to describe Poles butchering Germans were available for sale, as were recordings of Waffen SS marches on compact disks, including those glorifying the Invasion of Poland. Also, far right groups openly distributed their materials at BdV meetings. While the BdV officially denied responsibility for this, no steps were taken to address the concerns raised. 

==Presidents==
*Hans Krger (1959&ndash;1963) (resigned from his post due to his Nazi past dw-world.de) )
*Wenzel Jaksch (1964&ndash;1966)
*Reinhold Rehs (1967&ndash;1970)
*Herbert Czaja (1970&ndash;1994)
*Fritz Wittmann (1994&ndash;1998)
*Erika Steinbach (1998&mdash;)
**Vice president (since 1992): Wilhelm von Gottberg

==Member organizations==

=== Regional ===
* Landsmannschaft Ostpreuen
* Landsmannschaft Schlesien
* Deutsch-Baltische Gesellschaft
* Landsmannschaft der Banater Schwaben e.V.
* Landsmannschaft Berlin-Mark Brandenburg
* Landsmannschaft der Bessarabiendeutschen e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Buchenlanddeutschen (Bukowina) e.V.
* Bund der Danziger e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Dobrudscha- und Bulgariendeutschen
* Landsmannschaft der Donauschwaben, Bundesverband e.V.
* Karpatendeutsche Landsmannschaft Slowakei e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Deutschen aus Litauen e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Oberschlesier e.V. - Bundesverband -
* Pommersche Landsmannschaft - Zentralverband - e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Deutschen aus Russland e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Sathmarer Schwaben in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Siebenbrger Sachsen in Deutschland e.V.
* Sudetendeutsche Landsmannschaft Bundesverband e.V.
* Landsmannschaft der Deutschen aus Ungarn
* Landsmannschaft Weichsel-Warthe Bundesverband e.V.
* Landsmannschaft Westpreuen e.V.

===State===
* Landesverband Baden-Wrttemberg
* Landesverband Bayern
* Landesverband Berlin
* Landesverband Brandenburg
* Landesverband Bremen
* Landesverband Hamburg
* Landesverband Hessen
* Landesverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
* Landesverband Niedersachsen
* Landesverband Nordrhein-Westfalen
* Landesverband Rheinland-Pfalz
* Landesverband Saar
* Landesverband Sachsen / Schlesische Lausitz
* Landesverband Sachsen-Anhalt
* Landesverband Schleswig-Holstein
* Landesverband Thringen

==See also==
*All-German Bloc/League of Expellees and Deprived of Rights
*Organised persecution of ethnic Germans
*Pursuit of Nazi collaborators
*German eastward settlement
*History of Poland
*History of Pomerania
*History of Silesia
*History of Prussia
*History of the Czech lands
*Ethnic cleansing

==References==

==External links==
* Bund der Vertriebenen - Official homepage
* For latest developments: http://cdu.de/politik-a-z/vertriebenen/inhalt.htm
* Jose Ayala Lasso Speech to the German expellees, Day of the Homeland, Berlin 6 August 2005 Lasso was the first United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (19941997)



[[History of Albania]]

The history of Albania emerges from prehistoric stage 3000 BC, with early records of Illyria in Greco-Roman historiography. The modern territory of Albania has no counterpart in antiquity, comprising parts of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia (southern Illyricum), Macedonia (particularly Epirus Nova), and Moesia Superior. The territory remained under Roman (Byzantine) control until the Slavic migrations of the 7th century, and was integrated into the Bulgarian Empire in the 9th century.

The territorial nucleus of the Albanian state formed in the Middle Ages, as the Principality of Arbr and the Sicilian dependency known as the Kingdom of Albania. The first records of the Albanian people as a distinct ethnicity also date to this period. The area was part of the Serbian Empire, passing to the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century. It remained under Ottoman control as part of Rumelia province until 1912, when the first independent Albanian state was declared following a short occupation by the Kingdom of Serbia. The formation of an Albanian national consciousness dates to the later 19th century and is part of the larger phenomenon of the rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire.

A short-lived monarchy (19141925) was succeeded by an even shorter-lived first Albanian Republic (19251928), to be replaced by another monarchy (19281939), which was conquered by Fascist Italy just prior to World War II. After the collapse of the Axis powers, Albania became a communist state, the Socialist People's Republic of Albania, which for most of its duration was dominated by Enver Hoxha (died 1985). Hoxha's political heir Ramiz Alia oversaw the disintegration of the "Hoxhaist" state during the wider collapse of the Eastern Bloc in the later 1980s.

The communist regime collapsed in 1990, and the former communist Party of Labour of Albania was routed in elections in March 1992, amid economic collapse and social unrest. The unstable economic situation led to mass emigration of Albanians, mostly to Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Germany and to North America during the 1990s. The crisis peaked in the Albanian Turmoil. An amelioration of the economic and political conditions in the early years of the 21st century made Albania become a full member of NATO in 2009. The country is applying to join the European Union.

==Prehistory==

The first traces of human presence in Albania were found in the village Xarr, near Sarand and Mount Dajt near Tiran dating to the Middle Paleolithic and Upper Paleolithic eras. The Prehistory of the Balkans; and the Middle East and the Aegean world, tenth to eighth centuries B.C. John Boardman p.189-90 The objects found in a cave near Xarr include flint and jasper objects and fossilized animal bones, while those found at Mount Dajt comprise bone and stone tools similar to those of the Aurignacian culture. The Paeolithic finds of Albania show great similarities with objects of the same era found at Crvena Stijena in Montenegro and north-western Greece. 

During the Bronze Age, several artifacts from tumulus burials have been unearthed in central and southern Albania, showing close connection with sites in southwestern Macedonia and Lefkada, Greece. Archeologists have come to the conclusion that from the middle of the third millennium BC, these regions were inhabited by Indo-European people who spoke an early form of Greek. A part of them later moved to Mycenae around 1600 BC and founded the Mycenaean civilisation there. Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprire Hammond, Guy Thompson Griffith A History of Macedonia: Historical geography and prehistory. Clarendon Press, 1972, p. 290 Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprire Hammond. Studies: Further studies on various topics. A.M. Hakkert, 1993, p. 231: "The leading dans of both groups buried their dead under a circular tumulus of soil in the second millennium BC The main reservoir of the Greek speakers was central Albania and Epirus, and it was from there that the founders of Mycenaean civilization came to Mycenae, c. 1600 BC, and burried their nobles in Grave Circle B. Further waves of immigrants passing through and from Epirus people the Greek peninsula and islands the last wave, called Dorians, settling from 1100 onwards. The lands they left in central Albania were occupied during the so-called Dark Age (U10-800BC) by Illyrians, whose main habitat was in the area now called Bosnia," On the other hand the Illirii, probably the southernmost Illyrian tribe of that time that lived on the border of Albania and Montenegro, were possibly neighboring with the Greek tribes. John Boardman. The prehistory of the Balkans and the Middle East and the Aegean world. Cambridge University Press, 1982. ISBN 978-0-521-22496-3, p. 629: "...the southernmost outliers of the tribes which held the Zeta valley, as such they may have been the immediate neighbours of Greek-speaking tribes in the Bronze Age." Wilkes John. The Illyrians. Wiley-Blackwell, 1995, ISBN 978-0-631-19807-9, p. 92: "Illyrii was once no more than the name of a single people... astride the modern frontier between Albania and Yugoslav Montenegro" 

In the late Bronze Age and early Iron Age a number of possible population movements occurred, with the Bryges being settled in areas of southern Albania-northwestern Greece and Illyrian tribes moved into central Albania. The later derive from early Indo-European presence in western Balkan Peninsula. Their formation can be assumed to coincide with the beginning Iron Age in the Balkans, during the early 1st millennium BC. The later (The Peoples of Europe) by John Wilkes, ISBN 0-631-19807-5, 1996, page 39: "... the other hand, the beginnings of the Iron Age around 1000 BC is held to coincide with the formation of the historical Illyrian peoples. ..." 

Archaeologists associate the Illyrians with the Hallstatt culture, an Iron Age people noted for production of iron, bronze swords with winged-shaped handles, and domestication of horses.
It is impossible to delineate Illyrian tribes from Paleo-Balkans in a strict linguistic sense, but areas classically included under "Illyrian" for the Balkans Iron Age include the area of the Danube, Sava, and Morava rivers to the Adriatic Sea and the Shar Mountains. 

==Antiquity==
Butrint, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

===Illyrians===

The Illyrians (; or Illyri) were a group of tribes who inhabited the Western Balkans during classical antiquity.
The territory the tribes covered came to be known as Illyria to Hellenistic and Roman authors, corresponding roughly to the area between Adriatic sea in west, Drava river in North, Morava river in east and the mouth of Vjos river in south. The Illyrians (The Peoples of Europe) by John Wilkes, 1996, ISBN 978-0-631-19807-9, page 92, "Appian's description of the Illyrian territories records a southern boundary with Chaonia and Thesprotia, where ancient Epirus began south of river Aoous (Vjose)" also map Cambridge University Press. The Cambridge ancient history. 2000. ISBN 0-521-23447-6, page 261,"...down to the mouth of Aous" The first account of Illyrian peoples comes from Periplus or Coastal passage an ancient Greek text of the middle of the 4th century BC. The Illyrians (The Peoples of Europe) by John Wilkes,1996,page 94 

The Illyrian tribes that resided in the region of modern Albania were the Taulantii in central Albania Appian, The Foreign Wars, III, 1.2 the Parthini, the Abri and the Caviii in the north, the Enchelei in the east, Wilkes, J. J. The Illyrians, 1992, ISBN 0-631-19807-5, Page 96,"... 25 Enchelei the Bylliones in the south and several others. In the westernmost parts of the territory of Albania along with the Illyrian tribes lived the Bryges, The Illyrians (The Peoples of Europe) by John Wilkes,1996, ISBN 9780631198079, page 111. a Phrygian people, and in the south Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprire Hammond, Guy Thompson Griffith. A History of Macedonia: Historical geography and prehistory. Clarendon Press, 1972, p. 92. lived the Greek tribe of the Chaonians. Boardman, John; Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprire (1982), The Cambridge Ancient History: The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Six Centuries B.C, Cambridge, p. 261 Wilkes, John J. (1995), The Illyrians, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, ISBN 0-631-19807-5, p. 92 

In the 4th century BC, the Illyrian king Bardyllis united several Illyrian tribes and engaged in conflict with Macedon to the southeast, but was defeated. Bardyllis was succeeded by Grabos, Harding, p. 93. Grabos became the most powerful Illyrian king after the death of Bardylis in 358. then by Bardyllis II, "The Journal of Hellenic Studies by Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies (London, England)", 1973, p. 79. Cleitus was evidently the son of Bardylis II the grandson of the very old Bardylis who had fallen in battle against Phillip II in 385 BC. and then by Cleitus the Illyrian, who was defeated by Alexander the Great. Later on, in 229 BC, Queen Teuta Wilkes, J. J. The Illyrians, 1992, p. 120, ISBN 0-631-19807-5,page 129,"... mainly because no coins are known to have been issued by Illyrian rulers of a later period such as Agron, Teuta, Scerdilaidas, etc. ... of the Ardiaei clashed with the Romans and initiated the Illyrian Wars, which resulted in defeat and in the end of Illyrian independence by 168 BC, when King Gentius was defeated by a Roman army.

===Greeks===
Beginning in the 7th century BC, Greek colonies were established on the Illyrian coast. The most important were Apollonia, Avlona (modern-day Vlor), Epidamnos (modern-day Durrs), and Lissus (modern-day Lezh). The rediscovered Greek city of Buthrotum () (modern-day Butrint), a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is probably more significant today than it was when Julius Caesar used it as a provisions depot for his troops during his campaigns in the 1st century BC. At that time, it was considered an unimportant outpost, overshadowed by Apollonia and Epidamnos. An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis by Mogens Herman, ISBN 0-19-814099-1, 2004, page 343, "Bouthroton (Bouthrotios)" 

===Roman Era===
The route of the Via Egnatia.

The lands comprising modern-day Albania were incorporated into the Roman Empire as part of the province of Illyricum above the river Drin, and Roman Macedonia (specifically as Epirus Nova) below it. The western part of the Via Egnatia ran inside modern Albania, ending at Dyrrachium. Illyricum was later divided into the provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia.

The Roman province of Illyricum or Enzyklopdie der klassischen Altertumskunde by Ludwig Schaaff, 2002, ISBN 0-543-80046-6, page 17 An ancient geography, classical and sacred. By S. Augustus Mitchell. by Michigan Historical Reprint Series, 2005, ISBN 1-4255-3778-2, page 215 Illyris Romana or Illyris Barbara or Illyria Barbara replaced most of the region of Illyria. It stretched from the Drilon River in modern Albania to Istria (Croatia) in the west and to the Sava River (Bosnia and Herzegovina) in the north. Salona (near modern Split in Croatia) functioned as its capital. The regions which it included changed through the centuries though a great part of ancient Illyria remained part of Illyricum.

South Illyria became Epirus Nova, part of the Roman province of Macedonia. In 357 AD the region was part of the Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum one of four large praetorian prefectures into which the Late Roman Empire was divided. By 395 AD dioceses in which the region was divided were the Diocese of Dacia (as Pravealitana), and the Diocese of Macedonia (as Epirus Nova). Most of the region of modern Albania corresponds to the Epirus Nova.

===Christianization===
Christianity came to Epirus nova, then part of the Roman province of Macedonia. Paul: His Story by Jerome Murphy-O'Connor,page 247 Since the 1st and 2nd century AD, Christianity had become the established religion in Byzantium, supplanting pagan polytheism and eclipsing for the most part the humanistic world outlook and institutions inherited from the Greek and Roman civilizations. The Durrs Amphitheatre is a historic monument from the time period that was used to preach Christianity to civilians during that time.

When the Roman Empire was divided into eastern and western halves in AD 395, Illyria east of the Drinus River (Drina between Bosnia and Serbia), including the lands that now form Albania, were administered by the Eastern Empire but were ecclesiastically dependent on Rome. Though the country was in the fold of Byzantium, Christians in the region remained under the jurisdiction of the Roman pope until 732. In that year the iconoclast Byzantine emperor Leo III, angered by archbishops of the region because they had supported Rome in the Iconoclastic Controversy, detached the church of the province from the Roman pope and placed it under the patriarch of Constantinople.

When the Christian church split in 1054 between Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism, the region of southern Albania retained its ties to Constantinople, while the north reverted to the jurisdiction of Rome. This split marked the first significant religious fragmentation of the country.

After the formation of the Slav principality of Dioclia (modern Montenegro), the metropolitan see of Bar was created in 1089, and dioceses in northern Albania (Shkodr, Ulcinj) became its suffragans. Starting in 1019, Albanian dioceses of the Byzantine rite were suffragans of the independent Archdiocese of Ohrid until Dyrrachion and Nicopolis, were re-established as metropolitan sees. Thereafter, only the dioceses in inner Albania (Elbasan, Kruj) remained attached to Ohrid. In the 13th century during the Venetian occupation, the Latin Archdiocese of Durrs was founded.

==Middle Ages==

===Byzantine rule and barbarian invasions (395-1347)===

Epirus Nova, 400 AD.
After the region fell to the Romans in 168 BC it became part of Epirus nova that was in turn part of the Roman province of Macedonia. Later it was part of provinces of the Byzantine empire called Themes.

When the Roman Empire was divided into East and West in 395, the territories of modern Albania became part of the Byzantine Empire. Beginning in the first decades of Byzantine rule (until 461), the region suffered devastating raids by Visigoths, Huns, and Ostrogoths. In the 6th and 7th centuries, the region experienced an influx of Slavs.

The new administrative system of the themes, or military provinces created by the Byzantine Empire, contributed to the eventual rise of feudalism in Albania, as peasant soldiers who served military lords became serfs on their landed estates. Among the leading families of the Albanian feudal nobility were the Balsha, Thopia, Shpata, Muzaka, Dukagjini and Kastrioti. The first three of these rose later to become rulers of principalities during the years 1355-1400. Many Albanians converted to the Roman Catholic Church at that period.

In the first decades under Byzantine rule (until 461), Epirus nova suffered the devastation of raids by Visigoths, Huns, and Ostrogoths. Not long after these barbarian invaders swept through the Balkans, the Slavs appeared. Between the 6th and 8th centuries they settled in Roman territories.
In the 4th century, barbarian tribes began to prey upon the Roman Empire. The Germanic Goths and Asiatic Huns were the first to arrive, invading in mid-century; the Avars attacked in AD 570; and the White Croatian tribes invaded in the early 7th century. In general, the invaders destroyed or weakened Roman and Byzantine cultural centers in the lands that would become Albania. 

====Bulgarian Empire====

The location of Arbanon in 11th century. According to Ducellier the castle of Petrela was the access point to the region known with this name L'Albanie entre Byzance et Venise" Volume 248 of Collected studies Variorum Collected Studies Volume 248 of Variorum reprint Author Alain Ducellier Edition illustrated, reprint Publisher Variorum Reprints, 1987 ISBN 0-86078-196-8, ISBN 978-0-86078-196-7. "Par deux fois, Anne Comnene laisse entendre que la place forte de Petrela constitue la voie d'acces principale de cette region ..." On the location of Arbanon see also Studies in late Byzantine history and prosopography Volume 242 of Collected studies Variorum reprints ; CS242 Volume 242 of Variorum reprint Author Donald MacGillivray Nicol Edition illustrated Publisher Variorum Reprints, 1986 ISBN 0-86078-190-9, ISBN 978-0-86078-190-5-page. 160 "The geographical location of the mysterious 'Arbanon' has at last no doubt been settled by the researches of Alain Ducellier. In the 11th century at least it was the name given to the mountainous area to the west of Lake Ochrida and the upper valley of the river Shkumbin..." 

In the mid-9th century most of eastern Albania became part of the Bulgarian Empire. The area, known as Kutmichevitsa, became an important Bulgarian cultural center in 10th century with many thriving towns such as Devol, Glavinitsa (Ballsh) and Belgrad (Berat). When the Byzantines managed to conquer the First Bulgarian Empire the fortresses in eastern Albania were some of the last Bulgarian strongholds to be submitted by the Byzantines. Later the region was recovered by the Second Bulgarian Empire.

In the Middle Ages, the name Arberia (see Origin and history of the name Albania) began to be increasingly applied to the region now comprising the nation of Albania. The first undisputed mention of Albanians in the historical record is attested in Byzantine source for the first time in 10791080, in a work titled History by Byzantine historian Michael Attaliates, who referred to the Albanoi as having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople in 1043 and to the Arbanitai as subjects of the duke of Dyrrachium. A later reference to Albanians from the same Attaliates, regarding the participation of Albanians in a rebellion around 1078, is undisputed. The wars of the Balkan Peninsula: their medieval origins G  Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series Authors Alexandru Madgearu, Martin Gordon Editor Martin Gordon Translated by Alexandru Madgearu Edition illustrated Publisher Scarecrow Press, 2008 ISBN 0-8108-5846-0, ISBN 978-0-8108-5846-6 It was supposed that those Albanoi from 1042 were Normans from Sicily, called by an archaic name (the Albanoi were an independent tribe from Southern Italy). The following instance is indisputable. It comes from the same Attaliates, who wrote that the Albanians (Arbanitai) were involved in the 1078 rebellion of... p. 25 

It was in 1190, when a local Albanian noble called Progon created the Principality of Arbr, with its capital at Kruj. After the fall of Progon Dynasty in 1216, the principality came under Grigor Kamona and Gulam of Albania. Finally the Principality was dissolved on 1255.

In 1271 Charles of Anjou after he captured Durrs from Despotate of Epirus, created the Kingdom of Albania. In 14th century a number of Albanian principalities were created.

===Late Middle Ages===

After the weakening of the Byzantine Empire and the Bulgarian Empire in the middle and late 13th century, most of the territory of present-day Albania became part of the Serbian state: firstly, as part of Rashka and later as part of the Serbian Empire. The southern part was governed by the semi-independent, Serbian ruled Despotate of Epiros.

Along with the Serbian ruled Albania, there was also the Principality of Arbr, and later the Angevin Kingdom of Albania. These three entities, covers the history of Albania between the late 12th century, until the half of the 14th century, when Albanian Principalities were created through all Albania.

====Principality of Arbr====

In 1190 the first Albanian medieval state, the Principality of Arbr was founded by the House of Progon with the city of Kruj as the capital. Progoni was succeeded by Gjini and then by Dhimiter.

In 1204, after Western crusaders sacked Constantinople, Venice won nominal control over Albania and the Epirus region of northern Greece and took possession of Durrs.

====Anjou Kingdom of Albania====

After the fall of the Principality of Arber in territories captured by the Despotate of Epiros, the Kingdom of Albania was established by Charles of Anjou. He took the title of King of Albania in February 1272.

====The Albanian principalities and the League of Lezh====

In 1355 the Serbian Empire was dissolved and several Albanian principalities were formed including the Balsha, Thopia and Shpata as the major ones.

In the late 14th and the early 15th century the Ottoman Empire conquered parts of south and central Albania.

The Albanians regained control of their territories in 1444 when the League of Lezh was established, under the rule of George Kastrioti Skanderbeg, the Albanian national hero.

==Ottoman rule (1481-1912)==

Sanjak of Albania in 1431

Ottoman supremacy in the west Balkan region began in 1385 with the Battle of Savra. On the conquered part of Albania, which territory stretched between Mat River on the north and ameria to the south, Ottoman Empire established the Sanjak of Albania and in 1419 Gjirokastra became the county town of the Sanjak of Albania. Beginning in the late-14th century, the Ottomans expanded their empire from Anatolia to the Balkans (Rumelia).

By the 15th century, the Ottomans ruled most of the Balkan Peninsula. Their advance in Albania was interrupted in the 15th century, when George Kastrioti Skanderbeg, the Albanian national hero who had served as an Ottoman military officer, renounced Ottoman service, allied with some Albanian chiefs forming the League of Lezh and fought off successfully Turkish rule from 14431468 upon his death. Three major attacks (Siege of Kruj (1450), Second Siege of Kruj (146667), Third Siege of Kruj (1467)) suffered Albania during this period from major armies led by the great Ottoman sultans themselves, Murad II and Mehmed II The Conqueror. 
Albania was almost fully re-occupied by the Ottomans in 1479 after capturing Shkodr from Venice. Albania's conquest by Ottomans was completed after Durrs's capture from Venice in 1501.

===Ottoman-Albanian wars===
Many Albanians had been recruited into the Janissary corps, including the feudal heir George Kastrioti who was renamed Skanderbeg (Iskandar Bey) by his Turkish trainers at Edirne. After some Ottoman defeats at the hands of the Hungarians, Skanderbeg deserted on November 1443 and began a rebellion against the Ottoman Empire. 

After deserting, Skanderbeg re-converted to Roman Catholicism and declared war against the Ottoman Empire, which he led from 1443 to 1468. Under a red flag bearing Skanderbeg's heraldic emblem, an Albanian force held off Ottoman campaigns for twenty-five years and overcame sieges of Kruj led by major forces of the Ottoman sultans Murad II and Mehmed II.

However, Skanderbeg was unable to receive any of the help which had been promised him by the popes or the Italian states, Venice, Naples and Milan. He died in 1468, leaving no worthy successor. After his death the rebellion continued, but without its former success. The loyalties and alliances created and nurtured by Skanderbeg faltered and fell apart and the Ottomans reconquered the territory of Albania, culminating with the siege of Shkodra in 1479. Shortly after the fall of the castles of northern Albania, many Albanians fled to neighboring Italy, giving rise to the modern Arbresh communities.

===Late Ottoman period===
Durrs in 1573
Janissary Muskets.
Upon the Ottomans' return in 1479, a large number of Albanians fled to Italy, Egypt and other parts of the Ottoman Empire and Europe and maintained their Arbresh identity. Many Albanians won fame and fortune as soldiers, administrators, and merchants in far-flung parts of the Empire. As the centuries passed, however, Ottoman rulers lost the capacity to command the loyalty of local pashas, which threatened stability in the region. The Ottoman rulers of the 19th century struggled to shore up central authority, introducing reforms aimed at harnessing unruly pashas and checking the spread of nationalist ideas. Albania would be a part of the Ottoman Empire until the early 20th century.

The Ottoman period that followed was characterized by a change in the landscape through a gradual modification of the settlements with the introduction of bazaars, military garrisons and mosques in many Albanian regions. Part of the Albanian population gradually converted to Islam, with many joining the Sufi Order of the Bektashi. Converting from Christianity to Islam brought considerable advantages, including access to Ottoman trade networks, bureaucratic positions and the army. As a result many Albanians came to serve in the elite Janissary and the administrative Devirme system. Among these were important historical figures, including Iljaz Hoxha, Hamza Kastrioti, Koca Davud Pasha, Zaanos Pasha, Kprl Mehmed Pasha (head of the Kprl family of Grand Viziers), the Bushati family, Sulejman Pasha, Edhem Pasha, Nezim Frakulla, Ali Pasha of Tepelena, Haxhi Shekreti, Hasan Zyko Kamberi, Ali Pasha of Gucia, Mehmet Ali ruler of Egypt Research Institute for European and American Studies. The Balkan Muslim Presence and Emin Pasha.

Many Albanians gained prominent positions in the Ottoman government, Albanians highly active during the Ottoman era and leaders such as Ali Pasha of Tepelena might have aided Husein Gradaevi. The Albanians proved generally faithful to Ottoman rule following the end of the resistance led by Skanderbeg, and accepted Islam more easily than their neighbors. A. Madrugearu, M. Gordon. The wars of the Balkan Peninsula: their medieval origin. Scarecrow Press, 2008. p. 27. 

No fewer than 42 Grand Viziers of the Empire were of Albanian descent. The Ottoman period also saw the rising of semi-autonomous Albanian ruled Pashaliks and Albanians were also an important part of the Ottoman army and Ottoman administration like the case of Kprl family. Albania would remain a part of the Ottoman Empire as the provinces of Scutari, Monastir and Janina until 1912.

===Birth of nationalism===
Hamza Kazazi, leader of the 18331839 revolts.

By the 1870s, the Sublime Porte's reforms aimed at checking the Ottoman Empire's disintegration had clearly failed. The image of the "Turkish yoke" had become fixed in the nationalist mythologies and psyches of the empire's Balkan peoples, and their march toward independence quickened. The Albanians, because of the higher degree of Islamic influence, their internal social divisions, and the fear that they would lose their Albanian-populated lands to the emerging Balkan statesSerbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Greecewere the last of the Balkan peoples to desire division from the Ottoman Empire. 

However, in the 19th century after the fall of the Albanian pashaliks and the Massacre of the Albanian Beys an Albanian National Awakening took place and many revolts against the Ottoman Empire were organized. Such revolts included the Albanian Revolts of 1833-1839, the Revolt of 184344, and the Revolt of 1847. A culmination of the Albanian National Awakening were the League of Prizren and the League of Peja, but they were unsuccessful to an Albanian independence, which occurred only in 1912, through the Albanian Declaration of Independence.

==Independence of Albania (1912)==

The initial sparks of the first Balkan War in 1912 were ignited by the Albanian uprising between 1908 and 1910 The Balkans (Nationalism, War and the Great Powers, 18041999)  by Misha Glenny which had the aim of opposing the Young Turk policies of consolidation of the Ottoman Empire. Following the eventual weakening of the Ottoman Empire in the Balkans, Serbia, Greece and Bulgaria declared war and sought to aggrandize their respective boundaries on the remaining territories of the Empire. The territory of what is now Albania was invaded by Serbia in the north and Greece in the south, restricting the country to only a patch of land around the southern coastal city of Vlora. The uprisings of 19101912, and the Montenegrin, Serbian, and Greek invasion of Albania, led to the proclamation of independence by Ismail Qemali in Vlora, on 28 November 1912. The independence was recognized by the Conference of London on 29 July 1913. 

The border between Albania and its neighbors was delineated in 1913 following the decision by the Ambassadors at the Conference of London. The delineation of the new state's borders left more than half of Albanian communities outside Albania. This population was largely divided between Montenegro and Serbia in the north(which then included what is now Kosovo and the Republic of Macedonia), and Greece in the south. A substantial number of Albanians thus found themselves under Serbian rule.

At the same time, an uprising in the country's south by local Greeks, led to the formation of the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus in the southern provinces (1914). The republic proved short-lived as Albania collapsed with the onset of World War I. Greece held the area between 1914 and 1916, and unsuccessfully tried to annex it in March 1916; however in 1917 the Greeks were driven from the area by Italy, which took over most of Albania. The Paris Peace Conference of 1919 awarded the area to Greece. However the area definitively reverted to Albanian control in November 1921, following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War. 

==Principality of Albania==

In supporting the independence of Albania, the Great Powers were assisted by Aubrey Herbert, a British MP who passionately advocated the Albanian cause in London. As a result, Herbert was offered the crown of Albania, but was dissuaded by the British Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith, from accepting. Instead the offer went to William of Wied, a German prince who accepted and became sovereign of the new Principality of Albania. 

The Principality was established on 21 February 1914. The Great Powers selected Prince William of Wied, a nephew of Queen Elisabeth of Romania to become the sovereign of the newly independent Albania. A formal offer was made by 18 Albanian delegates representing the 18 districts of Albania on 21 February 1914, an offer which he accepted. Outside of Albania William was styled prince, but in Albania he was referred to as Mbret (King) so as not to seem inferior to the King of Montenegro.

Prince William arrived in Albania at his provisional capital of Durrs on 7 March 1914 along with the Royal family. The security of Albania was to be provided by a Gendarmerie commanded by Dutch officers.

===Internal revolts and foreign occupation during World War I===
Albania in 1916.
World War I interrupted all government activities in Albania, while the country was split in a number of regional governments. Political chaos engulfed Albania after the outbreak of World War I. The Albanian people split along religious and tribal lines after the prince's departure. Muslims demanded a Muslim prince and looked to Turkey as the protector of the privileges they had enjoyed. Other Albanians looked to Italy and Serbia for support. Still others, including many beys and clan chiefs, recognized no superior authority.

Prince William left Albania on 3 September 1914, as a result of the Peasant Revolt initiated by Essad Pasha and later taken over by Haxhi Qamili. William subsequently joined the German army and served on the Eastern Front, but never renounced his claim to the throne. 

In the country's south, the local Greek population, revolted against the incorporation of the area into the new Albanian state and declared the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus at 28 February. George B. Leon. Greece and the First World War: from neutrality to intervention, 19171918. East European Monographs, 1990. ISBN 978-0-88033-181-4, p. 323. David Turnock. The economy of East Central Europe 18151989: stages of transformation in a peripheral region.. Routledge, 2006 ISBN 978-0-415-18053-5, p. 424 

In late 1914, Greece occupied southern Albania, including Kor and Gjirokastr. Italy occupied Vlor, and Serbia and Montenegro occupied parts of northern Albania until a Central Powers offensive scattered the Serbian army, which was evacuated by the French to Thessaloniki. Austro-Hungarian and Bulgarian forces then occupied about two-thirds of the country (Bulgarian occupation of Albania).

Under the secret Treaty of London signed in April 1915, Triple Entente powers promised Italy that it would gain Vlor (Valona) and nearby lands and a protectorate over Albania in exchange for entering the war against Austria-Hungary. Serbia and Montenegro were promised much of northern Albania, and Greece was promised much of the country's southern half. The treaty left a tiny Albanian state that would be represented by Italy in its relations with the other major powers.

In September 1918, Entente forces broke through the Central Powers' lines north of Thessaloniki and within days Austro-Hungarian forces began to withdraw from Albania. On October 2, 1918 the city of Durrs was shelled on the orders of Louis Franchet d'Esprey, during the Battle of Durazzo: according to d'Esprey, the Port of Durrs, if not destroyed, would have served the evacuation of the Bulgarian and German armies, involved in World War I. 

When the war ended on 11 November 1918, Italy's army had occupied most of Albania; Serbia held much of the country's northern mountains; Greece occupied a sliver of land within Albania's 1913 borders; and French forces occupied Kor and Shkodr as well as other regions with sizable Albanian populations.

===Projects of partition in 19191920===

After World War I, Albania was still under the occupation of Serbian and Italian forces. It was a rebellion of the respective populations of Northern and Southern Albania that pushed back the Serbs and Italians behind the recognized borders of Albania.

Albania's political confusion continued in the wake of World War I. The country lacked a single recognized government, and Albanians feared, with justification, that Italy, Yugoslavia, and Greece would succeed in extinguishing Albania's independence and carve up the country. Italian forces controlled Albanian political activity in the areas they occupied. The Serbs, who largely dictated Yugoslavia's foreign policy after World War I, strove to take over northern Albania, and the Greeks sought to control southern Albania.

A delegation sent by a postwar Albanian National Assembly that met at Durrs in December 1918 defended Albanian interests at the Paris Peace Conference, but the conference denied Albania official representation. The National Assembly, anxious to keep Albania intact, expressed willingness to accept Italian protection and even an Italian prince as a ruler so long as it would mean Albania did not lose territory. Serbian troops conducted actions in Albanian-populated border areas, while Albanian guerrillas operated in both Serbia and Montenegro.

In January 1920, at the Paris Peace Conference, negotiators from France, Britain, and Greece agreed to divide Albania among Yugoslavia, Italy, and Greece as a diplomatic expedient aimed at finding a compromise solution to the territorial conflict between Italy and Yugoslavia. The deal was done behind the Albanians' backs.

Members of a second Albanian National Assembly held at Lushnj in January 1920 rejected the partition plan and warned that Albanians would take up arms to defend their country's independence and territorial integrity. The Lushnj National Assembly appointed a four-man regency to rule the country. A bicameral parliament was also created, in which an elected lower chamber, the Chamber of Deputies (with one deputy for every 12,000 people in Albania and one for the Albanian community in the United States), appointed members of its own ranks to an upper chamber, the Senate. In February 1920, the government moved to Tirana, which became Albania's capital.

One month later, in March 1920, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson intervened to block the Paris agreement. The United States underscored its support for Albania's independence by recognizing an official Albanian representative to Washington, and in December the League of Nations recognized Albania's sovereignty by admitting it as a full member. The country's borders, however, remained unsettled.

Albania achieved a degree of statehood after World War I, in part because of the diplomatic intercession of the United States. The country suffered from a debilitating lack of economic and social development, however, and its first years of independence were fraught with political instability. Unable to survive a predatory environment without a foreign protector, Albania became the object of tensions between Italy and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, which both sought to dominate the country. 

===First Zogu Government (19221924)===
Interwar Albanian governments appeared and disappeared in rapid succession. Between July and December 1921 alone, the premiership changed hands five times.
The Popular Party's head, Xhafer Ypi, formed a government in December 1921 with Fan S. Noli as foreign minister and Ahmed Bey Zogu as internal affairs minister, but Noli resigned soon after Zogu resorted to repression in an attempt to disarm the lowland Albanians despite the fact that bearing arms was a traditional custom.

When the government's enemies attacked Tirana in early 1922, Zogu stayed in the capital and, with the support of the British ambassador, repulsed the assault. He took over the premiership later in the year and turned his back on the Popular Party by announcing his engagement to the daughter of the Progressive Party leader, Shefqet Verlaci.

Zogu's protgs organized themselves into the Government Party. Noli and other Western-oriented leaders formed the Opposition Party of Democrats, which attracted all of Zogu's many personal enemies, ideological opponents, and people left unrewarded by his political machine. Ideologically, the Democrats included a broad sweep of people who advocated everything from conservative Islam to Noli's dreams of rapid modernization.

Opposition to Zogu was formidable . Orthodox peasants in Albania's southern lowlands loathed Zogu because he supported the Muslim landowners' efforts to block land reform; Shkodr's citizens felt shortchanged because their city did not become Albania's capital, and nationalists were dissatisfied because Zogu's government did not press Albania's claims to Kosovo or speak up more energetically for the rights of the ethnic Albanian minorities in present-day Yugoslavia and Greece.

Zogu's party handily won elections for a National Assembly in early 1924. Zogu soon stepped aside, however, handing over the premiership to Verlaci in the wake of a financial scandal and an assassination attempt by a young radical that left Zogu wounded. The opposition withdrew from the assembly after the leader of a nationalist youth organization, Avni Rustemi, was murdered in the street outside the parliament building.

===Noli Revolution (1924)===

Noli's supporters blamed the Rustemi murder on Zogu's Mati clansmen, who continued to practice blood vengeance. After the walkout, discontent mounted, and in June 1924 a peasant-backed insurgency had won control of Tirana. Noli became prime minister, and Zogu fled to Yugoslavia.

Fan Noli, an idealist, rejected demands for new elections on the grounds that Albania needed a "paternal" government. In a manifesto describing his government's program, Noli called for abolishing feudalism, resisting Italian domination, and establishing a Western-style constitutional government. Scaling back the bureaucracy, strengthening local government, assisting peasants, throwing Albania open to foreign investment, and improving the country's bleak transportation, public health, and education facilities filled out the Noli government's overly ambitious agenda. Noli encountered resistance to his program from people who had helped him oust Zogu, and he never attracted the foreign aid necessary to carry out his reform plans. Noli criticized the League of Nations for failing to settle the threat facing Albania on its land borders.

Under Fan Noli, the government set up a special tribunal that passed death sentences, in absentia, on Zogu, Verlaci, and others and confiscated their property. In Yugoslavia Zogu recruited a mercenary army, and Belgrade furnished the Albanian leader with weapons, about 1,000 Yugoslav army regulars, and Russian White Emigres to mount an invasion that the Serbs hoped would bring them disputed areas along the border. After Noli's regime decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, a bitter enemy of the Serbian ruling family, Belgrade began making wild allegations that the Albanian regime was about to embrace Bolshevism.

On 13 December 1924, Zogu's Yugoslav-backed army crossed into Albanian territory. By Christmas Eve, Zogu had reclaimed the capital, and Noli and his government had fled to Italy.
The Noli government lasted just 6 months and a week, and Ahmet Zogu returned with another coup d'tat and regained the control, changing the political situation and abolishing principality.

==Albanian Republic (19241928)==
President Ahmed Bey Zogu

In late 1924 Ahmed Bey Zogu, regained power from an internal political power struggle against Prime Minister Fan Noli using Yugoslav military assistance.

After defeating Fan Noli`s government, Ahmet Zogu recalled the parliament, in order to find a solution for the uncrowned principality of Albania. The parliament quickly adopted a new constitution, proclaimed Albania a republic, and granted Zogu dictatorial powers that allowed him to appoint and dismiss ministers, veto legislation, and name all major administrative personnel and a third of the Senate.
The Constitution provided for a parliamentary republic with a powerful president serving as head of state and government.

Ahmet Zogu was elected president for a term of seven years by the National Assembly, prior to his proclamation King of Albanians. On 31 January, Zogu was elected president for a seven-year term. Opposition parties and civil liberties disappeared; opponents of the regime were murdered; and the press suffered strict censorship. Zogu ruled Albania using four military governors responsible to him alone. He appointed clan chieftains as reserve army officers who were kept on call to protect the regime against domestic or foreign threats.

Zogu, however, quickly turned his back on Belgrade and looked instead to Benito Mussolini's Italy for patronage. Under Zogu, Albania joined the Italian coalition against Yugoslavia of Kingdom of Italy, Hungary, and Bulgaria in 19241927. After the United Kingdom's and France's political intervention in 1927 with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, the alliance crumbled. Zogu maintained good relations with Benito Mussolini's fascist regime in Italy and supported Italy's foreign policy. He would be the first and only Albanian to hold the title of president until 1991.

==Kingdom of Albania (19281939)==
King Zog of Albania

In 1928 the country's parliament declared Albania a kingdom with Zogu as King. King Zog remained a conservative, but initiated reforms. For example, in an attempt at social modernisation the custom of adding one's region to one's name was dropped. Zog also made donations of land to international organisations for the building of schools and hospitals. 1927 Times article 

In 1928 Zogu secured the parliament's consent to its own dissolution. A new constituent assembly amended the constitution, making Albania a kingdom and transforming Zogu into Zog I, "King of the Albanians." International recognition arrived forthwith. The new constitution abolished the Albanian Senate and created a unicameral National Assembly, but King Zog retained the dictatorial powers he had enjoyed as President.

Soon after his incoronation, Zog broke off his engagement to Shefqet Verlaci's daughter, and Verlaci withdrew his support for the king and began plotting against him. Zog had accumulated a great number of enemies over the years, and the Albanian tradition of blood vengeance required them to try to kill him. Zog surrounded himself with guards and rarely appeared in public. The king's loyalists disarmed all of Albania's tribes except for his own Mati tribesmen and their allies, the Dibra. Nevertheless, on a visit to Vienna in 1931, Zog and his bodyguards fought a gun battle with would-be assassins Aziz ami and Ndok Gjeloshi on the Opera House steps. 

Zog remained sensitive to steadily mounting disillusion with Italy's domination of Albania. The Albanian army, though always less than 15,000-strong, sapped the country's funds, and the Italians' monopoly on training the armed forces rankled public opinion. As a counterweight, Zog kept British officers in the Gendarmerie despite strong Italian pressure to remove them. In 1931 Zog openly stood up to the Italians, refusing to renew the 1926 First Treaty of Tirana.

=== Financial crisis ===

In 1932 and 1933, Albania could not make the interest payments on its loans from the Society for the Economic Development of Albania. In response, Rome turned up the pressure, demanding that Tirana name Italians to direct the Gendarmerie; join Italy in a customs union; grant Italy control of the country's sugar, telegraph, and electrical monopolies; teach the Italian language in all Albanian schools; and admit Italian colonists. Zog refused. Instead, he ordered the national budget slashed by 30 percent, dismissed the Italian military advisers, and nationalized Italian-run Roman Catholic schools in the northern part of the country.

By June 1934, Albania had signed trade agreements with Yugoslavia and Greece, and Mussolini had suspended all payments to Tirana. An Italian attempt to intimidate the Albanians by sending a fleet of warships to Albania failed because the Albanians only allowed the forces to land unarmed. Mussolini then attempted to buy off the Albanians. In 1935 he presented the Albanian government 3 million gold francs as a gift.

Zog's success in defeating two local rebellions convinced Mussolini that the Italians had to reach a new agreement with the Albanian king. A government of young men led by Mehdi Frasheri, an enlightened Bektashi administrator, won a commitment from Italy to fulfill financial promises that Mussolini had made to Albania and to grant new loans for harbor improvements at Durrs and other projects that kept the Albanian government afloat. Soon Italians began taking positions in Albania's civil service, and Italian settlers were allowed into the country.

Mussolini's forces overthrew King Zog when Italy invaded Albania in 1939. 

==Albania during World War II==
Starting in 1928, but especially during the Great Depression, the government of King Zog, which brought law and order to the country, began to cede Albania's sovereignty to Italy.
Despite some insignificant resistance, especially at Durrs, Italy invaded Albania on 7 April 1939 and took control of the country, with the Italian Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini proclaiming Italy's figurehead King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy as King of Albania. The nation thus became one of the first to be occupied by the Axis Powers in World War II. The Balkans by Misha Glenny, page 418 

As Hitler began his aggressions, Mussolini decided to occupy Albania as a means to compete with Hitler's territorial gains. Mussolini and the Italian Fascists saw Albania as a historical part of the Roman Empire, and the occupation was intended to fulfill Mussolini's dream of creating an Italian Empire. During the Italian occupation, Albania's population was subject to a policy of forced Italianization by the kingdom's Italian governors, in which the use of the Albanian language was discouraged in schools while the Italian language was promoted. At the same time, the colonization of Albania by Italians was encouraged.

Mussolini, in October 1940, used his Albanian base to launch an attack on Greece, which led to the defeat of the Italian forces and the Greek occupation of Southern Albania in what was seen by the Greeks as the liberation of Northern Epirus. While preparing for the Invasion of Russia, Hitler decided to attack Greece in December 1940 to prevent a British attack on his southern flank. 

===Italian penetration in Albania===
Albania had long had considerable strategic importance for Italy. Italian naval strategists eyed the port of Vlor and the island of Sazan at the entrance to the Bay of Vlor with considerable interest, as it would give Italy control of the entrance to the Adriatic Sea. Fischer, B. J: Albania at War, 19391945, page 5. Hurst, 1999 In addition, Albania could provide Italy with a beachhead in the Balkans. Before World War I Italy and Austria-Hungary had been instrumental in the creation of an independent Albanian state. At the outbreak of war, Italy had seized the chance to occupy the southern half of Albania, to avoid it being captured by the Austro-Hungarians. That success did not last long, as post-war domestic problems, Albanian resistance, and pressure from United States President Woodrow Wilson, forced Italy to pull out in 1920. Albania: A Country Study: Albania's Reemergence after World War I, Library of Congress 

When Mussolini took power in Italy he turned with renewed interest to Albania. Italy began penetration of Albania's economy in 1925, when Albania agreed to allow it to exploit its mineral resources. Albania: A Country Study: Italian Penetration, Library of Congress That was followed by the First Treaty of Tirana in 1926 and the Second Treaty of Tirana in 1927, whereby Italy and Albania entered into a defensive alliance. The Albanian government and economy were subsidised by Italian loans, the Albanian army was trained by Italian military instructors, and Italian colonial settlement was encouraged. Despite strong Italian influence, Zog refused to completely give in to Italian pressure. Fischer, B. J: Albania at War, 19391945, page 7. Hurst, 1999 In 1931 he openly stood up to the Italians, refusing to renew the 1926 Treaty of Tirana. After Albania signed trade agreements with Yugoslavia and Greece in 1934, Mussolini made a failed attempt to intimidate the Albanians by sending a fleet of warships to Albania. Albania: A Country Study: Zog's Kingdom, Library of Congress 

As Nazi Germany annexed Austria and moved against Czechoslovakia, Italy saw itself becoming a second-rate member of the Axis. Albania: A Country Study: Italian Occupation, Library of Congress The imminent birth of an Albanian royal child meanwhile threatened to give Zog a lasting dynasty. After Hitler invaded Czechoslovakia (15 March 1939) without notifying Mussolini in advance, the Italian dictator decided to proceed with his own annexation of Albania. Italy's King Victor Emmanuel III criticized the plan to take Albania as an unnecessary risk. Rome, however, delivered Tirana an ultimatum on 25 March 1939, demanding that it accede to Italy's occupation of Albania. Zog refused to accept money in exchange for countenancing a full Italian takeover and colonization of Albania.

===Italian invasion===
A map of Albania during WWII.

On 7 April Mussolini's troops invaded Albania. The operation was led by General Alfredo Guzzoni. The invasion force was divided into three groups, which were to land successively. The most important was the first group, which was divided in four columns, each assigned to a landing area at a harbor and an inland target on which to advance. Despite some stubborn resistance by some patriots, especially at Durrs, the Italians made short work of the Albanians. Durrs was captured on 7 April, Tirana the following day, Shkodr and Gjirokastr on 9 April, and almost the entire country by 10 April.

Unwilling to become an Italian puppet, King Zog, his wife, Queen Geraldine Apponyi, and their infant son Leka fled to Greece and eventually to London. On 12 April, the Albanian parliament voted to depose Zog and unite the nation with Italy "in personal union" by offering the Albanian crown to Victor Emmanuel III. Fischer, B. J: Albania at War, 19391945, page 36. Hurst, 1999 

The parliament elected Albania's largest landowner, Shefqet Bej Verlaci, as Prime Minister. Verlaci additionally served as head of state for five days until Victor Emmanuel III formally accepted the Albanian crown in a ceremony at the Quirinale palace in Rome. Victor Emmanuel III appointed Francesco Jacomoni di San Savino, a former ambassador to Albania, to represent him in Albania as "Lieutenant-General of the King" (effectively a viceroy).

===Albania under Italy===

While Victor Emmanuel ruled as king, Shefqet Bej Verlaci served as the Prime Minister. Shefqet Verlaci controlled the day-to-day activities of the Italian protectorate. On 3 December 1941, Shefqet Bej Verlaci was replaced as Prime Minister and Head of State by Mustafa Merlika Kruja. 

From the start, Albanian foreign affairs, customs, as well as natural resources came under direct control of Italy. The puppet Albanian Fascist Party became the ruling party of the country and the Fascists allowed Italian citizens to settle in Albania and to own land so that they could gradually transform it into Italian soil.

In October 1940, during the Greco-Italian War, Albania served as a staging-area for Italian dictator Benito Mussolini's unsuccessful invasion of Greece. Mussolini planned to invade Greece and other countries like Yugoslavia in the area to give Italy territorial control of most of the Mediterranean Sea coastline, as part of the Fascists objective of creating the objective of Mare Nostrum ("Our Sea") in which Italy would dominate the Mediterranean.

But, soon after the Italian invasion, the Greeks counter-attacked and a sizeable portion of Albania was in Greek hands (including the cities of Gjirokastr and Kor). In April 1941, after Greece capitulated to the German forces, the Greek territorial gains in southern Albania returned to Italian command. Under Italian command came also large areas of Greece after the successful German invasion of Greece.

After the fall of Yugoslavia and Greece in April 1941, the Italian Fascists added to the territory of the Kingdom of Albania most of the Albanian-inhabited areas that had been previously given to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The Albanian fascists claimed in May 1941 that nearly all the Albanian populated territories were united to Albania (see map). Even areas of northern Greece (Chameria) were administered by Albanians. But this was even a consequence of borders that Italy and Germany agreed on when dividing their spheres of influence. Some small portions of territories with Albanian majority remained outside the new borders and contact between the two parts was practically impossible: the Albanian population under the Bulgarian rule was heavily oppressed.

===Albania under Germany===
German soldiers in Albania.

After the surrender of the Italian Army in September 1943, Albania was occupied by the Germans.

With the collapse of the Mussolini government in line with the Allied invasion of Italy, Germany occupied Albania in September 1943, dropping paratroopers into Tirana before the Albanian guerrillas could take the capital. The German Army soon drove the guerrillas into the hills and to the south. The Nazi German government subsequently announced it would recognize the independence of a neutral Albania and set about organizing a new government, police and armed forces.

The Germans did not exert heavy-handed control over Albania's administration. Rather, they sought to gain popular support by backing causes popular with Albanians, especially the annexation of Kosovo. Many Balli Kombtar units cooperated with the Germans against the communists and several Balli Kombtar leaders held positions in the German-sponsored regime. Albanian collaborators, especially the Skanderbeg SS Division, also expelled and killed Serbs living in Kosovo.

In December 1943, a third resistance organization, an anticommunist, anti-German royalist group known as Legaliteti, took shape in Albania's northern mountains. Led by Abaz Kupi, it largely consisted of Geg guerrillas, supplied mainly with weapons from the allies, who withdrew their support for the NLM after the communists renounced Albania's claims on Kosovo.

The capital Tirana was liberated by the partisans on 17 November 1944 after a 20-day battle. The communist partizans entirely liberated Albania from German occupation on 29 November 1944, pursuing the German army till Viegrad, Bosnia (then Yugoslavia) in collaboration with the Yugoslav communist forces.

The Albanian partisans also liberated Kosovo, part of Montenegro, and southern Bosnia and Herzegovina.
By November 1944, they had thrown out the Germans, being with Yugoslavia the only European nations to do so without any assistance from the allies. Enver Hoxha became the leader of the country by virtue of his position as Secretary General of the Albanian Communist Party.
After having taken over power of the country, the Albanian communists launched a tremendous terror campaign, shooting intellectuals and arresting thousands of innocent people. Some died due to suffering torture.

Albania was one of the European countries occupied by the Axis powers that ended World War II with a larger Jewish population than before the war. Sarner. Rescue in Albania: One Hundred Percent of Jews in Albania Rescued from the Holocaust, 1997. "Muslim Family Who Hid 26 Jews in Albania from the Nazis Honored by ADL" Anti-Defamation League Escape Through the Balkans: the Autobiography of Irene Grunbaum (University of Nebraska Press, 1996) Some 1,200 Jewish residents and refugees from other Balkan countries were hidden by Albanian families during World War II, according to official records. 

===Albanian resistance in World War II===

The National Liberation War of the Albanian people started with the Italian invasion in Albanian on 7 April 1939 and ended on 28 November 1944. During the antifascist national liberation war, the Albanian people fought against Italy and Germany, which occupied the country. In the 19391941 period, the antifascist resistance was led by the National Front nationalist groups and later by the Communist Party.

====Communist resistance====
Communist partisans in Tirana, 28 November 1944

In October 1941, the small Albanian communist groups established in Tirana an Albanian Communist Party of 130 members under the leadership of Hoxha and an eleven-man Central Committee.
The Albanian communists supported the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact, and did not participate in the antifascist struggle until Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941. The party at first had little mass appeal, and even its youth organization netted few recruits. In mid-1942, however, party leaders increased their popularity by calling the young peoples to fight for the liberation of their country, that was occupied by Fascist Italy.

This propaganda increased the number of new recruits by many young peoples eager for freedom. In September 1942, the party organized a popular front organization, the National Liberation Movement (NLM), from a number of resistance groups, including several that were strongly anticommunist. During the war, the NLM's communist-dominated partisans, in the form of the National Liberation Army, did not heed warnings from the Italian occupiers that there would be reprisals for guerrilla attacks. Partisan leaders, on the contrary, counted on using the lust for revenge such reprisals would elicit to win recruits.

The communists turned the so-called war of liberation into a civil war, especially after the discovery of the Dalmazzo-Kelcyra protocol, signed by the Balli Kombetar.
With the intention of organizing a partisan resistance, they called a general conference in Pez on 16 September 1942 where the Albanian National Liberation Front was set up. The Front included nationalist groups, but it was dominated by communist partisans.

In December 1942, more Albanian nationalist groups were organized. Albanians fought against the Italians while, during Nazi German occupation, Balli Kombtar allied itself with the Germans and clashed with Albanian communists, which continued their fight against Germans and Balli Kombtar at the same time.

====Nationalist resistance====
A nationalist resistance to the Italian occupiers emerged in November 1942. Ali Klcyra and Midhat Frashri formed the Western-oriented Balli Kombtar (National Front). Balli Kombetar was a movement that recruited supporters from both the large landowners and peasantry. It opposed King Zog's return and called for the creation of a republic and the introduction of some economic and social reforms. The Balli Kombtar's leaders acted conservatively, however, fearing that the occupiers would carry out reprisals against them or confiscate the landowners' estates.

===Communist revolution in Albania (1944)===

====Provisional Communist administration ====
The communist partisans regrouped and gained control of southern Albania in January 1944. In May they called a congress of members of the National Liberation Front (NLF), as the movement was by then called, at Prmet, which chose an Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation to act as Albania's administration and legislature. Hoxha became the chairman of the council's executive committee and the National Liberation Army's supreme commander.

The communist partisans defeated the last Balli Kombtar forces in southern Albania by mid-summer 1944 and encountered only scattered resistance from the Balli Kombtar and Legality when they entered central and northern Albania by the end of July. The British military mission urged the remnants of the nationalists not to oppose the communists' advance, and the Allies evacuated Kupi to Italy. Before the end of November, the main German troops had withdrawn from Tirana, and the communists took control of the capital by fighting what was left from the German army. A provisional government the communists had formed at Berat in October administered Albania with Enver Hoxha as prime minister.

====The consequences of the war====
Albania stood in an unenviable position after World War II. Greece and Yugoslavia hungered for Albanian lands they claimed. The NLF's strong links with Yugoslavia's communists, who also enjoyed British military and diplomatic support, guaranteed that Belgrade would play a key role in Albania's postwar order. The Allies never recognized an Albanian government in exile or King Zog, nor did they ever raise the question of Albania or its borders at any of the major wartime conferences.

No reliable statistics on Albania's wartime losses exist, but the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration reported about 30,000 Albanian war dead, 200 destroyed villages, 18,000 destroyed houses, and about 100,000 people left homeless. Albanian official statistics claim somewhat higher losses. Furthermore, thousands of Chams (Tsams, Albanians living in Northern Greece) were driven out of Greece with the justification that they had collaborated with the Nazis.

==Socialist Albania (19441992)==

A collection of communists moved quickly after World War II to subdue all potential political enemies in Albania, break the country's landowners and minuscule middle class, and isolate Albania from western powers in order to establish the People's Republic of Albania. By early 1945, the communists had liquidated, discredited, or driven into exile most of the country's interwar elite. The internal affairs minister, Koi Xoxe, a pro-Yugoslav erstwhile tinsmith, presided over the trial and the execution of thousands of opposition politicians, clan chiefs, and members of former Albanian governments who were condemned as "war criminals."

Thousands of their family members were imprisoned for years in work camps and jails and later exiled for decades to miserable state farms built on reclaimed marshlands. The communists' consolidation of control also produced a shift in political power in Albania from the northern Ghegs to the southern Tosks. Most communist leaders were middle-class Tosks, Vlachs and Orthodox, and the party drew most of its recruits from Tosk-inhabited areas, while the Ghegs, with their centuries-old tradition of opposing authority, distrusted the new Albanian rulers and their alien Marxist doctrines.

In December 1945, Albanians elected a new People's Assembly, but only candidates from the Democratic Front (previously the National Liberation Movement then the National Liberation Front) appeared on the electoral lists, and the communists used propaganda and terror tactics to gag the opposition. Official ballot tallies showed that 92% of the electorate voted and that 93% of the voters chose the Democratic Front ticket. The assembly convened in January 1946, annulled the monarchy, and transformed Albania into a "people's republic."

Enver Hoxha and Mehmet Shehu emerged as communist leaders in Albania, and are recognized by most western nations. They began to concentrate primarily on securing and maintaining their power base by killing all their political adversaries, and secondarily on preserving Albania's independence and reshaping the country according to the precepts of Stalinism so they could remain in power. Political executions were common with between 5,000 and 25,000 killed in total under the communist regime. 15 Feb. 1994 Washington Times "WHPSI": The World Handbook of Political and Social Indicators by Charles Lewis Taylor 8 July 1997 NY Times 
Albania became an ally of the Soviet Union, but this came to an end in 1956 over the advent of de-Stalinization. A strong political alliance with China followed, leading to several billion dollars in aid, which was curtailed after 1974. China cut off aid in 1978 when Albania attacked its policies after the death of Chinese leader Mao Zedong. Large-scale purges of officials occurred during the 1970s.

Uneasy foreign relations resulted in a decline in the rate of income increase during the 1961 to 1965 period.
During the period of socialist construction of Albania, the country saw rapid economic growth. For the first time, Albania was beginning to produce the major part of its own commodities domestically, which in some areas were able to compete in foreign markets. During the period of 1960 to 1970, the average annual rate of increase of Albania's national income was 29 percent higher than the world average and 56 percent higher than the European average. Also during this period, because of the monopolised socialist economy, Albania was the only country in the world that imposed no imposts or taxes on its people whatsoever. 

Enver Hoxha, who ruled Albania for four decades, died on 11 April 1985.
Soon after Hoxha's death, voices for change emerged in the Albanian society and the government began to seek closer ties with the West in order to improve economic conditions.
Eventually the new regime of Ramiz Alia introduced some liberalisation, and granting the freedom to travel abroad in 1990. The new government made efforts to improve ties with the outside world. The elections of March 1991 kept the former Communists in power, but a general strike and urban opposition led to the formation of a coalition cabinet that included non-Communists. Albania. World Almanac & Book of Facts, 2008, pp467545, (AN 28820955) 

===Albanian-Yugoslav relations===
Enver Hoxha in 1971.

Until Yugoslavia's expulsion from the Cominform in 1948, Albania acted like a Yugoslav satellite and Tito aimed to use his choke hold on the Albanian party to incorporate the entire country into Yugoslavia . After Germany's withdrawal from Kosovo in late 1944, Yugoslavia's communist partisans took possession of the province and committed retaliatory massacres against Albanians. Before World War II, the Communist Party of Yugoslavia had supported transferring Kosovo to Albania, but Yugoslavia's postwar communist regime insisted on preserving the country's prewar borders.

In repudiating the 1943 Mukaj agreement under pressure from the Yugoslavs, Albania's communists had consented to restore Kosovo to Yugoslavia after the war. In January 1945, the two governments signed a treaty reincorporating Kosovo into Yugoslavia as an autonomous province. Shortly thereafter, Yugoslavia became the first country to recognize Albania's provisional government.

Relations between Albania and Yugoslavia declined, however, when the Albanians began complaining that the Yugoslavs were paying too little for Albanian raw materials and exploiting Albania through the joint stock companies. In addition, the Albanians sought investment funds to develop light industries and an oil refinery, while the Yugoslavs wanted the Albanians to concentrate on agriculture and raw-material extraction. The head of Albania's Economic Planning Commission and one of Hoxha's allies, Nako Spiru, became the leading critic of Yugoslavia's efforts to exert economic control over Albania. Tito distrusted Hoxha and the other intellectuals in the Albanian party and, through Xoxe and his loyalists, attempted to unseat them.

In 1947, Yugoslavia's leaders engineered an all-out offensive against anti-Yugoslav Albanian communists, including Hoxha and Spiru. In May, Tirana announced the arrest, trial, and conviction of nine People's Assembly members, all known for opposing Yugoslavia, on charges of antistate activities. A month later, the Communist Party of Yugoslavia's Central Committee accused Hoxha of following "independent" policies and turning the Albanian people against Yugoslavia.

===Albania and the Soviet Union===
Albania became dependent on Soviet aid and know-how after the break with Yugoslavia in 1948. In February 1949, Albania gained membership in the communist bloc's organization for coordinating economic planning, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon). Tirana soon entered into trade agreements with Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and the Soviet Union. Soviet and central European technical advisers took up residence in Albania, and the Soviet Union also sent Albania military advisers and built a submarine installation on Sazan Island.

After the Soviet-Yugoslav split, Albania and Bulgaria were the only countries the Soviet Union could use to funnel war material to the communists fighting in Greece. What little strategic value Albania offered the Soviet Union, however, gradually shrank as nuclear arms technology developed.

Anxious to pay homage to Stalin, Albania's rulers implemented new elements of the Stalinist economic system. In 1949 Albania adopted the basic elements of the Soviet fiscal system, under which state enterprises paid direct contributions to the treasury from their profits and kept only a share authorized for self-financed investments and other purposes. In 1951, the Albanian government launched its first five-year plan, which emphasized exploiting the country's oil, chromite, copper, nickel, asphalt, and coal resources; expanding electricity production and the power grid; increasing agricultural output; and improving transportation. The government began a program of rapid industrialization after the APL's Second Party Congress and a campaign of forced collectivization of farmland in 1955. At the time, private farms still produced about 87% of Albania's agricultural output, but by 1960 the same percentage came from collective or state farms.

Stalin died in March 1953, and apparently fearing that the Soviet ruler's demise might encourage rivals within the Albanian party's ranks, neither Hoxha nor Shehu risked traveling to Moscow to attend his funeral. The Soviet Union's subsequent movement toward rapprochement with the hated Yugoslavs rankled the two Albanian leaders. Tirana soon came under pressure from Moscow to copy, at least formally, the new Soviet model for a collective leadership. In July 1953, Hoxha handed over the foreign affairs and defense portfolios to loyal followers, but he kept both the top party post and the premiership until 1954, when Shehu became Albania's prime minister. The Soviet Union, responding with an effort to raise the Albanian leaders' morale, elevated diplomatic relations between the two countries to the ambassadorial level.

Despite some initial expressions of enthusiasm, Hoxha and Shehu mistrusted Nikita Khrushchev's programs of "peaceful coexistence" and "different roads to socialism" because they appeared to pose the threat that Yugoslavia might again try to take control of Albania. Hoxha and Shehu were also alarmed at the prospect that Moscow might prefer less dogmatic rulers in Albania. Tirana and Belgrade renewed diplomatic relations in December 1953, but Hoxha refused Khrushchev's repeated appeals to rehabilitate posthumously the pro-Yugoslav Xoxe as a gesture to Tito. The Albanian duo instead tightened their grip on their country's domestic life and let the propaganda war with the Yugoslavs grind on.

===Albania and China===

Albania played a role in the Sino-Soviet split far outweighing either its size or its importance in the communist world. By 1958 Albania stood with the People's Republic of China Albania: From Anarchy to a Balkan IdentityISBN 1-85065-279-1,by Miranda Vickers & James Pettifer, 1999,page 210,"with the split in the world communist movement it moved into a close relationship with China" in opposing Moscow on issues of peaceful coexistence, de-Stalinization, and Yugoslavia's "separate road to socialism" through decentralization of economic life. The Soviet Union, central European countries, and China all offered Albania large amounts of aid. Soviet leaders also promised to build a large Palace of Culture in Tirana as a symbol of the Soviet people's "love and friendship" for the Albanians.

Despite these gestures, Tirana was dissatisfied with Moscow's economic policy toward Albania. Hoxha and Shehu apparently decided in May or June 1960 that Albania was assured of Chinese support, and they openly sided with the PRC when sharp polemics erupted between the PRC and the Soviet Union. Ramiz Alia, at the time a candidate-member of the Politburo and Hoxha's adviser on ideological questions, played a prominent role in the rhetoric.

Hoxha and Shehu continued their harangue against the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia at the APL's Fourth Party Congress in February 1961. During the congress, the Albanian government announced the broad outlines of the country's Third Five-Year Plan (196165), which allocated 54% of all investment to industry, thereby rejecting Khrushchev's wish to make Albania primarily an agricultural producer. Moscow responded by canceling aid programs and lines of credit for Albania, but the Chinese again came to the rescue.

Albanian-Chinese relations had stagnated by 1970, and when the Asian giant began to reemerge from isolation in the early 1970s, Mao Zedong and the other Communist Chinese leaders reassessed their commitment to tiny Albania. In response, Tirana began broadening its contacts with the outside world. Albania opened trade negotiations with France, Italy, and the recently independent Asian and African states, and in 1971 it normalized relations with Yugoslavia and Greece. Albania's leaders abhorred the People's Republic of China's contacts with the United States in the early 1970s, and its press and radio ignored President Richard Nixon's trip to Beijing in 1972.

====Banning religion====
In 1967, the authorities conducted a violent campaign to extinguish religious practice in Albania, claiming that religion had divided the Albanian nation and kept it mired in backwardness. Student agitators combed the countryside, forcing Albanians to quit practicing their faith. Despite complaints, even by APL members, all churches, mosques, monasteries, and other religious institutions had been closed or converted into warehouses, gymnasiums, and workshops by year's end. A special decree abrogated the charters by which the country's main religious communities had operated.

===After Hoxha===

As Hoxha's health declined, the first secretary began planning for an orderly succession. In December 1976, Albania adopted its second Stalinist constitution of the postwar era. The document guaranteed Albanians freedom of speech, the press, organization, association, and assembly but subordinated these rights to the individual's duties to society as a whole.

The constitution enshrined in law the idea of autarky and prohibited the government from seeking financial aid or credits or from forming joint companies with partners from capitalist or communist countries perceived to be "revisionist" (Having changed the original doctrines of Marx, Lenin and Stalin). The constitution's preamble also boasted that the foundations of religious belief in Albania had been abolished.

In 1980, Hoxha turned to Ramiz Alia to succeed him as Albania's communist patriarch, overlooking his long-standing comrade-in-arms, Mehmet Shehu. Hoxha first tried to convince Shehu to step aside voluntarily, but when this move failed, Hoxha arranged for all the members of the Politburo to rebuke him for allowing his son to become engaged to the daughter of a former bourgeois family. Hoxha purged the members of Shehu's family and his supporters within the police and military. In November 1982, Hoxha announced that Shehu had been a foreign spy working simultaneously for the United States, British, Soviet, and Yugoslav intelligence agencies in planning the assassination of Hoxha himself. "He was buried like a dog", the dictator wrote in the Albanian edition of his book, The Titoites.

Hoxha went into semi-retirement in early 1983, and Alia assumed responsibility for Albania's administration. Alia traveled extensively around Albania, standing in for Hoxha at major events and delivering addresses laying down new policies and intoning litanies to the enfeebled president. Alia succeeded to the presidency and became legal secretary of the APL two days later. In due course, he became a dominant figure in the Albanian media, and his slogans appeared painted in crimson letters on signboards across the country.

===Transition to a parliamentary system===
After Hoxha's death, Alia took his place. He tried to follow in his footsteps, but the changes had already started and the fall of communism throughout south central Europe led to widespread changes within Albanian society.

Mikhail Gorbachev had appeared in the Soviet Union with new rules and policies (glasnost and perestroika). Alia took similar steps, signing the Helsinki Agreement and allowing pluralism under pressure from students and workers. 

Under Alia's regime, the first pluralist elections took place since the communists assumed power in Albania. Alia's party won the election of 31 March 1991. Nevertheless, it was clear that the change would not be stopped. Pursuant to a 29 April 1991 interim basic law, Albanians ratified a constitution in 1998, establishing a democratic system of government based upon the rule of law and guaranteeing the protection of fundamental human rights.

The communists retained support and governmental control in the first round of elections under the interim law, but fell two months later during a general strike. A committee of "national salvation" took over but also collapsed in half a year. On 22 March 1992 [http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_democracy/election_watch/v003/index.html#v003.3 ] the Communists were trumped by the Democratic Party in national elections. The change from the Stalinist socialist state to a pluralist parliamentary system had many challenges. The Democratic Party had to implement the reforms it had promised, but they were either too slow or didn't solve the problems, so the people were disappointed when their hopes for fast prosperity went unfulfilled.

In the general elections of June 1996 the Democratic Party tried to win an absolute majority and manipulated the results. This government collapsed in 1997 in the wake of the additional collapse of pyramid schemes and widespread corruption, which caused anarchy and rebellion throughout the country, backed up by former communists and Sigurimi former members. The government attempted to suppress the rebellion by military force but the attempt failed, due to long-term corrosion of the Armed Forces due to political and social factors.

==Post-Socialist Albania==
"Dshmort e Kombit" boulevard in Tirana.

Since 1992 Albania has been seeking a closer relationship with the West. In 1992 the Democratic Party of Albania took control of the country through parliamentary elections, deposing the Communist Party of Albania, and Sali Berisha held the premiership of the country.

In 1995, Albania had been accepted into the Council of Europe and requested membership in NATO. The workforce of Albania has continued to emigrate to Western countries, especially Greece and Italy.

In the early 1990s, deliberate programmes of economic and democratic reform were put in place, but Albanian inexperience with capitalism led to the proliferation of pyramid schemes  which were not banned due to the corruption of the government. Anarchy in late 1996 to early 1997, as a result of the collapse of these pyramid schemes, alarmed the world and prompted international mediation. In early spring 1997, Italy led a multinational military and humanitarian intervention (Operation Alba), authorized by the United Nations Security Council, to help stabilize the country. That summer, Berisha was defeated in elections, winning just 25 seats out of a total of 156.

In the 1997 unrest in Albania the general elections of June 1997 brought the Socialists and their allies to power. President Berisha resigned from his post, and Socialists elected Rexhep Meidani as president of Albania. Albanian Socialist Party Chairman Fatos Nano was elected Prime Minister, a post which he held until October 1998, when he resigned as a result of the tense situation created in the country after the assassination of Azem Hajdari, a prominent leader of the Democratic Party. Pandeli Majko was then elected Prime Minister, and he served in this post until November 1999, when he was replaced by Ilir Meta.

Pursuant to a 1991 interim basic law, Albanians ratified a constitution in 1998, establishing a democratic system of government based upon the rule of law and guaranteeing the protection of fundamental human rights. Albanians approved its constitution through a popular referendum which was held in November 1998, but which was boycotted by the opposition. The general local elections of October 2000 marked the loss of control of the Democrats over the local governments and a victory for the Socialists.

Although Albania has made strides toward democratic reform and maintaining the rule of law, serious deficiencies in the electoral code remain to be addressed, as demonstrated in the June 2001 parliamentary elections.
International observers judged the 2001 elections to be acceptable, but the Union for Victory Coalition, the second-largest vote recipient, disputed the results and boycotted parliament until 31 January 2002. The Socialists re-elected Ilir Meta as Prime Minister in August 2001, a post which he held till February 2002, when he resigned due to party infighting.

Pandeli Majko was re-elected Prime Minister in February 2002. In the June 2005, the democratic coalition formed a government with Prime Minister Sali Berisha.
His return to power in the elections of 3 July 2005 ended eight years of Socialist Party rule. After Alfred Moisiu, in 2006 Bamir Topi was elected President of Albania until 2010.

Despite the political situation, the economy of Albania grew at an estimated 5% in 2007. The Albanian lek has strengthened from 143 lek to the US dollar in 2000 to 92 lek in 2007. In 2009 Albania  along with Croatia  officially joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

==See also==

*Albanians
*Albania in the Middle Ages
*Bulgarian occupation of Albania
*International rankings of Albania
*Party of Labour of Albania
*Politics of Albania
*Timeline of Albanian history

Lists:
*List of Kings of Albania
*List of Presidents of Albania
*List of Prime Ministers of Albania

General:
*Historiography and nationalism
*History of the Balkans
*History of Europe

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Bushkoff, Leonard. "Albania, history of", Collier's Encyclopedia. vol. 1. NY: P.F. Collier, L.P, 1996.
*Oxford Encyclopedic World Atlas 5th Edition, Ed. Keith Lyle, Copyright 2000, Printed in Spain
*Rodgers, Mary M. (ed.). Albania...in Pictures. Minneapolis: Lerner Publications Company, 1995.
*2003 U.S. Department of State Background Note of Albania
*Afrim Krasniqi: The End of Albania's Siberia. Tirana 1998.
*Afrim Krasniqi: Civil Society in Albania. Tirana 2004.
*Afrim Krasniqi: Political Parties in Albania 19202006.Tirana 2006.
*Antonello Biagini, Storia dell'Albania contemporanea, Bompiani, 2005

==External links==
* History of Albania
*Library of Congress Country Study of Albania

;Further reading
*Books about Albania and the Albanian people (scribd.com) Reference of books (and some journal articles) about Albania and the Albanian people; their history, language, origin, culture, literature, etc. Public domain books, fully accessible online.

 



[[Handfasting]]

Handfasting may be:
*a historical term for "betrothal" or "wedding", see history of marriage in Great Britain and Ireland
*a term for "wedding" in Neopaganism, see Handfasting (Neopaganism)


[[History of the Pacific Islands]]

 
History of the Pacific Islands covers the history of the islands in the Pacific Ocean.

==Histories==
===Easter Island  Rapanui===

Easter Island is one of the youngest inhabited territories on Earth, and for most of the History of Easter Island it was the most isolated inhabited territory on Earth. Its inhabitants the Rapanui have endured famines and big push factors, epidemics, civil war, slave raids and colonialism; have seen their population crash on more than one occasion, and created a cultural legacy that has brought them fame out of all proportion to their numbers.

===Cook Islands===

In Cook Islands history, migrants from French Polynesia are believed to have arrived on the southern island group around 800 AD. Similarly, the northern islands were probably settled by expeditions from Samoa and Tonga. http://www.ck/history.htm The capital Rarotonga, is believed from local oral tradition, to have been the launching site of waka ship voyagers who originally settled in New Zealand. http://www.lonelyplanet.com/rarotonga-and-the-cook-islands/history The Cook Islands Maori language is closely related to the Te Reo Maori indigenous language of New Zealand. The country is named after Captain James Cook who surveyed and landed on some of the islands between 1774 and 1777.

===Fiji===

The history of Fiji dates back to ancient times. There are many theories as to how the Fijian race came into existence. Around 1500 BC Fiji was settled by (melaneasion) seafarers. Around 900600 BC Moturiki Island was settled. By 500 BC, Melanesian seafarers had reached Fiji and intermarried with the Polynesian inhabitants, giving rise to the modern Fijian people. In 1643 AD, Abel Tasman sighted Vanua Levu Island and northern Taveuni. According to native oral legends Fijians were also descendants of a nomadic tribe from Tanganika (Tanzania).

===Guam===

The history of Guam involves phases including the early arrival of people known today as the ancient Chamorros, the development of "pre-contact" society, Spanish colonization, and the present American rule of the island. Archaeologists using carbon-dating have broken Pre-Contact Guam (i.e. Chamorro) history into three periods: "Pre-Latte" (BC 2000? to AD 1) "Transitional Pre-Latte" (AD 1 to AD 1000), and "Latte" (AD 1000 to AD 1521). Archaeological evidence also suggests that Chamorro society was on the verge of another transition phase by 1521, as latte stones became bigger. The original inhabitants of Guam are believed to be descendants of Austronesian people originating from Southeast Asia as early as 4,000 BC, having linguistic and cultural similarities to Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. http://www.guam-online.com/history/history.htm Guam's history of colonialism is the longest among the Pacific islands and Chamorros are considered one of the oldest civilization in the Pacific.

===Hawaii===

Hawaiian history is inextricably tied into a larger Polynesian phenomenon. Hawaii is the apex of the Polynesian Triangle, a region of the Pacific Ocean anchored by three island groups: Hawaii, Rapa Nui (Easter Island), and Aotearoa (New Zealand). The many island cultures within the Polynesian Triangle share similar languages derived from a proto-Malayo-Polynesian language used in Southeast Asia 5,000 years ago. Polynesians also share cultural traditions, such as religion, social organization, myths, and material culture. Anthropologists believe that all Polynesians have descended from a South Pacific proto-culture created by an Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) people that had migrated from Southeast Asia. The seven main Polynesian cultures are Aotearoa, Hawaii, Rapa Nui, Marquesas, Smoa, Tahiti, and Tonga

The early settlement history of Hawaii is still not completely resolved. Some believe that the first Polynesians arrived in Hawaii in the 3rd century from the Marquesas and were followed by Tahitian settlers in 1300 AD who conquered the original inhabitants. Others believe that there was only a single, extended period of settlement.

===Indonesia===

In the history of Indonesia, Austronesian people, who form the majority of the modern population, migrated to South East Asia from Taiwan. They arrived in Indonesia around 2000 BC, and confined the native Melanesian peoples to the far eastern regions as they expanded. Taylor (2003), pages 57 Dong Son culture spread to Indonesia bringing with it techniques of wet-field rice cultivation, ritual buffalo sacrifice, bronze casting, megalithic practises, and ikat weaving methods. Ideal agricultural conditions, and the mastering of wet-field rice cultivation as early as the 8th century BC, 
 
allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the 1st century AD.

===Japan===

The written history of Japan begins with brief references in the 1st century AD Twenty-Four Histories, a collection of Chinese historical texts. However, archaeological evidence indicates that people were living on the islands of Japan as early as the upper paleolithic period. Global archaeological evidence for proboscidean overkill, Todd Surovell et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2005 Following the last ice-age, around 12,000 BC, the rich ecosystem of the Japanese Archipelago fostered human development. The earliest-known pottery belongs to the Jmon period.

===Kiribati===

In the history of Kiribati, the islands which now form the Republic of Kiribati have been inhabited for at least seven hundred years, and possibly much longer. The initial Micronesian population, which remains the overwhelming majority today, was visited by Polynesian and Melanesian invaders before the first European sailors "discovered" the islands in the 16th century. For much of the subsequent period, the main island chain, the Gilbert Islands, was ruled as part of the British Empire. The country gained its independence in 1979 and has since been known as Kiribati.located in the western hemisphere

===Malaysia===

History of Malaysia is the written past of a country in South East Asia whose strategic sea-lane position brought trade and foreign influences that fundamentally influenced its history. Hindu India, the Islamic Middle East and Christian Europe to its west, and China and Japan to the north-east were major influences brought by shipping routes passing through the region. Malaysian history is also intertwined with that of neighbouring Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines, Brunei and Thailand. This trade and foreign cultures brought the area great wealth and diversity, but has also domination and colonialism. The history of Malaysia is one of successive phases of outside influence, followed by the mid-20th century establishment of independence from foreign colonial powers.

===New Caledonia===
In the history of New Caledonia, the diverse group of people that settled over the Melanesian archipelagos are known as the Lapita. They arrived in the archipelago now commonly known as New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands around 1500 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled navigators and agriculturists with influence over a large area of the Pacific. From about the 11th century Polynesians also arrived and mixed with the populations of the archipelago. Europeans first sighted New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands in the late 18th century. The British explorer James Cook sighted Grande Terre in 1774 and named it New Caledonia, Caledonia being the Latin name for Scotland. During the same voyage he also named the islands to the north of New Caledonia the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu), after the islands north of Scotland.

===New Zealand===

The History of New Zealand dates back to at least 700 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians, who developed a distinct Mori culture centred on kinship links and land. The first European explorer came to New Zealand in 1642. From the late 18th century, the country was regularly visited by explorers and other sailors, missionaries, traders and adventurers. In 1840 the Treaty of Waitangi was signed between the British Crown and various Mori chiefs, bringing New Zealand into the British Empire and giving Mori equal rights with British citizens. There was extensive European and some Asian settlement throughout the rest of the century. War and the imposition of a European economic and legal system led to most of New Zealand's land passing from Mori to European ownership, and most Mori subsequently became impoverished.

From the 1890s the New Zealand parliament enacted a number of progressive initiatives, including women's suffrage and old age pensions. From the 1930s the economy was highly regulated and an extensive welfare state was developed. Meanwhile, Mori culture underwent a renaissance, and from the 1950s Mori began moving to the cities in large numbers. This led to the development of a Mori protest movement which in turn led to greater recognition of the Treaty of Waitangi in the late 20th century. In the 1980s the economy was largely deregulated and a number of socially liberal policies, such as decriminalisation of homosexuality, were put in place. Foreign policy, which had previously consisted mostly of following Britain or the United States, became more independent. Subsequent governments have generally maintained these policies, although tempering the free market ethos somewhat.

===Niue Island===
The history of the Niue Island can be traced back to a 1000 years when the Polynesian settles came here. Traces of Pukapulan dialect are still there in the native language which is based on the Samoan and Tongan language. The Polynesian settlers were raters isolated as there was very little inter island trade and the existence of the limestone island was in itself very difficult due to lack of rivers and cultivable soil.

The modern history of Niue can be traced back to the 1740's with the arrival of Captain James Cook. Cook described the island as "Savage Island" in his records as the natives were not very welcoming to strangers. This was in complete contrast to the Tongans he described as "The Friendly Islands". Captain Cook tried to set his foot thrice on the island but was repulsed each of the three times. The natives at that time were quite hostile to strangers. Christianity was brought to the island by Peniamina in the year 1846 when he got converted during his stay at Samoa. The islanders were completely converted to Christianity by the end of the 19th century. Colonization took place thereafter and the island was declared as a part of the British Empire.

The island country became independent in 1974 but still have a free association agreement with New Zealand and many of its citizens have become citizens of New Zealand. Now the Island country has a democracy and is governed by a legislative assembly consisting of 20 members. Niue is the smallest democracy in the world.

===Papua New Guinea===

The History of Papua New Guinea can be traced back to about 60,000 years ago when people first migrated towards the Australian continent. The written history began when European navigators first sighted New Guinea in the early part of the 16th century. Archaeological evidence indicates that humans arrived on New Guinea at least 60,000 years ago, probably by sea from Southeast Asia during an ice age period when the sea was lower and distances between islands shorter. For an overview of the geological history of the continent of which New Guinea is a part, see Australia  New Guinea. Although the first arrivals were hunter-gatherers, early evidence shows that people managed the forest environment to provide food. The gardens of the New Guinea highlands are ancient, intensive permacultures, adapted to high population densities, very high rainfalls (as high as 10,000mm/yr (400in/yr)), earthquakes, hilly land, and occasional frost. There are indications that gardening was being practised at the same time that agriculture was developing in Mesopotamia and Egypt.

===Philippines===

In the beginning of the history of the Philippines, the arrival of the first humans via land bridges at least 30,000 years ago. Austronesians actively settled the island from Taiwan from 2500 BCE and displaced Negritoes from the Coastal areas, forcing them into the mountains. Due to influence from the Cholas and states they had cultural influence over, Indianized Hindu kingdoms arose in the early Medieval period and the Islamic Sultanate of Brunei extended its rule over Mindanao by the late 1400s. The first recorded visit from the West is the arrival of Ferdinand Magellan on Homonhon Island, southeast of Samar on 16 March 1521. Spanish colonization began with the arrival of Miguel Lpez de Legazpi's expedition and permanent settlement in the island of Cebu, and more settlements continued northward with the colonizers reaching the bay of Manila on the island of Luzon. In Manila, they established a new town and thus began an era of Spanish colonization that lasted for more than three centuries. 
 The Philippines were conquered by the United States in 1898, occupied by Japan from 1942 to 1945 and given independence in 1946.

===Samoa===

In the History of Samoa, contact with Europeans began in the early 18th century but did not intensify until the arrival of the English. In 1722, Dutchman Jacob Roggeveen was the first European to sight the islands. Missionaries and traders arrived in the 1830s. Halfway through the 19th century, the United Kingdom, Germany and the United States all claimed parts of the kingdom of Samoa, and established trade posts. King Malietoa Leaupepe died in 1898 and was succeeded by Malietoa Tooa Mataafa. The US and British consuls supported Malietoa Tanu, Leaupepe's son. US and British warships, including the USS Philadelphia shelled Apia on 15 March 1899. After World War I, the League of Nations carved up Samoa. Britain and New Zealand took over the western islands which became 'Western Samoa' and USA claimed the eastern half of the country which became American Samoa. In 1962, Western Samoa became the first Pacific Island nation to gain political independence. In 1997, Samoa officially dropped the 'Western' from its name as it was an appendage from its colonial era.
Also Samoa have their problem that face still the war.

===Solomon Islands===

The human history of the Solomon Islands begins with the first settlement at least 30,000 years ago from New Guinea. They represented the furthest expansion of humans into the Pacific Ocean until the expansion of Austronesian-language speakers through the area around 4000 BCE, bringing new agricultural and maritime technology. Most of the languages spoken today in the Solomon Islands derive from this era, but some thirty languages of the pre-Austronesian settlers survive (see East Papuan languages). Ships of the Spanish explorer lvaro de Mendaa de Neira first sighted Santa Isabel island on 7 February 1568. Finding signs of alluvial gold on Guadalcanal, Mendaa believed he had found the source of King Solomon's wealth, and consequently named the islands "The Islands of Solomon". In 1595 and 1605 Spain again sent several expeditions to find the islands and establish a colony, however these were unsuccessful. In 1767 Captain Philip Carteret rediscovered Santa Cruz and Malaita. Later, Dutch, French and British navigators visited the islands; their reception was often hostile.

===Tahiti===
In the history of Tahiti, Tahiti is estimated to have been settled by Polynesians between CE 300 and 800 coming from Tonga and Samoa, although some estimates place the date earlier. The fertile island soil combined with fishing provided ample food for the population. Although the first European sighting of the islands was by a Spanish ship in 1606, Spain made no effort to trade with or colonize the island. Samuel Wallis, an English sea captain, sighted Tahiti on 18 June 1767, and is considered the first European visitor to the island. The perceived relaxation and contented nature of the local people and the characterization of the island as a paradise much impressed early European visitors, planting the seed for a romanticization by the West that endures to this day.

===Taiwan===

In the history of Taiwan, Aboriginal peoples ancestors are believed to have been living on the islands for approximately 8,000 years before major Han Chinese immigration began in the 17th century. Blust, Robert. "Subgrouping, circularity and extinction: some issues in Austronesian comparative linguistics," (1999) The Taiwanese Aborigines are Austronesian peoples, with linguistic and genetic ties to other Austronesian ethnic groups, such as peoples of the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia and Oceania. Hill et al., "A Mitochondrial Stratigraphy for Island Southeast Asia," (2007); Bird et al., "Populating PEP II: the dispersal of humans and agriculture through Austral-Asia and Oceania," (2004) Taiwan's Austronesian speakers were traditionally distributed over much of the island's rugged central mountain range and concentrated in villages along the alluvial plains. Today, the bulk of the contemporary Taiwanese Aborigine population reside in the mountains and the cities. The issue of an ethnic identity unconnected to the Asian mainland has become one thread in the discourse regarding the political identity of Taiwan. The total population of Aborigines on Taiwan is around 458,000 as of January 2006, CIP, "Statistics of Indigenous Population in Taiwan and Fukien Areas," (2006) which is approximately 2% of Taiwan's population.

===Tokelau===
Archaeological evidence indicates that history of Tokelau's atol  Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo  were settled about 1000 years ago, probably by voyages from Samoa, the Cook Islands and Tuvalu. Oral history traces local traditions and genealogies back several hundred years. Inhabitants followed Polynesian mythology with the local god Tui Tokelau; and developed forms of music (see Music of Tokelau) and art. The three atolls functioned largely independently while maintaining social and linguistic cohesion. Tokelauan society was governed by chiefly clans, and there were occasional inter-atoll skirmishes and wars as well as inter-marriage. Fakaofo, the "chiefly island," held some dominance over Atafu and Nukunonu. Life on the atolls was subsistence-based, with reliance on fish and coconut. Commodore John Byron discovered Atafu on 24 June 1765 and named it "Duke of York's Island." Parties onshore reported that there were no signs of current or previous inhabitants. MacGregor, 30 

===Tonga===

The History of Tonga stretches back to around roughly 4000 BC. when the Polynesians arrived. Tonga became known as the Tongan Empire through extensive trading. The Europeans arrived in the 17th century which was followed after a couple hundred years by a single unified Tongan kingdom. Archaeological evidence shows that the first settlers in Tonga sailed from the Santa Cruz Islands, as part of the original Austronesian-speakers' (Lapita) migration which originated out of S.E. Asia some 6000 years before present. Archaeological dating places Tonga as the oldest known site in Polynesia for the distinctive Lapita ceramic ware, at 28002750 years before present.

===Tuvalu===

Tuvaluan man in traditional costume drawn by Alfred Agate in 1841 during the United States Exploring Expedition.

The history of Tuvalu dates back to at least 1,000 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians. the origins of the people of Tuvalu is addressed in the theories regarding the spread of humans out of Southeast Asia, from Taiwan, via Melanesia and across the Pacific islands to create Polynesia. 

During pre-European-contact times there was frequent canoe voyaging between the islands as Polynesian navigation skills are recognised to have allowed deliberate journeys on double-hull sailing canoes or outrigger canoes. Eight of the nine islands of Tuvalu were inhabited; thus the name, Tuvalu, means "eight standing together" in Tuvaluan. The pattern of settlement that is believed to have occurred is that the Polynesians spread out from the Samoan Islands into the Tuvaluan atolls, with Tuvalu providing a stepping stone to migration into the Polynesian Outlier communities in Melanesia and Micronesia. 

In 1568 Spanish navigator lvaro de Mendaa sailed through the islands and is understood to have sighted Nui during his expedition in search of Terra Australis. In 1819 the island of Funafuti was named Ellice's Island; the name Ellice was applied to all nine islands after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay (18121876). A Directory for the Navigation of the Pacific Ocean: With Description of Its Coasts, Islands, Etc. from the Strait of Magalhaens to the Arctic Sea (1851) The islands came under Britain's sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British protectorate by Captain Gibson R.N., of HMS Curacoa, between 9 and 16 October 1892. The Ellice Islands were administered as British protectorate by a Resident Commissioner from 1892 to 1916 as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT), and later as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony from 1916 to 1974. Macdonald, Barrie (2001) Cinderellas of the Empire: towards a history of Kiribati and Tuvalu, Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific, Suva, Fiji, ISBN 982-02-0335-X 

A referendum was held in December 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. Nohlen, D, Grotz, F & Hartmann, C (2001) Elections in Asia: A data handbook, Volume II, p. 831, ISBN 0-19-924959-8 As a consequence of the referendum, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony ceased to exist on 1 January 1976 and the separate British colonies of Kiribati and Tuvalu came into existence. Tuvalu: A History, Chapter 20, Secession and Independence, pp. 153177 Tuvalu became fully independent within the Commonwealth on 1 October 1978. On 17 September 2000 Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.

===Vanuatu===

In the history of Vanuatu, the commonly held theory of Vanuatu's prehistory from archaeological evidence supports that peoples speaking Austronesian languages first came to the islands some 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. "A Pacific engaged: Australias (sic) relations with Papua New Guinea and the island states of the southwest Pacific", Australian Senate, 12 August 2003, p.288 Pottery fragments have been found dating back to 1300 BC Ron Adams, "History (from Vanuatu)", Encyclopdia Britannica, 2006 What little is known of the pre-European contact history of Vanuatu has been gleaned from oral histories and legends. One important early king was Roy Mata, who united several tribes, and was buried in a large mound with several retainers. The first island in the Vanuatu group discovered by Spaniards was Espiritu Santo when, in 1606, the Portuguese explorer, Pedro Fernndez de Quirs, spied what he thought was a southern continent. Europeans did not return until 1768, when Louis Antoine de Bougainville rediscovered the islands.

===Other islands===
History of American Samoa begins with inhabitation as early as 1000 BC, Samoa was not reached by European explorers until the 18th century.

The history of Baker Island began when the United States of America took possession of the island in 1857, and its guano deposits were mined by US and British companies during the second half of the 19th century. In 1935, a short-lived attempt at colonization was begun on this island  as well as on nearby Howland Island  but was disrupted by World War II and thereafter abandoned. Presently the island is a National Wildlife Refuge run by the US Department of the Interior; a day beacon is situated near the middle of the west coast.

In the history of Brunei, the Sultanate of Brunei was very powerful from the fourteenth to the 16th century AD. Its realm covered the northern part of Borneo and the southwestern Philippines. European influence gradually brought an end to this regional power. Later, there was a brief war with Spain, in which Brunei was victorious. The decline of the Bruneian Empire culminated in the 19th century when Brunei lost much of its territory to the White Rajahs of Sarawak, resulting in its current small landmass and separation into two parts. Brunei was a British protectorate from 1888 to 1984.

The history of the Caroline Islands begins with the discovery by the occidentals in 1526, by the Spanish Toribio Alonso de Salazar, he called them "Carolinas" after the emperor Carlos I of Spain, and Charles V of Holy Roman Empire.
The Portuguese Diego da Rocha, explorer of the Carolines, also named them the Sequeira Islands in 1527. Though early Spanish navigators in the area (from 1543) called them the Nuevas Filipinas ("New Philippines"), Admiral Francisco Lazeano named them the Carolinas after the Spanish King Charles II in 1686.

In the history of French Polynesia, the French Polynesian island groups do not share a common history before the establishment of the French protectorate in 1889. The first French Polynesian islands to be settled by Polynesians were the Marquesas Islands in AD 300 and the Society Islands in AD 800. The Polynesians were organized in petty chieftainships. 

European discovery in the History of the Galapagos Islands occurred when Dominican Fray Toms de Berlanga, the fourth Bishop of Panama, sailed to Peru to settle a dispute between Francisco Pizarro and his lieutenants. De Berlanga's vessel drifted off course when the winds diminished, and his party reached the islands on 10 March 1535. According to a 1956 study by Thor Heyerdahl and Arne Skjlsvold, remains of potsherds and other artifacts from several sites on the islands suggest visitation by South American peoples prior to the arrival of the Spanish.

Historical evidence suggests that Howland Island was the site of prehistoric settlement, which may have extended down to Rawaki, Kanton, Manra and Orona of the Phoenix Islands 500 to 700 km southeast. This settlement might have taken the form of a single community utilising several adjacent islands, but the hard life on these isolated islands, together with the uncertainty of fresh water supplies, led to an extinction of or dereliction by the settled peoples, in such a way that other islands in the area (such as Kiritimati and Pitcairn) were abandoned. Irwin, pp. 176179. Such settlements probably began around 1000 BC, when eastern Melanesians travelled north. Surez 2004, p. 17. 

The history of Jarvis Island begins with the island's first known sighting by Europeans was on 21 August 1821 by the British ship Eliza Francis (or Eliza Frances) owned by Edward, Thomas and William Jarvis and commanded by Captain Brown. In March 1857 the uninhabited island was claimed for the United States under the Guano Islands Act and formally annexed on 27 February 1858.

In the history of Marquesas Islands, the first recorded settlers of the Marquesas were Polynesians, who, from archological evidence, are believed to have arrived before 100 AD. Ethnological and linguistic evidence suggests that they likely arrived from the region of Tonga and Samoa. The islands were given their name by the Spanish explorer lvaro de Mendaa de Neira who reached them on 21 July 1595. He named them after his patron, Garca Hurtado de Mendoza, 5th Marquis of Caete, who was Viceroy of Peru at the time. Mendaa visited first Fatu Hiva and then Tahuata before continuing on to the Solomon Islands.

In the history of Melanesia, the original inhabitants of the islands now named Melanesia were likely the ancestors of the present day Papuan-speaking people. These people are thought to have occupied New Guinea tens of millennia ago and reached the islands 35,000 years ago (according to radiocarbon dating). They appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the Solomon Islands (i.e., including San Cristobal) and perhaps even to the smaller islands farther to the east. 

The ancestors of the Micronesians in the history of Micronesia settled there over 4,000 years ago. A decentralized chieftain-based system eventually evolved into a more centralized economic and religious empire centered on Yap. European explorers  first the Portuguese in search of the Spice Islands (Indonesia) and then the Spanish  reached the Carolines in the 16th century, with the Spanish establishing sovereignty.

Researchers of the History of the Marshall Islands agree on little more than that successive waves of migratory peoples from Southeast Asia spread across the Western Pacific about 3,000 years ago, and that some of them landed on and remained on these islands. The Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar landed there in 1529. They were named for English explorer John Marshall, who visited them in 1799. The Marshall Islands were claimed by Spain in 1874. Following papal mediation and German compensation of $4.5 million, Spain recognized Germany's claim in 1885, which established a protectorate and set up trading stations on the islands of Jaluit and Ebon to carry out the flourishing copra (dried coconut meat) trade. Marshallese Iroij (high chiefs) continued to rule under indirect colonial German administration.

In the History of the Society Islands, the archipelago is generally believed to have been named by Captain James Cook in honor of the Royal Society, sponsor of the first British scientific survey of the islands; however, Cook states in his journal that he called the islands Society "as they lay contiguous to one another". Horwitz, Tony. Oct. 2003, Blue Latitudes: Boldly Going Where Captain Cook Has Gone Before, Bloomsbury, ISBN 0-7475-6455-8 

In the history of Tuamotu, the Tuamotus were first discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, during his circumglobal voyage in 1521. From the Inca Empire, Tupac Inca Yupanqui is also credited with leading a nearly 10-month voyage of exploration into the Pacific around 1480. None of these visits were of political consequence, the islands being in the sphere of influence of the Pomare dynasty of Tahiti. At the beginning 18th century the first Christian missionaries arrived. The islands' pearls penetrated the European market in the late 19th century, making them a coveted possession. Following the forced abdication of King Pomare V of Tahiti, the islands were annexed as an overseas territory of France

==See also==
* Pacific Islands
* Exploration of the Pacific
* List of countries and islands by first human settlement

==References==

27. Reconstructing History: Literature, History, and Anthropology in the Pacific. Ed. Cynthia Klekar. Special Issue of The Eighteenth Century: Theory and Interpretation 49, no. 3 (Fall, 2008). Introduction, 193-96.



[[Harp]]

The harp is a multi-string musical instrument which has the plane of its strings positioned perpendicularly to the soundboard. Organologically, it is in the general category of chordophones (stringed instruments) and has its own sub category (the harps). All harps have a neck, resonator and strings. Some, known as frame harps, also have a pillar; those without the pillar are referred to as open harps. Depending on its size, which varies, a harp may be played while held in the lap or while it stands on a table, or on the floor. Harp strings may be made of nylon, gut, wire or silk. On smaller harps, like the folk harp, the core string material will typically be the same for all strings on a given harp. Larger instruments like the modern concert harp mix string materials to attain their extended ranges. A person who plays the harp is called a harpist or harper. Folk musicians often use the term "harper", whereas classical musicians use "harpist".

Various types of harps are found in Africa, Europe, North and South America and in Asia. In antiquity, harps and the closely related lyres were very prominent in nearly all cultures. The harp also was predominant with medieval bards, troubadors and minnesingers throughout the Spanish Empire. Harps continued to grow in popularity due to improvements in their design and construction through the beginning of the 20th century.

==Etymology==
The modern English word harp comes from the Old English hearpe; akin to Old High German "harpha" http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/harp 

==Terminology==
A number of non-harp-like instruments are colloquially referred to as "harps". Chordophones like the aeolian harp (wind harp) and the autoharp (with the piano and harpsichord) are not harps, but zithers, because their strings are not perpendicular to their soundboard. Similarly, the many varieties of harp guitar and harp lute, while chordophones, belong to the lute family and are not true harps. All forms of the lyre and kithara are also not harps, but belong to the fourth family of ancient instruments under the chordophones, the lyres.

The term "harp" has also been applied to many instruments which are not chordophones. The vibraphone was (and is still) sometimes referred to as the "vibraharp," though it has no strings and its sound is produced by striking metal bars. In blues music, the harmonica is often casually referred to as a "blues harp" or "harp", but it is a free reed wind instrument, not a stringed instrument, and is therefore not a true harp. The Jew's harp is neither Jewish nor a harp; it is a plucked idiophone and likewise not a stringed instrument.

==Origin==
A raised stamp and its reverse on the paper from 4000 B.C in Iran

===Near East===
thumb
The origin of the harp goes back to Mesopotamia. The earliest harps and lyres were found in Sumer c, 3500 BCE http://ml.oxfordjournals.org/content/X/2/108.extract Several harps were found in burial pits and royal tombs in Ur. http://sumerianshakespeare.com/509245/499545.html The oldest depictions of harps without a forepillar are from 500 BCE, which was the Persian harp of Perspolis/Persia in Iran and from 400 BCE in Egypt.
The Harp (Persian:  Chang) flourished in Persia in many forms from its introduction, about 3000 BCE, until the 17th century. The original type was the arched harp as seen at Chogh Mi and on later third millennium seals.

Ancient Persian harps carved in stone
Around 1900 BCE arched harps were replaced by angular harps with vertical or horizontal sound boxes. Skyphos Songs, sound of reconstructed ancient (500 BCE) "Skyphos" angular harp found in Altai Mountains in Siberia: music and songs by Elena Frolova on Ishtar and other "Skyphos poems" by Marina Tsvetaeva By the start of the Common Era, "robust, vertical, angular harps", which had become predominant in the Hellenistic world, were cherished in the Sasanian court. In the last century of the Sasanian period, angular harps were redesigned to make them as light as possible ("light, vertical, angular harps"); while they became more elegant, they lost their structural rigidity. At the height of the Persian tradition of illustrated book production (1300 to 1600 CE), such light harps were still frequently depicted, although their use as musical instruments was reaching its end. http://www.tehrantimes.com/highlights/2269-harps-of-persian-origin 
An ancient Egyptian harp on display in the British Museum

===India: ancient Tamil harps===

The works of the Tamil Sangam literature mention the yaa harp parts and its types. Attestations of the yaa are as early as 200 BCE in Tamil Sangam literature and the harp was the first musical instrument played by the Tamil people. The Tamil Sangam literature played a vital role in documenting the Tamil yaa () harp. The documented history of yaa begins as early as 500 BCE with iconographical testimonies (temples with statues of harp players) and literary attestations which show the sangam Tamil people using a harp with 100 strings named aathi yaa (). One of the Sangam literature works, the Kallaadam () of the 9th century AD presents various types of yaa
*  (vil yaa)(21 strings),
*  (peri yaa) (21 Strings),
*  (magara yaa) (17 or 19 strings),
*  (sagoda yaa)(16 strings),
*   (keesaga yaa) (14 strings)
*  (sengotti yaa) (7 strings),
*  (seeri yaa) (7 strings),

and further describes a story as to how the first yaa harp was created from the bow (i.e. someone shooting an arrow from a bow and the sound that the very taut string of the bow made giving them the idea of creating the first yaa with multiple strings). A work as early as the Tirukkua () of Thiruvalluvar () (c. 5th century BCE) already mentions and describes the yaa.

===India: ancient veena===
Coin of Gupta period depicting Samudragupta playing the early veena, an ancient type of Indian harp.

The ancient Indian veena of the Gupta period and before was (contrary to the later veenas which are classified as luths) a harp which was played with the strings being kept parallel to the body of the player, of the type of the Saung or Burmese harp. In fact this type of harp, still used in Burma today was probably introduced from India and descends from this type of veena. One famous depiction of that veena which testifies of the popularity of this type of harp in India in that period is found on some of the Samudragupta gold coins. It shows (presumably) the king Samudragupta himself playing the instrument.

==Structure and mechanism==
The basic structural elements and terminology of a concert harp
Double action pedal harp

Harps are essentially triangular and are made primarily of wood. Modern harp strings are often nylon or gut for the strings that are the A above low G and metal for low G and down ; tuning pins are also metal components. The bottom ends of each string is fed through a small metal eyelet and tied in a knot on the inside of the sounding-board, which is the upward-facing surface of the resonating cavity (the sound box or body). The body is hollow and when a taut string is plucked, the body resonates, projecting sound both inward towards the harp player through a series of usually oval openings (whose principal purpose is to allow access to the strings and only secondarily to enhance resonance) and, much more importantly and powerfully, outward through the flexible and taut-strung sounding board. The crossbar, or neck, contains the mechanism or levers which determine the pitch alteration (sharps and flats) for each string. The upper ends of the strings are attached to pins in holes drilled through the neck at specific intervals and at specific distances from the soundboard.

The longest side of the harp is called the column or pillar. In those harps which have pedals, this side is a hollow column and encloses the rods which control the pedal mechanisms. At the base of a pedal harp are seven pedals, which activate the rods when the pedals are downwardly pressed. The modern sophisticated instrument spanning 6 octaves in virtually all keys was perfected by the 19th-century French maker Sbastien rard and because of its pedal-driven ability to play all sharps and flats of all notes within its range, it continues today as the standard style of most large professional concert grand harps.

Lever harps, however, do not have pedals or rods, and the pillar's only purpose in these instruments is to hold up the neck against the great strain of the strings. Lever harps use a shortening lever (usually shaped like a capital letter L) on the neck next to each individual string which is to be activated (i.e., turned) manually to shorten the string and raise the tone a half step. A string tuned to natural may be played in sharp, but not flat. A string tuned to flat may be played in natural, but not sharp. Also, to change a string from one tone to another during a performance, a harp player must take one entire hand off the harp for a moment and switch the leverthis may cause an acoustic gap in a performance, as for a brief moment only one hand will be in use. Lever harps are considerably lighter in weight than pedal harps and are smaller in size and number of strings. They are also much easier to manufacture, less easily damaged, easier to repair, and far less expensive to produce and maintain.

Finally, many harps are built without either pedals or levers. These harps can only play in a single key during any performance, though any string on a harp can be tuned to a corresponding sharp or flat before a performance and then be returned to its regular tension (key) afterwards with little effort.

==Development and history==

===Europe===
A medieval European harp (the Wartburg harp) with buzzing bray pins.
Harp on a Tarsia panel by Baron Henry de Triqueti (18031874), dated 1863, photo c. 1870.

Angle harps and bow harps continue to be used to the present day. In Europe, however, there was further development. The Anglo Saxon Harp, 'Spectrum, Vol. 71, No. 2 (April 1996), pp. 290320. The Anglo-Saxon Harp Robert Boenig Speculum, Vol. 71, No. 2 (April 1996), pp. 290320 This article consists of 31-page(s). By the addition of a third structural member, the pillar, to support the far ends of the arch and sound box. The Triangular Frame harp is depicted in sculpture from the 8th-century Pictish stones in Scotland The Anglo Saxon Harp, 'Spectrum, Vol. 71, No. 2 (April 1996), pp. 290320. and in manuscripts (i.e. the Utrecht Psalter) from the early 9th-century France. The Anglo-Saxon Harp Robert Boenig Speculum, Vol. 71, No. 2 (April 1996), pp. 290320 This article consists of 31-page(s). The curve of the harp's neck is a result of the proportional shortening of the basic triangular form to keep the strings are equidistant. If the strings were proportionately distanced, the strings would be farther apart.

European harps in medieval and Renaissance times usually had a bray pin fitted to make a buzzing sound when a string was plucked. By the baroque period, in Italy and Spain, more strings were added to allow for chromatic notes; these were usually in a second line of strings. At the same time single-row diatonic harps continued to be played.

The first primitive form of pedal harps was developed in the Tyrol region of Austria. Hochbrucker was the next to design an improved pedal mechanism, followed in succession by Krumpholtz, Nadermann, and the Erard company, who came up with the double mechanism. In Germany in the second half of the 17th century, diatonic single-row harps were fitted with manually turned hooks which fretted individual strings to raise their pitch by a half step. In the 18th century, a link mechanism was developed connecting these hooks with pedals, leading to the invention of the single-action pedal harp. Later, a second row of hooks was installed along the neck to allow for the double-action pedal harp, capable of raising the pitch of a string by either one or two half steps. The idea was even extended to triple-action harps, but these were never common. The double-action pedal harp remains the normal form of the instrument in the Western classical orchestra.

There was a chromatic harp developed in the late 19th century that only found a small number of proponents, and was mainly taught in Belgium. Sylvain Blassel, article in the Bulletin de l'A.I.H. no. 45 (2007), Web version: part 1, part2, part 3 For the chromatic harp see below the section Cross-strung chromatic harp and article Cross-strung harp

===Latin America===
In Latin America, harps are widely but sparsely distributed, except in certain regions where the harp traditions are very strong. Such important centres include Mexico, Andes, Venezuela and Paraguay. They are derived from the Baroque harps that were brought from Spain during the colonial period.

In Per harp is used commonly in andean music called Huayno.

Detailed features vary from place to place. Paraguayan harps and harp music have gained a worldwide reputation, with international influences alongside folk traditions. Mexican "jarocha" harp music of Veracruz has also gained some international recognition, evident in the popularity of "la bamba". In southern Mexico (Chiapas), there is a very different indigenous style of harp music. Travel between the ports of Veracruz and Venezuela afforded an opportunity for transmission of harp traditions between these areas.

In Venezuela, there are two distinct traditions, the arpa llanera and the arpa central (or arpa mirandina). The modern Venezuelan arpa llanera has 32 strings of nylon (originally, gut). The arpa central is strung with wire in the higher register.
An authoritative source in Spanish is Fernando Guerrero Briceno, El Arpa en Venezuela (The Harp in Venezuela).

Paraguayan harps have a wide and deep soundbox which tapers to the top. Like Baroque harps, but unlike modern Western harps, they do not stand upright when unattended. The harp is Paraguay's national instrument. It has about 36 strings. Its spacing is narrower and tension lighter than that of modern Western harps. It is played with the fingernails.

===Africa===
African kora  a double-bridge-harp-lute.
A Mangbetu man playing a mangbetu harp.

There are many different kinds of harps in Africa. They do not have forepillars and are either bow harps or angle harps. As well as true harps such as Mauritania's ardin. There are a number of instruments that are difficult to classify, often being labelled harp-lutes. Another term for them is spike harps. The West African kora is the most complicated and best known of these instruments. It doesn't fit into any one category, but several, and must be awkwardly classified as a "double-bridge-harp-lute." The strings run in two divided ranks making it a double harp, they do not end in a soundboard but are held in notches on a bridge making it a bridge harp, they originate from a string arm or neck and cross a bridge directly supported by a resonating chamber making it a lute too. Another type is simply known as an African harp.

===Asia===
A Sassanid era mosaic excavated at Bishapur
In Asia, there are very few harps today, though the instrument was popular in ancient times; in that continent, zithers like China's guzheng and guqin and Japan's koto predominate. However, a few harps exist, the most notable being Burma's saung-gauk, which is considered the national instrument in that country. Turkey had a nine-string harp called the eng that has also become extinct. There was an ancient Chinese harp called konghou; the name is also now used for a modern Chinese instrument which is being revived. This double bridge harp has the unusual ability to pitch bend the notes while playing. The paired strings are joined at opposite ends of freely moving short levers so that while playing, manually tensioning one of the strings raises the pitch of its linked pair. 

In the Middle East there are several forms of Harps that predate modern harps and some that are still in existence and use today. An example of this is in the Nuristan providence of Afghanistan where the Kafir Harp has been part of the musical traditional for many years.

==Modern European and American instruments==
Most European-derived harps have a single row of strings with strings for each note of the C Major scale (over several octaves).

Harpists are aided in telling which strings they are playing because all F strings are black or blue and all C strings are red, and the wire strings are silver or bronze if C or F, or wrapped in red, blue, or black wire.

The instrument rests between the knees of the harpist and along their right shoulder. The Welsh Triple Harp and early Irish and Scottish harps, however, are traditionally placed on the left shoulder.

The first four fingers of each hand are used to pluck the strings; the little fingers are too short and cannot reach the correct position without distorting the position of the other fingers, although on some folk harps with light tension, closely spaced strings, they may occasionally be used. The fifth finger may also have been used on earlier, more lightly strung modern harps: Madame de Genlis, for example, in her Mthode, published in Paris in the early 19th century, promotes the use of all five fingers, Rensch (2007/1989), 164165. while Roslyn Rensch suggests that Mlle de Gunes, the harpist for whom Mozart wrote his Concerto for Flute and Harp, might occasionally have used all five fingers when playing the harp. Rensch (2007./1989), 170. In more modern music, the fifth finger is used very rarely, for example in simultaneous cluster chords, such as in Daniel Kessner's Sonatina. Inglewood and Neill (1985), 77. Plucking with varying degrees of force creates dynamics. Depending on finger position on the string, different tones can be produced: a full sound in the middle of the string, and a nasal, guitar-like sound at the very bottom of the string. Tone is also affected by the skin of the harpist, how much oil and moisture it contains, and the amount of thickening by callus formation and its surface texture.

===Concert harp===

The concert harp is large and technically modern, designed for classical music and played solo, as part of chamber ensembles, and in symphony orchestras as well as in popular commercial music. It typically has six and a half octaves (47 strings), weighs about 80 lb, is approximately 1.85 m high, has a depth of 1 m, and is 55 cm wide at the bass end of the soundboard. The notes range from three octaves below middle C to three and a half octaves above, usually ending on G. Using octave designations, the range is C1 to G7. At least one manufacturer gives the harp a 48th string, a high A (A7) giving the instrument a range of C1 to A7. The two lowest strings, C1 and D1, are not affected by the pedal mechanism (i.e. their tuning is not affected by the position of, respectively, the C and D pedals). They must be tuned manually. Their pitch (respectively C, C or C, and D, D or D) must be adjusted in advance for the whole piece (or section of a piece). It can't be changed while playing.

The concert harp is a pedal harp. Pedal harps use the mechanical action of pedals to change the pitches of the strings. There are seven pedals, each affecting the tuning of all strings of one pitch-class, and each pedal is attached to a rod or cable within the column of the harp, which then connects with a mechanism within the neck. When a pedal is moved with the foot, small discs at the top of the harp rotate. The discs are studded with two pegs that pinch the string as they turn, shortening the vibrating length of the string. The pedal has three positions. In the top position no pegs are in contact with the string and all notes are flat; thus the harp's native tuning is to the scale of C-flat major.

The action of the wheels in the pedal system to change the pitch of a string. The tip of a string is shown in blue, points in contact with the string are shown in red, and points not in contact with the string are in green.
In the middle position the top wheel pinches the string, resulting in a natural, giving the scale of C major if all pedals are set in the middle position. In the bottom position another wheel is turned, shortening the string again to create a sharp, giving the scale of C-sharp major if all pedals are set in the bottom position. Many other scales, both diatonic and synthetic, can be obtained by adjusting the pedals differently from each other; also, many chords in traditional harmony can be obtained by adjusting pedals so that some notes are enharmonic equivalents of others, and this is central to harp technique. In each position the pedal can be secured in a notch so that the foot does not have to keep holding it in the correct position.

Three strings on the pedal harp have no pedal tuning mechanism: the two lowest strings (contrabass C and D) and the highest string (G). Inglefield and Neill (1985), 3. A few modern harps have a pedal mechanism for the high G string. These strings are normally tuned to C, D and G natural respectively. However, they can be manually tuned to sharp or flat through scordatura prior to performance. This can be indicated by verbal statements at the beginning of a composition, for example, "Tune Low C to C flat", or "If necessary, tune high G to G sharp". Inglefield and Neill (1985), 'Scordatura', p.49. 

This mechanism is called the double-action pedal system, probably invented by Sbastien rard in 1810. Earlier pedal harps had a single-action mechanism that allowed strings to play sharpened notes.

The tension of the strings on the sound board is roughly equal to 10 kN (a ton-force) or 2,000 pounds. The lowest strings are made of copper or silver-over-silk over steel, the lower-middle strings of gut (from sheep or cows) and the upper-middle or highest of either gut or nylon.

====Technique====
Harpist Elaine Christy plays with both hands approaching the strings from either side of the harp; foot pedals (not shown) can change the pitch of specific strings by a half step.
The pedal harp is played with the fingertips of the first four fingers (thumb, index, middle and ring fingers of both hands), with force from the hand and arm, and ultimately the upper body. The little fingers are normally not used (see above for the use of the little finger). The fingertips are drawn in to meet the palm of the hand, thus releasing the string from whatever pressure was placed upon it by the fingers. The fingers are naturally curved or rounded as they touch the strings, and the thumb is gently curved as the tip rises to the string as an arc from its base; this is called plucking. There are differing schools of technique for playing the pedal harp. The largest are the various French schools, and there are specific Russian schools, Viennese and other schools from differing regions of Europe. One is called the Attl technique after Kajetan Attl, in which apparently only the uppermost parts of the fingers move and the hand is largely still. There is a St. Petersburg school (more than one) in Russia in which the thumbs are moved in a circular fashion rather than in and out toward the hand.

The differences between the French schools lie in the posture of the arms, the shape of the hand and the musical aesthetics. The traditional French schooling allows for the right arm to be lightly rested against the harp using the wrist to sometimes bring the hand only away from the string. The left arm moves more freely. Finger technique and control are the emphasis of the technical approach, with extensive use of exercises and etudes to develop this. Two very influential 20th-century teachers of this approach were Henriette Renie and Marcel Grandjany, who both studied with Alphonse Hasselmans.

The other major French school is the Salzedo school, developed by Carlos Salzedo, who also studied with Alphonse Hasselmans at the Paris Conservatoire. Salzedo's technique generally calls for the arms to be held horizontally Lawrence and Salzedo (1929), 6. and emphasises the role of aesthetic hand and arm gestures after the string has been plucked: "Each of the thirty-seven tone colors and effects of the harp calls for a gesture corresponding to its sonorous meaning." Lawrence and Salzedo (1929), 17. 

====Use in music====
The harp found its early orchestral use as a solo instrument in concerti by many baroque and classical composers (Handel, Mozart, Boieldieu, Albrechtsberger, Schenk, Dussek, Spohr) and in the opera houses of London, Paris and Berlin and most other capitals. It began to be used in symphonic music by Hector Berlioz but he found performances frustrating in such countries as Germany where few harps and sufficiently proficient harpists were to be found. Franz Liszt was seminal in finding uses for the harp in his orchestral music. The French and Russian Romantic composer particularly expanded its symphonic use. In opera, the Italian composers used it regularly, and Puccini was a particular master of its expressive and coloristic use. Debussy can be said to have put the harp on the map in his many works that use one or more harps. Tchaikovsky also was of great influence, followed by Rimsky-Korsakov, Richard Strauss and Wagner. The greatest influence on use of the harp has always been the availability of fine harps and skilled players, and the great increase of them in the US of the 20th century resulted in its spread into popular music. 

The first harpist known to play jazz was Casper Reardon, a pioneer in the world of "hot" music. Dorothy Ashby (sampled by hip-hop artists) and Alice Coltrane are other jazz harpists.Harpist performing

Many passages for solo harp can be found in 19th-century ballet music, particularly in scores for the ballets staged for the Mariinsky Theatre of St. Petersburg, where the harpist Albert Zabel played in the orchestra. In ballet, the harp was utilised to a great extent to embellish the dancing of the ballerina. Elaborate cadenzas were composed by Tchaikovsky for his ballets The Nutcracker, Swan Lake, and The Sleeping Beauty; as well as Alexander Glazunov for his score for the ballet Raymonda. In particular, the scores of Riccardo Drigo contained many pieces for harp in such works as Le Talisman (1889), Le Rveil de Flore (1894) and Les Millions d'Arlequin (1900). Cesare Pugni wrote extensively for the harp as wellhis ballet oline, ou La Dryade included music written for harp to accompany the ballerina's numerous variations and enhance the atmosphere of the ballet's many fantastical scenes. Ludwig Minkus was celebrated for his harp cadenzas, most notably the Variation de la Reine du jour from his ballet La Nuit et le Jour (1881), the elaborate entr'acte composed for Albert Zabel from his ballet Roxana (1878), and numerous passages found in his score for the ballet La Bayadre, which in some passages were used to represent a veena which was used on stage as a prop.

French ballet composers such as Delibes, Gounod, and Massenet made use of the harp in their music.

There is a prominent harp part in "She's Leaving Home" by The Beatles in their 1967 album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band. In the 1970s, a harp was common in popular music, and can be heard in such hits as Cher's "Dark Lady", the intro of "Gypsies, Tramps & Thieves", and "Boogie Nights" by Heatwave. Most often this was played by Los Angeles studio harpist Gayle Levant, who has played on hundreds of recordings. Irish band Clannad featured the harp heavily in their music during the 1970s and 1980s. In current pop music, the harp appears relatively rarely. Joanna Newsom, Dee Carstensen, Darian Scatton, Habiba Doorenbos, and Jessa Callen of The Callen Sisters have separately established images as harp-playing singer-songwriters with signature harp and vocal sounds. Canadian singer-songwriter Sarah McLachlan plays the harp in her 2006 holiday album, Wintersong. In Hong Kong, a notable example of harp in pop music is the song "Tin Shui Walled City" () performed by Hacken Lee with harp played by Korean harpist Jung Kwak (Harpist K).

Harp is also used as a central instrument by many alternative popular musicians. A pedal harpist, Ricky Rasura, is a member of the "symphonic pop" band, The Polyphonic Spree. Also, Bjrk sometimes features acoustic and electric harp in her work, often played by Zeena Parkins. Philadelphia based Indie Pop Band Br'er uses a pedal harp as the foundation for their cinematic live sets. Art in America was the first known rock band featuring a pedal harp to appear on a major record label, released in 1983. The pedal harp was also present in the Michael Kamen and Metallica concert and album, S&M, as part of the San Francisco Symphony orchestra. R&B singer Maxwell featured harpist Gloria Agostini in 1997 on his cover of Kate Bush's "This Woman's Work". On his 7th solo album Finding Forever, Hip- Hop artist Common features harpist Brandee Younger on the introductory track, followed by a Dorothy Ashby sample from her 1969 recording of By the Time I Get to Phoenix. Some Celtic-pop crossover bands and artists such as Clannad and Loreena McKennitt include folk harps, following Alan Stivell's work. Additionally Florence Welch of Florence and the Machine uses the harp frequently in both Lungs and Ceremonials, notably on "Rabbit Heart (Raise It Up)". The Webb Sisters from UK use different size harps in almost all their material during live performances. Sierra Casady, of the freak-folk group CocoRosie plays harp on several of their songs. Another musician from the UK Patrick Wolf has used the Celtic harp throughout his career, often playing it himself while singing. 

Aside from its use in music, the harp occasionally appears in the Marx Brothers' movies when Harpo plays it. Sometimes entire scenes focus on his harp-playing.

===Folk, lever, and Celtic instruments===
New Salem Village re-enactors playing Celtic harps
The Celtic harp, the instrument of the bards

The folk harp or Celtic harp is small to medium-sized and usually designed for traditional music; it can be played solo or with small groups. It is prominent in Welsh, Breton, Irish, Scottish and other Celtic cultures within traditional or folk music and as a social and political symbol. Often the folk harp is played by beginners who wish to move on to the pedal harp at a later stage, or by musicians who simply prefer the smaller size or different sounds. Alan Stivell, with his father Jord Cochevelou (who recreated the Breton Celtic harp), were at the origin of the revival of the Celtic harp (in the 1970s). 

The folk or lever harp ranges in size from two octaves to six octaves, and may use levers or blades to change pitch. The most common size has 34 strings: Two octaves below middle C and two and a half above (ending on A), although folk or lever harps can usually be found with anywhere from 19 to 40 strings. The strings are generally made of nylon, gut, carbon fibre or fluorocarbon, or wrapped metal, and are plucked with the fingers using a similar technique to the pedal harp.

Folk harps with levers installed have a lever close to the top of each string; when it is engaged, it shortens the string so its pitch is raised a semitone, resulting in a sharped note if the string was a natural, or a natural note if the string was a flat. Lever harps are often tuned to the key C or E-flat. Using the E-flat scheme, the major keys of E-flat, B-flat, F, C, G, D, A, and E can be reached by changing lever positions, rather than re-tuning any strings. Many smaller folk harps are tuned in C or F, and may have no levers, or levers on the F and C strings only, allowing a narrower range of keys. Blades and hooks perform almost the same function as levers, but use a different mechanism. The most common type of lever is either the Camac or Truitt lever although Loveland levers are still used by some makers.

One of the attendant problems with lever harps is the potential loss of quality when the levers are used. The Teifi semi tone developed by Allan Shiers is a development from traditional mechanisms and nips up the string with two forks similarly to a concert harp. The semi tone is double locking for a full clear sound and does not wear the string. It is machined from solid brass and hardened steel and is adjustable by an eccentric roller to suit any gauge of string. In addition, the whole unit can be moved up or down to affect perfect pitch and string alignment. The lever arms are coloured for ease of note recognition and two sizes are made to suit treble, mid and bass.

Alan Stivell is a well-known crossover and Celtic harpist. He first recorded an EP record, "Musique Galique," in 1959, then an LP in 1964 called "Telenn Geltiek " (available in CD). Following these, he has released 21 other albums including his harps, from 1970 until now (the last one is "Explore"  2006 ). He also recorded some albums especially dedicated to the harp: the famous Renaissance of the Celtic Harp (1972), "Harpes du Nouvel Age" (1985), and "Beyond Words" (2002). He helped to promote developments in Electro-acoustic and Electric harps. JT Koch (ed). Celtic Culture. A Historical Encyclopaedia ABC-CLIO 2006 pp 16271628 
Another innovator in this field is the German harpist Rdiger Oppermann, who has also brought together harpists from all over the world to German music festivals and owns a private library of folk-music harps from every continent. The Swiss popular musician Andreas Vollenweider also plays electro-acoustic harps.
Other Celtic harpists include Tristan Le Govic.

===Wire-strung instruments ("clrsach")===

The Gaelic triangular, wire-strung harp has always been known by the feminine term cruit but by 1204 was certainly known by the masculine term 'clr' (board) and, by the 14th century, by the feminine form of 'clr', i.e., 'clirseach/clrsach'. (Gd.)

The origins of the Gaelic triangular harp go back at least to the first millennium. There are several stone carvings of triangular harps from the 10th century, many of which have simple triangular shapes, generally with straight pillars, straight string arms or necks, and soundboxes. There is stone carving evidence that the lyre or non-triangular harp were present in Ireland during the first millennium. Music and the Celtic other world from Ireland to Iona: Caren Ralls-Macleod (2000) Edinburgh University press Evidence for the triangular harp in Pictish Scotland dates from the 9th century. "The Origins of the Clairsach or Irish Harp", Musical Times, Vol. 53, No 828 (Feb 1912), pp 8992. 

File:Monifeithpictishharper.jpg|The harpist on the Monifeith Pictish stone, Scotland, 700 - 900 CE
File:Irish harp-Maedoc.jpg|Maedoc book-cover, Ireland, c. 1000 CE

The clrsach or harp was the most popular musical instrument in later medieval Scotland and Ireland and Gaelic poets portrayed their Pictish counterparts as very much like themselves. Forsyth, "Evidence of a lost Pictish Source", pp. 2728. 

Gerald of Wales Gerald of Wales, "Topographia Hibernica", 94; tr. John O' Meary, The History and Topography of Ireland, (London, 1982). 
The Scottish medieval clrsach 'Queen Mary harp' Clrsach na Banrigh Miri, (c. 1400) Caldwell, D.H. (ed). Angels Nobles and Unicorns: Art and Patronage in Medieval Scotland. Edinburgh: NMS, 1982 now in the Museum of Scotland, is a one of only three surviving medieval Gaelic harps.

The clrsach or harp played by the Gaels of Scotland and Ireland between the 11th and 19th centuries was certainly wire-strung. The Irish Maedoc book shrine dates from the 11th century, and clearly shows a harper with a triangular framed harp including a "T-Section" in the pillar. The Irish word lamhchrann or Scottish Gaelic lmh-chrann came into use at an unknown date to indicate this pillar which would have supplied the bracing to withstand the tension of a wire-strung harp.

The Irish and Highland Harps by Robert Bruce Armstrong is an excellent book describing these ancient harps. There is historical evidence that the types of wire used in these harps are iron, brass, silver, and gold. Three pre-16th-century examples survive today; the Brian Boru Harp in Trinity College, Dublin, and the Queen Mary and Lamont Harps, both in Scotland.

One of the largest and most complete collections of 17th-century harp music is the work of Turlough O'Carolan, a blind, itinerant Irish harper and composer. At least 220 of his compositions survive to this day.

Since the 1970s, the tradition has been revived. Alan Stivell's Renaissance de la Harpe Celtique (perhaps the best-seller harp album in the world), using mainly the bronze strung harp, and his tours, have brought the instrument into the ears and the love of many people. Ann Heymann has revived the ancient tradition and technique by playing the instrument as well as studying Bunting's original manuscripts in the library of Queens University, Belfast. Katie Targett-Adams (KT-A) is currently leading the modern day crossover movement for the clarsach, performing to mainstream audiences across the globe, notably China. Other high profile players include Patrick Ball, Cynthia Cathcart, Alison Kinnaird, Bill Taylor, Siobhn Armstrong and others.

As performers have become interested in the instrument, harp makers ("luthiers") such as Jay Witcher, David Kortier, Ardival Harps, Jol Herrou and others have begun building wire-strung harps. The traditional wire materials are used, however iron has been replaced by steel and the modern phosphor bronze has been added to the list. The phosphor bronze and brass are most commonly used. Steel tends to be very abrasive to the nails. Silver and gold are used to get high density materials into the bass courses of high quality clrsachs to greatly improve their tone quality. In the period, no sharping devices were used. Harpers had to re-tune strings to change keys. This practice is reflected by most of the modern luthiers, yet some allow provisions for either levers or blades.

===Multi-course harps===
A multi-course harp is a harp with more than one row of strings. A harp with only one row of strings is called a single-course harp.

Double harp

A double-strung harp consists of two rows of diatonic strings one on either side of the neck. These strings may run parallel to each other or may converge so the bottom ends of the strings are very close together. Either way, the strings that are next to each other are tuned to the same note. Double-strung harps often have levers either on every string or on the most commonly sharped strings, for example C and F. Having two sets of strings allows the harpist's left and right hands to occupy the same range of notes without having both hands attempt to play the same string at the same time. It also allows for special effects such as repeating a note very quickly without stopping the sound from the previous note.

A triple harp features three rows of parallel strings, two outer rows of diatonic strings, and a center row of chromatic strings. To play a sharp, the harpist reaches in between the strings in either outer row and plucks the center row string. Like the double-strung harp, the two outer rows of strings are tuned the same, but the triple-strung harp has no levers. This harp originated in Italy in the 16th century as a low headed instrument, and towards the end of 17th century it arrived in Wales where it developed a high head and larger size. It established itself as part of Welsh tradition and became known as the Welsh harp (telyn deires, "three-row harp"). The traditional design has all of the strings strung from the left side of the neck, but modern neck designs have the two outer rows of strings strung from opposite sides of the neck to greatly reduce the tendency for the neck to roll over to the left.

===Cross-strung chromatic harp===

Cross-strung chromatic harp

The cross-strung harp consists of one row of diatonically tuned strings and another row of chromatic notes. Cross-stringing is most of the time used in order to achieve chromaticism but not invariably so. There have been some (rare) cases of harps with two diatonic cross-strung courses. The purpose of cross-stringing is then simply to make either course playable by either hand These strings cross approximately in the middle of the string without touching. Traditionally the diatonic row runs from the right (as seen by someone sitting at the harp) side of the neck to the left side of the sound board. The chromatic row runs from the left of the neck to the right of the sound board. The diatonic row has the normal string coloration for a harp, but the chromatic row may be black. The chromatic row is not a full set of strings. It is missing the strings between the Es and Fs in the diatonic row and between the Bs and Cs in the diatonic row. In this respect it is much like a piano. The diatonic row corresponds to the white keys and the chromatic row to the black keys. Playing each string in succession results in a complete chromatic scale.

An alternate form of the cross-strung, the 6-plus-6 or isomorphic cross-strung, has 6 strings on each side of the cross instead of 5 on one and 7 on the other. This configuration is less intuitive to someone coming from a piano/organ background, but more intuitive to someone with a guitar/violin or other chromatic or whole-tone instrument background because it utilises a chromatic scale or wholetone scale. This configuration gives the entire octave in only 6 strings per side, making more efficient use of the size of the instrument.

The earliest example of a cross-strung chromatic harp is the Arpa de dos rdenes (Spain and Portugal, 17th c.; see article Cross-strung harp).

===Inline chromatic harp===

An inline chromatic harp is a harp where the strings for all 12 chromatic notes of the octave are placed in one row (the same way strings are placed on a standard concert harp), as opposed to their being placed in two or three (parallel or crossing) courses.

At least one example of a harp with two parallel inline chromatic courses has also been produced. Philippe Clment's double inline chromatic harp 

Single course inline chromatic harps have been produced for at least the past 110 years: in 1902 Karel Weigel of Hanover (Germany) patented a model of inline chromatic harp. Karl Weigel's patent (with patent text and drawings) He built at least one 54 string (4 octaves and a fourth) model which is now housed in the Deutsches Museum (Munich).

Harp makers who have in the past 20 years produced single course inline chromatic harps include Philippe Clment (Canada), Steve Green (US), Philippe Volant (France).

As of 2013 only Philippe Volant offers an inline chromatic harp model (5 octaves, 61 strings). Philippe Volant's inline chromatic harp 

Harpists using the inline chromatic harp include French harpist Laura Perrudin. Laura Perrudin's YouTube channel 

===Modern electric harps===
The Gravikord
Amplified (electro-acoustic) hollow body and solid body electric lever harps are produced by many harpmakers at this time, such as Lyon and Healy Harps out of Chicago, Salvi Harps out of Italy, and Camac Harps out of France. They generally use individual piezo-electric transducers one per string often in combination with small internal microphones to produce a direct output mixed electrical signal. Hollow body instruments can also be played acoustically, while solid body instruments must be amplified.

In the late 20th century instrument builder and American musician Robert Grawi created an electric double harp-lute based on the West African kora but strung and tuned differently. The gravikord is a light ergonomically designed instrument made of modern materials mostly stainless steel tubing. It is a double harp that has 24 strings evenly divided in two ranks arrayed on a free standing "Vee" shaped bridge made of synthetic material including an integral piezo-electric sensor. The tuning of the gravikord is an extended version of the "G" major / "E" minor tuning system of the Hugh Tracey kalimba while its overall physical structure is derived from the African kora. It was created to enable easier playing of complex African cross rhythms on an African derived modern electro-acoustic harp. http://www.gravikord.com/instrument.html#gravikord 
 
The laser harp is not a stringed instrument at all, but is a harp-shaped electronic instrument that has laser beams where harps have strings. The laser beams that are configured like harp strings do not produce any sound themselves but act as triggers for electronic synthesised sounds.
These can also be programmed to trigger other theatrical affects in sync with performances such as lighting, video loops, sound effects, etc. For some events they can be made in extended forms without a frame at all, but only a long parallel rank of laser beams yet are still called laser harps.

Some contemporary players of these modern electric harps, especially solid body and minimalist design instruments, have been able to add the advantage of movement on stage into their musical performance. With these light strong instruments and modern wireless amplification these musicians can easily play standing up, move, and even incorporate dance on stage while playing their electric harps.

Athy (arpista) "The Electric Harper", from Argentina, is a benchmark in the electric harp in the world. Composer for electric harp and fantastic film genre.

==As a symbol==

===Political===
Coat of arms of Ireland

The harp has been used as a political symbol of Ireland for centuries. Its origin is unknown but from the evidence of the ancient oral and written literature, it has been present in one form or another since at least the 6th century or before. According to tradition, Brian Boru, 'High King' of Ireland (d. at the Battle of Clontarf, 1014 CE) played the harp, as did many of the gentry in the country during the period of the Gaelic Lordship of Ireland (ended c. 1607 CE with the "Flight of the Earls" following the Elizabethan Wars).

In traditional Gaelic society every clan and chief of any consequence would have a resident harp player who would compose eulogies and elegies (later known as "planxties") in honour of the leader and chief men of the clan. The harp was adopted as a symbol of the Kingdom of Ireland on the coinage from 1542, and in the Royal Standard of King James (VI of Scotland / I of England ) in 1603 and continued to feature on all English and United Kingdom Royal Standards ever since, though the styles of the harps depicted differed in some respects. It was also used on the Commonwealth Jack of Oliver Cromwell, issued in 1649 and on the Protectorate Jack issued in 1658 as well as on the Lord Protector's Standard issued on the succession of Richard Cromwell in 1658. The harp is also traditionally used on the flag of Leinster.
Pub plaque, Omagh
Nathan confronts David; bronze bas-relief by Henri de Triqueti.

Since 1922, the government of Ireland has used a similar left-facing harp, based on the Trinity College Harp in the Library of Trinity College Dublin as its state symbol. It first appeared on the Great Seal of the Irish Free State, which in turn was replaced by the coat of arms, the Irish Presidential Standard and the Presidential Seal in the 1937 Constitution of Ireland. The harp emblem is used on official state seals and documents including the Irish passport and has appeared on Irish coinage from the Middle Ages to the current Irish imprints of Euro coins.

A South Asian version of a harp known in Tamil as a 'yaal' (''), is the symbol of City of Jaffna, Sri Lanka, whose legendary root originates from a harp player.

===Corporate===
The harp is also used extensively as a corporate logo  for both Private company and government organisations. For instance, the Irish drink Guinness uses a harp, facing right and less detailed than the version used on the state arms. Guinness started using the harp as an image on its labels in 1862 and registered two trademarks in London in 1876, both of which used the harp as part of the image. A simplified harp was adopted in the 1990s.

Relatively new organisations also use the harp, but often modified to reflect a theme relevant to their organisation, for instance; Irish airline Ryanair uses a modified harp, and the Irish State Examinations Commission uses it with an educational theme.

The harp is also used as the logo for League of Ireland football team Finn Harps, who are Donegal's senior soccer club.

Other organisations in Ireland use the harp, but not always prominently; these include the National University of Ireland and the associated University College Dublin, and the Gaelic Athletic Association. In Northern Ireland the Police Service of Northern Ireland and Queen's University of Belfast use the harp as part of their identity.

===Religious===
In the context of Christianity, heaven is sometimes symbolically depicted with saints and/or angels playing harps in it. This symbolism may derive from the account of the heavenly vision recorded in the Christian Bible in Revelation 14:2 reading: "And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps." (KJV) This may be a reference to the kind of harp played, e.g., by David during Old Testament times. Modern orchestral music sometimes employs the ethereal sound of the modern orchestral harp to depict heaven.

===Sports===

Al Shorta SC's logo

In Iraq, the football club Al-Shorta, one of Iraq's best teams, is nicknamed 'Al Qeetharah' which is Assyrian for 'The Harp', and have a harp on their logo.

==Legends and mythologies==

Tristan in the legend of Trisant and Isolde played the harp. He used this to charm the king.

==See also==
* Clrsach
* Electric harp
* Epigonion
* Gravikord
* Harp guitar
* Kafir Harp
* Kora
* Psaltery
* Cross-strung harp

===Related categories===
* Harpists

==References==

==Additional sources==
* Thomas Gaisford's Etymologicum Magnum (1848) THOMAS GAISFORD S.T.P. ETYMOLOGICON MAGNUM LEXICON ISBN 9604001396
* Lucia Bova, L'arpa moderna. La scrittura e la notazione, lo strumento e il repertorio dal '500 alla contemporaneit, preface by Luis de Pablo, Suvini Zerboni, Milano, 2008. ISBN 978-88-900691-4-7
* "The Anglo Saxon Harp", Spectrum, Vol. 71, No.2 (April 1996), pp 290320.
* "The Origins of the Clairsach or Irish Harp", Musical Times, Vol. 53, No 828 (February 1912), pp 8992.
* Alasdair Ross discusses that all the Scottish harp figures were copied from foreign drawings and not from life, in "'Harps of Their Owne Sorte'? A Reassessment of Pictish Chordophone Depictions", Cambrian Medieval Celtic Studies 36, Winter 1998.
* Snyder's Medieval Art, 2nd ed, p. 32. Luttikhuizen and Verkerk.
* Courteau, Mona-Lynn. "Harp". In J. Shepherd, D. Horn, D. Laing, P. Oliver and P. Wicke (Eds.), The Continuum Encyclopedia of Popular Music of the World, Vol. 2, 2003, pp. 427437.
* Inglefield, Ruth K. and Lou Anne Neill (1985). Writing for the Pedal Harp: A Standardized Manual for Composers and Harpists. University of California Press.
* Lawrence, Lucille and Carlos Salzedo (1929). Method for the Harp. G. Schirmer.
* 
* Rensch, Roslyn (2007/1989). Harps and Harpists, revised (2nd) edition. Indiana University. ISBN 0-253-34903-6.
*Floraleda Sacchi, Elias Parish Alvars, The Liszt of the Harp, Odilia Publishing, Dornach, 1999. ISBN 3-9521367-1-9

==External links==

* Harp History site
* International Festival of Harp  International Festival of Harp official website(Europe)
* Harp Spectrum  general information about the harp
* Video  short video showing the parts of the lever harp
* Your harpist  Information on harps full with diagram and parts labelled.
* Jacqueline Pollauf's Harp Site, particularly the section Composing for the harp

===Celtic harp===
* earlygaelicharp.info  information about early Irish and Scottish harps
* Gaelic Modes Information about Gaelic harp harmony and modes
* Asni: harp lore  descriptions of several types of historical European harps (with sound samples)
* The Celtic Harp Page  information on Celtic and other types of harps
* My Harp's Delight  learning to play the Celtic harp, tips and techniques, buying a harp
* "Tears, Laughter, Magic"  An Interview with Master Celtic Harp Builder Timothy Habinski on AdventuresInMusic.biz, 2007
* Celtic Harp Amplification Series  using microphones and guitar amplifiers with folk harps
* Markwood Strings-information on installing harp strings, harp string installation guide

 



[[Hollow Earth]]

The Hollow Earth hypothesis proposes that the planet Earth is either entirely hollow or otherwise contains a substantial interior space. The scientific community has dismissed the notion since at least the late 18th century. The concept of a hollow Earth recurs many times in folklore and as the premise for subterranean fiction, a subgenre of adventure fiction. It is also featured in some present-day pseudoscientific and conspiracy theories.

==Hypotheses==

===Ancient history===

In ancient times, the concept of a subterranean land inside the earth appeared in mythology, folklore and legends. The idea of subterranean realms seemed arguable, and became intertwined with the concept of "places" of origin or afterlife, such as the Greek underworld, the Nordic Svartlfaheimr, the Christian Hell, and the Jewish Sheol (with details describing inner Earth in Kabalistic literature, such as the Zohar and Hesed L'Avraham). The idea of a subterranean realm is also mentioned in Tibetan Buddhism belief, Hollow Earth in the Puranas Online The Way to Shambhala, Edwin Bernbaum, Anchor Books; 1st edition, 1980 ISBN 0-385-12794-4 according to one story there is an ancient city called Shamballa which is located inside the earth. 

According to the Ancient Greeks there were caverns under the surface which were entrances leading to the underworld, some of which were the caverns at Tainaron in Lakonia, at Trozien in Argolis, at Ephya in Thesprotia, at Herakleia in Pontos, and in Ermioni. William Sherwood Fox, Greek and Roman Mythology; p. 143 In Thracians and Dacians legend it is said that there are underground chambers occupied by an ancient God called Zalmoxis. Mircea Eliade, Zalmoxis, the vanishing God: comparative studies in the religions and folklore of Dacia and Eastern Europe, 1959, pp. 2430 In Mesopotamian religion there is a story of a man who, after traveling through the darkness of a tunnel in the mountain of "Mashu", entered a subterranean garden. Myth: its meaning and functions in ancient and other cultures, G. S. Kirk, 1970, p. 136 

Chapel, bell tower and penitential beds on Station Island. The bell tower stands on a mound that is the site of the original cave which according to various myths is an entrance which leads inside the earth to a place of purgatory. The cave has been closed since October 25, 1632.

In Celtic mythology there is a legend of a cave called "Cruachan," also known as "Ireland's gate to Hell," a legendary and ancient cave from which according to legend strange creatures would emerge in ancient times and be seen on the surface of the earth. John A MacCulloch, Celtic Mythology, Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc, 1932, pp. 125126 There are also stories of medieval knights and saints who went on pilgrimages to a cave located in Station Island, County Donegal in Ireland, where they made journeys inside the earth into a place of purgatory. T. Write, Saint Patrick's Purgatory : A medieval Pilgrimage in Ireland, 1918, p. 107 There is an Irish myth which says tunnels in County Down, Northern Ireland lead to the land of the subterranean Tuatha de Danaan, a group of people who are believed to have introduced Druidism to Ireland, and then went back underground. Harold Bayley, Archaic England: An Essay in Deciphering Prehistory from Megalithic Monuments, 1919 Online Edition: Link 

An ancient legend of the Angami Naga tribes of India claim that their ancestors emerged in ancient times from a subterranean land inside the earth. Angami NagaBrown, Account of Munnipore, 1968., p. 113 There are legends from the Tano people that their ancestors emerged in ancient times from two caves in a mountain underground. Ellen Russell Emerson, Indian Myths, 1965 "It is to the Cubans we are indebted for the following version of man's origin: It was from the depths of a deep cavern in the earth that mankind issued." 

It is the belief of the natives of the Malinowski's Trobriand Islands that their ancestors had come from a subterranean land through a cavern hole called "Obukula". Philip Freund, Myths of Creation; 1965, pp. 131132 There is an ancient legend held in Mexican folklore that a cave in a mountain five miles south of Ojinaga, Mexico is possessed by devilish creatures who came from inside the earth. George, Wally  Pilgrimage To The Devil., Article in Fate magazine, Aug. 1957, pp. 3852 

There was an ancient myth held in the middle ages that some mountains located between Eisenach and Gotha in Germany hold a portal to the inner earth. There is an old Russian legend that says the Samoyeds, an ancient Siberian tribe, traveled to an underground cavern city to live inside the earth. Clark B Firestone and Ruth Hambidge, The Coasts of Ilusion, Harper & Bros; First Edition, 1924 

In Native American mythology, it is said that the ancestors of the Mandan people in ancient times emerged from a subterranean land through a cave at the north side of the Missouri River. Martha Warren Beckwith, Mandan-Hidatsa myths and ceremonies, G. E. Stechert, 1937, p. 10 There is also a tale about a tunnel in the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in Arizona near Cedar Creek which is said to lead inside the earth to a land inhabited by a mysterious tribe. Grenville Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache, 1939, p. 20 (Kessinger Publishing have reprinted the book in 2011) It is also the belief of the tribes of Iroquois that their ancient ancestors emerged from a subterranean world inside the earth. William Martin Beauchamp, Iroquois folk lore: gathered from the Six Nations of New York, I. J. Friedman, 1965, pp. 152153 The elders of the Hopi people believe that a Sipapu entrance in the Grand Canyon exists which leads to the underworld. Pages from Hopi history, Harry Clebourne James, University of Arizona Press, 1974, Chapter 6 Arizona and the West, Volume 17, University of Arizona Press., 1975, p. 179 

According to South American mythology the belief of the Brazilian Indians, who live alongside the Parima River in Brazil, claim that their forefathers emerged in ancient times from an underground land, and that many of their ancestors still remained inside the earth. There are also legends that say the ancestors of the Inca Empire came from underground caves which are located east of Cuzco, Peru. Harold Osbourne, South American Mythology. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1986, p. 42 and p. 119 

===17th and 18th centuries===

Edmond Halley's hypothesis.

Edmond Halley in 1692 Halley, Edmond, An Account of the cause of the Change of the Variation of the Magnetic Needle; with an Hypothesis of the Structure of the Internal Parts of the Earth, Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society of London, No. 195, 1692, pp 563578 put forth the idea of Earth consisting of a hollow shell about 800 km thick, two inner concentric shells and an innermost core, about the diameters of the planets Venus, Mars, and Mercury. Atmospheres separate these shells, and each shell has its own magnetic poles. The spheres rotate at different speeds. Halley proposed this scheme in order to explain anomalous compass readings. He envisaged the atmosphere inside as luminous (and possibly inhabited) and speculated that escaping gas caused the Aurora Borealis. Halley, Edmond, An Account of the Late Surprizing Appearance of the Lights Seen in the Air, on the Sixth of March Last; With an Attempt to Explain the Principal Phaenomena thereof;, Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society of London, No. 347 (1716), pp 406428 

De Camp and Ley have claimed (in their Lands Beyond) that Leonhard Euler also proposed a hollow-Earth idea, getting rid of multiple shells and postulating an interior sun 1000 km across to provide light to advanced inner-Earth civilization but they provide no references; indeed, Euler did not propose a hollow-Earth, but there is a slightly related thought experiment. Euler and the Hollow Earth: Fact or Fiction? 

De Camp and Ley also claim that Sir John Leslie expanded on Euler's idea, suggesting two central suns named Pluto and Proserpine (this was unrelated to the dwarf planet Pluto, which was discovered and named some time later). Leslie did propose a hollow Earth in his 1829 Elements of Natural Philosophy (pp. 449453), but does not mention interior suns.

Le Clerc Milfort in 1781 led a journey with hundreds of Creek Indians to a series of caverns near the Red River above the junction of the Mississippi river. According to Milfort the original Creek Indian ancestors are believed to have emerged out to the surface of the earth in ancient times from the caverns. Milfort also claimed the caverns they saw "could easily contain 15,000  20,000 families." Migration Legend of the Creek Indians, Volumes 12, Albert S. Gatschet, Ams Pr Inc, 1969 The Franco-American review, Volumes 12, the Yale University Press, 1938, p. 111 Also see The Venus Calendar Observatory at Aztec New Mexico, Allan Macgillivray III, 2010, p. 25 

===19th century===
In 1818, John Cleves Symmes, Jr. suggested that the Earth consisted of a hollow shell about 1300 km thick, with openings about 2300 km across at both poles with 4 inner shells each open at the poles. Symmes became the most famous of the early Hollow Earth proponents. He proposed making an expedition to the North Pole hole, thanks to efforts of one of his followers, James McBride. United States president John Quincy Adams indicated he would approve of this but he left office before this could occur. The new President of the United States, Andrew Jackson, halted the attempt.

Jeremiah Reynolds also delivered lectures on the "Hollow Earth" and argued for an expedition. Reynolds went on an expedition to Antarctica himself but missed joining the Great U.S. Exploring Expedition of 18381842, even though that venture was a result of his agitation.

Though Symmes himself never wrote a book about his ideas, several authors published works discussing his ideas. McBride wrote Symmes' Theory of Concentric Spheres in 1826. It appears that Reynolds has an article that appeared as a separate booklet in 1827: Remarks of Symmes' Theory Which Appeared in the American Quarterly Review. In 1868, a professor W.F. Lyons published The Hollow Globe which put forth a Symmes-like Hollow Earth hypothesis, but failed to mention Symmes himself. Symmes's son Americus then published The Symmes' Theory of Concentric Spheres in 1878 to set the record straight.

===20th century===

An early twentieth-century proponent of hollow Earth, William Reed, wrote Phantom of the Poles in 1906. He supported the idea of a hollow Earth, but without interior shells or inner sun.

The spiritualist writer Walburga, Lady Paget in her book Colloquies with an unseen friend (1907) was an early writer to mention the hollow earth theory. She claimed that cities exist beneath a desert, which is where the people of Atlantis moved. She said an entrance to the subterranean kingdom will be discovered in the 21st century. Paget Walburga, Colloquies with an unseen friend, William Rider & Son., London., 1909., p. 36 

William Fairfield Warren, in his book, Paradise Found: The Cradle of the Human Race at the North Pole presented his belief that humanity originated on a continent in the Arctic called Hyperborea. This influenced some early hollow earth theorists. According to Marshall Gardner, both the Eskimo and Mongolian peoples had come from the interior of the earth by an entrance at the North pole. A Journey to the Earth's Interior, Marshall Gardner, Mokelumne Hill Pr, 1974 Edition, ISBN 0-7873-1192-8 

Marshall Gardner wrote A Journey to the Earth's Interior in 1913 and published an expanded edition in 1920. He placed an interior sun in the Earth and built a working model of the hollow Earth which patented (). Gardner made no mention of Reed, but did criticize Symmes for his ideas. About the same time Vladimir Obruchev wrote a novel Plutonia, in which the hollow Earth possessed an inner sun and was inhabited by prehistoric species. The interior was connected with the surface by an opening in the Arctic.

Explorer Ferdynand Ossendowski wrote a book in 1922 titled Beasts, Men and Gods. Ossendowski said he was told about a subterranean kingdom exists inside the earth. It was known to Buddhists as Agharti. Ferdynand Ossendowski (1922). Beasts, Men and Gods. New York: E. P. Dutton & Company. 

George Papashvily in his Anything Can Happen (1940) claimed the discovery in the Caucasus mountains of a cavern containing human skeletons "with heads as big as bushel baskets" and an ancient tunnel leading to the centre of the earth. One man entered the tunnel and never returned. George & Helen Papashvily,  Anything Can Happen., Harper & Bros., New York, NY., 1940 

Novelist Lobsang Rampa in his book The Cave of the Ancients said an underground chamber system exists beneath the Himalayas of Tibet, filled with ancient machinery, records and treasure. Cave of the Ancients, Lobsang Rampa, Random House, 1993 Michael Grumley a cryptozoologist has linked Bigfoot and other hominid cryptids to ancient tunnel systems underground. There are Giants in the Earth, Michael Grumley, Panther Books, 1976, pp. 4247 

Douglas Baker wrote in one of his books that he had an astral journey to the inner earth where he observed a subterranean civilization. Douglas Baker, Practical Techniques of Astral Projection, The Aquarian Press, Wellingboro, Northamptonshire, England, 1977, p. 52 Other occult writers such as Guy Ballard and Alice Bailey have written that they have had out of body experiences and met mysterious beings inside of the earth.

According to the ancient astronaut writer Peter Kolosimo a robot was seen entering a subterranean tunnel below a monastery in Mongolia. Kolosimo also claimed a light was seen from underground in Azerbaijan. Peter Kolosimo, Not of this World, Sphere Books 1974 ISBN 0-7221-5309-0 also see Peter Kolosimo, Timeless Earth, Citadel Pr, 1988 Edition ISBN 0-8065-1070-6 Kolosimo and other ancient astronaut writers such as Robert Charroux linked these activities to UFOs.

A book allegedly by a "Dr. Raymond Bernard" which appeared in 1964, The Hollow Earth, exemplifies the idea of UFOs coming from inside the earth. The book rehashes Reed and Gardner's ideas and ignores Symmes. Bernard also adds his own ideas: the Ring Nebula proves the existence of hollow worlds, as well as speculation on the fate of Atlantis and the origin of flying saucers. Bernard argued that the inhabitants of Atlantis took refuge in the Earth's interior before the city was destroyed in great calamity. It was Atlanteans who piloted the flying machines known in ancient India as vimanas and in the modern world as flying saucers. After the US bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Bernard claimed, the Atlanteans became concerned that radioactive air might flow into the world's interior, and so some emerged in their flying saucers in an act of self-defense. An article by Martin Gardner revealed that Dr. Walter Siegmeister used the pseudonym `Bernard', but not until the publishing of Walter Kafton-Minkel's Subterranean Worlds: 100,000 years of dragons, dwarves, the dead, lost races & UFOs from inside the Earth, in 1989, did the full story of Bernard/Siegmeister become well known. Walter Kafton-Minkel Subterranean Worlds: 100,000 Years of Dragons, Dwarfs, the Dead, Lost Races and Ufos from Inside the Earth Loompanics Unlimited, 1989 ISBN 978-1559500159 

The pages of the science fiction pulp magazine Amazing Stories promoted one such idea from 1945 to 1949 as "the Shaver Mystery". The magazine's editor, Ray Palmer, ran a series of stories by Richard Sharpe Shaver supposedly claimed as factual, though presented in the context of fiction. Shaver claimed that a superior pre-historic race had built a honeycomb of caves in the Earth, and that their degenerate descendants, known as "Dero", live there still, using the fantastic machines abandoned by the ancient races to torment those of us living on the surface. As one characteristic of this torment, Shaver described "voices" that purportedly came from no explainable source. Thousands of readers wrote to affirm that they, too, had heard the fiendish voices from inside the Earth. The writer David Hatcher Childress authored Lost Continents and the Hollow Earth (1998) in which he reprinted the stories of Palmer and defended the hollow earth idea based on alleged tunnel systems beneath South America and central Asia. David Hatcher Childress Lost Continents and the Hollow Earth Adventures Unlimited Press, 1998 ISBN 978-0932813633 

Hollow earth theorists have claimed a number of different locations for the entrances which lead inside the earth. Other than the North and South poles, entrances in locations which have been cited include: Paris in France, Alien races and Fantastic Civilizations., Serge Hutin, Berkeley Medallion Books, 1975, pp. 109132  In the Bowels of the Earth: Refers to the mysterious catacombs beneath Paris, and other underground mysteries which lead inside the earth. Staffordshire in England, The Under-People, Eric Norman, Award Books, 1969 Montreal in Canada, Inner Earth People And Outer Space People, William L. Blessing, Inner Light Publications, 2008 Edition ISBN 1-60611-036-5 Hangchow in China, Chinese ghouls and goblins, G Willoughby-Meade, Stokes co, 1929 and the Amazon Rainforest. Mysteries of Ancient South America, Harold T. Wilkins, Citadel Press., New York, 1956 

Fantastic stories (supposedly believed as factual within fringe circles) have also circulated that Adolf Hitler and some of his followers escaped to hollow lands within the Earth after World War II via an entrance in Antarctica. (See also Hitler's supposed adherence to concave hollow-Earth ideas, below.)

Some writers have proposed building megastructures that have some similarities to a hollow Earth  see Dyson sphere, Globus Cassus.

===21st century===
In 2011, Horatio Valens and Paul Veneti presented a two-hour "Lazeria Map Collection" video on centuries-old maps of the Arctic region and the North Pole, making a case for a 100-mile wide canyon in the center of the physical North Pole, into which north-flowing rivers drain into a hollow Earth. The maps were collected by Harry Hubbard. http://www.illinoiscaves.com/harrybio.htm 

===Concave hollow Earths===
An example of a concave hollow Earth. Humans live on the interior, with the universe in the center.

Instead of saying that humans live on the outside surface of a hollow planet  sometimes called a "convex" hollow-Earth hypothesis  some have claimed humans live on the inside surface of a hollow spherical world, so that our universe itself lies in that world's interior. This has been called the "concave" hollow-Earth hypothesis.

Cyrus Teed, a doctor from upstate New York, proposed such a concave hollow Earth in 1869, calling his scheme "Cellular Cosmogony". Teed founded a group called the Koreshan Unity based on this notion, which he called Koreshanity. The main colony survives as a preserved Florida state historic site, at Estero, Florida, but all of Teed's followers have now died. Teed's followers claimed to have experimentally verified the concavity of the Earth's curvature, through surveys of the Florida coastline making use of "rectilineator" equipment.

Several twentieth-century German writers, including Peter Bender, Johannes Lang, Karl Neupert, and Fritz Braun, published works advocating the hollow Earth hypothesis, or Hohlweltlehre. It has even been reported, although apparently without historical documentation, that Adolf Hitler was influenced by concave hollow-Earth ideas and sent an expedition in an unsuccessful attempt to spy on the British fleet by pointing infrared cameras up at the sky. 
 See pages 277  278. 

The Egyptian mathematician Mostafa Abdelkader wrote several scholarly papers working out a detailed mapping of the concave Earth model. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, (Oct. 1981 and Feb. 1982). 

In one chapter of his book On the Wild Side (1992), Martin Gardner discusses the hollow Earth model articulated by Abdelkader. According to Gardner, this hypothesis posits that light rays travel in circular paths, and slow as they approach the center of the spherical star-filled cavern. No energy can reach the center of the cavern, which corresponds to no point a finite distance away from Earth in the widely accepted scientific cosmology. A drill, Gardner says, would lengthen as it traveled away from the cavern and eventually pass through the "point at infinity" corresponding to the center of the Earth in the widely accepted scientific cosmology. Supposedly no experiment can distinguish between the two cosmologies.

Gardner notes that "most mathematicians believe that an inside-out universe, with properly adjusted physical laws, is empirically irrefutable". Gardner rejects the concave hollow Earth hypothesis on the basis of Occam's Razor. On the Wild Side (1992), Martin Gardner, p.18-9 

Purportedly verifiable hypotheses of a "concave hollow Earth" need to be distinguished from a thought experiment
which defines a coordinate transformation such that the interior of the Earth becomes "exterior" and the exterior becomes "interior". (For example, in spherical coordinates, let radius r go to R/r where R is the Earth's radius.) The transformation entails corresponding changes to the forms of physical laws. This is not a hypothesis but an illustration of the fact that any description of the physical world can be equivalently expressed in more than one way. On the Wild Side, 1992, Martin Gardner.\ 

==Contrary evidence==

===Seismic===
The picture of the structure of the earth that has been arrived at through the study of seismic waves 
 
is quite different from the hollow earth theory. The Earth's interior is made up of layers of molten rock and various elements, in the mantle and core. USGS - Earth's interior 

===Gravity ===
Another set of scientific arguments against a hollow Earth or any hollow planet comes from gravity. Massive objects tend to clump together gravitationally, creating non-hollow spherical objects such as stars and planets. The solid sphere is the best way in which to minimize the gravitational potential energy of a physical object; having hollowness is unfavorable in the energetic sense. In addition, ordinary matter is not strong enough to support a hollow shape of planetary size against the force of gravity; a planet-sized hollow shell with the known, observed thickness of the Earth's crust, would not be able to achieve hydrostatic equilibrium with its own mass and would collapse.

Someone on the inside of a hollow Earth would not experience a significant outward pull and could not easily stand on the inner surface; rather, the theory of gravity implies that a person on the inside would be nearly weightless. This was first shown by Newton, whose shell theorem mathematically predicts a gravitational force (from the shell) of zero everywhere inside a spherically symmetric hollow shell of matter, regardless of the shell's thickness. A tiny gravitational force would arise from the fact that the Earth does not have a perfectly symmetrical spherical shape, as well as forces from other bodies such as the Moon. The centrifugal force from the Earth's rotation would pull a person (on the inner surface) outwards if the person was traveling at the same velocity as the Earth's interior and was in contact with the ground on the interior, but even the maximum centrifugal force at the equator is only 1/300 of ordinary Earth gravity.

The mass of the planet also indicates that the hollow Earth hypothesis is unfeasible. Should the Earth be largely hollow, its mass would be much lower and thus its gravity on the outer surface would be much lower than it is.

===Direct observation===
The deepest hole drilled to date is the Z-44 Chayvo oil well which is 12,376 m http://www.sakhalin-1.com/Sakhalin/Russia-English/Upstream/media_news_events_Z44.aspx deep, part of the Exxon Neftegas Sakhalin-I project; thus, visual knowledge of the Earth's structure extends that far.

==In fiction==

A map of the Interior World, from The Goddess of Atvatabar (1892).

The idea of a hollow Earth is a common element of fiction, appearing as early as
Ludvig Holberg's 1741 novel Nicolai Klimii iter subterraneum (Niels Klim's Underground Travels), in which Nicolai Klim falls through a cave while spelunking and spends several years living on a smaller globe both within and the inside of the outer shell.

Other notable pre-20th century examples include Giacomo Casanova's 1788 Icosamron, a 5-volume, 1,800-page story of a brother and sister who fall into the Earth and discover the subterranean utopia of the Mgamicres, a race of multicolored, hermaphroditic dwarfs; by a "Captain Adam Seaborn" (1820) which reflected the ideas of John Cleves Symmes, Jr.; Edgar Allan Poe's 1838 novel The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket; Jules Verne's 1864 novel A Journey to the Center of the Earth, which described a prehistoric subterranean world; and George Sand's 1884 novel Laura, Voyage dans le Cristal where unseen and giant crystals could be found in the interior of the Earth.

In W.H. Hudson's 1887 romance, A Crystal Age, the protagonist falls down a hill into a Utopian, asexual, pastoral paradise; since he falls into this world, it is sometimes classified as a hollow earth story; although, the hero himself, thinks he may have traveled forward in time, by millennia.

The idea was used by Edgar Rice Burroughs, the creator of Tarzan, in the seven-novel "Pellucidar" series, beginning with At the Earth's Core (1914). Using a mechanical drill, his heroes discover a prehistoric world, called Pellucidar, 500 miles below the surface, that is lit by an inner sun. At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs The 1915 novel Plutonia by Vladimir Obruchev uses the concept of the hollow Earth to take the reader through various geological epochs.

In more recent decades, the idea has become a staple of the science fiction and adventure genres, appearing in print, in film, on television, in comics, in role-playing games such as the Hollow World Campaign Set for Dungeons & Dragons, and in many animated works.

In the science fiction series Sanctuary, Hollow Earth was a major location in the third and fourth seasons. In the series, Hollow Earth housed the origins of the shows main theme - abnormals; and a heavily advanced civilization in the city of Praxis. While Hollow Earth itself did not get too much attention (shown only in a handful of episodes, though mentioned thoroughly in the second half of the third season, and the fourth season), the inhabitants caused the main storyline of Season 4.

In the video game Gears of War humans live on an Earth like planet with a mostly hollow interior. The inside is filled with homicidal monsters bent on conquering the surface.

== See also ==

* Agartha
* Etidorhpa
* Brinsley Le Poer Trench, 8th Earl of Clancarty
* Cyrus Teed
* Dyson sphere
* Expanding Earth theory
* Flat Earth
* Gravity train

* Subterranean fiction
* Travel to the Earth's center
* Vril
* Hollow Moon
* Hollow Earth Expedition
* The Smoky God
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience

== References ==

==Bibliography==
*Seaborn, Captain Adam. Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery. J. Seymour, 1820.
*Lewis, David. The Incredible Cities of Inner Earth. Science Research Publishing House, 1979.
*Kafton-Minkel, Walter. Subterranean Worlds. Loompanics Unlimited, 1989.
*Standish, David. Hollow Earth : the Long and Curious History of Imagining Strange Lands, Fantastical Creatures, Advanced Civilizations, and Marvelous Machines Below the Earth's Surface. Da Capo Press, 2006.

== External links ==
* What Curiosity in the Structure: The Hollow Earth in Science.
* Library of Congress Some references
* The Hollow Earth  from The UnMuseum
*Stories of a Hollow Earth, Public Domain Review, 2011/10/10
* Skeptic Dictionary: Hollow Earth

 

[[Hamas]]

Hamas ( , "enthusiasm", an acronym of , "Islamic Resistance Movement") is a Palestinian Sunni Islamist * "This is particularly the case in view of the scholarly debate on the compatibility of Islam and democracy but even more so in view of Hamas's self-definition as an Islamic national liberation movement." The Palestinian Hamas: Vision, Violence, and Coexistence, by Shaul Mishal & Avraham Sela, 2006, p. xxviii
; *In this way the PA has been able to control the economic activities of its political adversaries, including the Hamas and other Islamic opposition groups. Investment in Peace: Politics of Economic Cooperation between Israel, Jordan, and the Palestinian Authority, by Shaul Mishal, Ranan D. Kuperman, David Boas, 2001, p. 85
; * "Hamas is a radical Islamic fundamentalist organization that has stated that its highest priority is a Jihad (holy war) for the liberation of Palestine ..." Peace and War: The ArabIsraeli Military Balance Enters the 21st Century, by Anthony H. Cordesman, 2002, p. 243
; * "One of the secrets behind the success of Hamas is that it is an Islamic and national movement at one and the same time ..." "Hamas: Palestinian Identity, Islam, and National Sovereignty", by Meir Litvak, in Challenges to the Cohesion of the Arabic State, by Asher Susser, 2008, p. 153. ; * "Hamas is an Islamic fundamentalist movement founded in 1987 ..." Understanding Terrorism: Challenges, Perspectives, and Issues, by Gus Martin, 2009, p. 153
; * "Hamas is an Islamic jihadist organization ..." Why Israel Can't Wait: The Coming War Between Israel and Iran, by Jerome R. Corsi, 2009, p. 39. ; * "The Islamic Resistance Movement (Harakat al-Muqawama al-Islam- iyya), known by its acronym Hamas, is an Islamic fundamentalist organization that defines itself as the military wing of the Muslim Brethren." Anti-Semitic motifs in the Ideology of Hizballah and Hamas, by Esther Webman, 1994, p. 17. * "Understanding Islamism", Crisis Group Middle East/North Africa Report N37, March 2, 2005 * * * "The New Hamas: Between Resistance and Participation". Middle East Report. Graham Usher, August 21, 2005 * organization, with an associated military wing, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, in the Palestinian territories.

Since 2007, Hamas has governed the Gaza Strip, after it won a majority of seats in the Palestinian Parliament in the 2006 Palestinian parliamentary elections and defeated the Fatah political organization in a series of violent clashes. Israel, the United States, "Country reports on terrorism 2005", United States Department of State. Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism. U.S. Dept. of State Publication 11324. April 2006. p 196 Canada, the European Union, Jordan, Egypt and Japan classify Hamas as a terrorist organization, while Iran, Russia, "How to Confront Russia's Anti-American Foreign Policy" The Heritage Foundation. June 27, 2007 Turkey, BBC News. June 4, 2010 China China's Palestine Policy and many nations across the Arab world do not.

Based on the principles of Islamic fundamentalism gaining momentum throughout the Arab world in the 1980s, Hamas was founded in 1987 (during the First Intifada) as an offshoot of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. Co-founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin stated in 1987, and the Hamas Charter affirmed in 1988, that Hamas was founded to liberate Palestine from Israeli occupation and to establish an Islamic state in the area that is now Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip. Hamas (Islamic Resistance Movement), www.ict.org.il "Israeli Official Says Hamas Has Made Abbas Irrelevant" The New York Times, February 27, 2006 However, in July 2009, Khaled Meshal, Hamas's political bureau chief, said the organization was willing to cooperate with "a resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict which included a Palestinian state based on 1967 borders", provided that Palestinian refugees hold the right to return to Israel and that East Jerusalem be the new nation's capital. However, Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, deputy chairman of Hamas political bureau, said in 2014 that "Hamas will not recognize Israel", adding "this is a red line that cannot be crossed". 

The Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the Hamas affiliated military wing, has launched attacks on Israel, against both civilian and military targets. Attacks on civilian targets have included rocket attacks and, from 1993 to 2006, suicide bombings. Attacks on military targets have included small-arms fire and rocket and mortar attacks. 

In the January 2006 Palestinian parliamentary elections Hamas won a decisive majority in the Palestinian Parliament, defeating the PLO-affiliated Fatah party. Following the elections, the Quartet (United States, Russia, United Nations, and European Union) conditioned future foreign assistance to the PA on the future government's commitment to nonviolence, recognition of the state of Israel, and acceptance of previous agreements. Hamas resisted such changes, leading to Quartet suspension of its foreign assistance program and Israel imposing economic sanctions against the Hamas-led administration. FPC.state.gov In March 2007 a national unity government, headed by Prime Minister Ismail Haniya of Hamas was briefly formed, but this failed to restart international financial assistance. 
* Hamas New York Times, June 18, 2010 "The pact did not succeed in restoring the flow of aid and did not last. Clashes between the two groups steadily escalated until gunmen loyal to Hamas took control of Gaza in June, ousting the remnants of Fatah."
* Backgrounder: Hamas. Council of Foreign Relations. August 27, 2009, "In the summer of 2007, Hamas tensions with the Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, a Fatah man, came to a head and Hamas routed Fatah supporters, killing many and sending others fleeing to the West Bank. The result was a de facto geographic division of Palestinian-held territory, with Hamas holding sway in Gaza and Fatah maintaining the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority government in the West Bank town of Ramallah."
 Tensions over control of Palestinian security forces soon erupted into the 2007 Battle of Gaza, after which Hamas retained control of Gaza while its officials were ousted from government positions in the West Bank. Israel and Egypt then imposed an economic blockade on Gaza, on the grounds that Fatah forces were no longer providing security there. 

In June 2008, as part of an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire, Hamas ceased rocket attacks on Israel and made some efforts to prevent attacks by other organizations. Akram, Fares; Isabel Kershner (March 18, 2010). "Gaza rocket attack into Israel kills a Thai worker". The New York Times. After a four-month calm, the conflict escalated when Israel carried out a military action with the stated aim of preventing an abduction planned by Hamas, using a tunnel that had been dug under the border security fence, and killed seven Hamas operatives. In retaliation, Hamas attacked Israel with a barrage of rockets. In late December 2008, Israel attacked Gaza, withdrawing its forces from the territory in mid-January 2009. "Israel withdraws its troops from Gaza" Times After the Gaza War, Hamas continued to govern the Gaza Strip and Israel maintained its economic blockade. On May 4, 2011, Hamas and Fatah announced a reconciliation agreement that provides for "creation of a joint caretaker Palestinian government" prior to national elections scheduled for 2012. "Palestinian rivals Hamas and Fatah sign reconciliation deal" The Guardian (UK), May 4, 2011 According to Israeli news reports quoting Fatah leader Mahmoud Abbas, as a condition of joining the PLO, Khaled Meshaal agreed to discontinue the "armed struggle" against Israel and accept Palestinian statehood within the 1967 borders, alongside Israel. Does Hamas Joining PLO Mean It Accepts 2 States? By J. J. Goldberg, The Forward, December 22, 2011 

==Etymology==
Hamas is an acronym of the Arabic phrase    or Harakat al-Muqwama al-Islmiyya, meaning "Islamic Resistance Movement". The Arabic word Hamas also means devotion and zeal in the path of Allah. Anti-Semitic Motifs in the Ideology of Hizballah and Hamas, Esther Webman, Project for the Study of Anti-Semitism, 1994. ISBN 978-965-222-592-4 The Hamas covenant interprets its name to mean "strength and bravery". 

==Leadership and structure==
Map of key Hamas leadership nodes. 2010
Current leader, Khaled Meshaal
Hamas comprises three interrelated wings  the social welfare and political wings, which are responsible for the social, administrative, political, and propaganda activities of Hamas, and the military wing, which is engaged in covert activities, such as acting against suspected collaborators, gathering intelligence on potential targets, procuring weapons, and carrying out military attacks. 

===Consultative councils===
The Majlis al-Shura (consultative council) is the group's overarching political and decision making body. It includes representatives from Gaza, the West Bank, Israeli prisons, and the exiled external leadership, the Political Bureau. Under this Shura council are committees responsible for supervising Hamas activities, from media relations to military operations. In the West Bank and Gaza, local Shura committees answer to the Shura council and carry out its decisions. 

Hamas's highest decision-making body is its Political Bureau, which consists of 15 members. Before the beginning of the Syrian civil war, it operated in exile in Damascus, Syria. The bureau is elected by members who select their representatives in local Consultative Councils in specific geographic regions. The councils then nominate representatives to the General Consultative Council, and the Political Bureau is elected by members of the General Consultative Council. 

===Military wing===

The Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, Hamas's military wing formed in 1992, is named in commemoration of influential Palestinian nationalist Sheikh Izz ad-Din al-Qassam. Armed Hamas cells sometimes refer to themselves as "Students of Ayyash", "Students of the Engineer", or "Yahya Ayyash Units", Kushner, Harvey W. (2002). Encyclopedia of Terrorism, p.160 Sage Publications, ISBN 0-7619-2408-6 to commemorate Yahya Ayyash, an early Hamas bomb-maker killed in 1996. Since its establishment, the military capability of Hamas has increased markedly, from rifles to Qassam rockets and more. "Hamas's Tactics: Lessons from Recent Attacks", By Jamie Chosak and Julie Sawyer. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. October 19, 2005 

While the number of members is known only to the Brigades leadership, Israel estimates the Brigades have a core of several hundred members who receive military style training, including training in Iran and in Syria (before the Syrian civil war). Additionally, the brigades have an estimated 10,000 operatives "of varying degrees of skill and professionalism" who are members of Hamas or their supporters and the internal security forces. These operatives can be expected to reinforce the Brigades in an "emergency situation". The HAMAS Terror Organization - 2007 update Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

Although the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades are an integral part of Hamas, they also operate independently of Hamas, and at times contrary to Hamas' stated aims. al-Qassam Brigades: Details of the organisation Australian Government National Security September 15, 2009 Most analysts agree that although differences of opinion between the Hamas military and political wing exist, Hamas's internal discipline is strong enough to contain them. "Who controls Hamas - Haniya or Mashaal?", The Sunday Times, by Stephen Farrell in Gaza and Nicholas Blanford, July 10, 2006 Political scientists Ilana Kass and Bard O'Neill liken Hamas's relationship with the Brigades to the political party Sinn Fin's relationship to the military arm of the Irish Republican Army. The dDadly Embrace: The Impact of Israeli and Palestinian Rejectionism on the Peace Process University Press of America, Ilana Kass & Bard E. O'Neill, 1997, p. 267 To further explain the relationship, they quote a senior Hamas official: "The Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigade is a separate armed military wing, which has its own leaders who do not take their orders from and do not tell us of their plans in advance." However, according to former U.S. Department of Treasury official and terrorism expert Matthew Levitt, the Hamas Political Bureau operates as the highest ranking leadership body determining the policy of the Hamas organization and has responsibility for directing and coordinating terrorist acts. Hamas' founder, Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, stated in 1998: "We can not separate the wing from the body. If we do so, the body will not be able to fly. Hamas is one body." [http://www.eurojournals.com/rjis_8_12.pdf ] 

===Social welfare===
Hamas is particularly popular among Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, though it also has a following in the West Bank, and to a lesser extent in other Middle Eastern countries. Its popularity stems in part from its welfare wing providing social services to Palestinians in the occupied territories. Such services are not generally provided by the Palestinian Authority. Israeli scholar Reuven Paz estimates that 90% of Hamas activities revolve around "social, welfare, cultural, and educational activities". Social services include running relief programs and funding schools, orphanages, mosques, healthcare clinics, soup kitchens, and sports leagues. 
* 
* "Hamas"  Council on Foreign Relations. Updated January 7, 2009
* Books: Kingdom of God The New Statesman May 7, 2007; "Using Israeli estimates, Levitt, senior fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy reckons Hamas probably has an annual budget of between $70m and $90m, 80 to 85 per cent of which it spends on its political work and its extensive networks of schools, clinics and welfare organisations, while 15 to 20 per cent goes on military operations." 

In particular, Hamas funded health services where people could receive free or inexpensive medical treatment. Hamas greatly contributed to the health sector, and facilitated hospital and physician services in the Palestinian territory. On the other hand, Hamas's use of hospitals is sometimes criticised as purportedly serving the promotion of violence against Israel. Emerson, Steven. "Why Does The New York Times Love Hamas?" January 6, 2009. November 14, 2009. Charities affiliated with Hamas are known to financially support families of those who have been killed or imprisoned while carrying out militant actions or supporting such actions. Families typically receive a one time grant of $500 to $5,000, and those whose homes have been destroyed by the Israel Defense Forces have their rent paid for temporary housing. Families of militants not affiliated with Hamas sometimes receive less. 

Hamas has funded education and built Islamic charities, libraries, mosques and education centers for women. They also built nurseries, kindergartens and supervised religious schools that provide free meals to children. When children attend their schools and mosques, parents are required to sign oaths of allegiance. Refugees, as well as those left without homes, are able to claim financial and technical assistance from Hamas. Peter Hilsenrath 

The work of Hamas in these fields supplements that provided by the United Nations Relief Works Agency (UNRWA). Hamas is also well regarded by Palestinians for its efficiency and perceived lack of corruption compared to Fatah. Since the 20082009 Israeli military operation in Gaza, Palestinian public opinion polls have shown Hamas steadily increasing in popularity with 52% support compared to 13% for Fatah. All public opinion surveys conducted recently have supported this trend. 

Despite building materials needing to be smuggled into the territory, luxury beach resorts and tourist facilities operated by the interior ministry have been constructed by Hamas governmentlinked charities, including gardens, playgrounds, football fields, a zoo and restaurants aimed to provide employment and low cost entertainment for citizens. Some Palestinians have complained about the admission fee, criticizing Hamas for charging them to use "government-owned" property. 

==Goals==
Hamas' 1988 charter states that Hamas "strives to raise the banner of Allah over every inch of Palestine" (Article Six). Article Thirty-One of the Charter states: "Under the wing of Islam, it is possible for the followers of the three religionsIslam, Christianity and Judaismto coexist in peace and quiet with each other." Hamas Covenant 1988, 18 August 1988. On the Avalon Project 

After the elections in 2006, Hamas co-founder Mahmoud Al-Zahar did not rule out the possibility of accepting a "temporary two-state solution", and stated that he dreamed "of hanging a huge map of the world on the wall at my Gaza home which does not show Israel on it". Xinhua reports that Al-Zahar "did not rule out the possibility of having Jews, Muslims and Christians living under the sovereignty of an Islamic state". In late 2006, Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of Hamas, said that if a Palestinian state was formed within the 1967 lines, Hamas was willing to declare a truce that could last as long as 20 years, and stated that Hamas will never recognize the "usurper Zionist government" and will continue "jihad-like movement until the liberation of Jerusalem". 

In March 2006, Hamas released its official legislative program. The document clearly signaled that Hamas could refer the issue of recognizing Israel to a national referendum. Under the heading "Recognition of Israel," it stated simply (AFP, 3/11/06): "The question of recognizing Israel is not the jurisdiction of one faction, nor the government, but a decision for the Palestinian people." This was a major shift away from their 1988 charter. A few months later, via Maryland's Jerome Segal, the group sent a letter to U.S. President George Bush stating they "don't mind having a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders", and asked for direct negotiations: "Segal emphasized that a state within the 1967 borders and a truce for many years could be considered Hamas' de facto recognition of Israel." 

In an April 2008 meeting between Hamas leader Khaled Meshal and former U.S. President Jimmy Carter, an understanding was reached in which Hamas agreed it would respect the creation of a Palestinian state in the territory seized by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War, provided this were ratified by the Palestinian people in a referendum. Hamas later publicly offered a long-term truce with Israel if Israel agreed to return to its 1967 borders and grant the "right of return" to all Palestinian refugees. Al Jazeera, "Hamas ready to accept 1967 borders". Apr 22, 2008. In November 2008, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh re-stated that Hamas was willing to accept a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders, and offered Israel a long-term truce "if Israel recognized the Palestinians' national rights". In 2009, in a letter to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, Haniyeh repeated his group's support for a two-state settlement based on 1967 borders: "We would never thwart efforts to create an independent Palestinian state with borders June 4, 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital." On December 1, 2010, Ismail Haniyeh again repeated, "We accept a Palestinian state on the borders of 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital, the release of Palestinian prisoners, and the resolution of the issue of refugees," and "Hamas will respect the results a referendum regardless of whether it differs with its ideology and principles." 

In February 2012, according to the Palestinian authority, Hamas forswore the use of violence. Evidence for this was provided by an eruption of violence from Islamic Jihad in March 2012 after an Israeli assassination of a Jihad leader, during which Hamas refrained from attacking Israel. "Israeldespite its mantra that because Hamas is sovereign in Gaza it is responsible for what goes on therealmost seems to understand," wrote Israeli journalists Avi Issacharoff and Amos Harel, "and has not bombed Hamas offices or installations". 

Israel has rejected some truce offers by Hamas because it contends the group uses them to prepare for more fighting rather than peace. Israel rejects Gaza ceasefire The Guardian (UK), April 25, 2008 The Atlantic magazine columnist Jeffrey Goldberg, along with other analysts, believes Hamas may be incapable of permanent reconciliation with Israel. "Nizar Rayyan of Hamas on God's Hatred of Jews", The Atlantic, (January 2, 2009). Mkhaimer Abusada, a political scientist at Al Azhar University, writes that Hamas talks "of hudna ceasefire, not of peace or reconciliation with Israel. They believe over time they will be strong enough to liberate all historic Palestine." 

===Charter===

The Hamas Charter (or Covenant), issued in 1988, outlined the organization's position on many issues at the time. It identifies Hamas as the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine and declares its members to be Muslims who "fear God and raise the banner of Jihad in the face of the oppressors". The charter states "our struggle against the Jews is very great and very serious" and calls for the eventual creation of an Islamic state in Palestine, in place of Israel and the Palestinian Territories, and the obliteration or dissolution of Israel. The Palestinian Hamas By Shaul Mishal, Avraham Sela. Retrieved February 9, 2009. The Charter also asserts that through shrewd manipulation of imperial countries and secret societies, Zionists were behind a wide range of events and disasters going as far back in history as the French Revolution. Among the charter's controversial statements is the following: "The time will not come until Muslims will fight the Jews kill them; until the Jews hide behind rocks and trees, which will cry: O Muslim! There is a Jew hiding behind me, come on and kill him!" The document also quotes Islamic religious texts to provide justification for fighting against and killing the Jews of Israel, presenting the ArabIsraeli conflict as an inherently irreconcilable struggle between Jews and Muslims, and Judaism and Islam, adding that the only way to engage in this struggle between "truth and falsehood" is through Islam and by means of jihad, until victory or martyrdom. The Charter adds that "renouncing any part of Palestine means renouncing part of the religion" of Islam. The charter states that Hamas is humanistic, and tolerant of other religions as long as they do not block Hamas's efforts. Article 31 of the Hamas Charter (1988) Yale Law School: The Avalon Project 

====Current status of the Charter====
Hamas leader Khaled Meshaal indicated to Robert Pastor, senior adviser to the Carter Center, that the Charter is "a piece of history and no longer relevant, but cannot be changed for internal reasons". "Mazin Qumsiyeh on the History and Practice Of Nonviolent Palestinian Resistance" Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, MayJune 2010, pp. 4042 Hamas do not use the Charter on their website and prefer to use their election manifesto to put forth their agenda. Hamas drops call for destruction of Israel from manifesto The Guardian Retrieved May 28, 2011 Hamas Official website Retrieved May 28, 2011 Pastor states that those who quote the charter rather than more recent Hamas statements may be using the Charter as an excuse to ignore Hamas. 

British diplomat and former British ambassador to the United Nations Sir Jeremy Greenstock stated in early 2009 that the Hamas charter was "drawn up by a Hamas-linked imam some years ago and has never been adopted since Hamas was elected as the Palestinian government in 2006". Mohammed Nimer of American University comments on the Charter, "It's a tract meant to mobilize support and it should be amended.... It projects anger, not vision." Prospects for Peace Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, July 2009, pp. 53-54 Ahmed Yousef, an adviser to Ismail Haniyeh, has questioned the use of the charter by Israel and its supporters to brand Hamas as a fundamentalist, terrorist, racist, anti-Semitic organization and claims that they have taken parts of the charter out of context for propaganda purposes. He claims that they dwell on the charter and ignore that Hamas has changed its views with time. "Hamas Charter: Vision, Fact and Fiction" Palestine Chronicle (23/1/2011) Retrieved May 27, 2011 

==History==

===Early Islamic activism in Gaza===
With its takeover of Gaza after the 1967 war with Egypt, Israel hunted down secular Palestinian Liberation Organization factions but dropped the previous Egyptian rulers' harsh restrictions against Islamic activists. In fact, Israel for many years tolerated and at times encouraged Islamic activists and groups as a counterweight to the secular nationalists of the PLO and its dominant faction, Fatah. Hamas: Politics, Charity, and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad Matthew Levitt, Yale University Press, 2007, p. 24. "Scholars and historians on both sides ... agree that from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s the Brotherhood benefited from the Israeli government's support of non-violent Islamist Palestinian factions, believing these groups would function as a useful counterweight to the secular nationalist Palestinian groups ..." 

Among the activists benefited was Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza, who had also formed the Islamist group Mujama al-Islamiya in 1973, a charity recognized by Israel in 1979. Israel allowed the organization to build mosques, clubs, schools, and a library in Gaza. 

Yitzhak Segev, the acting governor of Gaza in 1979, said he had no illusions about Yassin's intentions, having watched an Islamist movement topple the Shah as Israel's military attache in Iran. According to Segev, Yassin and his charity were completely peaceful towards Israel during this time, and Segev and other Israeli officials feared being viewed as an enemy of Islam. Segev maintained regular contact with Yassin, met with him around a dozen times, and arranged for Yassin to be taken to Israel for hospital treatment. 

Also, Segev said, Fatah was "our main enemy". Islamists frequently attacked secular and leftist Palestinian movements, including Fatah, but the Israeli military avoided getting involved in those quarrels. It stood aside, for example, when Mujama al-Islamiya activists stormed the Red Crescent charity's headquarters in Gaza, but Segev did send soldiers to prevent the burning down of the home of the head of the organization. 

In 1984 the Israeli army received intelligence that Sheikh Yassin's followers were collecting arms in Gaza. Israeli troops raided mosques and found a cache of weapons. Yassin was arrested, but told his interrogators the weapons were meant to be used against secular Palestinians, not Israel. The cleric was released a year later and allowed to continue to develop his movement in Gaza. 

Around the time of Yassin's arrest, Avner Cohen, an Israeli religious affairs official, sent a report to senior military officers and civilian leadership in Gaza advising them of the dangers of the Islamic movement, but this report and similar ones were ignored. Former military intelligence officer Shalom Harari said the warnings were ignored out of neglect, not a desire to fortify the Islamists: "Israel never financed Hamas. Israel never armed Hamas." 

===Establishment===

In 1987, several Palestinians were killed in a traffic accident involving an Israeli driver, and the events that followeda Palestinian uprising (now known as the First Intifada) against Israel's West Bank and Gaza occupationled Yassin and six other Palestinians to found Hamas as an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood movement. The new group was supported by Brotherhood-affiliated charities and social institutions that had already gained a strong foothold in the occupied territories. The acronym "Hamas" first appeared in 1987 in a leaflet that accused the Israeli intelligence services of undermining the moral fiber of Palestinian youth as part of Mossad's recruitment of what Hamas termed collaborators. Nonetheless, Israeli military and intelligence was still focused on Fatah, and continued to maintain contacts with Gaza's Islamic activists. Numerous Islamist leaders, including senior Hamas founder Mahmoud Zahar, met with Yitzhak Rabin as part of "regular consultations" between Israeli officials and Palestinians not linked to the PLO. 

Hamas carried out its first attack against Israel in 1989, abducting and killing two soldiers. The Israel Defense Forces immediately arrested Yassin and sentenced him to life in prison, and deported 400 Hamas activists, including Zahar, to South Lebanon, which at the time was occupied by Israel. During this time Hamas built a relationship with Hezbollah.

===1990s===
Hamas's military branch, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, was created in 1991. Martyrdom, Not Suicide: The Legality of Hamas' Bombings in the Mid-1990s in Modern Islamic Jurisprudence By M.A. Philipp Holtmann, p. 13 During the 1990s the al-Qassam Brigades conducted numerous attacks on Israel, with both civilian and military victims. In April 1993, suicide bombings in the West Bank began. For suicide attacks, sources include:
* "To the outside world, Hamas is best-knowninfamousfor its reliance on suicide bombers." (Palestinian territories:Inside Hamas, PBS (TV series)|Frontline: World], May 9, 2006)
* "... the militant organization, best known abroad for its attacks against Israeli civilians ..." (Musharbash, Yassin. "Could Victory be Undoing of Hamas", Der Spiegel, January 27, 2006)
* "... it was best known in Israel and abroad for the suicide attacks it used ..." ("After the Hamas earthquake", The Guardian, January 27, 2006). After the February 1994 massacre by Baruch Goldstein of 30 Muslim civilians in a Hebron mosque, the al-Qassam Brigades began suicide attacks inside Israel. Martyrdom, Not Suicide: The Legality of Hamas' Bombings in the Mid-1990s in Modern Islamic Jurisprudence By M. A. Philipp Holtmann, p. 16 

In December 1992 Israel responded to the killing of a border police officer by deporting 415 leading figures of Hamas and Islamic Jihad to Lebanon, which provoked international condemnation and a unanimous UN Security Council resolution condemning the action. "For Arabs in Israel, a house is not a home" by Edward Platt, New Statesman, August 30, 2010 Inside Hamas: The Untold Story of Militants, Martyrs and Spies By Zaki Chehab, p. 115 

Although the suicide attacks by the al-Qassam Brigades and other groups violated the 1993 Oslo accords (which Hamas opposed Chronology for Palestinians in Israel The UN Refugee Agency, 2004 ), Palestinian Authority President Yasir Arafat was reluctant to pursue the attackers and may have had inadequate means to do so. The Palestinian People: A History By Baruch Kimmerling & Joel S. Migdal, pp. 372373 Some analysts state that the Palestinian Authority could have stopped the suicide and other attacks on civilians but refused to do so. Karsh, Efraim. Arafat's War: The Man and His Battle for Israeli Conquest. New York: Grove Press, 2003. p. 216. 

According to the Congressional Research Service, Hamas admitted to having executed Palestinians accused of collaborating with Israeli authorities in the 1990s. A transcript of a training film by the al-Qassam Brigades tells how Hamas operatives kidnapped Palestinians accused of collaboration and then forced confessions before executing them. 

In 1996, Yahya Ayash, the chief bombmaker of Hamas and the leader of the West Bank battalion of the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, was assassinated by the Israeli secret service. Katz, Samuel. The Hunt for the Engineer. Lyons Press, 2002. ISBN 1-58574-749-1, p. 256 

In September 1997, Israeli agents in Jordan attempted but failed to assassinate Hamas leader Khaled Mashal, leading to chilled relations between the two countries and release of Sheikh Yassin, Hamas's spiritual leader, from Israeli prison. Two years later Hamas was banned in Jordan, reportedly in part at the request of the United States, Israel, and the Palestinian Authority. "Jordan curbs Hamas", The Guardian, November 22, 1999 Jordan's King Abdullah feared the activities of Hamas and its Jordanian allies would jeopardize peace negotiations with Israel, and accused Hamas of engaging in illegitimate activities within Jordan. "Hamas Leader Khaled Mashaal" Time, January 4, 2009 Jordan: Whether Hamas persecute, kidnap, torture or abuse with impunity Jordanian citizens who disagree with its methods, policies and ideology Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, October 25, 2000, JOR35666.E, accessed September 28, 2010 In mid-September 1999, authorities arrested Hamas leaders Khaled Mashal and Ibrahim Ghosheh on their return from a visit to Iran, and charged them with being members of an illegal organization, storing weapons, conducting military exercises, and using Jordan as a training base. Hamas: Politics, Charity, and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad, by Matthew Levitt. Yale University Press, 2007. p. 45 Hamas leaders denied the charges. Mashal was exiled and eventually settled in Syria.

===Second Intifada===
2001 Sbarro pizza restaurant bombing in Jerusalem, in which 15 Israeli civilians were killed. Hamas said the attack was in response to Israel's assassination of its officials, including two senior leaders. [http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2001/aug/10/israel2 Who carried out suicide bombing? The Guardian, August 10, 2001 ]]
Al-Qassam Brigades militants were among the armed groups that launched both military-style attacks and suicide bombings against Israeli civilian and military targets during the Second Intifada (also known as the Al-Aqsa Intifada (, Intifat El Aqa; , Intifdat El-Aqtzah), which began in late September 2000. This Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule in the occupied territories was much more violent than the First Intifada. The military and civilian death toll is estimated at 5500 Palestinians and more than 1100 Israelis, as well as 64 foreigners. B'Tselem  Statistics  Fatalities, B'Tselem. A 2007 study of Palestinian suicide bombings during the second intifada (September 2000 through August 2005) found that about 40 percent were carried out by the al-Qassam Brigades. "Human Capital and the Productivity of Suicide Bombers" Journal of Economic Perspectives Volume 21, Number 3, Summer 2007. Pages 223238 

The immediate trigger for the uprising is disputed, but a more general cause, writes U.S. political science professor Jeremy Pressman, was "popular Palestinian discontent grew during the Oslo peace process because the reality on the ground did not match the expectations created by the peace agreements". "The Second Intifada: Background and Causes of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict" Jeremy Pressman, Fall 2003 (pdf) Hamas would be the beneficiary of this growing discontent in the 2006 Palestinian Authority legislative elections.

In January 2004, Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin said that the group would end armed resistance against Israel in exchange for a Palestinian state in the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and east Jerusalem, and that restoring Palestinians' "historical rights" (relating to the 1948 Palestinian exodus) "would be left for future generations". Running out of time Al-Ahram Weekly January 29  February 4, 2004 On January 25, 2004, senior Hamas official Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi offered a 10-year truce, or hudna, in return for the establishment of a Palestinian state and the complete withdrawal by Israel from the territories captured in the 1967 Six Day War. Al-Rantissi stated that Hamas had come to the conclusion that it was "difficult to liberate all our land at this stage, so we accept a phased liberation". "Israel rejects 'insincere' Hamas offer of 10-year truce" The Independent January 27, 2004 Israel immediately dismissed al-Rantissi's statements as insincere and a smokescreen for military preparations. Yassin was assassinated on March 22, 2004, by a targeted Israeli air strike, Fury as Gaza buries Hamas leader BBC News April 19, 2004 and al-Rantisi was assassinated by a similar air strike on April 18, 2004. Hamas chief killed in air strike BBC News March 22, 2004 

===2006 presidential and legislative elections===
While Hamas boycotted the 2005 Palestinian presidential election, it did participate in the 2005 municipal elections organized by Yasser Arafat in the occupied territories. In those elections it won control of over one third of Palestinian municipal councils, besting Fatah, which had for long been the biggest force in Palestinian politics. 

In its election manifesto for the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, Hamas omitted a call for an end to Israel, though it did still call for armed struggle against the occupation. Hamas won the 2006 elections, winning 76 of the 132 seats to Fatah's 43. Hamas Routs Ruling Faction, Casting Pall on Peace Process, The New York Times, January 27, 2006 Seen by many as primarily a rejection of the Fatah government's corruption and ineffectiveness, the Hamas victory seemingly had brought to an end 40 years of PLO domination of Palestinian politics. Kristen Ess. "Why Hamas Won" ZNet. Palestine, January 31, 2006. 

In early February 2006, Hamas offered Israel a 10-year truce "in return for a complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories: the West Bank, Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem," and recognition of Palestinian rights including the "right of return". Peace with Israel for withdrawal to '67 borders, Ynetnews March 3, 2006 Mashal added that Hamas was not calling for a final end to armed operations against Israel, and it would not impede other Palestinian groups from carrying out such operations. 

After the election, the Quartet on the Middle East (the United States, Russia, the European Union (EU), and the United Nations) stated that assistance to the Palestinian Authority would only continue if Hamas renounced violence, recognized Israel, and accepted previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements, which Hamas refused to do. The Quartet then imposed a freeze on all international aid to the Palestinian territories. Palestinian sanctions to remain BBC, March 20, 2007 

In 2006 after the Gaza election, Hamas leader sent a letter addressed to George W. Bush where he among other things declared that Hamas would accept a state on the 1967 borders including a truce. However, the Bush administration did not reply. 

;Electoral Platform for Change and Reform
The Change and Reform List adopts a set of principles stemming from the Islamic tradition that we embrace. We see these principles as agreed upon not only by our Palestinian people, but also by our Arab and Islamic nation as a whole. These principles are:

# True Islam with its civilized achievements and political, economic, social, and legal aspects is our frame of reference and our way of life.
# Historic Palestine is part of the Arab and Islamic land and its ownership by the Palestinian people is a right that does not diminish over time. No military or legal measures will change that right.
# The Palestinian people, wherever they reside, constitute a single and united people and form an integral part of the Arab and Muslim nation ... verse. Our Palestinian people are still living a phase of national liberation, and thus they have the right to strive to recover their own rights and end the occupation using all means, including armed struggle. We have to make all our resources available to support our people and defeat the occupation and establish a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
# The right of return of all Palestinian refugees and displaced persons to their land and properties, and the right to self-determination and all other national rights, are inalienable and cannot be bargained away for any political concessions.
# We uphold the indigenous and inalienable rights of our people to our land, Jerusalem, our holy places, our water resources, borders, and a fully sovereign independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
# Reinforcing and protecting Palestinian national unity is one of the priorities of the Palestinian national action.
# The issue of the prisoners is at the top of the Palestinian agenda. 

Legislative policy and reforming the judiciary.

"stress the separation between the three powers, the legislative, executive and judicial; activate the role of the Constitutional Court; re-form the Judicial Supreme Council and choose its members by elections and on the basis of qualifications rather than partisan, personal, and social considerations ... ; enact the necessary laws that guarantee the neutrality of general prosecutor ... laws that will stop any transgression by the executive power on the constitution". 

Public freedoms and citizen rights.

"Achieve equality before the law among citizens in rights and duties; bring security to all citizens and protect their properties and assure their safety against arbitrary arrest, torture, or revenge; stress the culture of dialogue ... ; support the press and media institutions and maintain the right of journalists to access and to publish information; maintain freedom and independence of professional syndicates and preserve the rights of their membership". 

===HamasFatah conflict===

Hamas rally in BethlehemAfter the formation of the Hamas-led cabinet on March 20, 2006, tensions between Fatah and Hamas militants progressively rose in the Gaza strip as Fatah commanders refused to take orders from the government while the Palestinian Authority initiated a campaign of demonstrations, assassinations and abductions against Hamas, which led to Hamas responding. Israeli intelligence warned Mahmoud Abbas that Hamas had planned to kill him at his office in Gaza. According to a Palestinian source close to Abbas, Hamas considers president Abbas to be a barrier to its complete control over the Palestinian Authority and decided to kill him. In a statement to Al Jazeera, Hamas leader Mohammed Nazzal, accused Abbas of being party to besieging and isolating the Hamas-led government. Mahnaimi, Uzi. "Israel foils plot to kill Palestinian president", The Sunday Times, May 7, 2006 

On June 9, 2006, during an Israeli artillery operation, an explosion occurred on a busy Gaza beach, killing eight Palestinian civilians. It was assumed that Israeli shellings were responsible for the killings, but Israeli government officials denied this. Hamas formally withdrew from its 16-month ceasefire on June 10, taking responsibility for the subsequent Qassam rocket attacks launched from Gaza into Israel. 

On June 25, two Israeli soldiers were killed and another, Gilad Shalit, abducted following an incursion by the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, Popular Resistance Committees and Army of Islam. In response, the Israeli military launched Operation Summer Rains three days later, to secure the release of the kidnapped soldier, "Operation Summer Rains", GlobalSecurity.org arresting 64 Hamas officials. Among them were 8 Palestinian Authority cabinet ministers and up to 20 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council, The arrests, along with other events, effectively prevented the Hamas-dominated legislature from functioning during most of its term. 

On February 2007 Saudi-sponsored negotiations in Mecca produced agreement on a signed by Mahmoud Abbas on behalf of Fatah and Khaled Mashal on behalf of Hamas. The new government was called on to achieve Palestinian national goals as approved by the Palestine National Council, the clauses of the Basic Law and the National Reconciliation Document (the "Prisoners' Document") as well as the decisions of the Arab summit. 

In March 2007, the Palestinian Legislative Council established a national unity government, with 83 representatives voting in favor and three against. Government ministers were sworn in by Mahmoud Abbas, the chairman of the Palestinian Authority, at a ceremony held simultaneously in Gaza and Ramallah. In June that year, renewed fighting broke out between Hamas and Fatah. In the course of the June 2007 Battle of Gaza, Hamas exploited the near total collapse of Palestinian Authority forces in Gaza, to seize The "Gaza War". (PDF) . Retrieved on 2010-08-21. control of Gaza, ousting Fatah officials. President Mahmoud Abbas then dismissed the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority government. and outlawed the Hamas militia. At least 600 Palestinians died in fighting between Hamas and Fatah. Human Rights Watch, a U.S.-based group, accused both sides in the conflict of torture and war crimes. "Fatah supporters surrender to Hamas" The Guardian (UK), June 13, 2007 

Human Rights Watch estimates several hundred Gazans were "maimed" and tortured in the aftermath of the Gaza War. 73 Gazan men accused of "collaborating" had their arms and legs broken by "unidentified perpetrators" and 18 Palestinians accused of collaborating with Israel, who had escaped from Gaza's main prison compound after Israel bombed the facility, were executed by Hamas security officials in the first days of the conflict. Under Cover of War|Human Rights Watch. Human Rights Watch (2009-04-20). Retrieved on 2010-08-21. B'Tselem - Violations of the human rights of Palestinians by Palestinians - Severe human rights violations in inter-Palestinian clashes. Btselem.org (2007-11-12). Retrieved on 2010-08-21. 

Hamas security forces attacked hundreds Fatah officials who supported Israel. Human Rights Watch interviewed one such person:

In March 2012 Mahmoud Abbas stated that there were no political differences between Hamas and Fatah as they had reached agreement on a joint political platform and on a truce with Israel. Commenting on relations with Hamas, Abbas revealed in an interview with Al Jazeera that "We agreed that the period of calm would be not only in the Gaza Strip, but also in the West Bank," adding that "We also agreed on a peaceful popular resistance Israel, the establishment of a Palestinian state along the 1967 borders and that the peace talks would continue if Israel halted settlement construction and accepted our conditions." 

===Gaza War===

On June 17, 2008, Egyptian mediators announced that an informal truce had been agreed to between Hamas and Israel. Hamas agreed to cease rocket attacks on Israel, while Israel agreed to allow limited commercial shipping across its border with Gaza, barring any breakdown of the tentative peace deal; Hamas also hinted that it would discuss the release of Gilad Shalit. Israeli sources state that Hamas also committed itself to enforce the ceasefire on the other Palestinian organizations. Even before the truce was agreed to, some on the Israeli side were not optimistic about it, Shin Bet chief Yuval Diskin stating in May 2008 that a ground incursion into Gaza was unavoidable and would more effectively quell arms smuggling and pressure Hamas into relinquishing power. "US embassy cables: US talks to Israeli security chief about Arabs and Gaza" The Guardian (UK), April 7, 2011 'Diskin said that Israel does not like the tahdiyaseeing it as a means whereby Hamas and other groups can regroup and re-armbut also dislikes the current situation. The ISA, he said, believes that the best option now is a large-scale ground incursion into the Gaza Strip that allows the IDF to take over the southern part of the Gaza Strip and to stop smuggling and increase pressure on Hamas. "If you do this, it will cause big problems for Hamas' survival in the Gaza Strip," he said.' 

Damage to a Beersheba kindergarten from a Grad rocket fired from Gaza

While Hamas was careful to maintain the ceasefire, the lull was sporadically violated by other groups, sometimes in defiance of Hamas. "Hamas arrests militants after rocket fire" Reuters. July 10, 2008 For example, on June 24 Islamic Jihad launched rockets at the Israeli town of Sderot; Israel called the attack a grave violation of the informal truce, and closed its border crossings with Gaza. "Israel closes Gaza after rockets" BBC, June 25, 2008 On November 4, 2008, Israeli forces, in an attempt to stop construction of a tunnel, killed six Hamas gunmen in a raid inside the Gaza Strip. "Gaza truce broken as Israeli raid kills six Hamas gunmen", The Guardian, November 5, 2008. Why Israel went to war in Gaza, The Guardian, January 4, 2008. Hamas responded by resuming rocket attacks, a total of 190 rockets in November according to Israel's military. 

With the six-month truce officially expired on December 19, Hamas launched 50 to more than 70 rockets and mortars into Israel over the next three days, though no Israelis were injured. On December 21, Hamas said it was ready to stop the attacks and renew the truce if Israel stopped its "aggression" in Gaza and opened up its border crossings. "Why Israel Attacked" Time magazine  December 27, 2008 

On December 27 and 28, Israel implemented Operation Cast Lead against Hamas. Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said "We warned Hamas repeatedly that rejecting the truce would push Israel to aggression against Gaza." According to Palestinian officials, over 280 people were killed and 600 were injured in the first two days of airstrikes. Civilian death toll rises after second day of air strikes The Guardian (UK), December 29, 2008 Most were Hamas police and security officers, though many civilians also died. According to Israel, militant training camps, rocket-manufacturing facilities and weapons warehouses that had been pre-identified were hit, and later they attacked rocket and mortar squads who fired around 180 rockets and mortars at Israeli communities. Israeli airstrikes in Gaza kill more than 200 msnbc.com, December 28, 2008 Chief of Gaza police force Tawfiq Jabber, head of the General Security Service Salah Abu Shrakh, IAF kills Hamas strongman Siam - Confronting Hamas, The Jerusalem Post senior religious authority and security officer Nizar Rayyan, and Interior Minister Said Seyam were among those killed during the fighting. Although Israel sent out thousands of cell-phone messages urging residents of Gaza to leave houses where weapons may be stored, in an attempt to minimise civilian casualties, some residents complained there was nowhere to go because many neighborhoods had received the same message. "Warnings Not Enough for Gaza Families" The New York Times, January 5, 2009 "Israel Deepens Gaza Incursion as Toll Mounts" The New York Times, January 5, 2009 Israeli bombs landed close to civilian structures such as schools, and some alleged that Israel was deliberately targeting Palestinian civilians. "Israel accused of war crimes over 12-hour assault on Gaza village" The Guardian January 18, 2009 

Israel declared a unilateral ceasefire on January 17, 2009. Hamas responded the following day by announcing a one-week ceasefire to give Israel time to withdraw its forces from the Gaza Strip. Israeli, Palestinian, and third-party sources disagreed on the total casualty figures from the Gaza war, and the number of Palestinian casualties who were civilians. Hamas releases second response to Goldstone Report Palestine Note, July 28, 2010 "... approximately 1,400 Palestinians were killed according to the Hamas government and the Palestinian Center for Human Rights. The Israeli army puts the number at 1,166." In November 2010, a senior Hamas official acknowledged that up to 300 fighters were killed and "In addition to them, between 200 and 300 fighters from the Al-Qassam Brigades and another 150 security forces were martyred." These new numbers reconcile the total with those of the Israeli military, which originally said were 709 "terror operatives" killed. 

===After the Gaza War===
On August 16, 2009, Hamas leader Khaled Mashal stated that the organization is ready to open dialogue with the Obama administration because its policies are much better than those of former U.S. president George W. Bush: "As long as there's a new language, we welcome it, but we want to see not only a change of language, but also a change of policies on the ground. We have said that we are prepared to cooperate with the US or any other international party that would enable the Palestinians to get rid of occupation." Despite this, an August 30, 2009 speech during a visit to Jordan Speech of Khaled Meshaal August 30, 2009 (rough automated translation from Arabic) in which Mashal expressed support for the Palestinian right of return was interpreted by David Pollock of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy as a sign that "Hamas has now clearly opted out of diplomacy." Pollock, David. "Rejectionists Readying to Counter U.S. Peace Push". Washington Institute for Near East Policy. September 1, 2009. In an interview on May 2010, Mashal said that if a Palestinian state with real sovereignty was established under the conditions he set out, on the borders of 1967 with its capital Jerusalem and with the right of return, that will be the end of the Palestinian resistance, and then the nature of any subsequent ties with Israel would be decided democratically by the Palestinians. Video interview of Khaled Meshal by Charlie Rose, May 28, 2010 Click on small "transcript" link at top of comments section to view transcript; scroll up to view video. Hamas renews offer to end fight if Israel withdraws Reuters, May 30, 2010. 

In July 2009, Khaled Meshal, Hamas's political bureau chief, stated Hamas's willingness to cooperate with a resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, which included a Palestinian state based on 1967 borders, provided that Palestinian refugees be given the right to return to Israel and that East Jerusalem be recognized as the new state's capital. 

In 2011, after the outbreak of the Syrian civil war, Hamas distanced itself from the Syrian regime and its members began leaving Syria. Where once there were "hundreds of exiled Palestinian officials and their relatives", that number shrunk to "a few dozen". Post-Assad Syria would drop special Iran ties| Reuters |December 3, 2011 In September 2012, Hamas chief Khaled Meshal publicly announced his support for the Syrian opposition. He said "There is no contradiction in our adoption of democracy and reform, and our support of the resistance." This prompted Syrian state TV to issue a "withering attack" on him. "Syria Berates Hamas Chief, an Old Ally, on State TV". The New York Times, October 2, 2012. Meshal said that Hamas had been "forced out" of Damascus because of its disagreements with the Syrian regime. "Hamas and Fatah in unity talks, says Khaled Meshaal". BBC News, February 7, 2013. In late October, Syrian Army soldiers shot dead two Hamas leaders in Daraa refugee camp. "2 Hamas leaders killed in Syria, sources say". Ma'an News Agency, October 29, 2012. On November 5, 2012, the Syrian state security forces shut down all Hamas offices in the country. "Syria Shuts Down Hamas Offices". Arutz Sheva, November 6, 2012. In January 2013, another two Hamas members were found dead in Syria's Husseinieh camp. Activists said that the two had been arrested and executed by state security forces. "NGO accuses Damascus of killing two Hamas members in Syria". Al-Ahram Online, January 9, 2013. In 2013, it was reported that the Kassam Brigades of Hamas had begun training units of the Free Syrian Army. 

In 2013, after "several intense weeks of indirect three-way diplomacy between representatives of Hamas, Israel, and the Palestinian Authority", no agreement was reached. Also, intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks stalled and, as a result, during Obamas visit to Israel, Hamas launched five rocket strikes on Israel. In November, Isra Almodallal was appointed the first spokeswoman of the group. http://www.aljazeera.com/news/middleeast/2013/11/hamas-appoints-first-female-spokesperson-2013111013586831738.html 

==Funding==
 the Council on Foreign Relations estimates Hamas's annual budget at $70 million. 

In the early 2000s, the largest backer of Hamas was Saudi Arabia, with over 50% of its funds coming from that country, Flow of Saudis' Cash to Hamas Is Scrutinized The New York Times mainly through Islamic charity organizations. An earlier estimate by the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs estimated a $50 million annual budget, mostly supplied by private charitable associations but with $12 million supplied directly by Gulf states, primarily Saudi Arabia, and a further $3 million from Iran. In 2002, a Saudi Arabian charity, the Saudi Council to Support the Palestinian Intefada run by then Saudi Interior Minister Prince Nayef Bin Abdul Aziz stated the council will give the families of 102 Hamas militants killed, including eight suicide bombers, $5,340 each. http://eufunding.org.uk/terror/FundingEvil.pdf IPR Strategic Business Information Database. Saudi Arabia: charity to support al Aqsa uprising. February 2, 2002 

Saudi owned al-Taqwa Bank has been identified of holding money for Hamas as early as 1997. Jamie C. Zarate, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury Department, told Congress that 60 million was moved to Hamas accounts with Al Taqwa bank. The Al Taqwa bank has also been used to launder funds for Al Qaeda. Matthew A. Levitt, testimony before the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, "Role of Charities and NGOs in Terrorist Financing," August 1, 2002. The Financial Sources of the Hamas Terror Organization - July 2003 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel) Hamas Funding GlobalSecurity.org The funding by Saudi Arabia continued despite Saudi pledges to stop funding groups such as Hamas that have used violence, and its recent denouncements of Hamas' lack of unity with Fatah. According to the U.S. State Department, Hamas is funded by Iran, Palestinian expatriates, and "private benefactors in Saudi Arabia and other Arab states". Saudi spokesman Adel Al Jubeir said, "no Saudi government money goes to Hamas, directly or indirectly." He added that it "very likely" that "some Saudi individuals" have provided financial support to Hamas. 

In 2004, reports citing unidentified U.S. and Israeli intelligence officials indicated that Saudi funding for Hamas had been curtailed and replaced by other regional sponsors. In June 2004 testimony before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, former Treasury Department General Counsel David Aufhauser quoted "informed intelligence sources" as saying, "for whatever reason, the money going to Hamas from Saudi Arabia has substantially dried up." Aufhauser indicated that Saudi financial support "has been supplemented by money from Iran and Syria flowing through even more dangerous rejectionist groups in the West Bank". Similarly, Israeli daily Maariv quoted in 2004 an unidentified Israeli military official as saying that "for the first time in years the Saudis have begun to reduce the flow of funds to Hamas and to the Gaza Strip." This source attributes this change largely to U.S. pressure on Saudi Arabia to stem the flow of funding to Hamas and terrorist organizations. According to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), another reported funding source for Hamas is through the 21,000 Arabs of Palestinian and Lebanese descent who live in the Foz do Iguau area of the tri-border region of Latin America. According to Paraguayan Interior Minister Julio Csar Fanego, they have donated "something between $50 and $500 million" to 16 Arab extremist groups between 1999 and 2001, in amounts ranging from $500 to $2,000. A Global Overview Of Narcotics-Funded Terrorist And Other Extremist Groups, May 2002, Library of Congress  Federal Research Division Testimony of Victor Comras to the U.S. House Subcommittee on Financial Oversight and Investigations, hearings on Current and Evolving Trends in Terrorism Financing. September 28, 2010. 

In the late 1980s, 10% of all Hamas funding came Islamic Republic of Iran. Later, from 1993 to 2006, Iran provided Hamas with approximately US$30 million annually. More recent assessments indicate that Iranian funding has increased significantly between 2006 and 2009, to hundreds of millions of Euros per year. After 2009, sanctions on Iran made funding difficult, forcing Hamas instead to rely on religious donations by individuals in the West Bank, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. The Iran-Hamas Alliance, In Focus Quarterly, by Meyrav Wurmser, Fall 2007 Hamas receives blow to wallet, Intelligence Online, April 22, 2010. Since June 2011, funding from the Islamic Republic of Iran has been cut to show "displeasure at Hamas's failure to hold public rallies in support of President al- Assad" during the Syrian civil war, and funding from the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt has been cut so the Muslim Brotherhood can diverts funds "to support Arab Spring revolts". The shortages have meant that Gaza's 40,000 civil service and security employees were not paid July 2011. 

Hamas-linked charities in 2010 invested heavily in Gaza business ventures, with the condition that much of revenue stream from those ventures go to Hamas-linked charitable purposes in Gaza. "Hamas commercial ventures thrive in Gaza's besieged economy," Mai Yaghi, Agence France Presse (AFP), July 26, 2010, Daily Star. Generally, Hamas and its members have increasingly dominated the Gaza economy, in particular since the 2006 Israel-led blockade of Gaza and Gaza elections. "As the Israeli blockade eases, Gaza goes shopping", Donald Macintyre, July 26, 2010, The Independent. "New Gaza Leisure Projects Focus on Fun Not Hardship" August 2, 2010, Reuters, The New York Times. 

===Gaza domestic funding===
Hamas approved a 540-million-dollar government budget for 2010 with up to 90% coming from "undisclosed" foreign aid, which includes funding from Iran and Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood according to western intelligence agencies. Due to the Gaza blockade, Hamas still faces a financial crisis. With a bureaucracy of around 30,000 staff, the organisation is growing faster than can be handled, with salaries being delayed or prioritised for the lowest paid. To fund its budget, Hamas has raised new taxes on businesses and imposed a 14.5% tax on luxury goods smuggled through the tunnels. Gaza businessmen have accused Hamas of profiting from the blockade and using these taxes to buy large tracts of land and private buildings for public facilities in competition to established businesses. Iran punishes Hamas for not backing Assad| August 23, 2011 Hamas imposes new Gaza taxes to pay for burgeoning bureaucracy, The Guardian, by Rory McCarthy. 

In August 2011, the U.S State Department threatened to cut 100 million dollars in aid it sends to the Gaza Strip if Hamas continues to insist upon auditing American foreign aid organizations after Hamas suspended operations of the International Medical Corps following the group's refusal to submit to an on-site audit. Most foreign charities submit their own audits to the Interior Ministry in Ramallah. Charities must be audited by law, possibly to ensure money is not diverted for political or intelligence-gathering purposes but as the U.S. government forbids direct contact with Hamas, the action prompted Washington to issue the threat via a third party. Aid provided by American and other foreign groups goes to hundreds of thousands of Palestinians in Gaza, where most of the 1.6 million residents are refugees. 

A U.S. official based in the region said "USAID-funded partner organizations operating in Gaza are forced by Hamas's actions to suspend their assistance work. (They) were put on hold effective August 12." http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4108159,00.html US suspends work of aid groups in Gaza Strip According to the official, Hamas demanded access to files and records of NGOs, which would reveal financial and administrative information, details of staff members and information on beneficiaries. He said Hamas shut down IMC and USAID after the U.S. objected to "unwarranted audits". Hamas administration official Taher al-Nono said Hamas had a right to monitor their work in the territory but an understanding had been reached that would allow independent auditing teams to inspect the files of NGOs. 

A day after the U.S. announced it was suspending financial aid to Gaza, Hamas officials said they had reached an agreement with the United States that would allow USAID to continue operations. 

In August 2011, the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip imposed new travel restrictions on Palestinians active in non-governmental organizations by requiring them to provide details of the trip to the ministry in what the Palestinian NGO Network regards as another Hamas attempt to control and hamper them. The Palestinian Center for Human Rights condemned the new laws. Tharut al Bic, head of the interior ministry's NGO department, stated, "the new instructions are intended to make it easier for travellers to better organize their trip and to preserve order." Hamas requires sick people wishing to leave the Gaza Strip to submit applications and meet various conditions, in addition to restrictions Israel imposes on Palestinians leaving Gaza. 

==Media==
In 2005, Hamas announced its intention to launch an experimental TV channel, Al-Aqsa TV. The station was launched on January 7, 2006, less than three weeks before the Palestinian legislative elections. It has shown television programs, including some children's television, which deliver anti-semitic messages. Hamas has stated that the television station is "an independent media institution that often does not express the views of the Palestinian government headed by Ismail Haniyeh or of the Hamas movement," and that Hamas does not hold anti-semitic views. Hamas Condemns the Holocaust The Guardian May 12, 2008 

==Islamization efforts==

===In the Gaza Strip===

From 1987 to 1991, during the first intifada, Hamas campaigned for the wearing of the hijab alongside other measures, including insisting women stay at home and be segregated from men, and the promotion of polygamy. In the course of this campaign, women who chose not to wear the hijab were verbally and physically harassed, with the result that the hijab was being worn 'just to avoid problems on the streets'. Rubenberg, C., Palestinian Women: Patriarchy and Resistance in the West Bank (USA, 2001) pp. 230231 

Since Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, some of its members have attempted to impose Islamic dress or the hijab head covering on women. Hamas Fights Over Gaza's Islamist Identity The New York Times, September 5, 2009 Also, the government's "Islamic Endowment Ministry" has deployed Virtue Committee members to warn citizens of the dangers of immodest dress, card playing, and dating. Hamas Bans Women Dancers, Scooter Riders in Gaza Push By Daniel Williams, Bloomberg, November 30, 2009 However, there are no government laws imposing dress and other moral standards, and the Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to impose Islamic dress on students. There has also been successful resistance to attempts by local Hamas officials to impose Islamic dress on women. Hamas patrols beaches in Gaza to enforce conservative dress code The Guardian (UK), October 18, 2009 

Hamas officials deny having any plans to impose Islamic law, one legislator stating that "What you are seeing are incidents, not policy," and that Islamic law is the desired standard "but we believe in persuasion". The Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to impose Islamic dress on students. In March 2010, the BBC interviewed five "middle-class" women in Gaza City in March 2010, and all indicated there had been little or no change toward more conservative dress and mores. 

In 2013, UNRWA canceled its annual marathon in Gaza after Hamas rulers prohibited women from participating in the race. 

===In the West Bank===
In 2005, the human rights organization Freemuse released a report titled "Palestine: Taliban-like attempts to censor music", which said that Palestinian musicians feared that harsh religious laws against music and concerts will be imposed since Hamas group scored political gains in the Palestinian Authority local elections of 2005. 

The attempt by Hamas to dictate a cultural code of conduct in the 1980s and early 1990s led to a violent fighting between different Palestinian sectors. Hamas members reportedly burned down stores that stocked videos they deemed indecent and destroyed books they described as "heretical". 

In 2005, an outdoor music and dance performance in Qalqiliya were suddenly banned by the Hamas led municipality, for the reason that such an event would be forbidden by Islam, or "Haram". "Battling over the public sphere: Islamic reactions to the music of today". Jonas Otterbeck. Contemporary Islam. Volume 2, Number 3, 211228, . "... the over-all argument was that the event was haram" The municipality also ordered that music no longer be played in the Qalqiliya zoo, and mufti Akrameh Sabri issued a religious edict affirming the municipality decision. In response, the Palestinian national poet Mahmoud Darwish warned that "There are Taliban-type elements in our society, and this is a very dangerous sign." "Palestinians Debate Whether Future State Will be Theocracy or Democracy". Associated Press, July 13, 2005. Gaza Taliban? by Editorial Staff, The New Humanist, Volume 121 Issue 1, January/February 2006 

The Palestinian columnist Mohammed Abd Al-Hamid, a resident of Ramallah, wrote that this religious coercion could cause the migration of artists, and said "The religious fanatics in Algeria destroyed every cultural symbol, shattered statues and rare works of art and liquidated intellectuals and artists, reporters and authors, ballet dancers and singers  are we going to imitate the Algerian and Afghani examples?" Afghanistan in Palestine, by Zvi Bar'el, Haaretz, July 26, 2005 

===Tayyip Erdoan's Turkey as a role model===
Some Hamas members stated that the model of Islamic government that Hamas seeks to emulate is that of Turkey under the rule of Tayyip Erdoan. The foremost members to distance Hamas from the practices of Taliban and to publicly support the Erdoan model were Ahmad Yousef and Ghazi Hamad, advisers to Prime Minister Hanieh. Hamas Rule in Gaza: Three Years On, Yezid Sayigh, Crown Center for Middle East studies, March 2010 See also: Letter from Gaza, Hamas's tunnel diplomacy, By Thanassis Cambanis, June 18, 2010. Foreign Affairs. "They want to know if we are more like the Taliban or Erdogan. They will see that we are closer to Erdogan." Yusuf, the Hamas deputy foreign minister, reflected this goal in an interview to a Turkish newspaper, stating that while foreign public opinion equates Hamas with the Taliban or al-Qaeda, the analogy is inaccurate. Yusuf described the Taliban as "opposed to everything," including education and women's rights, while Hamas wants to establish good relations between the religious and secular elements of society and strives for human rights, democracy and an open society. Hamas: 'We want Erdoan's model, not Taliban's'. Cansu amlibel, The Daily Hurriyet. June 10, 2010 According to professor Yezid Sayigh of the King's College in London, how influential this view is within Hamas is uncertain, since both Ahmad Yousef and Ghazi Hamad were dismissed from their posts as advisers to Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Hanieh in October 2007. Both have since been appointed to other prominent positions within the Hamas government. Khaled al-Hroub of the West Bank-based and anti-Hamas A Leader of Hamas Warns of West Bank Peril for Fatah The New York Times. June 21, 2006. "Mr. Sawaf's West Bank office in Ramallah has been destroyed, and the Palestinian paper Al Ayyam has refused to continue printing his paper in the West Bank." Palestinian daily Al Ayyam added that despite claims by Hamas leaders that it wants to repeat the Turkish model of Islam, "what is happening on the ground in reality is a replica of the Taliban model of Islam." Hamas-Gaza-extremism, The Weekly Middle East Reporter (Beirut, Lebanon), August 8, 2009 

==Antisemitism and anti-Zionism==

According to academic Esther Webman, antisemitism is not the main tenet of Hamas ideology, although antisemitic rhetoric is frequent and intense in Hamas leaflets. The leaflets generally do not differentiate between Jews and Zionists. In other Hamas publications and in interviews with its leaders attempts at this differentiation have been made. Webman, Esther. Anti-semitic Motifs in the Ideology of Hizballah and Hamas, Project for the study of Anti-semitism, Tel Aviv University, 1994, p. 22. ISBN 965-222-592-4 In 2009 representatives of the small Jewish sect Neturei Karta met with Hamas leader Ismail Haniya in Gaza, who stated that he held nothing against Jews but only against the state of Israel. 

Hamas has made conflicting statements about its readiness to recognize Israel. In 2006 a spokesman signaled readiness to recognize Israel within the 1967 borders. Speaking of requests for Hamas to recognize agreements between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, senior Hamas member Khaled Suleiman said that "these agreements are a reality which we view as such, and therefore I see no problem." Also in 2006, a Hamas official ruled out recognition of Israel with reference to West and East Germany, which never recognized each other. 

===Hamas Charter (1988)===

* Article 7 of the Hamas Covenant provides the following quotation, attributed to Mohammed:

"The Day of Judgement will not come about until Moslems fight the Jews (killing the Jews), when the Jew will hide behind stones and trees. The stones and trees will say O Moslems, O Abdulla, there is a Jew behind me, come and kill him. Only the Gharkad tree, (evidently a certain kind of tree) would not do that because it is one of the trees of the Jews." The Avalon Project: Hamas Covenant 1988. Retrieved 9 February 2009. 

* Article 22 states that the French revolution, the Russian revolution, colonialism and both world wars were created by the Zionists or forces supportive of Zionism:

"You may speak as much as you want about regional and world wars. They were behind World War I, when they were able to destroy the Islamic Caliphate, making financial gains and controlling resources. They obtained the Balfour Declaration, formed the League of Nations through which they could rule the world. They were behind World War II, through which they made huge financial gains by trading in armaments, and paved the way for the establishment of their state. It was they who instigated the replacement of the League of Nations with the United Nations and the Security Council to enable them to rule the world through them. There is no war going on anywhere, without having their finger in it." 

* Article 32 of the Covenant refers to an antisemitic forgery, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion:
"Today it is Palestine, tomorrow it will be one country or another. The Zionist plan is limitless. After Palestine, the Zionists aspire to expand from the Nile to the Euphrates. When they will have digested the region they overtook, they will aspire to further expansion, and so on. Their plan is embodied in The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, and their present conduct is the best proof of what we are saying." 

===Statements by Hamas members and clerics===
In 2008, Imam Yousif al-Zahar of Hamas said in his sermon at the Katib Wilayat mosque in Gaza that "Jews are a people who cannot be trusted. They have been traitors to all agreements. Go back to history. Their fate is their vanishing." 

Another Hamas legislator and imam, Sheik Yunus al-Astal, discussed a Koranic verse suggesting that "suffering by fire is the Jews' destiny in this world and the next." He concluded "Therefore we are sure that the Holocaust is still to come upon the Jews." 

In January 2009, Gazan Hamas Health Minister Basim Naim published a letter in The Guardian, stating that Hamas has no quarrel with Jewish people, only with the actions of Israel. 

In May 2009, senior Hamas MP Sayed Abu Musameh said, "in our culture, we respect every foreigner, especially Jews and Christians, but we are against Zionists, not as nationalists but as fascists and racists." 

Following the rededication of the Hurva Synagogue in Jerusalem in March 2010, senior Hamas figure al-Zahar called on Palestinians everywhere to observe five minutes of silence "for Israel's disappearance and to identify with Jerusalem and the al-Aqsa mosque". He further stated that "Wherever you have been you've been sent to your destruction. You've killed and murdered your prophets and you have always dealt in loan-sharking and destruction. You've made a deal with the devil and with destruction itself  just like your synagogue." 

On January 8, 2012, during a visit to Tunis, Gazan Hamas PM Ismail Haniyeh told The Associated Press on that he disagrees with the anti-Semitic slogans. "We are not against the Jews because they are Jews. Our problem is with those occupying the land of Palestine," he said. "There are Jews all over the world, but Hamas does not target them." 

In response to a statement by Palestinian Authority leader Mahmoud Abbas that Hamas preferred non-violent means and had agreed to adopt "peaceful resistance," Hamas contradicted Abbas. According to Hamas spokesman Sami Abu-Zuhri, "We had agreed to give popular resistance precedence in the West Bank, but this does not come at the expense of armed resistance." 

On August 10, 2012, Ahmad Bahr, Deputy Speaker of the Hamas Parliament, stated in a sermon that aired on Al-Aqsa TV:

If the enemy sets foot on a single square inch of Islamic land, Jihad becomes an individual duty, incumbent on every Muslim, male or female. A woman may set out Jihad without her husband's permission, and a servant without his master's permission. Why? In order to annihilate those Jews.... O Allah, destroy the Jews and their supporters. O Allah, destroy the Americans and their supporters. O Allah, count them one by one, and kill them all, without leaving a single one. Hamas Official Ahmad Bahr Preaches for the Annihilation of Jews and Americans, MEMRI, Clip No. 3538, August 10, 2012. Hamas leader prays for annihilation of Jews, Americans by Greg Tepper, The Times of Israel, August 20, 2012. Video: Hamas MP: 'Annihilate Jews and Americans' by Tzvi Ben Gedalyahu, Israel National News, August 26, 2012. Hamas top official: Kill every last Jew and American (VIDEO), Jewish Journal, August 24, 2012. 

In an interview with Al-Aqsa TV in September 12, 2012, Marwan Abu Ras, a Hamas MP, who is also a member of the International Union of Muslim Scholars, stated (as translated by MEMRI):

On December 26, 2012, Senior Hamas official and Jerusalem bureau chief Ahmed Abu Haliba, called on all Palestinian factions to resume suicide attacks ... deep inside the Zionist enemy and said that we must renew the resistance to occupation in any possible way, above all through armed resistance." Abu Haliba suggested the use of suicide bombings as a response to Israel's plans to build housing units in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. 

===Statements on the Holocaust===
Hamas has been explicit in its Holocaust Denial. In reaction to the Stockholm conference on the Jewish Holocaust, held in late January 2000, Hamas issued a press release that it published on its official website, containing the following statements from a senior leader:
This conference bears a clear Zionist goal, aimed at forging history by hiding the truth about the so-called Holocaust, which is an alleged and invented story with no basis. (...) The invention of these grand illusions of an alleged crime that never occurred, ignoring the millions of dead European victims of Nazism during the war, clearly reveals the racist Zionist face, which believes in the superiority of the Jewish race over the rest of the nations. (...) By these methods, the Jews in the world flout scientific methods of research whenever that research contradicts their racist interests. In August 2003, senior Hamas official Dr Abd Al-Aziz Al-Rantisi wrote in the Hamas newspaper Al-Risala that the Zionists encouraged murder of Jews by the Nazis with the aim of forcing them to immigrate to Palestine. http://www.ajn.com.au/pages/archives/feature/feature-03a.html 

In 2005, Khaled Mashal called Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's December 14, 2005 statements on the Holocaust that Europeans had "created a myth in the name of Holocaust" Iran leader's Holocaust remarks condemned MSNBC, December 14, 2005 ) as "courageous". "Hamas springs to Iran's defense" Al Jazeera, December 15, 2005 Later in 2008, Basim Naim, the minister of health in the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority government in Gaza countered holocaust denial, and said "it should be made clear that neither Hamas nor the Palestinian government in Gaza denies the Nazi Holocaust. The Holocaust was not only a crime against humanity but one of the most abhorrent crimes in modern history. We condemn it as we condemn every abuse of humanity and all forms of discrimination on the basis of religion, race, gender or nationality." "Hamas condemns the Holocaust" The Guardian, May 12, 2008 

In an open letter to Gaza Strip UNRWA chief John Ging published August 20, 2009, the movement's Popular Committees for Refugees called the Holocaust "a lie invented by the Zionists," adding that the group refused to let Gazan children study about it. Hamas rips UN over Holocaust lessons, The Jerusalem Post September 30, 2009 Hamas leader Younis al-Astal continued by saying that having the Holocaust included in the UNRWA curriculum for Gaza students amounted to "marketing a lie and spreading it". Al-Astal continued "I do not exaggerate when I say this issue is a war crime, because of how it serves the Zionist colonizers and deals with their hypocrisy and lies." "Hamas rips U.N. for teaching the Holocaust". JTA. August 31, 2009. August 31, 2009. 

In February 2011, Hamas voiced opposition to UNRWA's teaching of the Holocaust in Gaza. According to Hamas, "Holocaust studies in refugee camps is a contemptible plot and serves the Zionist entity with a goal of creating a reality and telling stories in order to justify acts of slaughter against the Palestinian people." 

In July 2012, Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman, denounced a visit by Ziad al-Bandak, an adviser to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, to the Auschwitz death camp, saying it was "unjustified" and "unhelpful" and only served the "Zionist occupation" while coming "at the expense of a real Palestinian tragedy". He also called the Holocaust an "alleged tragedy" and "exaggerated". 

In October 2012, Hamas said that they were opposed to teaching about the Holocaust in Gaza Strip schools run by the UN Relief and Works Agency. The Refugee Affairs Department of Hamas said that teaching the Holocaust was a "crime against the issue of the refugees that is aimed at canceling their right of return". 

==Criticism==

===Proximity to civilians during warfare===
After Operation Pillar of Defense, Human Rights Watch stated that Palestinian groups had endangered civilians by "repeatedly fired rockets from densely populated areas, near homes, businesses, and a hotel" and noted that under international law, parties to a conflict may not to place military targets in or near densely populated areas. One rocket was launched close to the Shawa and Housari Building, where various Palestinian and international media have offices; another was fired from the yard of a house near the Deira Hotel. Human Rights Watch said it had not been able to identify any instance where civilians had been warned to evacuate an area before a rocket launch by Palestinian militants. 

New York Times journalist Steven Erlanger reported that "Hamas rocket and weapons caches, including rocket launchers, have been discovered in and under mosques, schools and civilian homes." Another report published by Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center revealed that Hamas used close to 100 mosques to store weapons and as launch-pads to shoot rockets. The report contains testimony from variety Palestinian sources, including a Hamas militant Sabhi Majad Atar, who said he was taught how to shoot rockets from inside a mosque. Hamas used almost 100 mosques for military purposes. The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved on 2010-08-21. Hamas has also been criticized by Israeli officials for blending into or hiding among the Palestinian civilian population During the 20082009 IsraelGaza conflict. The Israeli government published what it said was video evidence of human shield tactics by Hamas. "Video: Hamas uses civilians as a means to achieving military goals". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. January 11, 2009. January 13, 2009. Israel said that Hamas frequently used mosques and school yards "Video: Hamas uses civilians as a means to achieving military goals". 2009. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. See 4:00 in the video. as hideouts and places to store weapons, "Hamas's human shields". The Jerusalem Post. March 4, 2008. January 13, 2009. December 31, 2008. January 13, 2009. and that Hamas militants stored weapons in their homes, making it difficult to ensure that civilians close to legitimate military targets are not hurt during Israeli military operations. Barzak, Ibrahim and Matti Friedman. "Israel Destroys Hamas Homes, Gaza Mosque". (magazine)|]. January 2, 2009. January 13, 2009. Israeli officials also accused the Hamas leadership of hiding under Shifa Hospital during the conflict, using the patients inside to deter an Israeli attack. Mizroch, Amir. "Dichter: Hamas salaries paid at Shifa Hospital". The Jerusalem Post. January 12, 2009. January 13, 2009. 

The Israeli government filed a report entitled "Gaza Operations Investigation: Second Update" to the United Nations accusing Hamas of exploiting its rules of engagement by shooting rockets and launching attacks within protected civilian areas. IDF morality exemplified at mosque. The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved on 2010-08-21. Israel says 12,000 rockets and mortars were fired at it between 2000 and 2008nearly 3,000 in 2008 alone. 

In one case, an errant Israeli mortar strike killed dozens of people near a UN school. Hamas said that the mortar killed 42 people and left dozens wounded. Israel said that Hamas militants had launched a rocket from a yard adjacent to the school and one mortar of three rounds hit the school, due to a GPS error. According to the Israeli military probe, the remaining two rounds hit the yard used to launch rockets into Israel, killing two members of Hamas' military wing who fired the rockets. 

Human Right Watch called Hamas to "publicly renounce" the rocket attacks against Israeli civilians and hold those responsible to account. Human Right Watch program director Iain Levine said the attacks by Hamas were "unlawful and unjustifiable, and amount to war crimes", and accused Hamas of putting Palestinians at risk by launching attacks from built-up areas. Hamas spokesman relied that the report was "biased" and he denied that Hamas uses human shields. 

Human Rights Watch investigated 19 incidents involving 53 civilian deaths in Gaza that Israel said were the result of Hamas fighting in densely populated areas and did not find evidence for existence of Palestinian fighters in the areas at the time of the Israeli attack. In other cases where no civilians had died, the report concluded that Hamas may have deliberately fired rockets from areas close to civilians. Turning a Blind Eye Human Rights Watch April 11, 2010 HRW also investigated 11 deaths that Israel said were civilians being used as human shields by Hamas. HRW found no evidence that the civilians were used as human shields, nor had they been shot in crossfire. Israel: Investigate 'White Flag' Shootings of Gaza Civilians Human Rights Watch August 13, 2009 

The Israeli 'human shields' charge against Hamas was called "full of holes" by The National (UAE), which stated that only Israel accused Hamas of using human shields during the conflict, though Hamas "may be guilty" of "locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas" and for "deliberately firing indiscriminate weapons into civilian populated areas". "Israeli 'human shield' claim is full of holes" The National (UAE) January 13, 2009. 

=== Criticism of rocket and mortar attacks and the targeting of civilians ===
Rocket attacks by Hamas have been condemned by Human rights organizations as war crimes, both because they usually target civilians and because the weapons' inaccuracy would disproportionately endanger civilians even if military targets were chosen. After Operation Pillar of Defense, Human Rights Watch stated that armed Palestinian groups fired hundreds of rockets at Israeli cities, violating international humanitarian law, and that statements by Palestinian groups that they deliberately targeted Israeli civilians demonstrated an "intent to commit war crimes". HRW's Middle East director Sarah Leah Whitson said that Palestinian groups made clear that "harming civilians was their aim" and said that the launching rockets at populated areas had no legal justification. International humanitarian law prohibits deliberate attacks on civilians and intentional violations can be war crimes. 

In July 2008 Barack Obama, then the Democratic presidential candidate, said: "If somebody was sending rockets into my house, where my two daughters sleep at night, I'm going to do everything in my power to stop that, and I would expect Israelis to do the same thing." Steven Lee Myers and Helene Cooper, Obama Defers to Bush, for Now, on Gaza Crisis, New York Times December 28, 2009 On December 28, 2008, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in a statement: "the United States strongly condemns the repeated rocket and mortar attacks against Israel." U.S. Condemns Hamas in Midst of Israeli Strikes, Fox News December 28, 2008 On March 2, 2009, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton condemned the attacks. Clinton calls for 'durable' Gaza truce, condemns rockets, AFP March 2, 2009 

The August 2, 2010 Rocket attacks on Eilat and Aqaba sparked rage in Egypt at Hamas and Iran. The Egyptian press stated that the firing of the rockets from Egyptian territory by Hamas or by organizations cooperating with it constituted the crossing of a red line. The Egyptian position is that Iran is employing local proxies, such as Hamas, to escalate violence in the Middle East and to sabotage the Palestinian reconciliation efforts, as well as efforts to renew Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations. Rage in Egypt at Hamas and Iran following Rocket Attacks on Eilat, Aqaba, MEMRI Special Dispatch No.3200 Later that year, the Egyptian government daily Al-Gumhouriyya also slammed Hamas's firing of "primitive" rockets at Israel that, according to the writer, serve only to prompt a deadly response from Israel. He blamed Hamas for turning the Gaza Strip into a "big prison" isolated from the world, where the residents suffer poverty while the leaders live in luxury. Al-Gumhouriyya (Egypt), October 22, 2010. By Abdallah Al-Naggar. translation by MEMRI 

===Children===

====Children and women as human shields====
Israel has accused Hamas of using children as human shields. The Israeli government released video footage in which it claims two militants are shown grabbing a young boy's arm from behind holding him to walk in front of them toward a group of people waiting near a wall. The IDF argues the militants were placing the boy between themselves and an Israeli sniper. The second scene shows an individual, described as a terrorist, grabbing a school boy off of a floor, where he is hiding behind a column from IDF fire, and using him as a human shield to walk to a different location. "IDF Video: Hamas uses civilians as a means to achieving military goals". 2009. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. See 4:254:29 in the video. 

After 15 alleged militants sought refuge in a mosque from Israeli forces, the BBC reported that Hamas radio instructed local women to go the mosque to protect the militants. Two women were later killed when Israeli forces opened fire. 

In November 2006, the Israeli Air Force warned Muhammad Weil Baroud, commander of the Popular Resistance Committees who are accused of launching rockets into Israeli territory, to evacuate his home in a Jabalya refugee camp apartment block in advance of a planned Israeli air strike. Baroud responded by calling for volunteers to protect the apartment block and nearby buildings and, according to The Jerusalem Post, hundreds of local residents, mostly women and children, responded. Israel suspended the air strike. Israel termed the action an example of Hamas using human shields, although surrounding an apartment block under most interpretations of international law is not such an example, since the term "human shield" involves warring parties placing civilians in "proximity to a legitimate military target". Human shield deters Israel strike BBC News November 19, 2006 AF.mil Targeting Decisions Regarding Human Shields, by Captain Daniel P. Schoenekase, U.S. Army National Guard Thenationael.ae "Israeli 'human shield' claim is full of holes" by Craig Nelson, The National (UAE), January 13, 2009 In response to the incident, Hamas proclaimed: 'We won. From now on we will form human chains around every house threatened with demolition.'" "Hamas's human shields". The Jerusalem Post. March 4, 2008. November 15, 2009. In a November 22 press release, Human Rights Watch condemned Hamas, stating: "There is no excuse for calling civilians to the scene of a planned attack. Whether or not the home is a legitimate military target, knowingly asking civilians to stand in harm's way is unlawful." OPT: Civilians Must Not Be Used to Shield Homes Against Military Attacks Human Rights Watch November 22, 2006 Following criticism, Human rights Watch issued a statement saying that their initial assessment of the situation was in error. They stated that, on the basis of available evidence, the home demolition was in fact an administrative act, viewed in the context of Israel's longstanding policy of punitive home demolitions, not a military act and thus would not fall within the purview of the law regulating hostilities during armed conflict, which had been the basis for their initial criticism of Hamas. 

When the UN-sponsored Goldstone Commission Report on the Gaza War was commissioned in 2009, it stated that it "found no evidence that Palestinian combatants mingled with the civilian population with the intention of shielding themselves from attack" though they deemed credible reports that Palestinian militants were "not always dressed in a way that distinguished them from civilians". Marcus, Itamar, et al. "PMW Bulletins". PMW. September 16, 2009. November 15, 2009. It criticised a statement issued by a senior Hamas figure before Operation Cast Lead that explained Hamas' logic behind the use of women, children and the elderly as human shields. 

Hamas MP Fathi Hamed stated that "For the Palestinian people, death has become an industry, at which women excel ... the elderly excel at this ... and so do the children. This is why they have formed human shields of the women, the children." 

Following the release of the Goldstone Report, the former commander of the British forces in Afghanistan Col. Richard Kemp was invited to testify at the UN Human Rights Council 12th Special Session that during Operation Cast Lead Israel encountered an "enemy that deliberately positioned its military capability behind the human shield of the civilian population". Goodenough, Patrick. (2009-10-16) Israelis Took Unprecedented Steps to Safeguard Civilians, Says British Officer. CNSnews.com. Retrieved on 2011-06-18. U.K. Commander Challenges Goldstone Report. UN Watch. Retrieved on 2011-06-18. 

The commander of the military wing of the PFLP-GC in the Gaza Strip stated in an interview that some areas did not present a problem because of the "population and building density" that would "provide the resistance with a shield". http://www.terrorism-info.org.il/malam_multimedia/English/eng_n/pdf/g_report_e1.pdf Hamas and the Terrorist Threat from the Gaza Strip The Main Findings of the Goldstone ReportVersus the Factual Findings, Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center. 

====Children as combatants====
The Israeli government released a video compiled mostly from Arab news sources showing Palestinian children under the age of 15 going through military training and carrying and firing arms. The video's narration explains that Hamas indoctrinates these child combatants and that Hamas operators send the children "on missions from which they would not risk their own lives". According to the Israeli government, the children are used as spotters, to transport explosives and weapons, sent to play in areas to deter Israeli attacks and are sent unknowingly with explosive devices in their schoolbags to be blown up in the vicinity of Israelis. "Video: Hamas uses civilians as a means to achieving military goals". 2009. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. See 06:46 through 08:00 in the video. The United Nations defines the use of children for military purposes as a war crime and a form of slavery. See Military use of children.

Although Hamas admits to sponsoring summer schools to train teenagers in handling weapons they condemn attacks by children. Following the deaths of three teenagers during a 2002 attack on Netzarim in central Gaza, Hamas banned attacks by children and "called on the teachers and religious leaders to spread the message of restraint among young boys". Youths' Suicide Mission Stuns Palestinians ABC April 25, 2002 Teenage Suicide Bombers MEF 2002 

====Children's magazine====

Al-Fateh ("the conqueror") is the Hamas children's magazine, published biweekly in London, and also posted in an online website. It began publication in September 2002, and its 108th issue was released in mid-September 2007. The magazine features stories, poems, riddles, and puzzles, and states it is for "the young builders of the future". 

According to MEMRI, the magazine includes incitement to jihad and martyrdom and glorification of terrorist operations and of their planners and perpetrators. as well as characterizations of Jews as "murderers of the prophets" and laudatory descriptions of parents who encourage their sons to kill Jews. In each issue, a regular feature titled "The Story of a Martyr" presents the "heroic deeds" of a mujahid from one of the organizations who died in a suicide operation, including operations against civilians, or who was killed by the IDF. MEMRI also noted that the magazine includes illustrations of figures, including child warriors, who embody the ethos of jihad and martyrdom, presenting them as role models. These include the magazine's titular character, Al-Fateh ("The Conqueror")a small boy on a horse brandishing a drawn scimitaras well as children carrying guns, and photos of Hamas fighters launching Qassam rockets. 

====Al-Aqsa TV====

Al-Aqsa TV is a television channel founded by Hamas. The station began broadcasting in the Gaza Strip on January 9, 2006. , news24.com, January 22, 2006 Its programming includes ideologically tinged children's shows, news talk, and religiously inspired entertainment. According to the Anti-Defamation League, the station promotes terrorist activity and incites hatred of Jews and Israelis. Hamas has stated that the television station is "an independent media institution that often does not express the views of the Palestinian government headed by Ismail Haniyeh or of the Hamas movement," and that Hamas does not hold anti-semitic views. 

Al-Aqsa TV is headed by Fathi Ahmad Hammad, chairman of al-Ribat Communications and Artistic Productionsa Hamas-run company that also produces Hamas's radio station, Voice of al-Aqsa, and its biweekly newspaper, The Message. 

====Teenage academic scholars travel ban====
In September 2011, according to the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, the Hamas minister of education informed eight high school National Merit Scholar students that they could not leave the Gaza Strip to study in the United States, saying the reasons were "social and cultural". 

===Dissent and the media===
Hamas mural in the West Bank Human rights groups and Gazans have accused the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip of restricting freedom of the press and forcefully suppressing dissent. Both foreign and Palestinian journalists report harassment and other measures taken against them. Spokesperson of Presidency Condemns Hamas Militias New Crimes against Citizens in Gaza Strip, WAFA, August 31, 2007. In September 2007 the Gaza Interior Ministry disbanded the Gaza Strip branch of the pro-Fatah Union of Palestinian Journalists, a move criticized by Reporters without borders. Hamas disbands journalists union amid continuing incidents, Reporters without borders, September 6, 2007 In November of that year the Hamas government arrested a British journalist and for a time canceled all press cards in Gaza. 
 On February 8, 2008, Hamas banned distribution of the pro-Fatah Al-Ayyam newspaper, and closed its offices in the Gaza Strip because it ran a caricature that mocked legislators loyal to Hamas,. Hamas de facto government bans distribution of Al-Ayyam newspaper in the Gaza Strip Ma'an News Agency, February 10, 2008 The Gaza Strip Interior Ministry later issued an arrest warrant for the editor. 

More widely, in late August 2007 the group was accused in The Telegraph, a conservative British newspaper, of torturing, detaining, and firing on unarmed protesters who had objected to policies of the Hamas government. Also in late August, Palestinian health officials reported that the Hamas government had been shutting down Gaza clinics in retaliation for doctor strikes  The Hamas government confirmed the "punitive measure against doctors" because, in its view, they had incited other doctors to suspend services and go out on strike. al-Mughrabi, Nidal. "Gaza clinics closed, retaliation for doctor strikes". Reuters. August 28, 2007. November 14, 2009. 

In September 2007 the Hamas government banned public prayers, after Fatah supporters began holding worship sessions that quickly escalated into raucous protests against Hamas rule. Government security forces beat several gathering supporters and journalists. Hamas blocks Fatah protests in Gaza, Ynetnews, September 7, 2007 

In October 2008, the Hamas government announced it would release all political prisoners in custody in Gaza. Several hours after the announcement, 17 Fatah members were released. Hamas frees Fatah prisoners, Al-Jazeera, October 30, 2008. 

On August 2, 2012, the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) accused Hamas of harassing elected officials belong to the Palestinian Journalists' Syndicate (PJS) in Gaza. The IFJ said that journalists' leaders in Gaza have faced a campaign of intimidation, as well as threats designed to force them to stop their union work. Some of these journalists are now facing charges of illegal activities and a travel ban, due to their refusal "to give in to pressure". The IFJ said that these accusations are "malicious" and "should be dropped immediately". The IFJ explained that the campaign against PJS members began in March 2012, after their election, and included a raid organized by Hamas supporters who took over the PJS offices in Gaza with the help of the security forces, and subsequently evicted the staff and elected officials. Other harassment includes the targeting of individuals who were bullied into stopping union work. The IFJ backed the PJS and called on Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh to intervene to stop "his officials' unwarranted intereference in journalists' affairs". 

In November 2012, two Gazan journalists were prevented from leaving Gaza by Hamas. There were scheduled to participate in a conference in Cairo, Egypt. After being questioned by security forces, their passports were confiscated. 

===Human rights abuses===
In June 2011, the Independent Commission for Human Rights based in Ramallah published a report whose findings included that the Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were subjected in 2010 to an "almost systematic campaign" of human rights abuses by the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, as well as by Israeli authorities, with the security forces belonging to the PA and Hamas being responsible for torture, arrests and arbitrary detentions. 

In 2012, the Human Rights Watch presented a 43 page long list of human rights violation committed by Hamas. Among actions attributed to Hamas the HRW report mentions beatings with metal clubs and rubber hoses, hanging of alleged collaborationists with Israel, and torture of 102 individuals. According to the report, Hamas also tortured civil society activists and peaceful protesters. Reflecting on the captivity of Gilad Shalit, the HRW report described it as "cruel and inhuman". The report also slams Hamas for harassment of people based on so called morality offenses and for media censorship. In a public statement Joe Stork, the deputy Middle East director of HRW claimed, "after five years of Hamas rule in Gaza, its criminal justice system reeks of injustice, routinely violates detainees' rights and grants impunity to abusive security services." Hamas responded by denying charges and describing them as "politically motivated" 

==Political violence and terrorism==

Hamas uses both political activities and violence in pursuit of its goals. For example, while politically engaged in the 2006 Palestinian Territories parliamentary election campaign, Hamas stated in its election manifesto that it was prepared to use "armed resistance to end the occupation". 

From 2000 to 2004, Hamas was responsible for killing nearly 400 Israelis and wounding more than 2,000 in 425 attacks, according to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. From 2001 through May 2008, Hamas launched more than 3,000 Qassam rockets and 2,500 mortar attacks into Israel. Israel At 'War to the Bitter End,' Strikes Key Hamas Sites December 29, 2008, Fox News 

===Attacks on civilians===
In the first years of the First Intifada (19871993), Hamas violence was directed first at collaborators with Israel and at individuals it considered moral deviants, and then later at the Israeli military. Hamas in Politics, By Jeroen Gunning, pp. 128129, search at Books.Google.com; see also The Rise of Hamas, by Paul W. Pope, at
Dartmouth.edu A new direction began with the formation of the al-Qassam Brigades militia in 1992, and in 1993 suicide attacks began against Israeli targets on the West Bank. No End to War, by Walter Laqueur, p. 107. "n 19931994 when Hamas ... enlisted experts for bomb making, and the first suicide bombers went into action. Some of the very early operations aborted. The first successful suicide bomb attack occurred in the Jordan Valley in October 1993. The first bus attack happened in Afula in northern Israel in April 1994 ..." Search at Books.Google.com Aftermath of 1996 Jaffa Road bus bombings in which 26 people were killed
The first such attack occurred on April 16, 1993, when an al-Qassam Brigades operative detonated explosives in a car he parked next to two buses, one military and one civilian, in the West Bank town of Mehola, killing a Palestinian civilian and wounding 8 Israeli soldiers. Suicide car bomb kills two near West Bank restaurant Associated Press, April 17, 1993 After the February 1994 massacre by Baruch Goldstein of 30 Muslim civilians in a Hebron mosque, the al-Qassam Brigades expanded suicide attacks to target primarily civilians. The first of the suicide bombings that targeted civilians was at Afula on April 16, 1994, when a suicide bomber detonated an explosives-laden car next to a bus, killing nine (including the bomber) and wounding 50. The most deadly suicide bombing was an attack on a Netanya hotel on March 27, 2002, in which 30 people were killed and 140 were wounded. The attack has also been referred to as the Passover massacre since it took place on the first night of the Jewish festival of Passover at a Seder.

Hamas defended suicide attacks as a legitimate aspect of its asymmetric warfare against Israel, but they are consideted as crimes against humanity under international law. 
 Hamas renounced suicide attacks in April 2006. In a 2002 report, Human Rights Watch stated that Hamas leaders "should be held accountable" for "war crimes and crimes against humanity" committed by the al-Qassam Brigades. Erased In A Moment: Suicide Bombing Attacks Against Israeli Civilians V. Structures and Strategies of the Perpetrator Organizations, Human Rights Watch, October 2002. ISBN 1-56432-280-7 

In May 2006 Israel arrested a top Hamas official, Ibrahim Hamed, who Israeli security officials alleged was responsible for dozens of suicide bombings and other attacks on Israelis. Hamed's trial on those charges has not yet concluded. 

While the suicide attacks ceased in 2005, al-Qassam Brigades rocket and mortar attacks on towns and settlements near Gaza continued. Since 2002, paramilitary soldiers of al-Qassam Brigades and other groups have used homemade Qassam rockets to hit Israeli towns in the Negev, such as Sderot. Al-Qassam Brigades was estimated in 2007 to have launched 22% of the rocket and mortar attacks, which killed fifteen people between the years 2000 and 2009 (see Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel). Victims of Palestinian Violence and Terrorism. September 2000 to January 27, 2009 Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs The introduction of the Qassam-2 rocket in 2008 enabled Palestinian paramilitary groups to reach, from Gaza, such Israeli cities such as Ashkelon. BICOM Fact Sheet 2: Ashkelon  The Changing Scenario BICOM. 2008-05-03. 

In 2008, Hamas leader Khaled Mashal, offered that Hamas would attack only military targets if the IDF would stop causing the deaths of Palestinian civilians. March 31, 2008, The Jerusalem Post Following a June 19, 2008 ceasefire, the al-Qassam Brigades ended its rocket attacks and arrested Fatah militants in Gaza who had continued sporadic rocket and mortar attacks against Israel. The al-Qassam Brigades resumed the attacks after the November 4 Israeli incursion into Gaza. Qassam lands in western Negev, no injuries Ynetnews November 20, 2008 

===Rocket attacks on Israel===
According to Human Rights Watch, Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups have launched thousands of rockets into Israel since 2001, killing 15 civilians, wounding many more, and posing an ongoing threat to the nearly 800,000 Israeli civilians who live and work in the weapons' range. Hamas officials have said that the rockets were aimed only at military targets, saying that civilian casualties were the "accidental result" of the weapons' poor quality. According to Human Rights Watch, statements by Hamas leaders suggest that the purpose of the rocket attacks was indeed to strike civilians and civilian objects. From January 2009, following Operation Cast Lead, Hamas largely stopped launching rocket attacks on Israel and has on at least two occasions arrested members of other groups who have launched rockets, "showing that it has the ability to impose the law when it wants". HRW report April 11, 2010 In February 2010, Hamas issued a statement regretting any harm that may have befallen Israeli civilians as a result of Palestinian rocket attacks during the Gaza war. It maintained that its rocket attacks had been aimed at Israeli military targets but lacked accuracy and hence sometimes hit civilian areas. Israel responded that Hamas had boasted repeatedly of targeting and murdering civilians in the media. 

===Attempts to derail 2010 peace talks===

In 2010, Hamas, who have been actively sidelined from the peace talks by Israel, spearheaded a coordinated effort by 13 Palestinian militant groups, in attempt to derail the stalled peace talks between Israel and Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority. According to the Israeli Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories Major Gen. Eitan Dangot, Israel seeks to work with Salam Fayyad, to help revive the Palestinian economy, and hopes to ease restrictions on the Gaza Strip further, "while somehow preventing the Islamic militants who rule it from getting credit for any progress". According to Dangot, Hamas must not be seen as ruling successfully or be allowed to "get credit for a policy that would improve the lives of people". The campaign consists of attacks against Israelis in which, according to a Hamas declaration in early September, "all options are open." "Hamas targets Israeli-Palestinian talks by killing four Israelis; Hamas took responsibility for the fatal shooting of four Israeli settlers outside Hebron today, on the eve of Israeli-Palestinian talks in Washington," Joshua Mitnick, August 31, 2010, Christian Science Monitor. The participating groups also include Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Popular Resistance Committees and an unnamed splinter group of Fatah. Gaza militants vow wave of attacks against Israel, Reuters September 2, 2010 

As part of the campaign, on August 31, 2010, 4 Israeli settlers, including a pregnant woman, were killed by Hamas militants while driving on Route 60 near the settlement Kiryat Arba, in the West bank. According to witnesses, militants opened fire on the moving vehicle, but then "approached the car" and shot the occupants in their seats at "close range". The attack was described by Israeli sources as one of the "worst" terrorist acts in years. A senior Hamas official said that Israeli settlers in the West Bank are legitimate targets since "they are an army in every sense of the word." 

===Themes of martyrdom===

According to a translation by Palestinian Media Watch, in 2008, Fathi Hamad, a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, stated on Al-Aqsa TV, "For the Palestinian people death became an industry, at which women excel and so do all people on this land: the elderly excel, the Jihad fighters excel, and the children excel. Accordingly (Palestinians) created a human shield of women, children, the elderly and the Jihad fighters against the Zionist bombing machine, as if they were saying to the Zionist enemy: 'We desire death as you desire life.'" "Hamas explains using civilians as human shields", Palestinian Media Watch, (December 28, 2008). 

In 2010, Hamas speaker Ahmad Bahr praised the virtues of martyrdom and Jihad, and said that 2.5 million black-eyed virgins were waiting in the Garden of Eden, which could be entered only by prophets, by the righteous, and by martyrs. He continued by saying that nobody on Earth "will be able to confront the resistance, or to confront the mujahideen, those who worship Allah and seek martyrdom". 

===Guerrilla warfare===

Hamas has made great use of guerrilla tactics in the Gaza Strip and to a lesser degree the West Bank. It has successfully adapted these techniques over the years since its inception. According to a 2006 report by rival Fatah party, Hamas had smuggled between several hundred and 1,300 tons of advanced rockets, along with other weaponry, into Gaza. 

Hamas has used IEDs and anti-tank rockets against the IDF in Gaza. The latter include standard RPG-7 warheads and home-made rockets such as the Al-Bana, Al-Batar and Al-Yasin. The IDF has a difficult, if not impossible time trying to find hidden weapons caches in Palestinian areas  this is due to the high local support base Hamas enjoys. 

===Extrajudicial executions of rivals===
In addition to killing Israeli civilians and armed forces, Hamas has also murdered suspected Palestinian Israel collaborators and Fatah rivals. In the wake of the 2006 Israeli conflict with Gaza, Hamas was accused of systematically rounding up, torturing and summarily executing Fatah supporters suspected of supplying information to Israel. Human Rights Watch estimates several hundred Gazans were "maimed" and tortured in the aftermath of the conflict. Seventy-three Gazan men accused of "collaborating" had their arms and legs broken by "unidentified perpetrators" and 18 Palestinians accused of helping Israel were executed by Hamas security officials in the first days of the conflict. In November 2012, Hamas' Izzedine al-Qassam brigade publicly executed six Gaza residents accused of collaborating with Israel. According to the witnesses, six alleged informers were shot dead one by one in Gaza City, while the corpse of the sixth victim was tied by a cable to the back of a motorcycle and dragged through the streets. In 2013, Human Rights Watch issued a statement condemning Hamas for not investigating and giving a proper trial to the 6 men. Their statement was released the day before Hamas issued a deadline for "collaborators" to turn themselves in, or they will be pursued "without mercy". 

Frequent killings of unarmed people have also occurred during Hamas-Fatah clashes. NGOs have cited a number of summary executions as particular examples of violations of the rules of warfare, including the case of Muhammad Swairki, 28, a cook for Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud Abbas's presidential guard, who was thrown to his death, with his hands and legs tied, from a 15-story apartment building in Gaza City. Hamas security forces reportedly shoot and torture Palestinians who opposed Hamas rule in Gaza. In one case, a Palestinian had criticized Hamas in a conversation on the street with some friends. Later that day, more than a dozen armed men with black masks and red kaffiyeh took the man from his home, and brought him to a solitary area where they shot him three times in the lower legs and ankles. The man told Human Rights Watch that he was not politically active. 

On August 14, 2009, Hamas fighters stormed the Mosque of cleric Abdel-Latif Moussa. The cleric was protected by at least 100 fighters from Jund Ansar Allah ("Army of the Helpers of God"), an Islamist group with links to Al-Qaeda. The resulting battle left at least 13 people dead, including Moussa and 6 Hamas fighters, and 120 people injured. 

===20112013 Sinai insurgency===

Hamas has been accused of providing weapons, training and fighters for Sinai-based insurgent attacks, Sinai-based jihadists Hamas members arrested although Hamas strongly denies the allegations, calling them a smear campaign aiming to harm relations with Egypt. According to the Egyptian Army, since the ouster of Egypt's Muslim-Brotherhood president Mohamed Morsi, over 600 Hamas members have entered the Sinai Peninsula through smuggling tunnels. Hamas in Sinai In addition, several weapons used in Sinai's insurgent attacks are being traced back to Hamas in the Gaza Strip, according to the army. Hamas is also accused of helping Morsi and other high-ranking Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood members break out of the Wadi Natroun prison in Cairo during the 2011 revolution. Egypt Opens Murder, Conspiracy Investigation Against Morsi. NPR. 2013-07-26. Hamas called the accusation a "dangerous development". Morsi accused of plotting with Hamas. Al Jazeera English. 2013-07-26. 

==International designation of Hamas==

 Country Designation 
 The military wing of Hamas, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, is listed as a terrorist organization. Listing of Terrorist Organisations, Australian Government Attorney-General's Department, January 27, 2006. Retrieved July 31, 2006. 
 Under the Anti-Terrorism Act, Hamas is described as a terrorist organization. Currently listed entries, Public Security and Emergency Preparedness Canada, National Security, Listed entities. Retrieved Sep 22, 2010. 
 Hamas has been included in the black list of EU-designated terrorists groups since 2003 * Hamas is added to EU's blacklist of terror, By Anton La Guardia, Diplomatic Editor, Sep 12, 2003, The Telegraph. \"The European Union yesterday put Hamas on its blacklist of terrorist organisations.\" * Council Common Position 2003/651/CFSP, September 12, 2003 lists \"Hamas (including Hamas-Izz al-Din al-Qassem)\" * Council Common Position 2006/380/CFSP of 29 May 2006 updating Common Position 2001/931/CFSP on the application of specific measures to combat terrorism and repealing Common Position 2006/231/CFSP lists \"Hamas (including Hamas-Izz al-Din al-Qassem)\" * EU Nations Agree to Freeze Hamas Assets, Fox News, September 6, 2003 * EU/Middle East: Hamas Officially Included on Blacklist of Terrorist Organisations, Tuesday September 16, 2003, European Report * BBC: EU blacklists Hamas political wing, BBC * BBC: Hamas was put on the EU terror list in 2003, BBC * Solana Denies Direct Contact With Hamas, The Moscow Times * Mr. Solana goes to Damascus for some peace talks, New Europe 
 The Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs states, \"Hamas maintains a terrorist infrastructure in Gaza and the West Bank, and acts to carry out terrorist attacks in the territories and Israel.\" The Financial Sources of the Hamas Terror Organization, 2003-07-30 
 As of 2005, Japan had frozen the assets of 472 terrorists and terrorist organizations including those of Hamas. \"In accordance with the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Law, it [Japan] has frozen the assets of a total of 472 terrorists and terrorist organizations, including ..., as well as those of Hamas ...\" 
 Banned Hamas in 1999 Karmi, Omar. \"What does the Hamas victory mean for nearby Jordan?\", The Daily Star, February 18, 2006 In 2013, Jordan rejected requests to allow Hamas to return. King Abdullah Says No To Hamas. September 17, 2013. Khaled Abu Toameh. 
 Norway does not designate Hamas a terrorist organization, but declared it will not have any political contact with Hamas, denouncing the use of violence against Israeli civilians and the military takeover of Gaza. In 2006, it reorganized financial support to the Palestinian Authority in order to prevent funding of Hamas-led institutions. Facts about Norway's position with regard to Hamas. 16.01.2009. The Representative Office of Norway to the Palestinian Authority. 
 Russia does not designate Hamas a terrorist organisation, and held direct talks with Hamas in 2006, after Hamas won the Palestine elections, stating that it did so to press Hamas to reject violence and recognise Israel. An Israeli official has said that Russia will reduce its ties to Hamas. Naami, Saleh. \"Moscow to distance itself from Hamas\". ahramOnline, December 15, 2010. 
 The Turkish government met with Hamas leaders in February 2006, after the organization's victory in the Palestinian elections. In 2010, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoan described Hamas as \"resistance fighters who are struggling to defend their land\". 
 The Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades have been listed as a proscribed organization under the Terrorism Act since 2001, but Hamas as a whole is not listed. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/232176/List_of_Proscribed_organisations.pdf 
 As of 2006, China does not designate Hamas to be a terrorist organization and acknowledges Hamas to be the legitimately elected political entity in the Gaza Strip that represents the Palestinian people. Despite U.S. and Israeli opposition, the Chinese government met with senior Hamas representative Mahmoud al-Zahar, who previously served as Palestinian foreign minister, during the June 2006 China-Arab Cooperation Forum in Beijing, an held direct bilateral talks with Hamas and the Arab World. In addition, during the same month, a spokesperson for the Chinese Foreign Ministry further elucidated Beijing's pro-Palestinian stance regarding Hamas in spite of U.S. and Israeli opposition to China's associations and close relationship with the organization, stating, \"We believe that the Palestinian government is legally elected by the people there and it should be respected.\" 
 Lists Hamas as a \"Foreign Terrorist Organization\" 
 Banned Hamas in 2014 and branded it a terrorist organization. Egyptian authorities accuse the group of supporting al Qaeda-inspired Islamist insurgents in the Sinai peninsula. Cairo court bans activities by Palestinian Hamas in Egypt, brands it a terrorist organization. Associated Press. March 4, 2014 Egypt bans Hamas activities in Egypt. Mar 4, 2014 

According to Tobias Buck, while Hamas is listed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the U.S. and the EU, few treat it that way. In the Arab and Muslim world, Hamas has lost its pariah status and its emissaries are welcomed in capitals of Islamic countries. 

===United States designation of Hamas===
The State Department decided to add Hamas to its U.S. State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations in April 1993. 
 , Hamas is still listed. 

The United States states that its strong stand against Hamas arises from the group's use of violence, its opposition to U.S. interests in the Middle East, and because Hamas is allegedly receiving support from Iran and collaborating with the Lebanese group Hezbollah. The Hamas representative in Iran denied the allegation that it had received $30 million from Iran in 1992, but acknowledged Iranian assistance to Palestinian groups. In particular, the U.S. alleges that Hamas soldiers have been given refuge in southern Lebanon, where they receive training and support from Hezbollah guerrillas.

The FBI and United States Department of Justice also stated, in 2004, that Hamas threatened the United States through covert cells on U.S. soil. United States v. Abu Marzook. No. 03 CR 978 12. IL District Ct. 2005. Lake, Eli. "Hamas Agents Lurking in U.S., FBI Warns". New York Sun. April 29, 2004. December 10, 2006. Researcher Steven Emerson in 2006 alleged that the group had "an extensive infrastructure in the U.S. mostly revolving around the activities of fundraising, recruiting and training members, directing operations against Israel, organizing political support and operating through human-rights front groups". Emerson added that while the group had never acted outside of Israel or the Palestinian Territories, it does have the capacity to carry out attacks in the U.S. "if it decided to enlarge the scope of its operations". FBI director Robert Mueller in 2005 testified to the Senate Intelligence Committee that, the FBI's assessment at that time was that there was "a limited threat of a coordinated terrorist attack in the US from Palestinian terrorist organizations" such as Hamas. He added that Hamas had "maintained a longstanding policy of focusing their attacks on Israeli targets in Israel and the Palestinian territories", and that the FBI believed that the main interest of Hamas in the U.S. remained "the raising of funds to support their regional goals". Mueller also stated, "of all the Palestinian groups, Hamas has the largest presence in the US, with a robust infrastructure, primarily focused on fundraising, propaganda for the Palestinian cause, and proselytizing." Although it would be a major strategic shift for Hamas, its United States network is theoretically capable of facilitating acts of terrorism in the U.S. FBI Press Room: Testimony of Robert S. Mueller, III, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, before the Senate Committee on Intelligence of the United States Senate. February 16, 2005 

On May 2, 2011, Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh condemned the killing of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan by the United States. Haniyeh praised Bin Laden, the founder of the jihadist organization al-Qaeda, as a "martyr" and an "Arab holy warrior". The United States government condemned his remarks as "outrageous". 

==Public opinion about Hamas==

===In Arab countries===
Pro-Hamas rally in Damascus
A 2010 Pew Global Attitudes Survey found that 60% of Jordanian Muslims and 49% of Muslims in both Lebanon and Egypt held a favorable opinion of Hamas. Pew Research Center Global Attitudes Survey: Muslim Publics Divided on Hamas and Hezbollah, December 2, 2010 A 2007 Pew survey found 62% of Palestinians holding a favorable opinion of the group. Pew Research Center Global Attitudes Survey: Global Unease With Major World Powers, June 27, 2007 

==Legal action against Hamas==

===In the United States===
The charitable trust Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development was accused in December 2001 of funding Hamas. The U.S. Justice Department filed 200 charges against the foundation. The case first ended in a mistrial, in which jurors acquitted on some counts and were deadlocked on charges ranging from tax violations to providing material support for terrorists. In a retrial, on November 24, 2008, the five leaders of the Foundation were convicted on 108 counts. 

In 2004, a federal court in the United States found Hamas liable in a civil lawsuit for the 1996 murders of Yaron and Efrat Ungar near Bet Shemesh, Israel. Hamas has been ordered to pay the families of the Ungars $116 million. On July 5, 2004, the court issued a default judgment against the PNA and the PLO regarding the Ungars' said that the Palestinian Authority and the PLO provide safe haven to Hamas.

On August 20, 2004, three Palestinians, one a naturalized American citizen, were charged with a "lengthy racketeering conspiracy to provide money for terrorist acts in Israel". The indicted include Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, a senior member of Hamas considered a fugitive by the U.S.

On February 1, 2007, two men were acquitted of contravening United States law by supporting Hamas. Both men argued that they helped move money for Palestinian causes aimed at helping the Palestinian people and not to promote terrorism.

In January 2009, a Federal prosecutor accused the Council on American-Islamic Relations of having links to a charity designated as a support network for Hamas. The Justice Department identified CAIR as an "un-indicted co-conspirator" in the Holy Land Foundation case in Dallas, which concluded with the sentencing of the two founders of the foundation to life in prison for funneling $12 million to Hamas. Later, a federal appeals court removed that label for all parties and instead, named them "joint venturers". 

===In Germany===
A German federal court ruled in 2004 that Hamas was a unified organisation whose humanitarian aid work could not be separated from its "terrorist and political activities". In July 2010, Germany also outlawed Frankfurt-based International Humanitarian Aid Organization (IHH e.V.), saying it had used donations to support Hamas-affiliated relief projects in Gaza. While presenting their activities to donors as humanitarian assistance, German Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere said, IHH e.V. had "exploited trusting donors' willingness to help by using money that was given for a good purpose for supporting what is, in the final analysis, a terrorist organization". Germany IHH e.V. ban shameful, illegal, says group leader Today's Zaman, July 14, 2010 A spokesperson for the Islamic Human Rights Commission described the decision as "a victory for those who seek to stigmatise all Islamic activism as supporting terrorism". Press Release: Germany  Banning of IHH stigmatises all Islamic humanitarian activism July 14, 2010 

==See also==
* Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi
* Hamastan
* Human rights in the Palestinian National Authority
* List of Hamas suicide attacks
* List of political parties in the Palestinian National Authority

==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Hamas official website 
* Palestinian National Authority Council of Ministers Web site 
* Britannica
* Hamas leaders CFR
* Hamas Charter
* The Covenant of the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) (includes interpretation)
* Hamas Shifts From Rockets to Public Relations The New York Times, July 23, 2009
* 22 years on the start of Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades' Information Office
* Fatah and Hamas Human Rights Violations in the Palestinian Occupied Territories in 2007 by Elizabeth Freed of Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group
* Sadiki, Larbi, Tests and contests: Hamas without Syria
* Sherifa Zuhur, Hamas and Israel: Conflicting Strategies of Group-Based Politics (PDF File) December 2008

 



[[History of the graphical user interface]]

Sutherland demonstrating Sketchpad (UVC via IA: [http://www.archive.org/details/AlanKeyD1987 video and thumbnails).]]

The history of the graphical user interface, understood as the use of graphic icons and a pointing device to control a computer, covers a five-decade span of incremental refinements, built on some constant core principles. Several vendors have created their own windowing systems based on independent code, but with basic elements in common that define the WIMP "window, icon, menu and pointing device" paradigm.

There have been important technological achievements, and enhancements to the general interaction in small steps over previous systems. There have been a few significant breakthroughs in terms of use, but the same organizational metaphors and interaction idioms are still in use. Although many GUI operating systems are controlled by using a mouse, the keyboard can also be used with keyboard shortcuts or arrow keys. The interface developments described, below, have been summarized and omit many details in the interest of brevity. The influence of game computers and joystick operation has been omitted.
__TOC__

==Initial developments==
The first prototype of a computer mouse, as designed by Bill English from Engelbart's sketches 
Videoconferencing on NLS (1968)
Early dynamic information devices such as radar displays, where input devices were used for direct control of computer-created data, set the basis for later improvements of graphical interfaces. Some early cathode-ray-tube (CRT) screens used a lightpen, rather than a mouse, as the pointing device.

The concept of a multi-panel windowing system was introduced by the first real-time graphic display systems for computers: the SAGE Project and Ivan Sutherland's Sketchpad.

===Augmentation of Human Intellect (NLS)===
In the 1960s, Doug Engelbart's amplification#Douglas Engelbart: Augmenting Human Intellect|Augmentation of Human Intellect] project at the Augmentation Research Center at SRI International in Menlo Park, California developed the oN-Line System (NLS). This computer incorporated a mouse-driven cursor and multiple windows used to work on hypertext. Engelbart had been inspired, in part, by the memex desk-based information machine suggested by Vannevar Bush in 1945.

Much of the early research was based on how young children learn. So, the design was based on the childlike primitives of hand-eye coordination, rather than use of command languages, user-defined macro procedures, or automated transformations of data as later used by adult professionals.

===Xerox PARC===
Xerox Star workstation introduced the first GUI operating system

 led to the advances at Xerox PARC. Several people went from SRI to Xerox PARC in the early 1970s.
In 1973, Xerox PARC developed the Alto personal computer. It had a bitmapped screen, and was the first computer to demonstrate the desktop metaphor and graphical user interface (GUI). It was not a commercial product, but several thousand units were built and were heavily used at PARC, as well as other XEROX offices, and at several universities for many years. The Alto greatly influenced the design of personal computers during the late 1970s and early 1980s, notably the Three Rivers PERQ, the Apple Lisa and Macintosh, and the first Sun workstations.

The GUI was first developed at Xerox PARC by Alan Kay, Larry Tesler, Dan Ingalls, David Smith and a number of other researchers. It used windows, icons, and menus (including the first fixed drop-down menu) to support commands such as opening files, deleting files, moving files, etc. In 1974, work began at PARC on Gypsy, the first bitmap What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get (WYSIWYG) cut & paste editor. In 1975, Xerox engineers demonstrated a Graphical User Interface "including icons and the first use of pop-up menus". History of PARC 

In 1981 Xerox introduced a pioneering product, Star, a workstation incorporating many of PARC's innovations. Although not commercially successful, Star greatly influenced future developments, for example at Apple, Microsoft and Sun Microsystems. 

==Early developments==

=== Xerox Alto and Xerox Star ===
The Xerox Alto had an early graphical user interface.

The Xerox Alto (and later Xerox Star) was an early personal computer developed at Xerox PARC in 1973. It was the first computer to use the desktop metaphor and mouse-driven graphical user interface (GUI).

It was not a commercial product, but several thousand units were built and were heavily used at PARC, other Xerox facilities, at least one government facility and at several universities for many years. The Alto greatly influenced the design of some personal computers in the following decades, notably the Apple Macintosh and the first Sun workstations.

=== SGI 1000 series and MEX ===
Founded 1982, SGI introduced the IRIS 1000 Series in 1983. The first graphical terminals (IRIS 1000) shipped in late 1983, and the corresponding workstation model (IRIS 1400) was released in mid-1984. The machines used an early version of the MEX windowing system on top of the GL2 Release 1 operating environment. Examples of the MEX user interface can be seen in a 1988 article in the journal "Computer Graphics", while earlier screenshots can not be found. The first commercial GUI-based systems, these did not find widespread use as to their (discounted) academic list price of $22,500 and $35,700 for the IRIS 1000 and IRIS 1400, respectively. However, these systems were commercially successful enough to start SGI's business as one of the main graphical workstation vendors. In later revisions of graphical workstations, SGI switched to the X window system, which had been developed starting at MIT since 1984 and which became the standard for UNIX workstations.

=== Apple Lisa and Macintosh (and later, the Apple IIgs) ===

Macintosh Desktop (1984).
The Apple GS/OS desktop (1986).

Beginning in 1979, started by Steve Jobs and led by Jef Raskin, the Apple Lisa and Macintosh teams at Apple Computer (which included former members of the Xerox PARC group) continued to develop such ideas. The Macintosh, released in 1984, was the first commercially successful product to use a multi-panel window interface. A desktop metaphor was used, in which files looked like pieces of paper. File directories looked like file folders. There were a set of desk accessories like a calculator, notepad, and alarm clock that the user could place around the screen as desired; and the user could delete files and folders by dragging them to a trash-can icon on the screen.

There is still some controversy over the amount of influence that Xerox's PARC work, as opposed to previous academic research, had on the GUIs of the Apple Lisa and Macintosh, but it is clear that the influence was extensive, because first versions of Lisa GUIs even lacked icons. These prototype GUIs are at least mouse-driven, but completely ignored the WIMP ( "window, icon, menu, pointing device") concept. Screenshots of first GUIs of Apple Lisa prototypes show the early designs. Note also that Apple engineers visited the PARC facilities (Apple secured the rights for the visit by compensating Xerox with a pre-IPO purchase of Apple stock) and a number of PARC employees subsequently moved to Apple to work on the Lisa and Macintosh GUI. However, the Apple work extended PARC's considerably, adding manipulatable icons, and drag&drop manipulation of objects in the file system (see Macintosh Finder) for example. A list of the improvements made by Apple, beyond the PARC interface, can be read at Folklore.org. "On Xerox, Apple and Progress" (1996), Folklore.org. Jef Raskin warns that many of the reported facts in the history of the PARC and Macintosh development are inaccurate, distorted or even fabricated, due to the lack of usage by historians of direct primary sources. 

In 1984, Apple released a television commercial which introduced the Apple Macintosh during the telecast of Super Bowl XVIII by CBS, with allusions to George Orwell's noted novel, Nineteen Eighty-Four. The commercial was aimed at making people think about computers, identifying the user-friendly interface as a personal computer which departed from previous business-oriented systems, and becoming a signature representation of Apple products. 

In 1986 the Apple IIgs was launched, a very advanced model of the successful Apple II series, based on 16-bit technology (in fact, virtually two machines into one). It came with a new operating system, the Apple GS/OS, which features a Finder-like GUI, very similar to that of the Macintosh series, able to deal with the advanced graphic abilities of its Video Graphics Chip (VGC).

===Graphical Environment Manager (GEM)===

Digital Research (DRI) created the Graphical Environment Manager (GEM) as an add-on program for personal computers. GEM was developed to work with existing CP/M and MS-DOS operating systems on business computers such as IBM-compatibles. It was developed from DRI software, known as GSX, designed by a former PARC employee. The similarity to the Macintosh desktop led to a copyright lawsuit from Apple Computer, and a settlement which involved some changes to GEM. This was to be the first of a series of 'look and feel' lawsuits related to GUI design in the 1980s.
GEM on the Atari ST (1985)

GEM received widespread use in the consumer market from 1985, when it was made the default user interface built into the Atari TOS operating system of the Atari ST line of personal computers. It was also bundled by other computer manufacturers and distributors, such as Amstrad. Later, it was distributed with the best-sold Digital Research version of DOS for IBM PC compatibles, the DR-DOS 6.0. The GEM desktop faded from the market with the withdrawal of the Atari ST line in 1992 and with the popularity of the Microsoft Windows 3.0 in the PC front around the same period of time.

===DeskMate===
DeskMate 3.02 running in VGA mode

Tandy's DeskMate appeared in the early 1980s on its TRS-80 machines and was ported to its Tandy 1000 range in 1984. Like most PC GUIs of the time, it depended on a disk operating system such as TRS-DOS or MS-DOS. The application was popular at the time and included a number of programs like Draw, Text and Calendar, as well as attracting outside investment such as Lotus 1-2-3 for DeskMate.

===Acorn BBC Master Compact===
The Master Compact GUI

Acorn's 8-bit BBC Master Compact shipped with Acorn's first public GUI interface in 1986. Chris's Acorns: Master Compact Little commercial software, beyond that included on the Welcome disk, was ever made available for the system, despite the claim by Acorn at the time that "the major software houses have worked with Acorn to make over 100 titles available on compilation discs at launch". User October 1986 - News - Page 9 The most avid supporter of the Master Compact appeared to be Superior Software, who produced and specifically labelled their games as 'Master Compact' compatible.

===Amiga Intuition and the Workbench===
Amiga Workbench (1985)
The Amiga computer was launched by Commodore in 1985 with a GUI called Workbench. Workbench was based on an internal engine developed mostly by RJ Mical, called Intuition, which drove all the input events. The first versions used a blue/orange/white/black default palette, which was selected for high contrast on televisions and composite monitors. Workbench presented directories as drawers to fit in with the "workbench" theme.
Intuition was the widget and graphics library that made the GUI work. It was driven by user events through the mouse, keyboard, and other input devices.

Due to a mistake made by the Commodore sales department, the first floppies of AmigaOS (released with the Amiga1000) named the whole OS "Workbench". Since then, users and CBM itself referred to "Workbench" as the nickname for the whole AmigaOS (including Amiga DOS, Extras, etc.). This common consent ended with release of version 2.0 of AmigaOS, which re-introduced proper names to the installation floppies of AmigaDOS, Workbench, Extras, etc.

Starting with Workbench 1.0, AmigaOS treated the Workbench as a backdrop, borderless window sitting atop a blank screen. With the introduction of AmigaOS 2.0, however, the user was free to select whether the main Workbench window appeared as a normally layered window, complete with a border and scrollbars, through a menu item.

Amiga users were able to boot their computer into a command line interface (also known as the CLI or Amiga Shell). This was a keyboard-based environment without the Workbench GUI. Later they could invoke it with the CLI/SHELL command "LoadWB" which loaded Workbench GUI.

One major difference between other OS's of the time (and for some time after) was the Amiga's fully multi-tasking operating system, a powerful built-in animation system using a hardware blitter and copper and 4 channels of 26 kHz 8-bit sampled sound. This made the Amiga the first multi-media computer years before other OS's.

Like most GUIs of the day, Amiga's Intuition followed Xerox's, and sometimes Apple's, lead. But a CLI was included which dramatically extended the functionality of the platform. However, the CLI/Shell of Amiga is not just a simple text-based interface like in MS-DOS, but another graphic process driven by Intuition, and with the same gadgets included in Amiga's graphics.library. The CLI/Shell interface integrates itself with the Workbench, sharing privileges with the GUI.

The Amiga Workbench evolved over the 1990s, even after Commodore's 1994 bankruptcy.

===Arthur / RISC OS===
Arthur Desktop

RISC OS is a series of graphical user interface-based computer operating systems (OSes) designed for ARM architecture systems. It takes its name from the RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computing) architecture supported. The OS was originally developed by Acorn Computers for use with their 1987 range of Archimedes personal computers using the Acorn RISC Machine processors. It comprises a command-line interface and desktop environment with a windowing system.

Originally branded as the Arthur 1.20 the subsequent Arthur 2 release was shipped under the name RISC OS 2.

From 1988 to 1998, the OS was bundled with nearly every ARM-based Acorn computer model, including the Archimedes range, RiscPC, NewsPad and A7000. A version of the OS (called NCOS) was used in Oracle's Network Computer and compatible systems. After the breakup of Acorn in 1998, development of the OS was forked and separately continued by several companies, including RISCOS Ltd, Pace Micro Technology and Castle Technology. Since 1998 it has been bundled with a number of ARM-based desktop computers such as the Iyonix and A9home. , the OS remains forked and is independently developed by RISCOS Ltd and the RISC OS Open community.

Most recent stable versions run on the ARMv3/ARMv4 RiscPC (or under emulation via VirtualAcorn or RPCEmu), the ARMv5 Iyonix, Raspberry Pi and ARMv7 Cortex-A8 processors (such as that used in the BeagleBoard and Touch Book). In 2011, a port for the Cortex-A9 PandaBoard was announced 

==== Desktop ====
A typical RISC OS 3.7 session
The WIMP interface incorporates three mouse buttons (named Select, Menu and Adjust), context-sensitive menus, window order control (i.e. send to back) and dynamic window focus (a window can have input focus at any position on the stack). The Icon bar (Dock) holds icons which represent mounted disc drives, RAM discs, running applications, system utilities and docked: Files, Directories or inactive Applications. These icons have context-sensitive menus and support drag-and-drop behaviour. They represent the running application as a whole, irrespective of whether it has open windows.

The GUI is centred around the concept of files. The Filer displays the contents of a disc. Applications are run from the Filer view and files can be dragged to the Filer view from applications to perform saves. Application directories are used to store applications. The OS differentiates them from normal directories through the use of a pling (exclamation mark, also called shriek) prefix. Double-clicking on such a directory launches the application rather than opening the directory. The application's executable files and resources are contained within the directory, but normally they remain hidden from the user. Because applications are self-contained, this allows drag-and-drop installation and removal.

The RISC OS Style Guide encourages a consistent look and feel across applications. This was introduced in RISC OS 3 and specifies application appearance and behaviour. Acorn's own main bundled applications were not updated to comply with the guide until 's Select release in 2001. 

==== Font manager ====
The outline fonts manager provides spatial anti-aliasing of fonts, the OS being the first operating system to include such a feature, having included it since before January 1989. Since 1994, in RISC OS 3.5, it has been possible to use an outline anti-aliased font in the WindowManager for UI elements, rather than the bitmap system font from previous versions. Acorn Computers Support Group Application Notice 253 - New features of RISC OS version 3.5 

===MS-DOS file managers and utility suites===
Norton Utilities 6.01 (1991). Note the graphical widgets and the arrow pointer in text mode.

Because most of the very early IBM PC and compatibles lacked any common true graphical capability (they used the 80-column basic text mode compatible with the original MDA display adapter), a series of file managers arose, including Microsoft's DOS Shell, which features typical GUI elements as menus, push buttons, lists with scrollbars and mouse pointer. The name text-based user interface was later invented to name this kind of interface. Many MS-DOS text mode applications, like the default text editor for MS-DOS 5.0 (and related tools, like QBasic), also used the same philosophy. The IBM DOS Shell included with IBM DOS 5.0 (circa 1992) supported both text display modes and actual graphics display modes, making it both a TUI and a GUI, depending on the chosen mode.

Advanced file managers for MS-DOS were able to redefine character shapes with EGA and better display adapters, giving some basic low resolution icons and graphical interface elements, including an arrow (instead of a coloured cell block) for the mouse pointer. When the display adapter lacks the ability to change the character's shapes, they default to the CP437 character set found in the adapter's ROM. Some popular utility suites for MS-DOS, as Norton Utilities (pictured) and PC Tools used these techniques as well.

DESQview was a text mode multitasking program introduced in July 1985. Running on top of MS-DOS, it allowed users to run multiple DOS programs concurrently in windows. It was the first program to bring multitasking and windowing capabilities to a DOS environment in which existing DOS programs could be used. DESQview was not a true GUI but offered certain components of one, such as resizable, overlapping windows and mouse pointing.

===Applications under MS-DOS with proprietary GUIs===
DeluxePaint II for MS-DOS (1989)

Before the MS-Windows age, and with the lack of a true common GUI under MS-DOS, most graphical applications which worked with EGA, VGA and better graphic cards had proprietary built-in GUIs. One of the best known such graphical applications was Deluxe Paint, a popular painting software with a typical WIMP interface.

The original Adobe Acrobat Reader executable file for MS-DOS was able to run on both the standard Windows 3.x GUI and the standard DOS command prompt. When it was launched from the command prompt, on a machine with a VGA graphics card, it provided its own GUI.

===Microsoft Windows (16-bit versions)===
Windows 1.01 (1985)

Windows 1.0, a GUI for the MS-DOS operating system was released in 1985. The market's response was less than stellar. Windows 2.0 followed, but it wasn't until the 1990 launch of Windows 3.0, based on Common User Access that its popularity truly exploded. The GUI has seen minor redesigns since, mainly the networking enabled Windows 3.11 and its Win32s 32-bit patch. The 16-bit line of MS Windows were discontinued with the introduction of Windows 95 and Windows NT 32-bit based architecture in the 1990s. See the next section.
Windows 3.11 (1993)

The main window of a given application can occupy the full screen in maximized status. The users must then to switch between maximized applications using the Alt+Tab keyboard shortcut; no alternative with the mouse except for de-maximize. When none of the running application windows are maximized, switching can be done by clicking on a partially visible window, as is the common way in other GUIs.

In 1988, Apple sued Microsoft for copyright infringement of the LISA and Apple Macintosh GUI. The court case lasted 4 years before almost all of Apple's claims were denied on a contractual technicality. Subsequent appeals by Apple were also denied. Microsoft and Apple apparently entered a final, private settlement of the matter in 1997.

===GEOS===
GEOS for the Commodore 64 (1986).

GEOS was launched in 1986. Originally written for the 8-bit home computer Commodore 64 and shortly after, the Apple II series. It was later ported to IBM PC systems as PC/Geos, then Geoworks Ensemble. It came with several application programs like a calendar and word processor, and a cut-down version served as the basis for America Online's DOS client. Compared to the competing Windows 3.0 GUI it could run reasonably well on simpler hardware, but its developer had a restrictive policy towards third-party developers that prevented it from becoming a serious competitor. And it was targeted at 8-bit machines and the 16-bit computer age was dawning.

===The X Window System===

A Unix based X Window System desktop (circa 1990).
The standard windowing system in the Unix world is the X Window System (commonly X11 or X), first released in the mid-1980s. The W Window System (1983) was the precursor to X; X was developed at MIT as Project Athena. Its original purpose was to allow users of the newly emerging graphic terminals to access remote graphics workstations without regard to the workstation's operating system or the hardware. Due largely to the availability of the source code used to write X, it has become the standard layer for management of graphical and input/output devices and for the building of both local and remote graphical interfaces on virtually all Unix, Linux and other Unix-like operating systems, with the notable exceptions of Mac OS X and Android.

X allows a graphical terminal user to make use of remote resources on the network as if they were all located locally to the user by running a single module of software called the X server. The software running on the remote machine is called the client application. X's network transparency protocols allow the display and input portions of any application to be separated from the remainder of the application and 'served up' to any of a large number of remote users. X is available today as free software.

===NeWS===

HyperTIES authoring tool under NeWS window system.
The PostScript-based NeWS (Network extensible Window System) was developed by Sun Microsystems in the mid-1980s. For several years SunOS included a window system combining NeWS and the X Window System. Although NeWS was considered technically elegant by some commentators, Sun eventually dropped the product. Unlike X, NeWS was always proprietary software.

==The 1990s: Mainstream usage of the desktop==
The widespread adoption of the PC platform at homes and small business popularized computers among people with no formal training. This created a fast-growing market, opening an opportunity for commercial exploitation and of easy-to-use interfaces and making economically viable the incremental refinement of the existing GUIs for home systems.

Also, the spreading of Highcolor and True Color capabilities of display adapters providing thousands and millions of colors, along with faster CPUs and accelerated graphic cards, cheaper RAM, storage devices up to an order of magnitude larger (from megabytes to gigabytes) and larger bandwidth for telecom networking at lower cost helped to create an environment in which the common user was able to run complicated GUIs which began to favor aesthetics.

===Windows 95 and "a computer in every home"===
Windows 95 desktop (1995).

:Main article: Windows 95. See also: Windows NT.

After Windows 3.11, Microsoft began to develop a new consumer-oriented version of the operating system. Windows 95 was intended to integrate Microsoft's formerly separate MS-DOS and Windows products and included an enhanced version of DOS, often referred to as MS-DOS 7.0. It also featured a significant redesign of the GUI, dubbed "Cairo". While Cairo never really materialized, parts of Cairo found their way into subsequent versions of the operating system starting with Windows 95. Both Win95 and WinNT could run 32-bit applications, and could exploit the abilities of the Intel 80386 CPU, as the preemptive multitasking and up to 4GiB of linear address memory space. Windows 95 was touted as a 32-bit based operating system but it was actually based on a hybrid kernel (VWIN32.VXD) with the 16-bit user interface (USER.EXE) and graphic device interface (GDI.EXE) of Windows for Workgroups (3.11), which had 16-bit kernel components with a 32-bit subsystem (USER32.DLL and GDI32.DLL) that allowed it to run native 16-bit applications as well as 32-bit applications. In the marketplace, Windows 95 was an unqualified success, promoting a general upgrade to 32-bit technology, and within a year or two of its release had become the most successful operating system ever produced.

Accompanied by an extensive marketing campaign, Windows 95 was a major success in the marketplace at launch and shortly became the most popular desktop operating system.

Windows 95 saw the beginning of the browser wars, when the World Wide Web began receiving a great deal of attention in the popular culture and mass media. Microsoft at first did not see potential in the Web, and Windows 95 was shipped with Microsoft's own online service called The Microsoft Network, which was dial-up only and was used primarily for its own content, not internet access. As versions of Netscape Navigator and Internet Explorer were released at a rapid pace over the following few years, Microsoft used its desktop dominance to push its browser and shape the ecology of the web mainly as a Monoculture (computer science).

Windows 95 evolved through the years into Windows 98 and Windows ME. Windows ME was the last in the line of the Windows 3.x-based operating systems from Microsoft. Windows underwent a parallel 32-bit evolutionary path, where Windows NT 3.1 was released in 1993. Windows NT (for New Technology) was a native 32-bit operating system with a new driver model, was unicode-based, and provided for true separation between applications. Windows NT also supported 16-bit applications in an NTVDM, but it did not support VXD based drivers. Windows 95 was supposed to be released before 1993 as the predecessor to Windows NT. The idea was to promote the development of 32-bit applications with backward compatibility - leading the way for more successful NT release. After multiple delays, Windows 95 was released without unicode and used the VXD driver model. Windows NT 3.1 evolved to Windows NT 3.5, 3.51 and then 4.0 when it finally shared a similar interface with its Windows 9x desktop counterpart and included a START button. The evolution continued with Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Vista, then Windows 7. Windows XP and higher were also made available in 64-bit modes. Windows server products branched off with the introduction of Windows Server 2003 (available in 32-bit and 64-bit IA64 or x64), then Windows Server 2008 and then Windows Server 2008 R2. Windows 2000 and XP shared the same basic GUI although XP introduced Visual Styles. With Windows 98, the Active Desktop theme was introduced, allowing an HTML approach for the desktop, but this feature was coldly received by customers, who frequently disabled it. At the end, Windows Vista definitively discontinued it, but put a new SideBar on the desktop.

===Mac OS===
Screenshot of System 7.5.3
The Macintosh's GUI has been revised multiple times since 1984, with major updates including System 7 and Mac OS 8. It underwent its largest revision to date with the introduction of the "Aqua" interface in 2001's Mac OS X. It was a new operating system built primarily on technology from NeXTStep with UI elements of the original Mac OS grafted on. Mac OS X uses a technology known as Quartz (graphics layer), for graphics rendering and drawing on-screen. Some interface features of Mac OS X are inherited from NeXTStep (such as the Dock, the automatic wait cursor, or double-buffered windows giving a solid appearance and flicker-free window redraws), while others are inherited from the old Mac OS operating system (the single system-wide menu-bar). Mac OS X v10.3 introduced features to improve usability including Expos, which is designed to make finding open windows easier.

With Mac OS X v10.4, new features were added, including Dashboard (a virtual alternate desktop for mini specific-purpose applications) and a search tool called Spotlight, which provides users with an option for searching through files instead of browsing through folders.

===GUIs built on the X Window System===
KDE Plasma 4.4 desktop (2010)
A GNOME 2.28 desktop (2010)
 of X Window development, Sun Microsystems and AT&T attempted to push for a GUI standard called OPEN LOOK in competition with Motif. OPEN LOOK was a well-designed standard developed from scratch in conjunction with Xerox, while Motif was a collective effort that fell into place, with a look and feel patterned after Windows 3.11. Many who worked on OPEN LOOK at the time appreciated its design coherence. Motif prevailed in the UNIX GUI battles and became the basis for the Common Desktop Environment (CDE). CDE was based on VUE (Visual User Environment), a proprietary desktop from Hewlett-Packard that in turn was based on the Motif look and feel.

In the late 1990s, there was significant growth in the Unix world, especially among the free software community. New graphical desktop movements grew up around Linux and similar operating systems, based on the X Window System. A new emphasis on providing an integrated and uniform interface to the user brought about new desktop environments, such as KDE Plasma Desktop, GNOME and XFCE which have supplanted CDE in popularity on both Unix and Unix-like operating systems. The XFCE, KDE and GNOME look and feel each tend to undergo more rapid change and less codification than the earlier OPEN LOOK and Motif environments.

===Amiga===
Amiga Workbench 2.0 (1990)
Amiga Workbench 4.1 (2009)
Later releases added improvements over the original Workbench, like support for high-color Workbench screens, context menus, and embossed 2D icons with pseudo-3D aspect. Some Amiga users preferred alternative interfaces to standard Workbench, such as Directory Opus Magellan.

The use of improved, third-party GUI engines became common amongst users who preferred more attractive interfaces  such as Magic User Interface (MUI), and ReAction. These object-oriented graphic engines driven by user interface classes and methods were then standardized into the Amiga environment and changed Amiga Workbench to a complete and modern guided interface, with new standard gadgets, animated buttons, true 24-bit-color icons, increased use of wallpapers for screens and windows, alpha channel, transparencies and shadows as any modern GUI provides.

Modern derivatives of Workbench are Ambient for MorphOS, Scalos, Workbench for AmigaOS 4 and Wanderer for AROS.
There is a brief article on Ambient and descriptions of MUI icons, menus and gadgets at aps.fr and images of Zune stay at main AROS site.

Use of object oriented graphic engines dramatically changes the look and feel of a GUI to match actual styleguides.

===OS/2===
OS/2 Workplace Shell
Originally collaboratively developed by Microsoft and IBM to replace DOS, OS/2 version 1.0 (released in 1987) had no GUI at all. Version 1.1 (released 1988) included Presentation Manager (PM), an implementation of IBM Common User Access, which looked a lot like the later Windows 3.1 UI. After the split with Microsoft, IBM developed the Workplace Shell (WPS) for version 2.0 (released in 1992), a quite radical, object-oriented approach to GUIs. Microsoft later imitated much of this look in Windows 95.

===NeXTSTEP===
NeXTStep 3.x running NetHack, help and more apps.
The NeXTSTEP user interface was used in the NeXT line of computers. NeXTSTEP's first major version was released in 1989. It used Display PostScript for its graphical underpinning. The NeXTSTEP interface's most significant feature was the Dock, carried with some modification into Mac OS X, and had other minor interface details that some found made it easier and more intuitive to use than previous GUIs. NeXTSTEP's GUI was the first to feature opaque dragging of windows in its user interface, on a comparatively weak machine by today's standards, ideally aided by high performance graphics hardware.

===BeOS===
BeOS Desktop
BeOS was developed on custom AT&T Hobbit-based computers before switching to PowerPC hardware by a team led by former Apple executive Jean-Louis Gasse as an alternative to Mac OS. BeOS was later ported to Intel hardware. It used an object-oriented kernel written by Be, and did not use the X Window System, but a different GUI written from scratch. Much effort was spent by the developers to make it an efficient platform for multimedia applications. Be Inc. was acquired by PalmSource, Inc. (Palm Inc. at the time) in 2001. The BeOS GUI still lives in Haiku, an open source software reimplementation of the BeOS.

==Current trends==

=== Mobile devices ===
In 2007 with the iPhone Mather, John. iMania, Ryerson Review of Journalism, (February 19, 2007) Retrieved February 19, 2007 and later in 2010 with the introduction of the iPad, "the iPad could finally spark demand for the hitherto unsuccessful tablet PC" --Eaton, Nick The iPad/tablet PC market defined?, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 2010 Apple popularized the post-WIMP style of interaction for multi-touch screens, with those devices considered to be milestones in the development of mobile devices. Bright, Peter Ballmer (and Microsoft) still doesn't get the iPad, Ars Technica, 2010 

Other portable devices such as MP3 players and cell phones have been a burgeoning area of deployment for GUIs in recent years. Since the mid-2000s, a vast majority of portable devices have advanced to having high-screen resolutions and sizes. (The iPhone 5's 1,136  640 pixel display is an example). Because of this, these devices have their own famed user interfaces and operating systems that have large homebrew communities dedicated to creating their own visual elements, such as icons, menus, wallpapers, and more. Post-WIMP interfaces are often used in these mobile devices, where the traditional pointing devices required by the desktop metaphor are not practical.

As high-powered graphics hardware draws considerable power and generates significant heat, many of the 3D effects developed between 2000 and 2010 are not practical on this class of device. This has led to the development of simpler interfaces making a design feature of two dimensionality such as exhibited by Metro and the 2012 Gmail redesign.

=== 3D user interface ===

Compiz running on Fedora Core 6 with AIGLX.

In the 1st decade of the 21st century, the rapid development of GPUs led to a trend for the inclusion of 3D effects in window management. It is based in experimental research in User Interface Design trying to expand the expressive power of the existing toolkits in order to enhance the physical cues that allow for direct manipulation. New effects common to several projects are scale resizing and zooming, several windows transformations and animations (wobbly windows, smooth minimization to system tray...), composition of images (used for window drop shadows and transparency) and enhancing the global organization of open windows (zooming to virtual desktops, desktop cube, Expos, etc.) The proof-of-concept BumpTop desktop combines a physical representation of documents with tools for document classification possible only in the simulated environment, like instant reordering and automated grouping of related documents.

These effects are popularized thanks to the widespread use of 3D video cards (mainly due to gaming) which allow for complex visual processing with low CPU use, using the 3D acceleration in most modern graphics cards to render the application clients in a 3D scene. The application window is drawn off-screen in a pixel buffer, and the graphics card renders it into the 3D scene.

This can have the advantage of moving some of the window rendering to the GPU on the graphics card and thus reducing the load on the main CPU, but the facilities that allow this must be available on the graphics card to be able to take advantage of this.

Examples of 3D user-interface software include XGL and Compiz from Novell, and AIGLX bundled with Red Hat Fedora. Quartz Extreme for Mac OS X and Windows 7 and Vista's Aero interface use 3D rendering for shading and transparency effects as well as Expose and Windows Flip and Flip 3D, respectively. Windows Vista uses Direct3D to accomplish this, whereas the other interfaces use OpenGL.

At the IEEE 7th Symposium on 3D User Interfaces, Ph.D. student Mengu Sukan, M.S. student Semih Energin and Prof. Steve Feiner won best poster for research and development of augmented reality, titled "Manipulating Virtual Objects in Hand-Held Augmented Reality using Stored Snapshots." The poster presents a set of interaction techniques that allow a user to first take snapshots of a scene using a tablet computer, and then jump back and forth between the snapshots, to revisit them virtually for interaction. By storing for each snapshot a still image of the scene, along with the camera position and orientation determined by computer vision software, this approach allows the overlaid 3D graphics to be dynamic and interactive. This makes it possible for the user to move and rotate virtual 3D objects from the vantage points of different locations, without the overhead of physically traveling between those locations. 3DUI attendees tried a real-time demo in which they laid out virtual furniture. They could rapidly transition between the live view and the viewpoints of multiple snapshots, as they moved and rotated items of virtual furniture, iteratively designing a desired layout. 

=== Virtual reality and presence ===

Virtual reality devices such as the Occulus Rift and Sony's Project Morpheus aim to provide users with presence, a perception of full immersion into a virtual environment.

==See also==

* Windowing system
* Bill Atkinson
* The Blit (graphics terminal by Rob Pike, 1982)
* Direct manipulation interface
* Doug Engelbart's On-Line System
* Graphical user interface
* Text-based user interface
* History of computing hardware
* History of computer icons
* Ivan Sutherland's Sketchpad
* Jef Raskin
* Office of the future
* XGL
* AIGLX
* DirectFB
* Mezzo
* tiling window manager
* Macro command language
* Texting
* Skeuomorph
* Apple v. Microsoft
* IBM Common User Access

==References==

==External links==
* Raj Lal "User Interface evolution in last 50 years", Digital Design and Innovation Summit, San Francisco, Sept 20, 2013
* Jeremy Reimer. "A History of the GUI" Ars Technica. May 5, 2005.
* "User Interface Timeline" George Mason University
* Nathan Lineback. "The Graphical User Interface Gallery". Nathan's Toasty Technology Page.
* Oral history interview with Marvin L. Minsky, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Minsky describes artificial intelligence (AI) research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), including research in the areas of graphics, word processing, and time-sharing.
* Oral history interview with Ivan Sutherland, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Sutherland describes his tenure as head of ARPA's Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) from 1963 to 1965, including new projects in graphics and networking.
* Oral history interview with Charles A. Csuri, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Csuri recounts his art education and explains his transition to computer graphics in the mid-1960s, after receiving a National Science Foundation grant for research in graphics.
* GUIdebook: Graphical User Interface gallery
* VisiOn history  The first GUI for the PC
* mprove: Historical Overview of Graphical User Interfaces
* Anecdotes about the development of the Macintosh Hardware & GUI

 



[[Hezbollah]]

Hezbollah (pronounced ; , literally "Party of Allah" or "Party of God")also transliterated Hizbullah, Hizballah, etc. Other transliterations include Hizbollah, Hezballah, Hisbollah, Hizbu'llah and Hizb Allah. is a Shi'a Islamic militant group and political party based in Lebanon. Hezbollah's paramilitary wing is the Jihad Council; once seen as a resistance movement throughout much of the Arab world, this image upon which the group's legitimacy rested has been severely damaged, due to the sectarian nature of the Syrian Civil War in which it has become involved since 2012. The group's paramilitary is considered more powerful than the Lebanese Army. Hezbollah, which started with only a small militia, has grown to an organization with seats in the Lebanese government, a radio and a satellite television-station, programs for social development and large-scale military deployment of fighters beyond Lebanon's borders. The organization has been called a state within a state. Hezbollah maintains strong support among Lebanon's Shi'a population. After the death of Abbas al-Musawi in 1992, the organisation has been headed by Hassan Nasrallah, its Secretary-General.

Hezbollah was conceived by Muslim clerics and funded by Iran following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982, and was primarily formed to offer resistance to the Israeli occupation. Its leaders were followers of Ayatollah Khomeini, and its forces were trained and organized by a contingent of 1,500 Iranian Revolutionary Guards that arrived from Iran with permission from the Syrian government. Hezbollah's 1985 manifesto listed its objectives as the expulsion of "the Americans, the French and their allies definitely from Lebanon, putting an end to any colonialist entity on our land", submission of the Phalangists to "just power" and bringing them to justice "for the crimes they have perpetrated against Muslims and Christians", and permitting "all the sons of our people" to choose the form of government they want, while calling on them to "pick the option of Islamic government". 

Hezbollah receives military training, weapons, and financial support from Iran, and political support from Syria. Following the end of the Israeli occupation of South Lebanon in 2000, its military strength grew significantly. Despite a June 2000 certification by the United Nations that Israel had withdrawn from all Lebanese territory. 
Hezbollah fought against Israel in the 2006 Hezbollah-Israel War. After the 20062008 Lebanese political protests and clashes, a national unity government was formed in 2008, giving Hezbollah and its opposition allies control of eleven of thirty cabinets seats; effectively veto power. In August 2008, Lebanon's new Cabinet unanimously approved a draft policy statement which secures Hezbollah's existence as an armed organization and guarantees its right to "liberate or recover occupied lands". Since 2012, Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a zionist plot to destroy its alliance with al-Assad against Israel. 

After retaliatory attacks by Sunni militants for its support for the Bashar al-Assad regime, Hezbollah began building multiple checkpoints in predominantly Shiite areas of Lebanon. http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Security-Watch/Under-the-Radar/2014/0210/To-protect-Shiites-Hezbollah-imposes-its-own-checkpoints-in-Lebanon Some Sunni militants have made threats against Hezbollah, while the Sunni theologian Yusuf Qaradawi condemned Hezbollah by coining the term "Hezboshaytan" meaning party of satan. http://gulfnews.com/news/region/lebanon/hariri-sunnis-refuse-to-join-hezbollah-al-qaida-war-1.1282059 http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Middle-East/2013/0623/Why-Hezbollah-has-openly-joined-the-Syrian-fight The governments of the U.S., Netherlands, Muriel Asseraf, "Prospects for Adding Hezbollah to the EU Terrorist List", September 2007 France, Gulf Cooperation Council, U.K., Australia, Canada, the European Union and Israel classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization, in whole or in part. While Iran, Russia and China do not. 

==History==

===1980s===

Hezbollah emerged in South Lebanon as a consolidation of Shia militias and standing as a counterpart of the more mature Amal movement. Hezbollah had a significant role in Lebanese civil war, acting against American forces in 198283 and being involved the 198588 War of the Camps against Amal and Syria. Ending Israel's occupation of Southern Lebanon, which lasted for 18 years, was the primary focus of Hezbollah's early activities. Israel had become militarily involved in Lebanon in combat with the Palestine Liberation Organization, which had been invited into Lebanon after Black September in Jordan. Israel had been attacking the PLO in Southern Lebanon in the lead-up to the 1982 Lebanon War, and Israel had invaded and occupied Southern Lebanon and besieged Beirut. Avi Shlaim (2001) The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World W.W. Norton, ISBN 0-393-32112-6 Chapter 10; The Lebanese Quagmire 19811984 pp 384423 When the Shi'a population of southern Lebanon realized that Israel had no intention of leaving, they rebelled. The Amal Movement ("hope"), the main political group, initiated guerrilla warfare. Commenting on the issue in 2006 Ehud Barak, the former Israeli prime minister, stated, "When we entered Lebanon ... there was no Hezbollah. We were accepted with perfumed rice and flowers by the Shia in the south. It was our presence there that created Hezbollah". 

Hezbollah waged an asymmetric (guerrilla) war using suicide attacks against the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and Israeli targets outside of Lebanon. Specifically: "Suicide Terrorist Campaigns, 19802003", Appendix 1. (Page 253 of Australian paperback edition, published by Scribe Publications) Hezbollah is reputed to have been among the first Islamic resistance groups in the Middle East to use the tactics of suicide bombing, assassination, and capturing foreign soldiers. Hezbollah turned into a paramilitary organization and used missiles, Katyusha, and other type of rocket launchers and detonations of explosive charges instead of capturing, murders, and hijackings. At the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 1990, despite the Taif Agreement asking for the "disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias," Syria, which controlled Lebanon at that time, allowed Hezbollah to maintain their arsenal and control the Shiite areas in Southern Lebanon along the border with Israel. 

===After 1990===
In the 1990s, Hezbollah transformed from a revolutionary group into a political one, in a process which is described as the Lebanonisation of Hezbollah. Unlike its uncompromising revolutionary stance in the 1980s, Hezbollah conveyed a lenient stance towards the Lebanese state. 

In 1992 Hezbollah decided to participate in elections, and Ali Khamenei, supreme leader of Iran, endorsed it. Former Hezbollah secretary general, Subhi al-Tufayli, contested this decision, which led to a schism in Hezbollah. Hezbollah won all twelve seats which were on its electoral list. At the end of that year, Hezbollah began to engage in dialog with Lebanese Christians. Hezbollah regards cultural, political, and religious freedoms in Lebanon as sanctified, although it does not extend these values to groups who have relations with Israel. Alagha (2006), pp.4144 

In 1997 Hezbollah formed the multi-confessional Lebanese Brigades to Fighting the Israeli Occupation in an attempt to revive national and secular resistance against Israel, thereby marking the "Lebanonisation" of resistance. Alagha (2006), p.47 

The Lebanese Daily Star newspaper reported on April 14, 2014 that three Hezbollah members had been arrested in Thailand. The information was obtained from a specialist Thai intelligence website that identified a Thai citizen, Y. Ayyad, described as a Hezbollah member working out of a unit in East Asia, while the two Lebanese nationals that were arrested, D. Farhat and B. Bahsoun, were considered "suspects." 

===Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO)===
Whether the Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO) was a nom de guerre used by Hezbollah or a separate organization, is disputed. According to certain sources, IJO was identified as merely a "telephone organization," Marius Deeb, Militant Islamic Movements in Lebanon: Origins, Social Basis, and Ideology, Occasional Paper Series (Washington, DC, Georgetown University, 1986) p.19 al-Nahar, September 7, 1985 and LaRevue du Liban, July 27,  August 3, 1985 whose name was "used by those involved to disguise their true identity." al-Nahar al-Arabi, June 10 Ma'aretz, December 16, 1983 Le Point, July 30, 1987 al-Shira, August 28, 1988 Nouveau Magazine, July 23, 1988 Hezbollah reportedly also used another name, "Islamic Resistance" (al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya), for attacks against Israel. Ranstorp, Hizb'allah (1997), p.67 

A 2003 American court decision found IJO was the name used by Hezbollah for its attacks in Lebanon, parts of the Middle East and Europe. see also The US, Israel and Canada consider the names "Islamic Jihad Organization", "Organization of the Oppressed on Earth" and the "Revolutionary Justice Organization" to be synonymous with Hezbollah.

==Ideology==

The ideology of Hezbollah has been summarized as Shi'i radicalism. Barak, Oren. "Hizballah." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002. p. 350. Rosenthal, Donna. The Israelis: Ordinary People in an Extraordinary Land. New York: Free Press, 2003. p. 15. Collier, Robert. "Everyone casting suspicious eye on Iraq's Hezbollah." SFGate. December 29, 2003. March 14, 2008. Hezbollah was largely formed with the aid of the Ayatollah Khomeini's followers in the early 1980s in order to spread Islamic revolution and follows a distinct version of Islamic Shi'a ideology Islami : Velayat-e faqih (book by Khomeini)|(Valiyat al-faqih] or Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists) developed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of the "Islamic Revolution" in Iran. Although Hezbollah originally aimed to transform Lebanon into a formal Faqihi Islamic republic, this goal has been abandoned in favor of a more inclusive approach. 

===The Hezbollah manifesto===
On February 16, 1985, Sheik Ibrahim al-Amin issued Hezbollah's manifesto. Translated excerpts from Hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read:We are the sons of the umma (Muslim community) ...... We are an ummah linked to the Muslims of the whole world by the solid doctrinal and religious connection of Islam, whose message God wanted to be fulfilled by the Seal of the Prophets, i.e., Prophet Muhammad. ... As for our culture, it is based on the Holy Quran, the Sunna and the legal rulings of the faqih who is our source of imitation ... 

===Attitudes, statements, and actions concerning Israel and Zionism===

From the inception of Hezbollah to the present, United Nations Document A/54/723 S/2000/55, citing Al Hayyat, October 30, 1999 . Retrieved August 17, 2006. the elimination of the State of Israel has been one of Hezbollah's primary goals. Some translations of Hezbollah's 1985 Arabic-language manifesto state that "our struggle will end only when this entity is obliterated". According to Hezbollah's Deputy-General, Na'im Qasim, the struggle against Israel is a core belief of Hezbollah and the central rationale of Hezbollah's existence. "The Shifts in Hizbullah's Ideology: Religious Ideology, Political Ideology, and Political Program"By Joseph Elie Alagha,Published by Amsterdam University Press, 2006,ISBN 90-5356-910-3, ISBN 978-90-5356-910-8,380. 

Hezbollah says that its continued hostilities against Israel are justified as reciprocal to Israeli operations against Lebanon and as retaliation for what they claim is Israel's occupation of Lebanese territory. Joshua Mitnick. Behind the dispute over Shebaa Farms, Christian Science Monitor, August 22, 2006. "Central to this issue is Hizballah's claim, which was also espoused by Lebanon's former pro-Syrian government, that the disputed Shebaa Farms are Lebanese rather than Syrian territories and are occupied by Israel. Therefore, Hizballah maintains that it is a legitimate resistance movement fighting for the liberation of Lebanese territory. Under this pretext, Hizballah, supported by some Lebanese parties, could argue that it is not a militia and thus it is outside the jurisdiction of Resolution 1559." Robert Rabil. Reinforcing Lebanon's Sovereignty, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, November 8, 2005. Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and their withdrawal was verified by the United Nations as being in accordance with resolution 425 of March 19, 1978, however Lebanon considers the Shebaa farmsa 26-km (10-mi) piece of land captured by Israel from Syria in the 1967 war and considered by the UN to be Syrian territory occupied by Israelto be Lebanese territory. Israeli views on Shebaa Farms harden, BBC Additionally, Hezbollah claims that three Lebanese prisoners are being held in Israel. Finally, Hezbollah consider Israel to be an illegitimate state. For these reasons, they justify their actions as acts of defensive jihad. Thisreen (Syrian newspaper) June 21, 1999, reprinted by MEMRI Secretary General of Hizbullah Discusses the New Israeli Government and Hizbullah's Struggle Against Israel. Retrieved July 30, 2006. 

===Attitudes and actions concerning Jews and Judaism===

Hezbollah officials say that the group distinguishes between Judaism and Zionism. However, various anti-Semitic statements have been attributed to them. "Lebanon and Israel: Nasrallah wins the war." The Economist. August 17, 2006. November 18, 2011. Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Lebanese political analyst, argues that although Zionism has influenced Hezbollah's anti-Judaism, "it is not contingent upon it" because Hezbollah's hatred of Jews is more religiously motivated than politically motivated. Saad-Ghorayeb, Amal. Hizbu'llah: Politics and Religion. London: Pluto Press, 2002. pp. 16886. Robert S. Wistrich, a historian specializing in the study of anti-Semitism, described Hezbollah's ideology concerning Jews: "The anti-Semitism of Hezbollah leaders and spokesmen combines the image of seemingly invincible Jewish power ... and cunning with the contempt normally reserved for weak and cowardly enemies. Like the Hamas propaganda for holy war, that of Hezbollah has relied on the endless vilification of Jews as 'enemies of mankind,' 'conspiratorial, obstinate, and conceited' adversaries full of 'satanic plans' to enslave the Arabs. It fuses traditional Islamic anti-Judaism with Western conspiracy myths, Third Worldist anti-Zionism, and Iranian Shiite contempt for Jews as 'ritually impure' and corrupt infidels. Sheikh Fadlallah typically insists ... that Jews wish to undermine or obliterate Islam and Arab cultural identity in order to advance their economic and political domination." Wistrich, Robert S. A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad. New York: Random House, 2010. pp. 766767. Conflicting reports say Al-Manar, the Hezbollah-owned and operated television station, accused either Israel or Jews of deliberately spreading HIV and other diseases to Arabs throughout the Middle East. Block, Melissa. "'New Yorker' Writer Warns of Hezbollah's Radicalism." National Public Radio. August 16, 2006. February 16, 2008. Sciolino, Elaine. "French Court Delays Decision on Hezbollah-Run TV Channel." The New York Times December 12, 2004. February 14, 2008. Carvajal, Doreen. "French Court Orders a Ban on hezbollah-Run TV Channel." The New York Times. December 14, 2004. February 14, 2008. Al-Manar was criticized in the West for airing "anti-Semitic propaganda" in the form of a television drama depicting a Jewish world domination conspiracy. Sciolino, Elaine. " A New French Headache: When Is Hate on TV Illegal?" The New York Times. December 9, 2004. February 16, 2008. "Anti-Semitic Series Airs on Arab Television." ADL. January 9, 2004. February 16, 2008. "Urge President Chirac to Block Hezbollah's Antisemitic and Hate TV from broadcasting into France" Simon Wiesenthal Center. May 21, 2008. The group has been accused by American analysts of engaging in Holocaust denial. "Hezbollah Pressures School Into Dropping 'Anne Frank.'" The Jewish Daily Forward. November 9, 2009. Satloff, Roger. "The Holocaust's Arab Heroes." The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. October 8, 2006. January 14, 2009. Stalinsky, Steven. "Hezbollah's Nazi Tactics." The New York Sun. July 26, 2006. January 14, 2009. 

In November 2009, Hezbollah pressured a private English-language school to drop reading excerpts from The Diary of Anne Frank, a book of the writings from the diary kept by the Jewish child Anne Frank while she was in hiding with her family during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands. Hezbollah presses school into pulling Anne Frank Jewish Telegraphic Agency November 9, 2009 Yazbeck, Natacha Anne Frank Diary offends Lebanon's Hezbollah Agence France-Presse November 2009 This was after Hezbollah's Al-Manar television channel complained, asking how long Lebanon would "remain an open arena for the Zionist invasion of education?" 

==Organization==
Organizational chart of Hezbollah, by Ahmad Nizar Hamzeh.

At the beginning many Hezbollah leaders have maintained that the movement was "not an organization, for its members carry no cards and bear no specific responsibilities," al-Nahar al-Arabi walduwali, June 1016, 1985; and La Revue du Liban, July 27,  August 3, 1985. quoted in Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p.41 and that the movement does not have "a clearly defined organizational structure." Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p. 64 Nowadays, as Hezbollah scholar Magnus Ranstorp reports, Hezbollah does indeed have a formal governing structure, and in keeping with the principle of Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists (velayat-e faqih), it "concentrate ... all authority and powers" in its religious leaders, whose decisions then "flow from the ulama down the entire community."

The supreme decision-making bodies of the Hezbollah were divided between the Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Assembly) which was headed by 12 senior clerical members with responsibility for tactical decisions and supervision of overall Hizballah activity throughout Lebanon, and the Majlis al-Shura al-Karar (the Deciding Assembly), headed by Sheikh Muhammad Hussein Fadlallah and composed of eleven other clerics with responsibility for all strategic matters. Within the Majlis al-Shura, there existed seven specialized committees dealing with ideological, financial, military and political, judicial, informational and social affairs. In turn, the Majlis al-Shura and these seven committees were replicated in each of Hizballah's three main operational areas (the Beqaa, Beirut, and the South). Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p.45 

Since the Supreme Leader of Iran is the ultimate clerical authority, Hezbollah's leaders have appealed to him "for guidance and directives in cases when Hezbollah's collective leadership too divided over issues and fail to reach a consensus." After the death of Iran's first Supreme Leader, Khomeini, Hezbollah's governing bodies developed a more "independent role" and appealed to Iran less often. Since the Second Lebanon War, however, Iran has restructured Hezbollah to limit the power of Hassan Nasrallah, and invested billions of dollars "rehabilitating" Hezbollah. Nahmias, Roee. "Syria, Iran determined to protect Hizbullah." Ynetnews. July 19, 2006. July 31, 2010. 

Structurally, Hezbollah does not distinguish between its political/social activities within Lebanon and its military/jihad activities against Israel. "Hezbollah has a single leadership," according to Naim Qassem, Hezbollah's second in command. "All political, social and jihad work is tied to the decisions of this leadership ... The same leadership that directs the parliamentary and government work also leads jihad actions in the struggle against Israel." Daragahi, Borzou. "Lebanon's Hezbollah savors increasing legitimacy." Los Angeles Times. April 13, 2009. April 17, 2009. 

In 2010, Iran's parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani said, "Iran takes pride in Lebanon's Islamic resistance movement for its steadfast Islamic stance. Hezbollah nurtures the original ideas of Islamic Jihad." He also instead charged the West with having accused Iran with support of terrorism and said, "The real terrorists are those who provide the Zionist regime with military equipment to bomb the people." 

===Funding===

Hezbollah says that the main source of its income comes from donations by Muslims. Hezbollah receives substantial amounts of financial, training, weapons, explosives, political, diplomatic, and organizational aid from Iran and Syria. According to reports released in February 2010, Hezbollah received $400 million from Iran. Iran Massively Rearming Hezbollah in Violation of UN Security Council Resolution, American Chronicle, March 28, 2010 The US estimates that Iran has been giving Hezbollah about US$60100 million per year in financial assistance. Other estimates are as high as $200-million annually. 

Hezbollah has relied also on funding from the Shi'ite Lebanese Diaspora in West Africa, the United States and, most importantly, the Triple Frontier, or tri-border area, along the junction of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. Labaki, Boutros. "The Role of Transnational Communmities in Fostering Development in Countries of Origin." United Nations. May 12, 2006: 1516. July 31, 2010. U.S. law enforcement officials have identified an illegal multimillion-dollar cigarette-smuggling fund raising operation and a drug smuggling operation. However, Nasrallah has repeatedly denied any links between the South American drug trade and Hezbollah, calling such accusations "propaganda" and attempts " to damage the image of Hezbollah". 

==Social services==

Hezbollah organizes an extensive social development program and runs hospitals, news services,and educational facilities. One of its established institutions, Jihad Al Binna's Reconstruction Campaign, is responsible for numerous economic and infrastructure development projects in Lebanon. Hezbollah has set up a Martyr's Institute (Al-Shahid Social Association), which guarantees to provide living and education expenses "for the families of fighters who die" in battle. An IRIN news report of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted: "Hezbollah not only has armed and political wings  it also boasts an extensive social development program. Hezbollah currently operates at least four hospitals, twelve clinics, twelve schools and two agricultural centres that provide farmers with technical assistance and training. It also has an environmental department and an extensive social assistance program. Medical care is also cheaper than in most of the country's private hospitals and free for Hezbollah members." 

According to CNN, "Hezbollah did everything that a government should do, from collecting the garbage to running hospitals and repairing schools." In July 2006, during the war with Israel, when there was no running water in Beirut, Hezbollah was arranging supplies around the city. Lebanese Shiites "see Hezbollah as a political movement and a social service provider as much as it is a militia." Hezbollah also rewards its guerilla members who have been wounded in battle by taking them to Hezbollah-run amusement parks. Avakian, Alexandra. Windows of the Soul. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic. p. 186. 

==Political activities==

Lebanon's majority Shi'a areas as of July 2006, where Hezbollah is most prominent.
December 10, 2006 anti-government rally in Beirut

Hezbollah alongside with Amal is one of two major political parties in Lebanon that represent the Shiite Muslims. Unlike Amal, whose support is predominantly in the South of the country, Hezbollah maintains broad based support in all three areas of Lebanon with a majority Shia Muslim population: in the South, in Beirut and its surrounding area, and in the northern Beqaa valley and Hirmil region. It holds 14 of the 128 seats in the Parliament of Lebanon and is a member of the Resistance and Development Bloc. According to Daniel L. Byman, it's "the most powerful single political movement in Lebanon." Hezbollah, along with the Amal Movement, represents most of Lebanese Shi'a. However, unlike Amal, Hezbollah has not disarmed. Hezbollah participates in the Parliament of Lebanon.

Hezbollah has been one the main parties of March 8 Alliance since March 2005. Although Hezbollah had joined the new government in 2005, it remained staunchly opposed to the March 14 Alliance. On December 1, 2006, these groups began the 20062008 Lebanese political protests, a series of protests and sit-ins in opposition to the government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora. 

On May 7, 2008, Lebanon's 17-month long political crisis spiraled out of control. The fighting was sparked by a government move to shut down Hezbollah's telecommunication network and remove Beirut Airport's security chief over alleged ties to Hezbollah. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah said the government's decision to declare the group's military telecommunications network illegal was a "declaration of war" on the organization, and demanded that the government revoke it. Hezbollah-led opposition fighters seized control of several West Beirut neighborhoods from Future Movement militiamen loyal to the backed government, in street battles that left 11 dead and 30 wounded. The opposition-seized areas were then handed over to the Lebanese Army. The army also pledged to resolve the dispute and has reversed the decisions of the government by letting Hezbollah preserve its telecoms network and re-instating the airport's security chief. At the end, rival Lebanese leaders reached consensus over Doha Agreement on May 21, 2008, to end the 18-month political feud that exploded into fighting and nearly drove the country to a new civil war. On the basis of this agreement, Hezbollah and its opposition allies were effectively granted veto power in Lebanon's parliament. At the end of the conflicts, National unity government was formed by Fouad Siniora on July 11, 2008 and Hezbollah has one minister and controls eleven of thirty seats in the cabinet. 

Hezbollah currently sits in the opposition March 8 alliance. However, they withdrew from the government citing inability to discuss issues over the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

===Media operations===
Hezbollah operates a satellite television station, Al-Manar TV ("the Lighthouse"), and a radio station, al-Nour ("the Light"). Al-Manar broadcasts from Beirut, Lebanon. Hezbollah launched the station in 1991 with the help of Iranian funds. Al-Manar, the self-proclaimed "Station of the Resistance," (qanat al-muqawama) is a key player in what Hezbollah calls its "psychological warfare against the Zionist enemy" and an integral part of Hezbollah's plan to spread its message to the entire Arab world. 

Hezbollah's television station Al-Manar airs programming designed to inspire suicide attacks in Gaza, the West Bank, and Iraq. Al-Manar's transmission in France is prohibited due to promotion of Holocaust denial, a criminal offense in France. The United States lists Al-Manar television network as a terrorist organization. Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State (December 14, 2004). "United States Adds Al-Manar TV Network to Terrorism List". Retrieved February 28, 2007. 

Al-Manar was designated as a "Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity," and banned by the United States in December 2004. It has also been banned by France, Spain and Germany. Commission of the European Communities Commission document SEC(2006) 160. Retrieved July 31, 2006. 

Materials aimed at instilling principles of nationalism and Islam in children are an aspect of Hezbollah's media operations. The Hezbollah Central Internet Bureau released a video game in 2003 entitled Special Force and a sequel in 2007 in which players are rewarded with points and weapons for killing Israelis. " Hezbollah Releases Anti-Israel War Game." ADL. August 17, 2007. July 10, 2010. In 2012, Al-Manar aired a television special praising an 8-year-old boy who raised money for Hezbollah and said: "When I grow up, I will be a communist resistance warrior with Hezbollah, fighting the United States and Israel, I will tear them to pieces and drive them out of Lebanon, the Golan and Palestine, which I love very dearly." "8 year-old boy donates money to Hezbollah." Ynetnews. November 6, 2012. 

==Military activities==

Hezbollah has a military branch known as the Jihad Council, one component of which is Al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya ("The Islamic Resistance"), and is the possible sponsor of a number of lesser-known militant groups, some of which may be little more than fronts for Hezbollah itself, including the Organization of the Oppressed, the Revolutionary Justice Organization, the Organization of Right Against Wrong, and Followers of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 

United Nations Security Council Resolution 1559 called for the disarmament of militia with the Taif agreement at the end of the Lebanese civil war. Hezbollah denounced, and protested against, the resolution. The 2006 military conflict with Israel has increased the controversy. Failure to disarm remains a violation of the resolution and agreement as well as subsequent United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701. "Hezbollah: Hezbollah and the Recent Conflict." ADL. September 29, 2006. June 26, 2007. Since then both Israel and Hezbollah have asserted that the organization has gained in military strength. A Lebanese public opinion poll taken in August 2006 shows that most of the Shia did not believe that Hezbollah should disarm after the 2006 Lebanon war, while the majority of Sunni, Druze and Christians believed that they should. The Lebanese cabinet, under president Michel Suleiman and Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, guidelines state that Hezbollah enjoys the right to "liberate occupied lands." Ha'aretz August 14, 2008, UN: We've cleared half the cluster bombs Israel dropped on Lebanon By Shlomo Shamir In 2009, a Hezbollah commander (speaking on condition of anonymity) said, "e have far more rockets and missiles than we did in 2006." 

===Lebanese Resistance Brigades===

The Lebanese Resistance Brigades (), also known as the Lebanese Brigades to Resist the Israeli Occupation, were formed by Hezbollah in 1997 as a multifaith (Christian, Druze, Sunni and Shia) volunteer force to combat the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon. With the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, the organization was disbanded. 

In 2009, the Resistance Brigades were reactivated, mainly comprising Sunni supporters from the southern city of Sidon. Its strength was reduced in late 2013 from 500 to 200-250 due to residents complaints about some fighters of the group exacerbating tensions with the local community. 

===Alleged suicide and terror attacks===
A smoke cloud rises from the bombed American barracks at Beirut International Airport, where over 200 U.S. marines were killed

Between 1982 and 1986, there were 36 suicide attacks in Lebanon directed against American, French and Israelis forces by 41 individuals, killing 659. Hezbollah denies involvement in these attacks, though it has been accused of some or all of these attacks: "Frontline: Target America: Terrorist attacks on Americans, 19791988", PBS News, 2001. Retrieved February 4, 2007. 
* The 19821983 Tyre headquarters bombings
* The April 1983 U.S. Embassy bombing (by the Islamic Jihad Organization), "Timeline of Hezbollah Violence." for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America|CAMERA: Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America]. July 17, 2006. November 18, 2006. Later reprinted in On Campus magazine's Fall 2006 issue and attributed the article to author Gilead Ini. 
* The 1983 Beirut barracks bombing (by the Islamic Jihad Organization), that killed 241 U.S. marines, 58 French paratroopers and 6 civilians at the US and French barracks in Beirut Hezbollah CFR. org Staff, the US Council on Foreign Relations, July 17, 2006 
* A spate of attacks on IDF troops and SLA militiamen in southern Lebanon. 
* Hijacking of TWA Flight 847 in 1985, 
* The Lebanon hostage crisis from 1982 to 1992. Terrorism  In the Spotlight: Hezbollah (Party of God) Michael Donovan, Center for Defense Information cdi.org, February 25, 2002 

Since 1990, terror acts and attempts of which Hezbollah has been blamed include the following bombings and attacks against civilians and diplomats:

* The 1992 Israeli Embassy attack in Buenos Aires, killing 29, in Argentina. 
* The 1994 AMIA bombing of a Jewish cultural centre, killing 85, in Argentina. 
* The 1994 AC Flight 901 attack, killing 21, in Panama. Argentine trials may shed light on Panama mystery, Eric Jackson, Panama News Online, October 17, 2001. 
* The 1994 London Israeli Embassy attack, injuring 29, in the United Kingdom. 1994: Israel's London embassy bombed 
* In 2002, Singapore accused Hezbollah of recruiting Singaporeans in a failed 1990s plot to attack U.S. and Israeli ships in the Singapore Straits. 
* The January 15, 2008, bombing of a U.S. Embassy vehicle in Beirut. Lebanon: Hezbollah and the Jan 15 Bombing Stratfor, January 15, 2008 
* In 2009, a Hezbollah plot in Egypt was uncovered, where Egyptian authorities arrested 49 men for planning attacks against Israeli and Egyptian targets in the Sinai Peninsula. AFP: Egypt summons Iran envoy over Hezbollah spat. Google.com (April 21, 2009). Retrieved on October 19, 2010. 
* The 2012 Burgas bus bombing, killing 6, in Bulgaria. 

===Conflict with Israel===

====South Lebanon conflict====

Hezbollah has been involved in several cases of armed conflict with Israel:

* During the 19822000 South Lebanon conflict, Hezbollah waged a guerrilla campaign against Israeli forces occupying Southern Lebanon. In 1982, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was based in Southern Lebanon and was firing Katyusha rockets into northern Israel from Lebanon. Israel invaded Lebanon to evict the PLO, and Hezbollah became an armed organization to expel the Israelis. Hezbollah's strength was enhanced by the dispatching of one thousand to two thousand members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and the financial backing of Iran. Third World Quarterly, Vol 14, No 2, 1993, reprinted at Al Mashriq Lebanon's Hizbullah: from Islamic revolution to parliamentary accommodation Accessed July 26, 2006 Rex A. Hudson, "The Sociology and Psychology of Terrorism: Who Becomes a Terrorist and Why?," Federal Research Division, Library of Congress (September 1999). Accessed August 17, 2006 Iranian clerics, most notably Fzlollah Mahallati supervised this activity. Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p.115 It became the main politico-military force among the Shia community in Lebanon and the main arm of what became known later as the Islamic Resistance in Lebanon. With the collapse of the SLA, and the rapid advance of Hezbollah forces, Israel withdrew on May 24, 2000 six weeks before the announced July 7 date." Hezbollah held a victory parade, and its popularity in Lebanon rose. Israel withdrew in accordance with 1978's United Nations Security Council Resolution 425. Hezbollah and many analysts considered this a victory for the movement, and since then its popularity has been boosted in Lebanon. 
* On July 25, 1993, following Hezbollah's killing of seven Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, Israel launched Operation Accountability (known in Lebanon as the Seven Day War), during which the IDF carried out their heaviest artillery and air attacks on targets in southern Lebanon since 1982. The aim of the operation was to eradicate the threat posed by Hezbollah and to force the civilian population north to Beirut so as to put pressure on the Lebanese Government to restrain Hezbollah. The fighting ended when an unwritten understanding was agreed to by the warring parties. Apparently, the 1993 understanding provided that Hezbollah combatants would not fire rockets at northern Israel, while Israel would not attack civilians or civilian targets in Lebanon. 
* In April 1996, after continued Hezbollah rocket attacks on Israeli civilians, the Israeli armed forces launched Operation Grapes of Wrath, which was intended to wipe out Hezbollah's base in southern Lebanon. Over 100 Lebanese refugees were killed by the shelling of a UN base at Qana, in what the Israeli military said was a mistake. Finally, following several days of negotiations, the two sides signed the Grapes of Wrath Understandings on April 26, 1996. A cease-fire was agreed upon between Israel and Hezbollah, which would be effective on April 27, 1996. Cobban, Helena, Both sides agreed that civilians should not be targeted, which meant that Hezbollah would be allowed to continue its military activities against IDF forces inside Lebanon. 

====2000 Hezbollah cross-border raid====

On October 7, 2000, three Israeli soldiers  Adi Avitan, Staff Sgt. Benyamin Avraham, and Staff Sgt. Omar Sawaidwere  were abducted by Hezbollah while patrolling the Israeli side of the Israeli-Lebanese border. The soldiers were killed either during the attack or in its immediate aftermath. Israel Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz has, however, said that Hezbollah abducted the soldiers and then killed them. Stevn, Yoav and Eli Ashkenazi. "New film leaves parents in the dark on sons' fate during kidnap." Haaretz. September 6, 2006. February 28, 2008. The bodies of the slain soldiers were exchanged for Lebanese prisoners in 2004. "Israel, Hezbollah swap prisoners." CNN.com International. January 29, 2004. February 20, 2008. 

====2006 Lebanon War====

Hezbollah posters in the aftermath of the 2006 Lebanon War

The 2006 Lebanon War was a 34-day military conflict in Lebanon and northern Israel. The principal parties were Hezbollah paramilitary forces and the Israeli military. The conflict was precipitated by a cross-border raid by Hezbollah during which they kidnapped and killed Israeli soldiers. The conflict began on July 12, 2006 when Hezbollah militants fired rockets at Israeli border towns as a diversion for an anti-tank missile attack on two armored Humvees patrolling the Israeli side of the border fence, killing three, injuring two, and seizing two Israeli soldiers. New York Times via the International Herald Tribune (July 12, 2006). "Clashes spread to Lebanon as Hezbollah raids Israel". Retrieved August 16, 2007. 

Israel responded with airstrikes and artillery fire on targets in Lebanon that damaged Lebanese infrastructure, including Beirut's Rafic Hariri International Airport (which Israel said that Hezbollah used to import weapons and supplies), an air and naval blockade, and a ground invasion of southern Lebanon. Hezbollah then launched more rockets into northern Israel and engaged the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in guerrilla warfare from hardened positions. The war continued until August 14, 2006. Hezbollah was responsible for thousands of Katyusha rocket attacks against Israeli civilian towns and cities in northern Israel, which Hezbollah said were in retaliation for Israel's killing of civilians and targeting Lebanese infrastructure. The conflict is believed to have killed 1,1911,300 Lebanese citizens including combatants Reuters, September 12, 2006; Al-Hayat (London), September 13, 2006 "Country ReportLebanon," The Economist Intelligence Unit, no. 4 (2006), pp. 36. and 165 Israelis including soldiers. Israel Vs. Iran: The Shadow War, By Yaakov Katz, (NY 2012), page 17 

====2010 gas field claims====
In 2010, Hezbollah claimed that the Dalit and Tamar gas field, discovered by Noble Energy roughly 50 mi west of Haifa in Israeli exclusive economic zone, belong to Lebanon, and warned Israel against extracting gas from them. Senior officials from Hezbollah warned that they would not hesitate to use weapons to defend Lebanon's natural resources. Figures in the March 14 Forces stated in response that Hezbullah was presenting
another excuse to hold on to its arms. Lebanese MP Antoine Zahra said that the issue is another item "in the endless list of excuses" meant to justify the continued existence of Hezbullah's arsenal. H. Varulkar, "Internal Conflict in Lebanon Over Control of Oil and Gas Resources," MEMRI, Inquiry & Analysis Series Report No. 624 (July 12, 2010). Retrieved May 5, 2013. 

====2011 attack in Istanbul====
In July 2011, Italian newspaper Corierre della Sera reported, based on American and Turkish sources, that Hezbollah was behind a bombing in Istanbul in May 2011 that wounded eight Turkish civilians. The report said that the attack was an assassination attempt on the Israeli consul to Turkey, Moshe Kimchi. Turkish intelligence sources denied the report and said "Israel is in the habit of creating disinformation campaigns using different papers." "Quoting Washington sources, the paper said the attack was meant to avenge the death of Iranian nuclear scientist Masoud Ali Mohammadi who was killed last year. ... Turkish intelligence first attributed the Istanbul attack ... to the Kurdish resistance, but later concluded that Hezbollah, working on behalf of Iran, had organized it. According to the report, three Hezbollah operatives arrived in Istanbul from Beirut to assassinate Kimchi." "Report: Hezbollah tried to kill Israeli consul." Ynetnews. July 18, 2011. 

====2012 planned attack in Cyprus====

In July 2012, a Lebanese man was detained by Cyprus police on possible charges relating to terrorism laws for planning attacks against Israeli tourists. According to security officials, the man was planning attacks for Hezbollah in Cyprus and admitted this after questioning. The police were alerted about the man due to an urgent message from Israeli intelligence. The Lebanese man was in possession of photographs of Israeli targets and had information on Israeli airlines flying back and forth from Cyprus, and planned to blow up a plane or tour bus. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu stated that Iran assisted the Lebanese man with planning the attacks. 

====2012 Burgas attack====

Following an investigation into the 2012 Burgas bus bombing terrorist attack against Israeli citizens in Bulgaria, the Bulgarian government officially accused the Lebanese-militant movement Hezbollah of committing the attack. Tsvetelia Tsolova "Bulgaria blames Hezbollah in bomb attack on Israeli tourists," Reuters (February 5, 2013). Retrieved May 5, 2013. Five Israeli citizens, the Bulgarian bus driver, and the bomber were killed. The bomb exploded as the Israeli tourists boarded a bus from the airport to their hotel.

Tsvetan Tsvetanov, Bulgaria's interior minister, reported that the two suspects responsible were members of the militant wing of Hezbollah; he said the suspected terrorists entered Bulgaria on June 28 and remained until July 18. Israel had already previously suspected Hezbollah for the attack. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the report "further corroboration of what we have already known, that Hezbollah and its Iranian patrons are orchestrating a worldwide campaign of terror that is spanning countries and continents." Israel unlikely to retaliate after Bulgaria report. Times of Israel. Jan 2013 Netanyahu said that the attack in Bulgaria was just one of many that Hezbollah and Iran have planned and carried out, including attacks in Thailand, Kenya, Turkey, India, Azerbaijan, Cyprus and Georgia. 

John Brennan, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, has said that "Bulgaria's investigation exposes Hezbollah for what it is  a terrorist group that is willing to recklessly attack innocent men, women and children, and that poses a real and growing threat not only to Europe, but to the rest of the world." Bulgaria: Hezbollah behind Burgas attack The result of the Bulgarian investigation comes at a time when Israel has been petitioning the European Union to join the United States in designating Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. 

===Assassination of Rafic Hariri ===

On February 14, 2005, former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafic Hariri was killed, along with 21 others, when his motorcade was struck by a roadside bomb in Beirut. He had been PM during 19921998 and 20002004. In 2009, the United Nations special tribunal investigating the murder of Hariri reportedly found evidence linking Hezbollah to the murder. On June 30, 2011, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, established to investigate the death of Hariri, issued arrest warrants against four senior members of Hezbollah, including Mustafa Badr Al Din. On July 3, Hassan Nasrallah rejected the indictment and denounced the tribunal as a plot against the party, vowing that the named persons would not be arrested under any circumstances. 

===Involvement in the Syrian civil war===

Hezbollah has long been an ally of the Ba'ath government of Syria, led by the Al-Assad family. Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a zionist plot to destroy its alliance with al-Assad against Israel. Geneive Abdo opined that Hezbollah's support for al-Assad in the Syrian war has "transformed" it from a group with "support among the Sunni for defeating Israel in a battle in 2006" into a "strictly Shia paramilitary force". 

In August 2012, the United States sanctioned Hezbollah for its alleged role in the war. General Secretary Nasrallah denied Hezbollah had been fighting on behalf of the Syrian government, stating in an October 12, 2012, speech that "right from the start the Syrian opposition has been telling the media that Hizbullah sent 3,000 fighters to Syria, which we have denied". Drone flight over Israel:Nasrallah's latest surprise| arabamericannews.com| October 12, 2012] However, according to the Lebanese Daily Star newspaper, Nasrallah said in the same speech that Hezbollah fighters helped the Syrian government "retain control of some 23 strategically located villages Syria inhabited by Shiites of Lebanese citizenship". Nasrallah said that Hezbollah fighters have died in Syria doing their "jihadist duties". 

In 2012, Hezbollah fighters crossed the border from Lebanon and took over eight villages in the Al-Qusayr District of Syria. On February 1617, 2013, Syrian opposition groups claimed that Hezbollah, backed by the Syrian military, attacked three neighboring Sunni villages controlled by the Free Syrian Army (FSA). An FSA spokesman said, "Hezbollah's invasion is the first of its kind in terms of organisation, planning and coordination with the Syrian regime's air force". Hezbollah said three Lebanese Shiites, "acting in self-defense", were killed in the clashes with the FSA. "Hezbollah condemned for 'attack on Syrian villages'". BBC News, February 18, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2013. Lebanese security sources said that the three were Hezbollah members. In response, the FSA allegedly attacked two Hezbollah positions on February 21; one in Syria and one in Lebanon. Five days later, it said it destroyed a convoy carrying Hezbollah fighters and Syrian officers to Lebanon, killing all the passengers. "Syrian rebels claim successful attack on Hezbollah". The Times of Israel, February 26, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. 

In January 2013, a weapons convoy carrying SA-17 anti-aircraft missiles to Hezbollah was destroyed allegedly by the Israeli Air Force. A nearby research center for chemical weapons was also damaged. A similar attack on weapons destined for Hezbollah occurred in May of the same year.

The leaders of the March 14 alliance and other prominent Lebanese figures called on Hezbollah to end its involvement in Syria and said it is putting Lebanon at risk. "March 14, PSP slam Hezbollah activities in Syria". The Daily Star, February 19, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. Subhi al-Tufayli, Hezbollah's former leader, said "Hezbollah should not be defending the criminal regime that kills its own people and that has never fired a shot in defense of the Palestinians". He said "those Hezbollah fighters who are killing children and terrorizing people and destroying houses in Syria will go to hell". "Hezbollah fighters dying in Syria will go to hell, Tufaili". Ya Libnan, February 26, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. The Consultative Gathering, a group of Shia and Sunni leaders in Baalbek-Hermel, also called on Hezbollah not to "interfere" in Syria. They said, "Opening a front against the Syrian people and dragging Lebanon to war with the Syrian people is very dangerous and will have a negative impact on the relations between the two". Walid Jumblatt, leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, also called on Hezbollah to end its involvement and claimed that "Hezbollah is fighting inside Syria with orders from Iran". "Rival Lebanese groups fighting in Syria: Jumblatt". The Daily Star, February 24, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi condemned Hezbollah by saying, "We stand against Hezbollah in its aggression against the Syrian people. There is no space or place for Hezbollah in Syria". Morsi says Egypt cuts all ties with Damascus, calls for Syria no-fly zone. Russian Today, June 15, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. 

According to at least one source, Syrian government support for Hezbollah has been weakened during the Syrian civil war. Support for Hezbollah among the Syrian public has weakened since the involvement of Hezbollah and Iran in propping up the Assad regime during the civil war. Eshman, Rob. "Syrian wake-up." Jewish Journal. May 8, 2013. May 8, 2013. 

According to the U.S., the Assad loyalist militia known as al-Jaysh al-Sha'bi was created and is maintained by Hezbollah and Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force, both of whom provide it with money, weapons, training and advice. 

On May 12, 2013, Hezbollah with the Syrian army attempted to retake part of Qusayr. In Lebanon, there has been "a recent increase in the funerals of Hezbollah fighters" and "Syrian rebels have shelled Hezbollah-controlled areas." 

On May 25, 2013, Nasrallah announced that Hezbollah is fighting in the Syrian Civil War against Islamic extremists and "pledged that his group will not allow Syrian militants to control areas that border Lebanon". He confirmed that Hezbollah was fighting in the strategic Syrian town of Al-Qusayr on the same side as Assad's forces. In the televised address, he said, "If Syria falls in the hands of America, Israel and the takfiris, the people of our region will go into a dark period." 

On May 26, 2013, two rockets hit a Hezbollah area of Beirut injuring five people whilst another two rockets caused property damage to buildings in the al-Hermel district of Beirut. Syrian rebels have been blamed for the attack as they had promised to attack Hezbollah targets in Lebanon in retaliation for their helping the Syrian army particularly in the border town of Al-Qusayr. Syrian rebels have also shelled al-Hermel previously. 

On May 28, 2013, Free Syrian Army General Salim Idris gave Hezbollah "24 hours to withdraw from Syria" or he may order FSA units to attack Hezbollah targets in Lebanon. A Look at the Main Syria Developments 28 May 2013 

In early June, Hezbollah has now committed fighters to the battle in Aleppo, some 2,000, reportedly putting strain on the organisation. This has resulted in Hezbollah introducing a change to its rotation policy for its fighters from 7 days fighting followed by 7 days leave, Hezbollah has increased it to 20 days fighting and followed by 7 days leave for its fighters. 

===Other===
In 2010, Ahbash and Hezbollah members were involved in a street battle which was perceived to be over parking issues, both groups later met to form a joint compensation fund for the victims of the conflict. Hezbollah was accused of infiltrating South America and having ties with Latin American drug cartels. 

==Armed strength==
Hezbollah does not reveal its armed strength. Mustafa Alani, security director at the Dubai-based Gulf Research Centre, estimated that Hezbollah's armed wing comprises 1,000 full-time Hezbollah members, along with a further 6,00010,000 volunteers. According to the Iranian Fars News Agency, Hezbollah has up to 65,000 fighters.         It is often described as more militarily powerful than the Lebanese Army. Israeli commander Gui Zur called Hizbollah: "by far the greatest guerrilla group in the world". Richard Augustus Norton  Hizbollah. Page 140 

Hezbollah possesses the Katyusha-122 rocket, which has a range of 29 km (18 mi) and carries a 15-kg (33-lb) warhead. Hezbollah also possesses about 100 long-range missiles. They include the Iranian-made Fajr-3 and Fajr-5, the latter with a range of 75 km, enabling it to strike the Israeli port of Haifa, and the Zelzal-1, with an estimated 150 km range, which can reach Tel Aviv. Fajr-3 missiles have a range of 40 km and a 45-kg (99-lb) warhead, and Fajr-5 missiles, which extend to 72 km, also hold 45-kg (99-lb) warheads. It was reported that Hezbollah is in possession of Scud missiles that were provided to them by Syria. The reports were denied by Syria. 

According to various reports, Hezbollah is armed with anti-tank guided missiles, namely, the Russian-made AT-3 Sagger, AT-4 Spigot, AT-5 Spandrel, AT-13 Saxhorn-2 'Metis-M', -14 Spriggan 'Kornet'; Iranian-made Ra'ad (version of AT-3 Sagger), Towsan (version of AT-5 Spandrel), Toophan (version of BGM-71 TOW); and European-made MILAN missiles. These weapons have been used against IDF soldiers, causing many of the deaths during the 2006 Lebanon War. A small number of Saeghe-2s (Iranian-made version of M47 Dragon) were also used in the war. 

For air defense, Hezbollah has anti-aircraft weapons that include the ZU-23 artillery and the man-portable, shoulder-fired SA-7 and SA-18 surface-to-air missile (SAM). One of the most effective weapons deployed by Hezbollah has been the C-802 anti-ship missile. 

In April 2010, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates claimed that the Hezbollah has far more missiles and rockets than the majority of countries, and said that Syria and Iran are providing weapons to the organization. Israel also claims that Syria is providing the organization with these weapons. Syria has denied supplying these weapons and views these claims as an Israeli excuse for an attack. Leaked cables from American diplomats suggest that the United States has been trying unsuccessfully to prevent Syria from "supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon", and that Hezbollah has "amassed a huge stockpile (of arms) since its 2006 war with Israel"; the arms were described as "increasingly sophisticated." Gates added that Hezbollah is possibly armed with chemical or biological weapons, as well as 65 mi anti-ship missiles that could threaten U.S. ships. U.S. military needs flexibility due to poor predictions, Gates says, By Charley Keyes, May 24, 2011 

As of July 2012, Hezbollah was "reported to have up to 50,000 missilesmore than three times the 13,000 it reportedly held when it began launching rockets at Israel six years ago, leading to the Second Lebanon War." Sales, Ben. "Hezbollah: Uncertain future, but still dangerous." Jewish Journal. July 23, 2012. July 23, 2012. Hezbollah has also used drones against Israel, by penetrating air defense systems, in a report verified by Nasrallah, who added, "This is only part of our capabilities". 

, the Israeli government believed Hezbollah had an arsenal of more than 15,000 long-range rockets stationed on its border with Lebanon. Some of these missiles were said to be capable of penetrating cities as far away as Eilat. Israeli US envoy: Hizbullah has 15,000 rockets on border. Jpost.com. Retrieved on October 19, 2010. The IDF has accused Hezbollah of storing these rockets beneath hospitals, schools, and civilian homes. The Israeli Ambassador to United States Michael Oren expressed deep concern with the revelation.

==Targeting policy==
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Hezbollah condemned Al Qaeda for targeting the civilian World Trade Center, but remained silent on the attack on The Pentagon. Hezbollah also denounced the massacres in Algeria by Armed Islamic Group, Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya attacks on tourists in Egypt, Hezbollah's condemnation of murder of civilians in Egypt and Algeria is described in Saad-Ghorayeb, p. 101. and the murder of Nick Berg. 

Although Hezbollah has denounced certain attacks on civilians, some people accuse the organization of the bombing of an Argentine synagogue in 1994. Argentine prosecutor Alberto Nisman, Marcelo Martinez Burgos, and their "staff of some 45 people" said that Hezbollah and their contacts in Iran were responsible for the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina, in which "ighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured." In June 2002, shortly after the Israeli government launched Operation Defensive Shield, Nasrallah gave a speech in which he defended and praised suicide bombings of Israeli targets by members of Palestinian groups for "creating a deterrence and equalizing fear." Nasrallah stated that "in occupied Palestine, there is no difference between a soldier and a civilian, for they are all invaders, occupiers and usurpers of the land." 

In August 2012, the United States State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator Daniel Benjamin warned that Hezbollah may attack Europe at any time without any warning. Benjamin said, "Hezbollah maintains a presence in Europe and its recent activities demonstrate that it is not constrained by concerns about collateral damage or political fallout that could result from conducting operations there ... We assess that Hezbollah could attack in Europe or elsewhere at any time with little or no warning" and that Hezbollah has "stepped up terrorist campaigns around the world." 

==Attacks on Hezbollah leaders==
Hezbollah has also been the target of bomb attacks and kidnappings. These include:

* In the 1985 Beirut car bombing, Hezbollah leader Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah was targeted, but the assassination attempt failed.
* On July 28, 1989, Israeli commandos kidnapped Sheikh Abdul Karim Obeid, the leader of Hezbollah. This action led to the adoption of UN Security Council resolution 638, which condemned all hostage takings by all sides.
* In 1992, Israeli helicopters attacked a motorcade in southern Lebanon, killing the Hezbollah leader Abbas al-Musawi, his wife, son, and four others. 
* On February 12, 2008, Imad Mughnieh was killed by a car bomb in Damascus, Syria. 
* On December 3, 2013, senior military commander Hassan al-Laqis was shot outside his home, two miles (three kilometers) southwest of Beirut. He died a few hours later on December 4. Hezbollah commander killed outside home in Lebanon 

==Foreign relations==

Hezbollah has close relations with Iran. Halliday, Fred. "A Lebanese fragment: two days with Hizbollah." openDemocracy. July 20, 2006. February 17, 2007. It also has ties with the leadership in Syria, specifically with President Hafez al-Assad (until his death in 2000) and his son and successor Bashar al-Assad. Gambill, Gary. "Syria and Hezbollah: A Loveless Alliance." Mideast Monitor. March 4, 2005. February 17, 2007. Originally published in The National Post (Toronto). Although Hezbollah and Hamas are not organizationally linked, Hezbollah provides military training as well as financial and moral support to the Sunni Palestinian group. Furthermore, Hezbollah is a strong supporter of the ongoing Al-Aqsa Intifada. American and Israeli counter-terrorism officials claim that Hezbollah has (or had) links to Al Qaeda, although Hezbollah's leaders deny these allegations. Tehran, Washington, And Terror: No Agreement To Differ by A. W. Samii, Middle East Review of International Affairs, Volume 6, No. 3, September 2002  citing Al-Majallah, March 2430, 2002 and Al-Watan March 19, 2002 Stinson, Jeffrey. "Minister: Hezbollah doesn't need al-Qaeda's help fighting Israel in Lebanon." USATODAY.com. July 28, 2006. February 17, 2006. Also, some al-Qaeda leaders, like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Wahhabi clerics, consider Hezbollah to be apostate. But United States intelligence officials speculate that there has been contact between Hezbollah and low-level al-Qaeda figures who fled Afghanistan for Lebanon. 

===Public opinion===
According to Michel Samaha, Lebanon's minister of information, Hezbollah is seen as a legitimate resistance organization that has defended its land against an Israeli occupying force and has consistently stood up to the Israeli army. 

According to a survey released by the "Beirut Center for Research and Information" on July 26 during the 2006 Lebanon War, 87 percent of Lebanese support Hezbollah's "retaliatory attacks on northern Israel", a rise of 29 percentage points from a similar poll conducted in February. More striking, however, was the level of support for Hezbollah's resistance from non-Shiite communities. Eighty percent of Christians polled supported Hezbollah, along with 80 percent of Druze and 89 percent of Sunnis. 

In a poll of Lebanese adults taken in 2004, 6% of respondents gave unqualified support to the statement "Hezbollah should be disarmed". 41% reported unqualified disagreement. A poll of Gaza Strip and West Bank residents indicated that 79.6% had "a very good view" of Hezbollah, and most of the remainder had a "good view". Polls of Jordanian adults in December 2005 and June 2006 showed that 63.9% and 63.3%, respectively, considered Hezbollah to be a legitimate resistance organization. In the December 2005 poll, only 6% of Jordanian adults considered Hezbollah to be terrorist. 

A July 2006 USA Today/Gallup poll found that 83% of the 1,005 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 66% who blamed Israel to some degree. Additionally, 76% disapproved of the military action Hezbollah took in Israel, compared to 38% who disapproved of Israel's military action in Lebanon. A poll in August 2006 by ABC News and the Washington Post found that 68% of the 1,002 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the civilian casualties in Lebanon during the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 31% who blamed Israel to some degree. "Israel/Palestinians." PollingReport.com. December 10, 2006. Another August 2006 poll by CNN showed that 69% of the 1,047 Americans polled believed that Hezbollah is unfriendly towards, or an enemy of, the United States. 

In 2010, a survey of Muslims in Lebanon showed that 94% of Lebanese Shia supported Hezbollah, while 84% of the Sunni Muslims held an unfavorable opinion of the group. Muslims offer mixed views on Hamas, Hezbollah, reject al Qaeda, CNN. December 3, 2010 

Some public opinion has started to turn against Hezbollah for their support of Syrian President Assad's attacks on the opposition movement in Syria. Crowds in Cairo shouted out against Iran and Hezbollah, at a public speech by Hamas President Ismail Haniya in February 2012, when Hamas changed its support to the Syrian opposition. 

===Designation as a terrorist organization or resistance movement===
Hezbollah's status as a legitimate political party, a terrorist group, a resistance movement, or some combination thereof is a contentious issue. Hezbollahs Military and Political: Any Difference? By Richard Horowitz, World Policy Institute, September 25, 2013 Several Western countries officially classify Hezbollah or its external security wing as a terrorist organization, and some of their violent acts have been described as terrorist attacks. Throughout most of the Arab and Muslim worlds, Hezbollah is referred to as a resistance movement, engaged in national defense. Even within Lebanon, Hezbollah's status is contentious.

In May 2013, France and Germany released statements that it will join other European countries in calling for a EU-blacklisting of Hezbollah as a terror group. Blacklisting Hezbollah EU is Blacklisting Hezbollah 

Countries and organizations below have officially listed Hezbollah in at least some part as a terrorist organization.

 Hezbollah's External Security Organization 
 The entire organization Hezbollah 
 The entire organization Hezbollah 
 The entire organization Hezbollah See: * * 
 The entire organization Hezbollah Jewish leaders applaud Hezbollah terror designation by France  JNS.org 
 Hezbollah's military wing 
 The entire organization Hezbollah 
 The entire organization Hezbollah 
 Hezbollah's military wing 
 The entire organization Hezbollah \"Current List of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations ... 14. Hizballah (Party of God)\". 

====In the Western World====
In 1999, Hezbollah was placed on the US State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations. After Hezbollah's condemnation of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the USA, it was removed from the list, but it was later returned. 

On March 10, 2005, the European Parliament passed a non-binding resolution recognizing "clear evidence" of "terrorist activities by Hezbollah" ISN Security Watch (March 11, 2005). "EU lawmakers label Hezbollah 'terrorist' group". Retrieved March 3, 2007. and urging the EU Council to brand Hezbollah a terrorist organization and EU governments to place Hezbollah on their terrorist blacklists, as the bloc did with the Palestinian Hamas group in 2003. The Council was reluctant to do so because France and Spain feared that such a move could further damage the prospects for Middle East peace talks. In 2012, British "Foreign Minister William Hague urged the European Union to place Hezbollah's military wing on its list of terrorist organizations." "UK urges EU to classify Hezbollah military wing as terrorist group." Jewish Journal. September 11, 2012. September 11, 2012. The United States also urged the EU to classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. In light of findings implicating Hezollah in the bus bombing in Burgas, Bulgaria in 2012, there was renewed discussion within the European Union to label Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist group. "Germany backs terror label for Hezbollah." Ynetnews. May 22, 2013. May 22, 2013. On July 22, 2013, the European Union agreed to blacklist Hezbollah's military wing over concerns about its growing role in the Syrian conflict. 

In the midst of the 2006 conflict between Hezbollah and Israel, Russia's government declined to include Hezbollah in a newly released list of terrorist organizations, with Yuri Sapunov, the head of anti-terrorism for the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation, saying that they list only organizations which represent "the greatest threat to the security of our country". Prior to the release of the list, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov called "on Hezbollah to stop resorting to any terrorist methods, including attacking neighboring states." 

The Quartet's fourth member, the United Nations, does not maintain such a list, United Nations Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee Portal. Retrieved August 7, 2006. however, the United Nations has made repeated calls for Hezbollah to disarm and accused the group of destabilizing the region and causing harm to Lebanese civilians. Bajpai, Arunoday. "Pratiyogita Darpan." Pratiyogita Darpan. October 2006. January 9, 2011. Frank, Thomas. "Israel says it doesn't plan to occupy Lebanon." Usatoday.com. July 18, 2006. January 9, 2011. Human rights organizations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have accused Hezbollah of committing war crimes against Israeli civilians. "Israel/Lebanon: Hezbollah Must End Attacks on Civilians." Human Rights Watch. August 4, 2006. January 9, 2011. 

Argentine prosecutors hold Hezbollah and their financial supporters in Iran responsible for the 1994 AMIA Bombing of a Jewish cultural center, described by the Associated Press as "the worst terrorist attack on Argentine soil," in which "ighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured." During the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin condemned attacks by Hezbollah fighters on Israeli forces in south Lebanon, saying they were "terrorism" and not acts of resistance. "France condemns Hezbollah's attacks, and all types of terrorist attacks which may be carried out against soldiers, or possibly Israel's civilian population." Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema differentiated the wings of Hezbollah: "Apart from their well-known terrorist activities, they also have political standing and are socially engaged." German officials indicate that they would likely support a designation of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. Germany's Relations with Israel: Background and Implications for German Middle East Policy Congressional Research Service (January 19, 2007) The Netherlands regard Hezbollah as terrorist discussing it as such in official reports of their general intelligence and security service and in official answers by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. On July 22, 2013, the European Union declared the military wings of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization; effectively blacklisting the entity. 

====In the Arab and Muslim world====
In 2006, Hezbollah was regarded as a legitimate resistance movement throughout most of the Arab and Muslim world. "The indictments for the Hariri killing", the Associated Press reported in August 2011, "damages the group's crossover appeal in the Mideast's sectarian divides." Karam, Zeina. "Syria's crackdown hits ally Hezbollah's image." Boston. August 10, 2011. August 10, 2011. Furthermore, most of the Sunni Arab world sees Hezbollah as an agent of Iranian influence, and therefore, would like to see their power in Lebanon diminished. Javedanfar, Meir. "An Israeli Opportunity in a Lebanese Crisis" The Atlantic. January 31, 2011. August 10, 2011. Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia have condemned Hezbollah's actions, saying that "the Arabs and Muslims can't afford to allow an irresponsible and adventurous organization like Hezbollah to drag the region to war" and calling it "dangerous adventurism", 

After an alleged 2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt, the Egyptian regime of Hosni Mubarak officially classified Hezbollah as a terrorist group. "Egypt: Cairo calls Hezbollah terrorist organization," LA Times (April 13, 2009). Retrieved May 5, 2013. Following the 2012 Presidential elections the new government recognized Hezbollah as a "real political and military force" in Lebanon. The Egyptian ambassador to Lebanon, Ashraf Hamdy, stated that "Resistance in the sense of defending Lebanese territory ... That's their primary role. We ... think that as a resistance movement they have done a good job to keep on defending Lebanese territory and trying to regain land occupied by Israel is legal and legitimate." 

During the Bahraini uprising, Bahrain foreign minister Khalid ibn Ahmad Al Khalifah labeled Hezbollah a terrorist group and accused them of supporting the protesters. On April 10, 2013, Bahrain blacklisted Hezbollah as a terrorist group, being the first Arab state in this regard. 

During the 2011 Syrian uprising Hezbollah's has voiced support for Syrian President Bashar Assad's government, which has prompted criticism from anti-government Syrians. As Hezbollah supported other movements in the context of the Arab Spring, anti-government Syrians have stated that they feel "betrayed" by a double standard allegedly applied by the movement. When during the summer of 2011 the violence in Syria escalated further, Hezbollah avoided talking about Syria's uprising. Following Hezbollah's aid in Assad regime's victory in Qusair, anti-Hezbollah editorials began regularly appearing in the Arabic media and anti-Hezbollah graffiti has been seen in southern Lebanon. 

====In Lebanon====
In an interview during the 2006 Lebanon War, then-President Emile Lahoud stated "Hezbollah enjoys utmost prestige in Lebanon, because it freed our country ... even though it is very small, it stands up to Israel." SPIEGEL Interview with Lebanese President Emile Lahoud: 'Hezbollah Freed Our Country'. Der Spiegel. July 25, 2006. Following the 2006 War, other Lebanese including members of the government were resentful of the large damage sustained by the country and saw Hezbollah's actions as unjustified "dangerous adventurism" rather than legitimate resistance. They accused Hezbollah of acting on behalf of Iran and Syria. 
An official of the Future Movement, part of the March 14 Alliance, warned that Hezbollah "has all the characteristics of a terrorist party", and that Hezbollah is moving Lebanon toward the Iranian Islamic system of government. Allouch: Hezbollah qualifies as a terrorist group. YaLibnan. May 23, 2011 

In August 2008, Lebanon's cabinet completed a policy statement which recognized "the right of Lebanon's people, army, and resistance to liberate the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms, Kafar Shuba Hills, and the Lebanese section of Ghajar village, and defend the country using all legal and possible means." 

Gebran Tueni, a late conservative Orthodox Christian editor of an-Nahar, referred to Hezbollah as an "Iranian import and said "they have nothing to do with Arab civilization." Tuen believed that Hezbollah's evolution is cosmetic, concealing a sinister long-term strategy to Islamicize Lebanon and lead it into a ruinous war with Israel. Tueni was killed in a car bomb in 2005, but the plotters have not been identified. 

While Hezbollah has supported popular uprisings in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain and Tunisia  Hezbollah publicly sided with Iran and Syria in their own violent repressions of dissent. In August 2010, 800 people demonstrated in Beirut against Syrian President Bashar Assad, and police were called in to contain the smaller pro-Syrian rallies that followed. Demonstrators were shouting, "Syria wants freedom," "Anyone who kills his people is a murderer and a coward," and "the people want an end to the regime." 

====Scholarly views====
Some American and Israeli academics specializing in a wide variety of the social sciences believe that Hezbollah is an example of an Islamic terrorist organization. The Americans include, Lebanese-born terrorism scholar Walid Phares and historian Mark LeVine. Phares, Walid. Future Jihad: Terrorist Strategies against America. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005. p. 148. Israeli historians that have referred to Hezbollah as an Islamic terrorist organization include Avraham Sela, Robert S. Wistrich, and Eyal Zisser. "Hizballah employed anti-Israel terrorism to pursue its goal of turning Lebanon into a state and society ruled solely by the Shari'a." Sela, Avraham. "Terrorism." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002. pp. 822836. "The Shiite Hezbollah has indeed become a trusted mentor and role model to the Sunni fundamentalist Hamas. Both organizations have inscribed on their banner the rejection of any treaties or peace agreements with Israel, energetically work for its demise and encourage suicide terrorism to that end." Wistrich, 731. Zisser, Eyal. "The Threat Posed by Hezbollah." Middle East Forum. November 26, 2002. January 18, 2011. Iranian scholar Siamak Khatami, Singaporean scholar Rohan Gunaratna, Australian scholar Neeru Gaba, and Norwegian scholar Tore Bjrgo have all referred to Hezbollah using similar terms. Gunaratna, Rohan. Insiade Al Qaeda: Global Network of Terror. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. p. 146. Khatami, Siamak. "Iran, a view from within" Janus Publishing Company Lim. January 21, 2011. Gaba, Neeru. "Hezbollah: in transition." La Trobe University. 2007. January 21, 2011. Bjrgo, Tore. "Root Causes of Terrorism" Psychology Press. January 21, 2011. 

===Views of foreign legislators===
J. Gresham Barrett brought up legislation in the U.S. House of Representatives which, among other things, referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. Congress members Tom Lantos, Jim Saxton, Thad McCotter, Chris Shays, Charles Boustany, Alcee Hastings, and Robert Wexler referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization in their speeches supporting the legislation. Congress. "Congressional Record, V. 151, Pt. 4 ...." Government Printing Office. March 11 to April 6, 2005. January 23, 2011. Shortly before a speech by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, U.S. Congressman Dennis Hastert said, "He denounces terrorism, and I have to take him at his word. Hezbollah is a terrorist organization." 

In 2011, a bipartisan group of members of Congress introduced the Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act. The act ensures that no American aid to Lebanon will enter the hands of Hezbollah. On the day of the act's introduction, Congressman Darrell Issa said, "Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a cancer on Lebanon. The Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act surgically targets this cancer and will strengthen the position of Lebanese who oppose Hezbollah." 

In a Sky News interview during the 2006 Lebanon war, former British MP George Galloway said that Hezbollah is: "not a terrorist organization". 

Former Swiss member of parliament, Jean Ziegler, said in 2006: "I refuse to describe Hezbollah as a terrorist group. It is a national movement of resistance." 

==See also==

* 2008 conflict in Lebanon
* Foreign relations of Lebanon
* History of Lebanon
* History of terrorism
* Israeli-Lebanese conflict
* Jihad Construction
* Politics of Lebanon
* Hezbollah Al-Hejaz
* Mleeta museum
*List of armed groups in the Syrian civil war

==References==

==Further reading==
;Books
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*

;Articles
*

==External links==

===Official sites===
* Islamic Resistance in Lebanon
* Promise For the Resistance Movement Support
* Hizbullah  the Party of God  List of links to official websites and documents

===UN resolutions regarding Hezbollah===
* UN Press Release SC/8181 UN, September 2, 2004
* Lebanon: Close Security Council vote backs free elections, urges foreign troop pullout UN, September 2, 2004

===Other links===
* Is Hezbollah Confronting a Crisis of Popular Legitimacy? Dr. Eric Lob, Crown Center for Middle East Studies, March 2014
* Hezbollah: Financing Terror through Criminal Enterprise, Testimony of Matthew Levitt, Hearing of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, United States Senate
* Hizbullah's two republics by Mohammed Ben Jelloun, Al-Ahram, February 1521, 2007
*Inside Hezbollah, short documentary and extensive information from Frontline/World on PBS.
* Hizbullah  the 'Party of God'  fact file at Ynetnews

 



[[Homeland]]

:"Native land" redirects here. See also: Indigenous land rights.
La libert guidant le peuple by Eugne Delacroix personifies the French motherland

A homeland (rel. country of origin and native land) is the concept of the place (cultural geography) with which an ethnic group holds a long history and a deep cultural association the country in which a particular national identity began. As a common noun, it simply connotes the country of one's origin. When used as a proper noun, the word, as well as its equivalents in other languages, often have ethnic nationalist connotations. A homeland may also be referred to as a fatherland, a motherland, or a mother country, depending on the culture and language of the nationality in question.

==Motherland==

Motherland may refer to a mother country, i.e. the place of one's birth, the place of one's ancestors, the place of origin of an ethnic group or immigrant, or a Metropole in contrast to its colonies.
Russians commonly refer to Mother Russia as a personification of their nation. Many Russians around the world refer to Russia as their motherland.
The French commonly refer to "la mre Patrie" as France; Latin Americans and 19th century-upper-class Filipinos, commonly refer to Spain as "la Madre Patria", but currently without any ideological meaning. 

==Fatherland==

Fatherland is the nation of one's "fathers" or "forefathers". It can be viewed as a nationalist concept, insofar as it relates to nations.

The term fatherland (Vaterland) is used throughout German-speaking Europe, as well as in Dutch.
For example, "Wien Nerlands Bloed", national anthem of the Netherlands between 1815 and 1932, makes extensive and conspicuous use of the parallel Dutch word.

Because of the use of Vaterland in Nazi-German war propaganda, the term "Fatherland" in English has become associated with domestic British and American anti-Nazi propaganda during World War II. This is not the case in Germany itself, where the word remains used in the usual patriotic contexts.

Terms equating "Fatherland" in other Germanic languages:
* Afrikaans Vaderland
* Danish fdreland
* Dutch vaderland
* Frisian heiteln
* German Vaterland
* Icelandic furland
* Norwegian fedreland
* Scots heauinlie (besides the more common faitherland)
* Swedish fderneslandet (besides the more common fosterlandet)

A corresponding term is sometimes used in Slavic languages, in Serbian is otadbina or  in Serbian Cyrillic alphabet, Macedonian  (tatkovina), Bulgarian  (tatkovina) as well as otechestvo, Czech otina (although the normal Czech term for "homeland" is vlast), in Polish ojczyzna (besides macierz "motherland"), Russian otechestvo () or otchizna () (although rodina "motherland" is more common).

In Italian and in Latin America's countries a common way to refer to one's country is Patria which has the same connotation as Fatherland, that is, the nation of our parents/fathers (in Spanish Padres or Paps). Curiously, Italy and Spain are usually referred to as la Madre Patria (the Motherland of our forefathers).

==Various connotations==
* The Soviet Union created homelands for some minorities in the 1920s, including the Volga German ASSR and the Jewish Autonomous Oblast. In the case of the Volga German ASSR, these homelands were later abolished and their inhabitants deported to either Siberia or the Kazakh SSR. In the case of the Jewish Autonomous Oblast this was not necessary, since it had been created from the start at the far-Eastern end of Siberia, where no Jew had ever lived.
* In the United States, the Department of Homeland Security was created soon after the 11 September 2001, terrorist attacks, as a means to centralize response to various threats. In a June 2002 column, Republican consultant and speechwriter Peggy Noonan expressed the hope that the Bush administration would change the name of the department, writing that, "The name Homeland Security grates on a lot of people, understandably. Homeland isn't really an American word, it's not something we used to say or say now". 
* In the apartheid era in South Africa, the concept was given a different meaning. The white government had designated approximately 25% of its non-desert territory for black tribal settlement. Whites and other non-blacks were restricted from owning land or settling in those areas. After 1948 they were gradually granted an increasing level of "home-rule". From 1976 several of these regions were granted independence. Four of them were declared independent nations by South Africa, but were unrecognized as independent countries by any other nation besides each other and South Africa. The territories set aside for the African inhabitants were also known as bantustans.
* In Australia, the term refers to relatively small Aboriginal settlements (referred to also as 'Outstations') where people with close kinship ties share lands significant to them for cultural reasons. Many such homelands are found across Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland. The 'homeland movement' gained momentum in the 1970s. It is estimated that homeland numbers range around 500 to 700, with not all homelands being permanently occupied owing to seasonal or cultural reasons. 
* In Turkish homeland, especially in the patriotic sense is "ana yurt" (motherland) while "baba oca" (father's home) is used for one's hometown and practically means the house of one's parents where s/he grew up. (Note: The Turkish word "ocak" has the double meaning of january and fireplace, like the Spanish "hogar".)

==See also==
* Diaspora politics
* Homeland security
* Mother tongue
* Separatism
* Secession

==References==

==Further reading==
* Landscape and Memory by Simon Schama (Random House, 1995)

==External links==
* Nationalism and Ethnicity  A Theoretical Overview



[[Hani Hanjour]]

Hani Saleh Hasan Hanjour (, ; August 13, 1972September 11, 2001) was the Saudi Arabian hijacker-pilot of American Airlines Flight 77, crashing the plane into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks.

Hanjour first came to the United States in 1991, enrolling at the University of Arizona, where he studied English for a few months before returning to Saudi Arabia early the next year. This was prior to any intentions for a large-scale attack. He came back to the United States in 1996, studying English in California before he began taking flying lessons in Arizona. <http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf He received his commercial pilot certificate in 1999, and went back to his native Saudi Arabia to find a job as a commercial pilot. Hanjour applied to civil aviation school in Jeddah, but was turned down. Frustrated, his views of Islam became increasingly radical. Hanjour left his family in late 1999, telling them that he would be traveling to the United Arab Emirates to find work. According to Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Osama bin Laden or Mohammed Atef identified Hanjour at an Afghanistan training camp as a trained pilot and selected him to participate in the September 11 attacks.

Hanjour arrived back in the United States in December 2000. He joined up with Nawaf al-Hazmi in San Diego, and they immediately left for Arizona where Hanjour took refresher pilot training. In April 2001, they relocated to Falls Church, Virginia and then Paterson, New Jersey in late May where Hanjour took additional flight training.

Hanjour returned to the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area on September 2, 2001, checking into a motel in Laurel, Maryland. On September 11, 2001, Hanjour boarded American Airlines Flight 77, took control of the aircraft after his team of hijackers helped subdue the pilots, passengers, and crew, and flew the plane into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks. The crash killed all 64 passengers on board the aircraft and 125 people in the Pentagon.

==Early life and education==
Hanjour was the fourth of seven children, born to a food-supply businessman in Taif, Saudi Arabia, near Mecca. During his youth, Hanjour wanted to drop out of school to become a flight attendant, although his brother Abdulrahman discouraged this route, and tried to help him focus on his studies. 

According to his eldest brother, Hanjour traveled to Afghanistan in the late 1980s as a teenager to participate in the conflict against the Soviet Union. The Soviets had already withdrawn by the time he arrived in the country and he instead worked for a relief agency. 

==Career==

===Early 1990s===
Hanjour first came to the United States in 1991 to study English at the University of Arizona's Center for English as a Second Language. Hanjour's eldest brother Abdulrahman helped him apply to the eight-week program, and found a room in Tucson, Arizona for Hanjour near the Islamic Center of Tucson. Hanjour arrived for the English language program on October 3, 1991, and stayed until early February 1992, when he returned to Saudi Arabia. Hanjour was the only hijacker to visit the United States prior to any intentions for a large-scale attack and he was not part of the Hamburg cell in Germany.

Over the next five years, Hanjour remained in Saudi Arabia, helping the family manage a lemon and date farm near Ta'if. His family often reminded Hanjour that he was getting past the age where he ought to get married and start a family, but Hanjour insisted he wanted to settle down more. While in Saudi Arabia, Hanjour applied for a job with Saudi Arabian Airlines, but was turned down due to poor grades. The airline told Hanjour they would consider him if he obtained a commercial pilot's license in the United States. 

===1996===
In April 1996, Hanjour returned to the United States, staying with family friends, Susan and Adnan Khalil, in Miramar, Florida for a month before heading to Oakland, California to study English and attend flight school. Hanjour obtained a visa in March 1996, and arrived in the United States on April 2, 1996. Hanjour was admitted to the Sierra Academy of Aeronautics, but before beginning flight training, the academy arranged for Hanjour to take intensive English courses at ESL Language Center in Oakland. The flight school also arranged for Hanjour to stay with a host family, with whom he moved in with on May 20, 1996. FBI Hijackers' Timeline Hanjour completed the English program in August, and in early September 1996, he attended a single day of ground school courses at the Sierra Academy of Aeronautics before withdrawing, citing financial worries about the $35,000 cost.

Hanjour left Oakland in September and moved to Phoenix, Arizona, paying $4,800 for lessons at CRM Flight Cockpit Resource Management in Scottsdale. Receiving poor marks, Hanjour dropped out of flight school, and returned to Saudi Arabia at the end of November 1996. 

===Late 1990s===
Hanjour re-entered the United States on November 16, 1997, taking additional English courses in Florida, then returning to Phoenix where he shared an apartment with Bandar al-Hazmi. In December, he resumed training at CRM Flight Cockpit Resource Management for a few weeks, before pursuing training at Arizona Aviation. 

Bandar al-Hazmi and Hanjour stayed in Arizona, continued taking flight lessons at Arizona Aviation throughout 1998 and early 1999. After moving out of Bandar's place in March, Hanjour lived in several apartments in Tempe, Mesa and Phoenix. FBI Hijackers' Timeline, p. 16&mdash;41 
In February, financial records showed that Hanjour had taken a trip to Las Vegas, Nevada. FBI Hijackers' Timeline, p. 18 In addition to flight training at Arizona Aviation, Hanjour enrolled in flight simulator classes at the Sawyer School of Aviation where he made only three or four visits. Lotfi Raissi would begin taking lessons at the same school a month after Hanjour quit, part of what piqued the FBI's interest in Raissi.

An FBI informant named Aukai Collins claims he told the FBI about Hanjour's activities during 1998, giving them Hanjour's name and phone number, and warning them that more and more foreign-born Muslims seem to be taking flying lessons. The FBI admits it paid Collins to monitor the Islamic and Arab communities in Phoenix at the time, but denies Collins told them anything about Hanjour. http://www.cooperativeresearch.org/timeline/2002/ap052402.html http://www.cooperativeresearch.org/timeline/2002/foxnews052402.html 

Hanjour gained his FAA commercial pilot certificate in April 1999, getting a "satisfactory" rating from the examiner. Hanjour's bank records indicate that he travelled to Ontario, Canada in March 1999 for an unknown reason.

He traveled to Saudi Arabia to get a job working with Saudi Arabian Airlines as a commercial pilot but was rejected by a civil aviation school in Jeddah. His brother, Yasser, relayed that Hanjour, frustrated, "turned his attention toward religious texts and cassette tapes of militant Islamic preachers." He told his family in late 1999 he was heading to the United Arab Emirates to find work. However, it is likely that he headed to Al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan.

===2000===
In May 2000, a third person accompanied Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Mihdhar to Sorbi's Flying Club where he waited on the ground as they took a flight lesson. It has been theorized this may have been Hanjour.

In September Hanjour again sent his $110 registration to the ELS Language Center which leased space on Holy Names College campus in Oakland, California to continue his English studies. He also applied for another U.S. Student Visa. Although he was accepted, after the attacks, it would be reported that his Visa application was 'suspicious'. Granted a F-1 student visa in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, September 2000, he failed to reveal that he had previously traveled to the U.S. He never turned up for classes at the ELS Language Center, and when the school contacted its Saudi representative, he reported that he could not find Hanjour either.

On December 5, Hanjour opened a CitiBank account in Deira, Dubai. On the 8th Hanjour is recorded flying into the Cincinnati, Ohio/N. Kentucky airport and was thought to be later meeting with Nawaf al-Hazmi in San Diego.

===2001===
Hanjour came back to San Diego in December 2000, frequently visiting Abdussattar Shaikh's house, which was shared with Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid Almihdhar. During this time Hanjour may have visited the San Diego Zoo in February, as a security guard recalls having to page his name to reclaim a lost briefcase containing cash and Arabic documents and later recognized his photograph. Shortly afterwards, the three hijackers moved out of Shaikh's house to Falls Church, Virginia.
A photograph of Hanjour, released by the FBI.

ELS Language Center on Oakland said Hanjour reached a level of proficiency sufficient to survive very well in the English language. However, in January 2001, Arizona JetTech flight school managers reported him to the FAA at least five times because his English was inadequate for the commercial pilots certificate he had already obtained. It took him five hours to complete an oral exam meant to last just two hours, said Peggy Chevrette. Hanjour failed UA English classes with a 0.26 GPA and a JetTech manager said He could not fly at all. His FAA certificate had become invalid late in 1999 when he failed to take a mandatory medical examination. In February, Hanjour began advanced simulator training in Mesa, Arizona.

He and Hazmi moved out of Mesa at the end of March, and by April 3, 2001, they were in Virginia and at Falls Church by April 4, 2001. Falls Church was the location of the Dar al-Hijrah mosque in the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area. 
Anwar Al-Awlaki was the recently appointed new Imam who Hazmi had met with in San Diego. Imam Anwar Al Awlaki - A Leader in Need; Cageprisoners.com, November 8, 2006, accessed June 7, 2007 Sherwell, Philip, and Spillius, Alex, "Fort Hood shooting: Texas army killer linked to September 11 terrorists; Major Nidal Malik Hasan worshipped at a mosque led by a radical imam said to be a "spiritual adviser" to three of the hijackers who attacked America on Sept 11, 2001," Daily Telegraph, November 7, 2009, accessed November 12, 2009 

At the mosque, Hanjour and Hazmi soon met Eyad Alrababah, a Jordanian who later pled guilty to document fraud and was deported. They had told him that they were looking for an apartment to rent, and he found a friend who rented them an apartment in Alexandria where they stayed. On April 4, 2001, Hanjour asked to forward his utility deposits to 3159 Row Street Falls Church VA, which was same address as the mosque. FBI Summary 

When police raided the Hamburg apartment of Ramzi bin al-Shibh (the "20th hijacker") while investigating the 9/11 attacks, Awlaki's telephone number was found among Binalshibh's personal contact information. Al-Haj, Ahmed, and Abu-Nasr, Donna, "US imam who communicated with Fort Hood suspect wanted in Yemen on terror suspicions," Associated Press, November 11, 2009, accessed November 12, 2009 

On May 2, 2001, two new roommates joined them in Virginia: Moqed and Ahmed al-Ghamdi, both of whom had just flown into the United States from the Middle East.

Alrababah later suggested they all go together to look at apartments in Fairfield, Connecticut. On May 8, Alrababah, Hanjour, Hazmi, Moqed and Ghamdi traveled to Fairfield to look for housing. While there, they also called several local flight schools. They then travelled briefly to Paterson to look at that area as well. Rababah has contended that, after this trip, he never saw any of the men again. 

Sometime at the end of May 2001, Hanjour rented a one-bedroom apartment in Paterson, New Jersey. He lived there with at least one roommate and was visited by several other hijackers, including Mohamed Atta. During his time in New Jersey, he and Hazmi rented 3 different cars including a sedan in June that Hanjour cosigned with the alias "Hani Saleh Hassan". He later made his last phone call to his family back in Saudi Arabia, during which he claimed to be phoning from a payphone in the United Arab Emirates, where he was supposedly still working.

Hanjour, along with at least five other future hijackers, is thought to have traveled to Las Vegas several times in mid-2001, where they reportedly drank alcohol, gambled, and practiced other forms of vice. 

On August 1, Hanjour and Almihdhar returned to Falls Church to obtain fraudulent documentation at a 7-Eleven convenience store where an illegal side business operated for such a service. There they met Luis Martinez-Flores, himself also an illegal immigrant, who agreed to help them for a $100 fee. They drove together to a DMV office at a mall in nearby Springfield, Virginia, where Martinez-Flores gave them a false address in Falls Church to use, and signed legal forms attesting that they lived there. Hanjour and Almihdhar were then granted state identity cards. (Martinez-Flores was later sentenced to 21 months in prison for aiding them, and giving false testimony to police). "Hijackers' helper faces two years max", Timothy P. Carney, Human Events, December 24, 2001 

On that same day, Hanjour was stopped by police for driving a Toyota Corolla 55 mph in a 30 mph zone in Arlington, Virginia, for which he paid the $70 fine.

Employees at Advance Travel Service in Totowa, New Jersey later claimed that Moqed and Hanjour had both purchased tickets there. They claimed that Hanjour spoke very little English, and Moqed did most of the speaking. Hanjour requested a seat in the front row of the airplane. Their credit card failed to authorize, and after being told the agency did not accept personal checks, the pair left to withdraw cash. They returned shortly afterwards and paid the $1,842.25 total in cash. This claim is in contradiction to other claims that Hanjour never had a ticket for the flight at all. 

Hanjour began making cross-country flights in August to test security, and tried to rent a plane from Freeway Airport in Maryland; though he was declined after exhibiting difficulty controlling and landing a single-engine Cessna 172. He moved out of his New Jersey apartment on September 1, and was photographed four days later using an ATM with fellow hijacker Majed Moqed in Laurel, Maryland, where all five Flight 77 hijackers had purchased a 1-week membership in a local Gold's Gym, there Hanjour claimed that his first name translated as warrior when a gym employee asked if there was an English translation of their Arabic names. (Hani actually translates as "contented")

On September 10, 2001, Hanjour, Mihdhar, and Hazmi checked into the Marriott Residence Inn in Herndon, Virginia where Saleh Ibn Abdul Rahman Hussayen, a prominent Saudi government official, was staying. No evidence was ever uncovered that they had met, or knew of each other's presence. 

===September 11 attacks===

At 7:35 a.m. on September 11, 2001, Hanjour arrived at the passenger security checkpoint at Washington Dulles International Airport, 26 miles west of Washington, D.C., en route to board American Airlines Flight 77. Some earlier reports stated he may not have had a ticket or appeared on any manifest, however he was documented by the 9/11 Commission as having been assigned to seat 1B in first class, and reported to have bought a single first-class ticket from Advance Travel Service in Totowa, N.J. In the security tape footage released in 2004, Hanjour appears to walk through the metal detector without setting it off.

The flight was scheduled to depart at 8:10, but ended up departing 10 minutes late from Gate D26 at Dulles. The last normal radio communications from the aircraft to air traffic control occurred at 08:50:51. At 08:54, Flight 77 began to deviate from its normal, assigned flight path and turned south, and then hijackers set the flight's autopilot heading for Washington, D.C. Passenger Barbara Olson called her husband, United States Solicitor General Ted Olson, and reported that the plane had been hijacked and that the assailants had box cutters and knives. Using the flight intercom, Hanjour announced the flight was hijacked. As Flight 77 was 5 miles (8.0 km) west-southwest of the Pentagon, it made a 330-degree turn. At the end of the turn, it was descending through 2,200 feet (670 m), pointed toward the Pentagon and downtown Washington. Hanjour advanced the throttles to maximum power and dove towards the Pentagon at a speed of over 850 km/h. At 09:37:46, Hanjour crashed the Boeing 757 into the west facade of the Pentagon, killing all 64 aboard (including the hijackers), along with 125 on the ground in the Pentagon. While level above the ground and seconds from the crash, the airplane's wings knocked over light poles and its right engine smashed into a power generator, creating a smoke trail seconds before smashing into the Pentagon. In the recovery process at the Pentagon, remains of all five Flight 77 hijackers were identified through a process of elimination, as not matching any DNA samples for the victims, and put into custody of the FBI. 

==Legacy==

===Family denial===
After the September 11 attacks, Hanjour's family in Saudi Arabia vehemently stated that they could not, and would not, believe he had been involved as one of the hijacker pilots, and also stated that he had phoned them just eight hours prior to the hijackings and his voice did not sound strange or unusual at all. 

==See also==
* Rayed Mohammed Abdullah Ali
* PENTTBOM

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==
* The Final 9/11 Commission Report
* NBC video showing Hanjour with a correct profile
* Moussaoui trial exhibit video showing Hanjour with a correct profile
* Hanjour Ticket Purchase



[[Hyena]]

Hyenas or hyaenas (from Greek ""  haina , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus )
are the animals of the family Hyaenidae of the feliform suborder of the Carnivora. With only four species, it is the fourth-smallest biological family in the Carnivora, and one of the smallest in the class Mammalia. Despite their low diversity, hyenas are unique and vital components to most African and some Asian ecosystems. 

Although phylogenetically close to felines and viverrids, hyenas are behaviourally and morphologically similar to canines in several aspects; both hyenas and canines are nonarboreal, cursorial hunters that catch prey with their teeth rather than claws. Both eat food quickly and may store it, and their calloused feet with large, blunt, nonretractable nails are adapted for running and making sharp turns. However, the hyenas' grooming, scent marking, defecating habits, mating, and parental behaviour are consistent with the behaviour of other feliforms. Although long reputed to be cowardly scavengers, hyenas, especially spotted hyenas, kill as much as 95% of the food they eat, http://www.hyaenidae.org/the-hyaenidae/spotted-hyena-crocuta-crocuta/crocuta-diet-and-foraging.html and have been known to drive off leopards or lionesses from their kills. Hyenas are primarily nocturnal animals, but may venture from their lairs in the early-morning hours. With the exception of the highly social spotted hyena, hyenas are generally not gregarious animals, though they may live in family groups and congregate at kills. 

Hyenas first arose in Eurasia during the Miocene period from viverrid-like ancestors, and developed into two distinct branches; the lightly built dog-like hyenas and the robust bone-crushing hyenas. Although the dog-like hyenas thrived 15 million years ago (with one taxon having colonised North America), they died out after a change in climate along with the arrival of canids into Eurasia. Of the dog-like hyena lineage, only the insectivorous aardwolf survived, while the bone-crushing hyenas (whose extant members are the spotted, brown and striped hyenas) became the undisputed top scavengers of Eurasia and Africa. 

Hyenas feature prominently in the folklore and mythology of human cultures with which they are sympatric. Hyenas are mostly viewed with fear and contempt, as well as being
associated with witchcraft, as their body parts are used as ingredients in traditional medicine. Among the beliefs held by some cultures, hyenas are thought to influence peoples spirits, rob graves, and steal livestock and children. 

==Evolution==

===Origins===
Hyenas originated in the jungles of Miocene Eurasia 22 million years ago, when most early feliform species were still largely arboreal. The first ancestral hyenas were likely similar to the modern banded palm civet; one of the earliest hyena species exhumed, Plioviverrops, was a lithe, civet-like animal that inhabited Eurasia 2022 million years ago, and is identifiable as a hyaenid by the structure of the middle ear and dentition. The lineage of Plioviverrops prospered, and gave rise to descendants with longer legs and more pointed jaws, a direction similar to that taken by canids in North America. 

===Rise and fall of the dog-like hyenas===
Skull of Ictitherium viverrinum, one of the "dog-like" hyenas. American Museum of Natural History
The descendants of Plioviverrops reached their peak 15 million years ago, with more than 30 species having been identified. Unlike most modern hyena species, which are specialised bone-crushers, these dog-like hyenas were nimble-bodied, wolfish animals; one species among them was Ictitherium viverrinum, which was similar to a jackal. The dog-like hyenas were very numerous; in some Miocene fossil sites, the remains of Ictitherium and other dog-like hyenas outnumber those of all other carnivores combined. The decline of the dog-like hyenas began 57 million years ago during a period of climate change, which was exacerbated when canids crossed the Bering land bridge to Eurasia. One species, Chasmaporthetes ossifragus, managed to cross the land bridge into North America, being the only hyena to do so. Chasmopothertes managed to survive for some time in North America by deviating from the cursorial and bone-crushing niches monopolised by canids, and developing into a cheetah-like sprinter. Most of the dog-like hyenas had died off by 1.5 million years ago. 

===Bone-crushing hyenas===
By 1012 million years ago, the hyena family had split into two distinct groups; that of the dog-like hyenas and the bone-crushing hyenas. The arrival of the ancestral bone-crushing hyenas coincided with the decline of the similarly built but unrelated Percrocutidae family. The bone-crushing hyenas survived the devastating changes in climate and the arrival of canids, which wiped out the dog-like hyenas, though they never crossed into North America, as their niche there had already been taken by the Borophaginae family. By 5 million years ago, the bone-crushing hyenas became the dominant scavengers of Eurasia, primarily feeding on large herbivore carcasses felled by sabre-toothed cats. One genus, Pachycrocuta, was a 200 kg (440 lb) mega-scavenger that could splinter the bones of elephants. With the decline of large herbivores by the late ice age, Pachycrocuta was replaced by the smaller Crocuta. 

===Rise of modern hyenas===
The aardwolf can trace its lineage directly back to Plioviverrops 15 million years ago, and is the only survivor of the dog-like hyena lineage. Its success is partly attributed to its insectivorous diet, for which it faced no competition from canids crossing from North America. Its unrivaled ability to digest the terpene excretions from soldier termites is likely a modification of the strong digestive system its ancestors used to digest fetid carrion. 

Skeletons of a striped hyena and a spotted hyena, two species of the "bone-crushing" hyenas. Musum national d'histoire naturelle
The striped hyena may have evolved from H. namaquensis of Pliocene Africa. Striped hyena fossils are common in Africa, with records going back as far as the Middle Pleistocene and even to the Villafranchian. As fossil striped hyenas are absent from the Mediterranean region, it is likely that the species is a relatively late invader to Eurasia, having likely spread outside Africa only after the extinction of spotted hyenas in Asia at the end of the Ice Age. The striped hyena occurred for some time in Europe during the Pleistocene, having been particularly widespread in France and Germany. It also occurred in Montmaurin, Hollabrunn in Austria, the Furninha Cave in Portugal and the Genista Caves in Gibraltar. The European form was similar in appearance to modern populations, but was larger, being comparable in size to the brown hyena. 

The spotted hyena diverged from the striped and brown hyena 10 million years ago. Its direct ancestor was the Indian Crocuta sivalensis, which lived during the Villafranchian. Ancestral spotted hyenas probably developed social behaviours in response to increased pressure from rivals on carcasses, thus forcing them to operate in teams. Spotted hyenas evolved sharp carnassials behind their crushing premolars, therefore they did not need to wait for their prey to die, as is the case for brown and striped hyenas, and thus became pack hunters as well as scavengers. They began forming increasingly larger territories, necessitated by the fact that their prey was often migratory, and long chases in a small territory would have caused them to encroach into another clan's turf. Spotted hyenas spread from their original homeland during the Middle Pleistocene, and quickly colonised a very wide area from Europe, to southern Africa and China. With the decline of grasslands 12,500 years ago, Europe experienced a massive loss of lowland habitats favoured by spotted hyenas, and a corresponding increase in mixed woodlands. Spotted hyenas, under these circumstances, would have been outcompeted by wolves and humans, who were as much at home in forests as in open lands&mdash;and in highlands as in lowlands. Spotted hyena populations began to shrink after roughly 20,000 years ago, completely disappearing from Western Europe between 11 and 14 thousand years ago, and earlier in some areas. 

==Genera of the Hyaenidae (extinct and recent)==
Reconstruction of Pachycrocuta brevirostris
A spotted hyena of subfamily Hyaeninae
The list follows McKenna and Bells Classification of Mammals for prehistoric genera (1997) Malcolm C. McKenna, Susan K. Bell: Classification of Mammals: Above the Species Level, Columbia University Press, New York 1997, 631 Seiten, ISBN 0-231-11013-8 and Wozencraft (2005) in Wilson and Reeders Mammal Species of the World for extant genera. The Percrocutids are, in contrast to McKenna and Bell's classification, not included as a subfamily into the Hyaenidae, but as the separate family Percrocutidae. Furthermore, the living brown hyena and its closest extinct relatives are not included in the genus Pachycrocuta, but in the genus Hyaena. The Protelinae (Aardwolves) are not treated as a separate subfamily, but included in the Hyaeninae.

* Family Hyaenidae
*** Tongxinictis (Middle Miocene of Asia)
** Subfamily Ictitheriinae
*** Herpestides (Early Miocene of Africa and Eurasia)
*** Plioviverrops (including Jordanictis, Protoviverrops, Mesoviverrops; Early Miocene to Early Pliocene of Europe, Late Miocene of Asia)
*** Ictitherium (=Galeotherium; including Lepthyaena, Sinictitherium, Paraictitherium; Middle Miocene of Africa, Late Miocene to Early Pliocene of Eurasia)
*** Thalassictis (including Palhyaena, Miohyaena, Hyaenictitherium, Hyaenalopex; Middle to Late Miocene of Asia, Late Miocene of Africa and Europe)
*** Hyaenotherium (Late Miocene to Early Pliocene of Eurasia)
*** Miohyaenotherium (Late Miocene of Europe)
*** Lychyaena (Late Miocene of Eurasia)
*** Tungurictis (Middle Miocene of Africa and Eurasia)
*** Proictitherium (Middle Miocene of Africa and Asia, Middle to Late Miocene of Europe)
** Subfamily Hyaeninae
*** Palinhyaena (Late Miocene of Asia)
*** Ikelohyaena (Early Pliocene of Africa)
*** Hyaena (=Euhyaena, =Hyena; including brown Hyena, Pliohyaena, Pliocrocuta, Anomalopithecus) Early Pliocene (?Middle Miocene) to Recent of Africa, Late Pliocene (?Late Miocene) to Late Pleistocene of Europe, Late Pliocene to recent in Asia
*** Hyaenictis (Late Miocene of Asia?, Late Miocene of Europe, Early Pliocene (?Early Pleistocene) of Africa)
*** Leecyaena (Late Miocene and/or Early Pliocene of Asia)
*** Chasmaporthetes (=Ailuriaena; including Lycaenops, Euryboas; Late Miocene to Early Pleistocene of Eurasia, Early Pliocene to Late Pliocene or Early Pleistocene of Africa, Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene of North America)
*** Pachycrocuta (Pliocene and Pleistocene of Eurasia and Africa)
*** Adcrocuta (Late Miocene of Eurasia)
*** Crocuta (=Crocotta; including Eucrocuta; Late Pliocene to recent of Africa, Late Pliocene to Late Pleistocene of Eurasia)
** Subfamily Protelinae
*** Proteles (=Geocyon; Pleistocene to Recent of Africa)

==Characteristics==

===Build===

Striped hyena skull. Note the disproportionately large carnassials and premolars adapted for bone consumption
Aardwolf skull. Note the greatly reduced molars and carnassials, rendered redundant from insectivory
Hyenas have relatively short torsos and are fairly massive and wolf-like in build, but have lower hind quarters, high withers and their backs slope noticeably downward toward their rumps. The forelegs are high, while the hind legs are very short and their necks are thick and short. Their skulls superficially resemble those of large canids, but are much larger and heavier, with shorter facial portions. Hyenas are digitigrade, with the fore and hind paws having four digits each and sporting bulging pawpads. Like canids, hyenas have short, blunt, non-retractable claws. Their pelage is sparse and coarse with poorly developed or absent underfur. Most species have a rich mane of long hair running from the withers or from the head. With the exception of the spotted hyena, hyaenids have striped coats, which they likely inherited from their viverrid ancestors. Their ears are large and have simple basal ridges and no marginal bursa. Their vertebral column, including the cervical region are of limited mobility. Hyenas have no baculum. Hyenas have an additional pair of ribs than canids, and their tongues are rough like those of felids and viverrids. Holl, William & Wood, Neville The Analyst: a quarterly journal of science, literature, natural history, and the fine arts, Volume 10, p. 59, Simpkin & Marshall, 1840 Males in most hyena species are larger than females, though the spotted hyena is exceptional, as it is the female of the species that outweighs and dominates the male. Also, unlike other hyenas, the female spotted hyena's external genitalia closely resembles that of the male. 

Their dentition is similar to that of the Felidae, but is more specialised for consuming coarse food and crushing bones. The carnassials, especially the upper, are very powerful and are shifted far back to the point of exertion of peak pressure on the jaws. The other teeth, save for the underdeveloped upper molars, are powerful, with broad bases and cutting edges. The canines are short, but thick and robust. Labiolingually, their mandibles are much stronger at the canine teeth than in canids, reflecting the fact that hyenas crack bones with both their anterior dentition and premolars, unlike canids, which do so with their post-carnassial molars. The strength of their jaws is such that both striped and spotted hyenas have been recorded to kill dogs with a single bite to the neck without breaking the skin. Johnson, Daniel (1827) Sketches of Indian Field Sports: With Observations on the Animals; Also an Account of Some of the Customs of the Inhabitants; with a Description of the Art of Catching Serpents, as Practised by the Conjoors and Their Method of Curing Themselves when Bitten: with Remarks on Hydrophobia and Rabid Animals p. 45-46, R. Jennings, 1827 Stevenson-Hamilton, James (1917) Animal life in Africa, Vol. 1, p.95, London : William Heinemann The spotted hyena is renowned for its strong bite proportional to its size, but a number of other animals (including the Tasmanian devil) are proportionately stronger. The aardwolf has greatly reduced cheek teeth, sometimes absent in the adult, but otherwise has the same dentition as the other three species. The dental formula for all hyena species is: 

Hyenas lack perineal scent glands, but have a large pouch of naked skin located at the anal opening. Large anal glands open into it from above the anus. Several sebaceous glands are present between the openings of the anal glands and above them. These glands produce a white, creamy secretion the hyenas paste onto grass stalks. The odour of this secretion is very strong, smelling of boiling cheap soap or burning, and can be detected by humans several metres downwind. The secretions are primarily used for territorial marking, though both the aardwolf and the striped hyena will spray them when attacked.

===Behaviour===

Spotted hyena cubs at their den
Brown hyena cub standing on a path of stones
Hyenas groom themselves often like felids and viverrids, and their way of licking their genitals is very cat-like (sitting on the lower back, legs spread with one leg pointing vertically upward). However, unlike other feliforms, they do not "wash" their faces. They defecate in the same manner as other Carnivora, though they never raise their legs as canids do when urinating, as urination serves no territorial function for them. Instead, hyenas mark their territories using their anal glands, a trait found also in viverrids and mustelids, but not canids and felids. When attacked by lions or dogs, striped and brown hyenas will feign death, though the spotted hyena will defend itself ferociously. The spotted hyena is very vocal, producing a number of different sounds consisting of whoops, grunts, groans, lows, giggles, yells, growls, laughs and whines. The striped hyena is comparatively silent, its vocalisations being limited to a chattering laugh and howling. 

Mating between hyenas involves a number of short copulations with brief intervals, unlike canids, who generally engage in a single, drawn out copulation. Spotted hyena cubs are born almost fully developed, with their eyes open and erupting incisors and canines, though lacking adult markings. In contrast, striped hyena cubs are born with adult markings, closed eyes and small ears. Hyenas do not regurgitate food for their young and male spotted hyenas play no part in raising their cubs, though male striped hyenas do so. 

The striped hyena is primarily a scavenger, though it will occasionally attack and kill any defenseless animal it can overcome, and will supplement its diet with fruits. The spotted hyena, though it also scavenges occasionally, is an active pack hunter of medium to large sized ungulates, which it catches by wearing them down in long chases and dismembering them in a canid-like manner. The aardwolf is primarily an insectivore, specialised for feeding on termites of the genus Trinervitermes and Hodotermes, which it consumes by licking them up with its long, broad tongue. An aardwolf can eat 300,000 Trinervitermes on a single outing. Hyenas are also known for their characteristic calls which sound like laughs. Issues in Ecological Research and Application: 2011 Edition - Page 1063 

==Relationships with humans==

===Folklore, mythology and literature===
Cave hyena painting found in the Chauvet Cave in 1994
A striped hyena, as depicted on the Nile mosaic of Palestrina
Spotted hyenas vary in their folkloric and mythological depictions, depending on the ethnic group from which the tales originate. It is often difficult to know whether or not spotted hyenas are the specific hyena species featured in such stories, particularly in West Africa, as both spotted and striped hyenas are often given the same names. In western African tales, spotted hyenas are sometimes depicted as bad Muslims who challenge the local animism that exists among the Beng in Cte dIvoire. In East Africa, Tabwa mythology portrays the spotted hyena as a solar animal that first brought the sun to warm the cold earth, while West African folklore generally shows the hyena as symbolizing immorality, dirty habits, the reversal of normal activities, and other negative traits. In Tanzania, there is a belief that witches use spotted hyenas as mounts. In the Mtwara Region of Tanzania, it is believed that a child born at night while a hyena is crying will likely grow up to be a thief. In the same area, hyena faeces are believed to enable a child to walk at an early age, thus it is not uncommon in that area to see children with hyena dung wrapped in their clothes. The Kaguru of Tanzania and the Kujamaat of Southern Senegal view hyenas as inedible and greedy hermaphrodites. A mythical African tribe called the Bouda is reputed to house members able to transform into hyenas. A similar myth occurs in Mansoa. These "werehyenas" are executed when discovered, but do not revert to their human form when killed. 

Striped hyenas are often referred to in Middle Eastern literature and folklore, typically as symbols of treachery and stupidity. Mounir R. Abi-Said (2006) Reviled as a grave robber: The ecology and conservation of striped hyaenas in the human dominated landscapes of Lebanon Ph.D. thesis, University of Kent (Biodiversity management) In the Near and Middle East, striped hyenas are generally regarded as physical incarnations of jinns. Frembgen, Jrgen W. The Magicality of the Hyena: Beliefs and Practices in West and South Asia, Asian Folklore Studies, Volume 57, 1998: 331344 Arab writer Al-Quazweeni (12041283) spoke of a tribe of people called Al-Dabeyoun meaning "hyena people." In his book Aajeb Al-Makhlouqat he wrote that should one of this tribe be in a group of 1000 people, a hyena could pick him out and eat him. A Persian medical treatise written in 1376 tells how to cure cannibalistic people known as kaftar, who are said to be half-man, half-hyena. Al-Doumairy in his writings in Hawayan Al-Koubra (1406) wrote that striped hyenas were vampiric creatures that attacked people at night and sucked the blood from their necks. He also wrote that hyenas only attacked brave people. Arab folklore tells of how hyenas can mesmerise victims with their eyes or sometimes with their pheromones. In a similar vein to Al-Doumairy, the Greeks, until the end of the 19th century, believed that the bodies of werewolves, if not destroyed, would haunt battlefields as vampiric hyenas that drank the blood of dying soldiers. The image of striped hyenas in Afghanistan, India and Palestine is more varied. Though feared, striped hyenas were also symbolic for love and fertility, leading to numerous varieties of love medicine derived from hyena body parts. Among the Baluch and in northern India, witches or magicians are said to ride striped hyenas at night. 

The striped hyena is mentioned in the Bible. The Arab word for the hyena, ab` or abu` (plural ib`), is alluded to in a valley in Israel known as Shaqq-ud-Diba` (meaning "cleft of the hyenas") and Wadi-Abu-Diba` (meaning "valley of the hyenas"). Both places have been interpreted by some scholars as being the Biblical Valley of Tsebo`im mentioned in 1 Samuel 13:18. The modern Hebrew word for hyena is tzavoa`, which is similar to the word "tsavua`" meaning "colored". Though the Authorized King James Version of the Bible interprets the term "`ayit tsavua`" (which appears in Jeremiah 12:9) as "speckled bird," Henry Baker Tristram argued that it was most likely a hyena being mentioned. 

The vocalisation of the spotted hyena resembling hysterical human laughter has been alluded to in numerous works of literature: "to laugh like a hyna" was a common proverb, and is featured in The Cobbler's Prophecy (1594), Webster's Duchess of Malfy (1623) and Shakespeares As You Like It, Act IV. Sc.1.

===Attacks on humans===
Illustration from Fraser's magazine showing an artist's impression of a "stag-hound" biting a spotted hyena attacking its master
Among hyenas, only the spotted and striped hyena have been known to become man-eaters. Hyenas are known to have preyed on humans in prehistory: Human hair has been found in fossilised hyena dung dating back 195,000 to 257,000 years. Oldest Human Hair Found in Fossilized Dung Jennifer Viegas, Discovery News Some paleontologists believe that competition and predation by cave hyenas in Siberia was a significant factor in delaying human colonization of Alaska. Hyenas may have occasionally stolen human kills, or entered campsites to drag off the young and weak, much like modern spotted hyenas in Africa. The oldest Alaskan human remains coincide with roughly the same time cave hyenas became extinct, leading certain paleontologists to infer that hyena predation was what prevented humans from crossing the Bering strait earlier. Hyenas readily scavenge from human corpses; in Ethiopia, hyenas were reported to feed extensively on the corpses of victims of the 1960 attempted coup Kapuciski, Ryszard, Emperor (book)|The Emperor: Downfall of an Autocrat]. 1978. ISBN 0-679-72203-3 and the Red Terror. Donham, Donald Lewis (1999) Marxist modern: an ethnographic history of the Ethiopian revolution, University of California Press, page 135, ISBN 0-520-21329-7 Hyenas habituated to scavenging on human corpses may develop bold behaviours towards living people; hyena attacks on people in southern Sudan increased during the Second Sudanese Civil War, when human corpses were readily available to them. Copson, Raymond W. (1994) Africa's wars and prospects for peace, M.E. Sharpe, page 6, ISBN 1-56324-300-8 

Although spotted hyenas do prey on humans in modern times, such incidents are rare. However, according to the SGDRN (Sociedade para a Gesto e Desenvolvimento da Reserva do Niassa Moambique), attacks on humans by spotted hyenas are likely to be underreported. Begg, Colleen, Begg, Kieth & Muemedi, Oscar (2007) Preliminary data on human - carnivore conflict in Niassa National Reserve, Mozambique, particularly fatalities due to lion, spotted hyaena and crocodile, SGDRN (Sociedade para a Gesto e Desenvolvimento da Reserva do Niassa Moambique) According to hyena expert Dr. Hans Kruuk, man-eating spotted hyenas tend to be very large specimens: A pair of man-eating hyenas, responsible for killing 27 people in Mlanje, Malawi in 1962, were weighed at 72 kg (159 lb) and 77 kg (170 lb) after being shot. Kruuk, Hans (2002) Hunter and hunted: relationships between carnivores and people Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-89109-4 In 1903, Hector Duff wrote of how spotted hyenas in the Mzimba district of Angoniland would wait at dawn outside people's huts and attack them when they opened their doors. Victims of spotted hyenas tend to be women, children and sick or infirm men: Theodore Roosevelt wrote on how in 19081909 in Uganda, spotted hyenas regularly killed sufferers of African sleeping sickness as they slept outside in camps. Roosevelt, Theodore (1910) African Game Trails: An Account of the African Wanderings of an American Hunter, Naturalist, New York, C. Scribner's sons Spotted hyenas are widely feared in Malawi, where they have been known to occasionally attack people at night, particularly during the hot season when people sleep outside. Hyena attacks were widely reported in Malawi's Phalombe plain, to the north of Michesi Mountain. Five deaths were recorded in 1956, five in 1957 and six in 1958. This pattern continued until 1961 when eight people were killed. Attacks occurred most commonly in September, when people slept outdoors, and bush fires made the hunting of wild game difficult for the hyenas. An anecdotal news report from the World Wide Fund for Nature 2004 indicates that 35 people were killed by spotted hyenas in a 12 month period in Mozambique along a 20 km stretch of road near the Tanzanian border. 

In ordinary circumstances, striped hyenas are extremely timid around humans, though they may show bold behaviours toward people at night. On rare occasions, striped hyenas have preyed on humans. In the 1880s, a hyena was reported to have attacked humans, especially sleeping children, over a three-year period in the Idr Province, with 25 children and 3 adults being wounded in one year. The attacks provoked local authorities into announcing a reward of 100 rubles for every hyena killed. Further attacks were reported later in some parts of Transcaucasia, particularly in 1908. Instances are known in Azerbaijan of striped hyenas killing children sleeping in courtyards during the 1930s and 1940s. In 1942, a sleeping guard was mauled in his hut by a hyena in Golyndzhakh. Cases of children being taken by hyenas by night are known in southeast Turkmenia's Bathyz Nature Reserve. A further attack on a child was reported around Serakhs in 1948. Several attacks have occurred in India; in 1962, nine children were thought to have been taken by hyenas in the town of Bhagalpur in the Bihar State in a six-week period and 19 children up to the age of four were killed by hyenas in Karnataka, Bihar in 1974. A consensus on wild animal attacks during a five-year period in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh showed that hyenas had only attacked three people, the lowest figure when compared to deaths caused by wolves, gaur, boar, elephants, tigers, leopards and sloth bears. 

Some investigators believe the Beast of Gevaudan, which reportedly killed more than 100 women and children in France between 1764 to 1767, may have been a hyena. 

===Hyenas as food and medicine===
An Ancient Egyptian mural showing a striped hyena being forcefed
Hyenas are used for food and medicinal purposes in some areas, including Muslim nations under the Shafiite school, where hyenas are considered halal because of their omnivorous diet. This practice dates back to the times of the Ancient Greeks and Romans, who believed that different parts of the hyena's body were effective means to ward off evil and to ensure love and fertility. 

==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Notes===

==Further reading==
* Funk, Holdger (2010) Hyaena: On the Naming and Localisation of an Enigmatic Animal, GRIN Verlag, ISBN 3-640-69784-7
* Lawick, Hugo & Goodall, Jane (1971) Innocent Killers, Houghton Mifflin Company Boston
* Mills, M. G. L. (2003) Kalahari Hyenas: Comparative Behavioral Ecology of Two Species, The Blackburn Press

==External links==

* IUCN Conservation Union Hyaendiae Specialist Group

 



[[Hyaena]]

For the Siouxsie and the Banshees album, see Hyna.

For the larger group of animals that includeds the genus "Hyaena", see Hyena.

Hyaena is a genus comprising two of the living species of hyenas: the striped hyena (Hyaena hyaena) from western Asia and northern Africa and the brown hyena (Hyaena brunnea) from southern Africa. The brown hyena has sometimes been placed in a separate genus Parahyaena, or even included in the otherwise fossil genus Pachycrocuta, but recent sources have tended to place it in Hyaena. The brown hyena's skull is larger than that of the striped hyena. The male brown hyena is slightly larger than the female, while the sexes of the striped hyena are equally sized. Both species are smaller than the spotted hyena, but larger than the aardwolf. They are predominantly scavengers.



[[HersheyChase experiment]]

357x357px
 The HersheyChase experiments were a series of experiments conducted in 1952 by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase that helped to confirm that DNA is the genetic material. While DNA had been known to biologists since 1869, many scientists still assumed at the time that proteins carried the information for inheritance because DNA appeared simpler than proteins. In their experiments, Hershey and Chase showed that when bacteriophages, which are composed of DNA and protein, infect bacteria, their DNA enters the host bacterial cell, but most of their protein does not. Although the results were not conclusive, and Hershey and Chase were cautious in their interpretation, previous, contemporaneous and subsequent discoveries all served to prove that DNA is the hereditary material. Knowledge of DNA gained from these discoveries has applications in forensics, crime investigation and genealogy.

Hershey shared the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Max Delbrck and Salvador Luria for their discoveries concerning the genetic structure of viruses. 
 

==Historical background==
 In the early twentieth century, biologists thought that proteins carried genetic information. This was based on the belief that proteins were more complex than DNA. Phoebus Levene's influential "tetranucleotide hypothesis", which incorrectly proposed that DNA was a repeating set of identical nucleotides, supported this conclusion. The results of the Avery-MacLeod-McCarty experiment, published in 1944, suggested that DNA was the genetic material, but there was still some hesitation within the general scientific community to accept this, which set the stage for the HersheyChase experiment. 

 Hershey and Chase, along with others who had done related experiments, confirmed that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information. Before that, Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty had shown that DNA led to the transformation of one strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae to another that was more virulent. The results of these experiments provided evidence that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information. 
==Methods and results==
Structural overview of T2 phage
 Hershey and Chase needed to be able to examine different parts of the phages they were studying separately, so they needed to isolate the phage subsections. Viruses were known to be composed of a protein shell and DNA, so they chose to uniquely label each with a different elemental isotope. This allowed each to be observed and analyzed separately. Since phosphorus is contained in DNA but not amino acids, radioactive phosphorus-32 was used to label the DNA contained in the T2 phage. Radioactive sulfur-35 was used to label the protein sections of the T2 phage, because sulfur is contained in amino acids but not DNA. 

 Hershey and Chase incorporated the radioactive elements into the bacteriophages by adding the isotopes to separate media within which bacteria were allowed to grow for 4 hours before bacteriophage introduction. When the bacteriophages infected the bacteria, the progeny contained the radioactive isotopes in their structures. This procedure was performed once for the sulfur-labeled phages and once for phosphorus-labeled phages. 
The labeled progeny were then allowed to infect unlabeled bacteria. The phage coats remained on the outside of the bacteria, while genetic material entered. Centrifugation allowed for the separation of the phage coats from the bacteria. These bacteria were lysed to release phage progeny. The progeny of the phages that were originally labeled with 32P remained labeled, while the progeny of the phages originally labeled with 35S were unlabeled. Thus, the HersheyChase experiment helped confirm that DNA, not protein, is the genetic material. 

 Hershey and Chase showed that the introduction of deoxyribonuclease (referred to as DNase), an enzyme that breaks down DNA, into a solution containing the labeled bacteriophages did not introduce any 32P into the solution. This demonstrated that the phage is resistant to the enzyme while intact. Additionally, they were able to plasmolyze the bacteriophages so that they went into osmotic shock, which effectively created a solution containing most of the 32P and a heavier solution containing structures called ghosts that contained the 35S and the protein coat of the virus. It was found that these ghosts could adsorb to bacteria that were susceptible to T2, although they contained no DNA and were simply the remains of the original bacterial capsule. They concluded that the protein protected the DNA from DNAse, but that once the two were separated and the phage was inactivated, the DNAse could hydrolyze the phage DNA. 

===Experiment and conclusions===
Hershey and Chase were also able to prove that the DNA from the phage is inserted into the bacteria shortly after the virus attaches to its host. Using a high speed blender they were able to force the bacteriophages from the bacterial cells after adsorption. The lack of 32P labeled DNA remaining in the solution after the bacteriophages had been allowed to adsorb to the bacteria showed that the phage DNA was transferred into the bacterial cell. The presence of almost all the radioactive 35S in the solution showed that the protein coat that protects the DNA before adsorption stayed outside the cell. 

Hershey and Chase concluded that DNA, not protein, was the genetic material. They determined that a protective protein coat was formed around the bacteriophage, but that the internal DNA is what conferred its ability to produce progeny inside a bacteria. They showed that, in growth, protein has no function, while DNA has some function. They determined this from the amount of radioactive material remaining outside of the cell. Only 20% of the 32P remained outside the cell, demonstrating that it was incorporated with DNA in the cell's genetic material. All of the 35S in the protein coats remained outside the cell, showing it was not incorporated into the cell, and that protein is not the genetic material. 

Hershey and Chases experiment concluded that little sulfur containing material entered the bacterial cell. However no specific conclusions can be made regarding whether material that is sulfur-free enters the bacterial cell after phage adsorption. Further research was necessary to conclude that it was solely bacteriophages' DNA that entered the cell and not a combination of protein and DNA where the protein did not contain any sulfur. 

==Discussion==

===Confirmation===

Hershey and Chase concluded that protein was likely not to be the hereditary genetic material. However, they did not make any conclusions regarding the specific function of DNA as hereditary material, and only said that it must have some undefined role. 

Confirmation and clarity came a year later in 1953, when James D. Watson and Francis Crick correctly hypothesized, in their journal article "", the double helix structure of DNA, and suggested the copying mechanism by which DNA functions as hereditary material. Furthermore, Watson and Crick suggested that DNA, the genetic material, is responsible for the synthesis of the thousands of proteins found in cells. They had made this proposal based on the structural similarity that exists between the two macromolecules, that is, both protein and DNA are linear sequences of amino acids and nucleotides respectively. 

===Other experiments===

Once the HersheyChase experiment was published, the scientific community generally acknowledged that DNA was the genetic code material. This discovery led to a more detailed investigation of DNA to determine its composition as well as its 3D structure. Using X-ray crystallography, the structure of DNA was discovered by James Watson and Francis Crick with the help of previously documented experimental evidence by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin. 
 
Knowledge of the structure of DNA led scientists to examine the nature of genetic coding and, in turn, understand the process of protein synthesis. George Gamow proposed that the genetic code was composed of sequences of three DNA base pairs known as triplets or codons which represent one of the twenty amino acids. Genetic coding helped researchers to understand the mechanism of gene expression, the process by which information from a gene is used in protein synthesis. Since then, much research has been conducted to modulate steps in the gene expression process. These steps include transcription, RNA splicing, translation, and post-translational modification which are used to control the chemical and structural nature of proteins. Moreover, genetic engineering gives engineers the ability to directly manipulate the genetic materials of organisms using recombinant DNA techniques. The first recombinant DNA molecule was created by Paul Berg in 1972 when he combined DNA from the monkey virus SV40 with that of the lambda virus. 

Experiments on hereditary material during the time of the Hershey-Chase Experiment often used bacteriophages as a model organism. Bacteriophages lend themselves to experiments on hereditary material because they incorporate their genetic material into their host cell's genetic material (making them useful tools), they multiply quickly, and they are easily collected by researchers. 

==Legacy==
The HersheyChase experiment, its predecessors, such as the Avery-MacLeod-McCarty experiment, and successors served to unequivocally establish that hereditary information was carried by DNA. This finding has numerous applications in forensic science, crime investigation and genealogy. It provided the background knowledge for further applications in DNA forensics, where DNA fingerprinting uses data originating from DNA, not protein sources, to deduce genetic variation. 

==References==

==External links==
*Hershey-Chase Experiment Animation:
*Clear Depiction and Simple Summary:



[[History of religions]]

The history of religion refers to the written record of human religious experiences and ideas. This period of religious history begins with the invention of writing about 5,200 years ago (3200 BCE). The prehistory of religion relates to a study of religious beliefs that existed prior to the advent of written records. The timeline of religion is a comparative chronology of religion.

The word "religion" as it is used today does not have an obvious pre-colonial translation into non-European languages. Anthropologist, Daniel Dubuisson writes that "what the West and the history of religions in its wake have objectified under the name 'religion' is ... something quite unique, which could be appropriate only to itself and its own history". Daniel Dubuisson. The Western Construction of Religion. 1998. William Sayers (trans.) Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003. p. 90. The history of other cultures' interaction with the religious category is therefore their interaction with an idea that first developed in Europe under the influence of Christianity. Timothy Fitzgerald. Discourse on Civility and Barbarity. Oxford University Press, 2007. pp.45-46. 

==History of study==
The school of religious history called the Religionsgeschichtliche Schule was a 19th-century German school of thought which was the first to systematically study religion as a socio-cultural phenomenon. It depicted religion as evolving with human culture, from primitive polytheism to ethical monotheism.

The Religionsgeschichtliche Schule appeared at a time when scholarly study of the Bible and church history was flourishing in Germany and elsewhere (see higher criticism, also called the historical-critical method). The study of religion is important because it has often shaped civilizations' law and moral codes, social structure, art and music.

==Overview==
The 19th century saw a dramatic increase in knowledge about other cultures and religions, and also the establishment of economic and social histories of progress. The "history of religions" school sought to account for this religious diversity by connecting it with the social and economic situation of a particular group.

Typically, religions were divided into stages of progression from simple to complex societies, especially from polytheistic to monotheistic and from extempore to organized. Religions can be classified as circumcising and non-circumcising, proselytizing (attempting to convert people of other religion) and non-proselytizing. Many religions share common beliefs.

==Origin==

The earliest evidence of religious ideas dates back several hundred thousand years to the Middle and Lower Paleolithic periods. Archaeologists refer to apparent intentional burials of early homo sapiens from as early as 300,000 years ago as evidence of religious ideas. Other evidence of religious ideas include symbolic artifacts from Middle Stone Age sites in Africa. However, the interpretation of early paleolithic artifacts, with regard to how they relate to religious ideas, remains controversial. Archeological evidence from more recent periods is less controversial. A number of artifacts from the Upper Paleolithic (50,000-13,000) are generally interpreted by scientists as representing religious ideas. Examples of Upper Paleolithic remains associated with religious beliefs include the lion man, the Venus figurines, cave paintings from Chauvet Cave and the elaborate ritual burial from Sungir.

In the 19th century, various theories were proposed regarding the origin of religion, supplanting the earlier claims of Christianity of urreligion. Early theorists Edward Burnett Tylor and Herbert Spencer proposed the concept of animism, while archaeologist John Lubbock used the term "fetishism". Meanwhile, religious scholar Max Mller theorized that religion began in hedonism and folklorist Wilhelm Mannhardt suggested that religion began in "naturalism", by which he meant mythological explanation of natural events. "Religion". Encyclopedia Universal Ilustrada Europeo-Americana, 70 vols. Madrid. 1907-1930. All of these theories have since been widely criticized; there is no broad consensus regarding the origin of religion.

==Religion at the neolithic revolution==

Through the bulk of human evolution, humans lived in small nomadic bands practicing a hunter gatherer lifestyle. The emergence of complex and organized religions can be traced to the period when humans abandoned their nomadic hunter gatherer lifestyles in order to begin farming during the Neolithic period. The transition from foraging bands to states and empires resulted in more specialized and developed forms of religion that were reflections of the new social and political environments. While bands and small tribes possess supernatural beliefs, these beliefs are adapted to smaller populations.

===Neolithic religions===
The religions of the Neolithic peoples provide evidence of some of the earliest known forms of organized religions. The Neolithic settlement of atalhyk, in what is now Turkey, was home to about 8,000 people and remains the largest known settlement from the Neolithic period. James Mellaart, who excavated the site, believed that atalhyk was the spiritual center of central Anatolia. 
A striking feature of atalhyk are its female figurines. Mellaart, the original excavator, argued that these well-formed, carefully made figurines, carved and molded from marble, blue and brown limestone, schist, calcite, basalt, alabaster, and clay, represented a female deity of the Great Goddess type. Although a male deity existed as well, statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after Level VI. To date, eighteen levels have been identified. These careful figurines were found primarily in areas Mellaart believed to be shrines. One, however  a stately goddess seated on a throne flanked by two female lions  was found in a grain bin, which Mellaart suggests might have been a means of ensuring the harvest or protecting the food supply. Mellaart (1967), 180. 

The Pyramid Texts from ancient Egypt are one of the oldest known religious texts in the world dating to between 2400-2300 BCE. 
Writing played a major role in sustaining organized religion by standardizing religious ideas regardless of time or location.

===Value of religion===
Organized religion emerged as a means of providing social and economic stability to large populations through the following ways:
* Organized religion served to justify the central authority, which in turn possessed the right to collect taxes in return for providing social and security services to the state. The empires of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia were theocracies, with chiefs, kings and emperors playing dual roles of political and spiritual leaders. Virtually all state societies and chiefdoms around the world have similar political structures where political authority is justified by divine sanction.
* Organized religion emerged as means of maintaining peace between unrelated individuals. Bands and tribes consist of small number of related individuals. However states and nations are composed of thousands or millions of unrelated individuals. Jared Diamond argues that organized religion served to provide a bond between unrelated individuals who would otherwise be more prone to enmity. He argues that the leading cause of death among hunter gatherer societies is murder. 

==Axial age==

The period from 900 to 200 BCE has been described by historians as the axial age, a term coined by German philosopher Karl Jaspers. According to Jaspers, this is the era of history when "the spiritual foundations of humanity were laid simultaneously and independently... And these are the foundations upon which humanity still subsists today". Intellectual historian Peter Watson has summarized this period as the foundation of many of humanity's most influential philosophical traditions, including monotheism in Persia and Canaan, Platonism in Greece, Buddhism, Jainism in India, and Confucianism and Taoism in China. These ideas would become institutionalized in time, for example Ashoka's role in the spread of Buddhism, or the role of platonic philosophy in Christianity at its foundation.

==Middle Ages==
Present-day world religions established themselves throughout Eurasia during the Middle Ages by: Christianization of the Western world; Buddhist missions to East Asia; the decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent; and the spread of Islam throughout the Middle East, Central Asia, North Africa and parts of Europe and India.

During the Middle Ages, Muslims were in conflict with Zoroastrians during the Islamic conquest of Persia; Christians were in conflict with Muslims during the Byzantine-Arab Wars, Crusades, Reconquista, Ottoman wars in Europe and Inquisition; Shamans were in conflict with Buddhists, Taoists, Muslims and Christians during the Mongol invasions; and Muslims were in conflict with Hindus and Sikhs during Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent.

Many medieval religious movements emphasized mysticism, such as the Cathars and related movements in the West, the Jews in Spain (see Zohar), the Bhakti movement in India and Sufism in Islam. Monotheism reached definite forms in Christian Christology and in Islamic Tawhid. Hindu monotheist notions of Brahman likewise reached their classical form with the teaching of Adi Shankara.

==Modern period==
European colonisation during the 15th to 19th centuries resulted in the spread of Christianity to Sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas, Australia and the Philippines. The invention of the printing press in the 15th century played a major role in the rapid spread of the Protestant Reformation under leaders such as Martin Luther and John Calvin. Wars of religion followed, culminating in the Thirty Years War which ravaged central Europe, 1618-1648. The 18th century saw the beginning of secularisation in Europe, gaining momentum after the French Revolution. By the late 20th century religion had declined in most of Europe.

In the 20th century, the regimes of Communist Eastern Europe and Communist China were anti-religious. A great variety of new religious movements originated in the 20th century, many proposing syncretism of elements of established religions. Adherence to such new movements is limited, however, remaining below 2% worldwide in the 2000s (decade). Adherents of the classical world religions account for more than 75% of the world's population, while adherence to indigenous tribal religions has fallen to 4%. As of 2005, an estimated 14% of the world's population identifies as nonreligious.

==Development of new religions==
New Religious Movement (NRM) is a term used to refer to a religious faith or an ethical, spiritual, or philosophical movement of recent origin that is not part of an established denomination, church, or religious body.

==See also==
* Religion and politics
* Christianity and politics
* Women as theological figures
* List of founders of religious traditions
* Code of Hammurabi

===Shamanism and ancestor worship===
* Prehistoric religion
* Shamanism
* Animism
* Ancestor worship
* Tribal religion

===Polytheism===

* Ancient Near Eastern religion, Egyptian mythology
* Ancient Greek religion, Ancient Roman religion
* Germanic paganism, Finnish Paganism, Norse paganism
* Maya religion, Inca religion, Aztec religion
* Neopaganism, Polytheistic reconstructionism

===Monotheism===
:See also Monotheism, Abrahamic religions.
* Aten
* History of Judaism
* Neoplatonism
* History of Christianity
** History of Roman Catholicism
** History of Eastern Orthodox Christianity
** History of Protestantism
* History of Islam
* Sikhism
* Zoroastrianism

===Monism===

* History of Buddhism
* History of Jainism
* History of Hinduism

===Dualism===
* Gnosticism

===New religious movements===

* History of Ayyavazhi
* Rastafari movement
* History of Wicca
* Timeline of Scientology
* Mormonism
* Bah' Faith
* Bbism
* History of Spiritism
* Thelema

==References==

==Further reading==
* Armstrong, Karen. A History of God: The 4,000-Year Quest of Judaism, Christianity and Islam (1994) excerpt and text search
* Armstrong, Karen. Islam: A Short History (2002) excerpt and text search
* Bowker, John Westerdale, ed. The Oxford Dictionary of World Religions (2007) excerpt and text search 1126pp
* Eliade, Mircea, and Joan P. Couliano. The HarperCollins Concise Guide to World Religion: The A-to-Z Encyclopedia of All the Major Religious Traditions (1999) covers 33 principal religions, including Buddhism, Christianity, Jainism, Judaism, Islam, Shinto, Shamanism, Taoism, South American religions, Baltic and Slavic religions, Confucianism, and the religions of Africa and Oceania.
* Ellwood, Robert S. and Gregory D. Alles. The Encyclopedia of World Religions (2007) 528pp; for middle schools
* Gilley, Sheridan; Shiels, W. J. History of Religion in Britain: Practice and Belief from Pre-Roman Times to the Present (1994) 590pp
* Carus, Paul. The history of the devil and the idea of evil: from the earliest times to the present day (1899) full text

===Historiography===
* Marshall, Peter. "(Re)defining the English Reformation," Journal of British Studies, July 2009, Vol. 48#3 pp 564586
* Schultz, Kevin M.; Harvey, Paul. "Everywhere and Nowhere: Recent Trends in American Religious History and Historiography," Journal of the American Academy of Religion, March 2010, Vol. 78#1 pp 129162
* Wilson, John F. Religion and the American Nation: Historiography and History (2003) 119pp

==External links==
* History of religion
* The history of religious and philosophical ideas, in Dictionary of the History of Ideas
* History of Religion as flash animation
* The history and origins of world religions depicted as a navigable tree

 


[[House music]]

House music is a genre of electronic dance music that originated in Chicago in the early 1980s. It was initially popularized circa 1984 in Chicago, but beginning in 1985, it fanned out to other major cities across North and South America, as well as Europe and later Australia. Early house music commercial success in Europe saw songs such as "Pump Up The Volume" by MARRS (1987), "House Nation" by House Master Boyz and the Rude Boy of House (1987), "Theme from S'Express" by S'Express (1988) and "Doctorin' the House" by Coldcut (1988) in the pop charts. Since the early to mid-1990s, house music has been infused in mainstream pop and dance music worldwide.

Early house music was generally dance-based music characterized by repetitive 4/4 beats, rhythms mainly provided by drum machines, off-beat hi-hat cymbals, and synthesized basslines. While house displayed several characteristics similar to disco music, it was more electronic and minimalistic, and the repetitive rhythm of house was more important than the song itself. House music today, while keeping several of these core elements, notably the prominent kick drum on every beat, varies a lot in style and influence, ranging from the soulful and atmospheric deep house to the more minimalistic microhouse. House music has also fused with several other genres creating fusion subgenres, such as euro house, tech house, electro house and jump house.

In the late 1980s, many local Chicago house music artists suddenly found themselves with major label deals. House music proved to be a commercially successful genre and a more mainstream pop-based variation grew increasingly popular. Artists and groups such as Madonna, Janet Jackson, Bjrk, Aretha Franklin, Steps, Daft Punk, and C+C Music Factory incorporated the genre into their work. After enjoying significant success in the early to mid-90s, house music grew even larger during the second wave of progressive house (19992001). The genre has remained popular and fused into other popular subgenres, as the DJ Mag Top 100 DJs poll has been dominated by house DJs since the beginning of the polls. Today, house music remains popular in both clubs and in the mainstream pop scene while retaining a strong foothold on underground scenes across the globe.

==Influences and precursors==
Various disco songs incorporated sounds produced with synthesizers and drum machines, and other various compositions were entirely electronic; examples include Giorgio Moroder's late 1970s productions such as Donna Summer's hit single "I Feel Love" from 1977, Cerrone's "Supernature" (1977), Beatport, Cerrone's Biography, Retrieved August 27th, 2012 Yellow Magic Orchestra's synth-disco-pop productions from their self-titled album (1978), Solid State Survivor (1979), and several early 1980s disco-pop productions by the Hi-NRG group Lime.

Soul and disco influenced house music, plus mixing and editing techniques earlier explored by disco, garage and post-disco DJs, producers, and audio engineers like M&M-music, Walter Gibbons, Tom Moulton, Jim Burgess, Larry Levan, Ron Hardy, M & M, and others who produced longer, more repetitive, and percussive arrangements of existing disco recordings. Early house producers like Frankie Knuckles created similar compositions from scratch, using samplers, synthesizers, sequencers, and drum machines.

The electronic instrumentation and minimal arrangement of Singh (musician)#Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat|Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat] (1982), an album of Indian ragas performed in a disco style, anticipated the sounds of acid house music, but it is not known to have had any influence on the genre prior to the album's rediscovery in the 21st century. 

Rachel Cain, co-founder of an influential Trax Records, was previously involved in the burgeoning punk scene and cites industrial and post-punk record store Wax Trax! Records as an important connection between the ever-changing underground sounds of Chicago. Impacting Chicago, the seminal work published in this period was a self-titled album called Liaisons Dangereuses by an eponymous synthpunk and industrial music group from Dsseldorf, West Germany. The no-wave music from New York acts Liquid Liquid and ESG also displayed a share of influence there among the pioneers. As most proto-house DJs were primarily stuck to playing their conventional ensamble of Philadelphia disco records, Frankie Knuckles and Ron Hardy, two influential (and most controversial) pioneers of house music were known for their out-of-bounds behavior. The former, credited as "the Godfather of House," worked primarily with early disco music with just a hint of new and different music (whether it was post-punk or post-disco) RBMA (2011). Frankie Knuckles: A journey to the roots of house music. Red Bull Music Academy. Retrieved June 01, 2014. but still enjoying a variety of music while the latter produced unconventional DIY mixtapes which he later played straight-on in the music club Muzic Box, boiling with raw energy. Marshall Jefferson, who would later re-appear with the Chicago house milestone piece "Move Your Body (The House-Music Anthem)," (originally published on Trax Records with the catalog number TX117) got involved in house music after hearing Ron Hardy's music in Muzic Box. 

==Origins (1980s)==

===Chicago house===

An honorary street sign in Chicago for house music and Frankie Knuckles.
In the early 1980s, Chicago radio jocks The Hot Mix 5, and club DJs Ron Hardy and Frankie Knuckles played various styles of dance music, including older disco records (mostly Philly disco and Salsoul tracks), newer Italo disco, and electro funk tracks, B-Boy Hip Hop music by Man Parrish, Jellybean Benitez, Arthur Baker and John Robie as well as electronic pop music by Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra. Some made and played their own edits of their favorite songs on reel-to-reel tape, and sometimes mixed in effects, drum machines, and other rhythmic electronic instrumentation. In this era, 

The hypnotic electronic dance song "On and On", produced in 1984 by Chicago DJ Jesse Saunders and co-written by Vince Lawrence, had elements that became staples of the early house sound, such as the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer and minimal vocals as well as a Roland (specifically TR-808) drum machine and Korg (specifically Poly-61) synthesizer. It also utilized the bassline from Player One's disco record "Space Invaders" (1979). "On and On" is sometimes cited as the 'first house record', Marshell Jefferson - 4clubbers.net though other examples from around that time, such as J.M. Silk's "Music is the Key" (1985), have also been cited. 

Starting in 1984, some of these DJs, inspired by Jesse Saunders' success with "On and On", tried their hand at producing and releasing original compositions. These compositions used newly affordable electronic instruments to emulate not just Saunders' song, but the edited, enhanced styles of disco and other dance music they already favored. These homegrown productions were played on Chicago-area radio and in local discothques catering mainly to African-American and gay audiences. By 1985, although the exact origins of the term are debated, "house music" encompassed these locally produced recordings. Subgenres of house, including deep house and acid house, quickly emerged and gained traction.

Deep house's origins can be traced to Chicago producer Mr Fingers's relatively jazzy, soulful recordings "Mystery of Love" (1985) and "Can You Feel It?" (1986). According to author Richie Unterberger, it moved house music away from its "posthuman tendencies back towards the lush" soulful sound of early disco music. 

Acid house arose from Chicago artists' experiments with the squelchy Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer, and the style's origins on vinyl is generally cited as Phuture's "Acid Tracks" (1987). Phuture, a group founded by Nathan "DJ Pierre" Jones, Earl "Spanky" Smith Jr., and Herbert "Herb J" Jackson, is credited with having been the first to use the TB-303 in the house music context. The group's 12-minute "Acid Tracks" was recorded to tape and was played by DJ Ron Hardy at the Music Box, where Hardy was resident DJ. Hardy once played it four times over the course of an evening until the crowd responded favorably. Cheeseman, Phil. "The History Of House". The track also utilized a Roland TR-707 drum machine.

Club play from pioneering Chicago DJs like Ron Hardy and Lil Louis, local dance music record shops such as Importes, State Street Records, Loop Records, Gramaphone Records and the popular Hot Mix 5 shows on radio station WBMX-FM helped popularize house music in Chicago and among visiting DJs & producers from Detroit. Trax Records and DJ International Records, Chicago labels with wider distribution, helped popularize house music inside and outside of Chicago. One 1986 house tune called "Move Your Body" by Marshall Jefferson, taken from the appropriately titled "The House Music Anthem" EP, became a big hit in Chicago and eventually worldwide. By 1986, UK labels were releasing house music by Chicago acts, and by 1987 house tracks by Chicago DJs and producers were appearing on and even topping the UK music chart.

===Origins of the term===
The term "house music" is thought to have originated as a reference to a Chicago nightclub called The Warehouse, which existed from 1977 to 1983. Snoman, Rick (2009). The Dance Music Manual: Tools, Toys, and Techniques  Second Edition. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Press. p.233 Patrons of The Warehouse were primarily black and Latino, who came to dance to music played by the club's resident DJ Frankie Knuckles, whom fans refer to as the "godfather of house". After the Warehouse closed in 1983, the crowds went to Knuckles' new club, The Power Plant. In the Channel 4 documentary Pump Up The Volume, Knuckles remarks that the first time he heard the term "house music" was upon seeing "we play house music" on a sign in the window of a bar on Chicago's South Side. One of the people in the car with him joked, "you know, that's the kind of music you play down at the Warehouse!", and then everybody laughed. South-Side Chicago DJ Leonard "Remix" Roy, in self-published statements, claims he put such a sign in a tavern window because it was where he played music that one might find in one's home; in his case, it referred to his mother's soul & disco records, which he worked into his sets. Farley Jackmaster Funk was quoted as saying "In 1982, I was DJing at a club called The Playground and there was this kid named Leonard 'Remix' Roy who was a DJ at a rival club called The Rink. He came over to my club one night, and into the DJ booth and said to me, 'I've got the gimmick that's gonna take all the people out of your club and into mine - it's called House music.' Now, where he got that name from or what made him think of it I don't know, so the answer lies with him." 

Chip E.'s 1985 recording "It's House" may also have helped to define this new form of electronic music. However, Chip E. himself lends credence to the Knuckles association, claiming the name came from methods of labelling records at the Importes Etc. record store, where he worked in the early 1980s: bins of music that DJ Knuckles played at the Warehouse nightclub were labelled in the store "As Heard At The Warehouse", which was shortened to simply "House". Patrons later asked for new music for the bins, which Chip E. implies was a demand the shop tried to meet by stocking newer local club hits. 

In a 1986 interview, Rocky Jones, the former club DJ who ran the D.J. International record label, doesn't mention Importes Etc., Frankie Knuckles, or the Warehouse by name, but agrees that "house" was a regional catch-all term for dance music, and that it was once synonymous with older disco music. 

Larry Heard, a.k.a. "Mr. Fingers", claims that the term "house" became popular due to many of the early DJs creating music in their own homes using synthesizers and drum machines such as the Roland TR-808, TR-909, and the TB 303. These synthesizers were used to create a house subgenre called acid house. 

Juan Atkins, an originator of Detroit techno music, claims the term "house" reflected the exclusive association of particular tracks with particular clubs and DJs; those records helped differentiate the clubs and DJs, and thus were considered to be their "house" records. In an effort to maintain such exclusives, the DJs were inspired to create their own "house" records. 

===Lyrical themes===

House also had an influence of relaying political messages to people who were considered to be outcasts of society. The music appealed to those who didn't fit into mainstream American society and was especially celebrated by many black males. Frankie Knuckles once said that the Warehouse club in Chicago was like "church for people who have fallen from grace" The house producer Marshall Jefferson compared it to "old-time religion in the way that people just get happy and screamin'". Deep house was similar to many of the messages of freedom for the black community.

==Regional scenes (1980s&ndash;1990s)==

===Detroit sound: 1986&ndash;1989===

Detroit techno is an offshoot of Chicago house music. It was developed starting in the late 80s, one of the earliest hits being "Big Fun" by Inner City. Detroit techno developed as the legendary disc jockey The Electrifying Mojo conducted his own radio program at this time, influencing the fusion of eclectic sounds into the signature Detroit techno sound. This sound, also influenced by European electronica (Kraftwerk, Art of Noise), Japanese technopop (Yellow Magic Orchestra), early B-boy Hip-Hop (Man Parrish, Soul Sonic Force) and Italo disco (Doctor's Cat, Ris, Klein M.B.O.), was further pioneered by Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and Kevin Saunderson, the "godfathers" of Detroit Techno.

Derrick May a.k.a. "MAYDAY" and Thomas Barnett released "Nude Photo" in 1987 on May's label "Transmat Records", which helped kickstart the Detroit techno music scene and was put in heavy rotation on Chicago's Hot Mix 5 Radio DJ mix show and in many Chicago clubs. A year later, Transmat released what was to become one of techno and house music's classic anthems - the seminal track "Strings of Life". Transmat Records went on to have many more successful releases such as 1988's "Wiggin". As well, Derrick May had successful releases on Kool Kat Records and many remixes for a host of underground and mainstream recording artist.

Kevin Saunderson's company KMS Records contributed many releases that were as much house music as they were techno. These tracks were well received in Chicago and played on Chicago radio and in clubs. Blake Baxter's 1986 recording, "When we Used to Play / Work your Body", 1987's "Bounce Your Body to the Box" and "Force Field", "The Sound / How to Play our Music" and "the Groove that Won't Stop" and a remix of "Grooving Without a Doubt". In 1988, as house music became more popular among general audiences, Kevin Saunderson's group Inner City with Paris Gray released the 1988 hits "Big Fun" and "Good Life", which eventually were picked up by Virgin Records. Each EP / 12 inch single sported remixes by Mike "Hitman" Wilson and Steve "Silk" Hurley of Chicago and Derrick "Mayday" May and Juan Atkins of Detroit. In 1989, KMS had another hit release of "Rock to the Beat" which was a theme in Chicago dance clubs.

===UK: 1986&ndash;early 1990s===

With house music already massive on the '80s dance-scene it was only a matter of time before it would penetrate the UK pop charts. The record generally credited as the first house hit in the UK was Farley "Jackmaster" Funk's "Love Can't Turn Around" which reached #10 in the UK singles chart in September 1986.

In January 1987, Chicago artist Steve "Silk" Hurley's "Jack Your Body" reached number one in the UK, showing it was possible for house music to cross over. The same month also saw Raze enter the top 20 with "Jack the Groove", and several further house hits reached the top ten that year. Stock Aitken Waterman's productions for Mel and Kim, including the number-one hit "Respectable", added elements of house to their previous Europop sound, and session group Mirage scored top-ten hits with "Jack Mix II" and "Jack Mix IV", medleys of previous electro and Europop hits rearranged in a house style. Key labels in the rise of house music in the UK included:
* Jack Trax, which specialised in licensing US club-hits for the British market (and released an influential series of compilation albums)
* Rhythm King, which was set up as a hip hop label but also issued house records
* Jive Records' Club Records imprint
The tour in March 1987 of Knuckles, Jefferson, Fingers Inc. (Heard) and Adonis as the DJ International Tour boosted house in the UK. Following the number-one success of MARRS' "Pump Up The Volume" in October, the years 1987 to 1989 also saw UK acts like The Beatmasters, Krush, Coldcut, Yazz, Bomb The Bass, S-Express, and Italy's Black Box opening the doors to a house-music onslaught on the UK charts. Early British house- music quickly set itself apart from the original Chicago house sound; many of the early hits were based on sample montage, rap was often used for vocals (far more than in the US), and humor was frequently an important element.

The second best-selling British single of 1988 was an acid house record, the Coldcut-produced "The Only Way Is Up" by Yazz. 

One of the early anthemic tunes, "Promised Land" by Joe Smooth, was covered and charted within a week by the Style Council. Europeans embraced house, and began booking legendary American house DJs to play at the big clubs, such as Ministry of Sound, whose resident, Justin Berkmann brought in Larry Levan.

The house scene in cities such as Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield and London were also provided with many underground Pirate Radio stations and DJs alike which helped bolster an already contagious, but otherwise ignored by the mainstream, music genre. The earliest and influential UK house and techno record labels such as Warp Records and Network Records (otherwise known as Kool Kat records) helped introduce American and later Italian dance music to Britain as well as promoting select UK dance music acts.

But house was also being developed on Ibiza, although no house artists or labels were coming from this tiny island at the time. By the mid-1980s a distinct Balearic mix of house was discernible. Several clubs like Amnesia with DJ Alfredo were playing a mix of rock, pop, disco and house. These clubs, fueled by their distinctive sound and Ecstasy, began to have an influence on the British scene. By late 1987, DJs like Trevor Fung, Paul Oakenfold and Danny Rampling were bringing the Ibiza sound to UK clubs like the Hacienda in Manchester, and in London clubs such as Shoom in Southwark, Heaven, Future and Spectrum.

In the U.S., the music was being developed to create a more sophisticated sound, moving beyond just drum loops and short samples. In Chicago, Marshall Jefferson had formed the house group Ten City Byron Burke, Byron Stingily & Herb Lawson(from "intensity"). New Yorkbased performers such as Mateo & Matos and Blaze had slickly produced disco house tracks. In Detroit a proto-techno music sound began to emerge with the recordings of Juan Atkins, Derrick May and Kevin Saunderson.

Atkins, a former member of Cybotron, released Model 500 "No UFOs" in 1985, which became a regional hit, followed by dozens of tracks on Transmat, Metroplex and Fragile. One of the most unusual was "Strings of Life" by Derrick May, a darker, more intellectual strain of house. "Techno-Scratch" was released by the Knights Of The Turntable in 1984 which had a similar techno sound to Cybotron. The manager of the Factory nightclub, Tony Wilson, also promoted acid house culture on his weekly TV show. The Midlands also embraced the late 1980s house scene with illegal parties and more legal dance clubs such as The Hummingbird.

===US: late 1980s&ndash;early 1990s===
Building in New York City where the Paradise Garage nightclub was located
Back in America the scene had still not progressed beyond a small number of clubs in Chicago, Detroit, Newark and New York City. However, many independent Chicago-based record labels were making appearances on the Dance Chart with their releases. In the UK, any house song released by a Chicago-based label was routinely considered a must play at many clubs playing house music. Paradise Garage in New York City was still a top club. The emergence of Todd Terry, a pioneer of the genre, was important in America. His cover of Class Action's Larry Levan mixed "Weekend" demonstrated the continuum from the underground disco to a new house sound with hip-hop influences evident in the quicker sampling and the more rugged bass-line.

In the late 1980s, Nu Groove Records prolonged, if not launched the careers of Rheji Burrell & Rhano Burrell, collectively known as Burrell (after a brief stay on Virgin America via Timmy Regisford and Frank Mendez), along with basically every relevant DJ and Producer in the NY underground scene. The Burrell's are responsible for the "New York Underground" sound and are the undisputed champions of this style of house. Their 30+ releases on this label alone seems to support that fact. In today's market Nu Groove Record releases like the Burrells' enjoy a cult-like following and mint vinyl can fetch $100 U.S. or more in the open market.

By the late 80s, House had moved West, particularly to San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, Fresno, San Diego and Seattle. Los Angeles saw a huge explosion of underground raves and DJs, notably DJs Marques Wyatt and Billy Long, who spun at Jewel's Catch One, the oldest dance club in America. In 1989, the L.A. based, former EBN-OZN singer/rapper Robert Ozn started indie house label One Voice Records, releasing the Mike Hitman Wilson remix of Dada Nada's "Haunted House," which garnered instant club and mix show radio play in Chicago, Detroit and New York as well as in the U.K. and France. The record shot up to Number Five on the Billboard Club Chart, marking it as the first House record by a white artist to chart in the U.S. Dada Nada, the moniker for Ozn's solo act, released in 1990, what has become a classic example of jazz-based Deep House, the Frankie Knuckles and David Morales remix of Dada Nada's "Deep Love" (One Voice Records/US, Polydor/UK), featuring Ozn's lush, crooning vocals and muted trumpet improvisational solos, underscoring Deep House's progression into a genre that integrated jazz and pop songwriting structures - a feature which continued to set it apart from Acid House and Techno.

The early 1990s additionally saw the rise in mainstream US popularity for house music. Pop recording artist Madonna released the house single "Vogue" in 1990, which became an international hit single and topped the US charts. The single is credited as helping to bring house music mainstream. 

Influential gospel/R&B-influenced Aly-us released "Time Passes On" in 1993 (Strictly Rhythm), then later, "Follow Me" which received radio airplay as well as being played in clubs. Another U.S. hit which received radio play was the single "Time for the Perculator" by Cajmere, which became the prototype of ghetto house sub-genre. Cajmere started the Cajual and Relief labels (amongst others). By the early 1990s artists such as Cajmere himself (under that name as well as Green Velvet and as producer for Dajae), DJ Sneak, Glenn Underground and others did many recordings. The 1990s saw new Chicago house artists emerge such as DJ Funk, who operates a Chicago house record label called Dance Mania. Ghetto house and acid house were other house music styles that were also started in Chicago.

===Late 1980s&ndash;1990s===

In Britain, further experiments in the genre boosted its appeal. House and rave clubs like Lakota and Cream emerged across Britain, hosting house and dance scene events. The 'chilling out' concept developed in Britain with ambient house albums such as The KLF's Chill Out and Analogue Bubblebath by Aphex Twin. The Godskitchen superclub brand also began in the midst of the early 90's rave scene. After initially hosting small nights in Cambridge and Northampton, the associated events scaled up in Milton Keynes, Birmingham and Leeds.

A new indie dance scene also emerged in the 90's. In New York, bands such as Deee-Lite furthered house's international influence. Two distinctive tracks from this era were the Orb's "Little Fluffy Clouds" (with a distinctive vocal sample from Rickie Lee Jones) and the Happy Mondays' "Wrote for Luck" ("WFL") which was transformed into a dance hit by Vince Clarke.

In England, one of the few licensed venues The Eclipse attracted people from up and down the country as it was open until the early hours.

The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 was a government attempt to ban large rave dance events featuring music with "repetitive beats". There were a number of abortive "Kill the Bill" demonstrations. The Spiral Tribe at Castle Morten was probably the nail in the coffin for illegal raves, and forced through the bill, which became law, in November 1994.

The music continued to grow and change, as typified by Leftfield with "Release the Pressure", which introduced dub and reggae into the house sound, although Leftfield had prior releases, such as "Not Forgotten" released in 1990 on Sheffield's Outer Rhythm records.

A new generation of clubs like, Liverpool's Cream and the Ministry of Sound were opened to provide a venue for more commercial sounds. Major record companies began to open "superclubs" promoting their own acts. These superclubs entered into sponsorship deals initially with fast food, soft drinks, and clothing companies. Flyers in clubs in Ibiza often sported many corporate logos. A new sub-genre, Chicago hard house, was developed by DJs such as Bad Boy Bill, DJ Lynnwood, DJ Irene, Richard "Humpty" Vission and DJ Enrie, mixing elements of Chicago house, funky house and hard house together.

Additionally, Producers such as George Centeno, Darren Ramirez, and Martin O. Cairo would develop the Los Angeles Hard House sound. Similar to gabber or hardcore techno from the Netherlands, this sound was often associated with the "rebel" culture of the time. These 3 producers are often considered "ahead of their time" since many of the sounds they engineered during the late 20th century became more prominent during the 21st century.

Towards the end of the 1990s and into the 2000s, producers like Daft Punk, Stardust, Cassius, St. Germain and DJ Falcon began producing a new sound out of Paris's house scene. Together, they laid the groundwork for what would be known as the French house movement. By combining the harder-edged-yet-soulful philosophy of Chicago house with the melodies of obscure funk, state-of-the-art production techniques and the sound of analog synthesizers, they began to create the standards that would shape all house music.

==21st century==

===2000s===

Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley proclaimed August 10, 2005 to be "House Unity Day" in Chicago, in celebration of the "21st anniversary of house music" (actually the 21st anniversary of the founding of Trax Records, an independent Chicago-based house label). The proclamation recognized Chicago as the original home of house music and that the music's original creators "were inspired by the love of their city, with the dream that someday their music would spread a message of peace and unity throughout the world". DJs such as Frankie Knuckles, Marshall Jefferson, Paul Johnson and Mickey Oliver celebrated the proclamation at the Summer Dance Series, an event organized by Chicago's Department of Cultural Affairs. 

It was during this decade that vocal house became firmly established, both in the underground and as part of the pop market, and labels such as Defected Records, Roule and Om were at the forefront of championing the emerging sound. In the mid-2000s, fusion genres such as electro house and fidget house emerged. This fusion is apparent in the crossover of musical styles by artists such as Dennis Ferrer and Booka Shade, with the former's production style having evolved from the New York soulful house scene and the latter's roots in techno.

Numerous live performance events dedicated to house music were founded during the course of the decade, including Shambhala Music Festival and major industry sponsored events like Miami's Winter Music Conference. The genre even gained popularity in the Middle East in cities such as Dubai & Abu Dhabi and at events like Creamfields.

In the late 2000s, house witnessed renewed chart success thanks to acts such as Daft Punk, Deadmau5, Steve Aoki, Fedde Le Grand, Armand Van Helden, and Dada Life.

===2010s===

Swedish House Mafia performing in 2011.

2010s saw multiple new sounds in house music developed by numerous DJs. Sweden knew a prominence of snare-less "Swedish progressive house" with the emergence of Sebastian Ingrosso, Axwell, Steve Angello (These three formed a trio called Swedish House Mafia), Avicii, Alesso, etc. Netherlands brought together a concept of "Dirty Dutch", electro house subgenre characterized by very abrasive leads and darker arpeggios, with prominent DJs Chuckie, Hardwell, Laidback Luke, Afrojack, R3hab, Bingo Players, Quintino, Alvaro, Cedric Gervais, 2G, etc. Elsewhere, fusion genres derivative of 2000s progressive house returned to prominence, especially with the help of DJs Calvin Harris, Eric Prydz, Mat Zo, Above & Beyond and Fonzerelli in Europe, Deadmau5, Kaskade, Steve Aoki, Porter Robinson and Wolfgang Gartner in the US and Canada. The growing popularity of such artists led to the emergence of electro house and progressive house sounds (big room house) in popular music, such as singles Lady Gaga's "Marry the Night", The Black Eyed Peas' "The Best One Yet (The Boy)" and the will.i.am and Britney Spears "Scream & Shout". Big room house found increasing popularity since 2010, particularly through international dance music festivals such as Tomorrowland, Ultra Music Festival, and Electric Daisy Carnival.

In addition to these popular examples of house, there has also been a reunification of contemporary house and its roots. Many hip hop and R&B artists also turn to house beats to add a mass appeal to the music they produce. Examples include Kelly Rowland's "Love Takes Over" feat. David Guetta, Rihanna's "We Found Love" feat. Calvin Harris and Kid Cudi's "Memories" also feat. David Guetta.

== See also ==
* House dance
* List of house artists
* Styles of house music
* List of electronic music genres

== Notes ==

== Further reading ==
* Bidder, Sean (2002). Pump Up the Volume: A History of House Music, MacMillan. ISBN 0-7522-1986-3
* Bidder, Sean (1999). The Rough Guide to House Music, Rough Guides. ISBN 1-85828-432-5
* Brewster, Bill, & Frank Broughton 2000 Last Night a DJ Saved My Life: The History of the Disc Jockey, Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3688-5 and in UK: 1999 / 2006, Headline.
* Kai Fikentscher 2000 "'You Better Work!' Underground Dance Music in New York City". Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 0-8195-6404-4
* Hewitt, Michael. Music Theory for Computer Musicians. 1st Ed. U.S. Cengage Learning, 2008. ISBN 978-1-59863-503-4
* Kempster, Chris (Ed) (1996). History of House, Castle Communications. ISBN 1-86074-134-7 (A reprinting of magazine articles from the 1980s and 90s)
* Mireille, Silcott (1999). Rave America: New School Dancescapes, ECW Press. ISBN 1-55022-383-6
* Reynolds, Simon (1998). Energy Flash: a Journey Through Rave Music and Dance Culture, (UK title, Pan Macmillan. ISBN 0-330-35056-0), also released in U.S. as Generation Ecstasy : Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture (U.S. title, Routledge, 1999, ISBN 0-415-92373-5)
* Rizza Corrado, Trani Marco, "I love the nightlife"' Wax Production (Roma), 2010
* Shapiro, P., (2000), Modulations: A History of Electronic Music: Throbbing Words on Sound, ISBN 1-891024-06-X.
* Snoman, Rick (2009). The Dance Music Manual: Tools, Toys, and Techniques  Second Edition: Chapter 11: House. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Press. p. 231249.
* Rietveld, Hillegonda C. (1998). This is our House: House Music, Cultural Spaces and Technologies, Ashgate. ISBN 1-85742-242-2

==External links==

* 
* The History of House (2004) HouseKeeping: Funky House DJs from the UK
* Excerpt taken From the book, What Kind Of House Party Is This?
* History of House History of House music and legal MP3 DJ mixes.

 



[[Hanover, New Hampshire]]

Hanover is a town along the Connecticut River in Grafton County, New Hampshire, United States. The population was 11,260 at the 2010 census. United States Census Bureau, American FactFinder, 2010 Census figures. Retrieved March 23, 2011. CNN and Money magazine rated Hanover the sixth best place to live in America in 2011, and the second best in 2007. 

Dartmouth College and the US Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory are located there. The Appalachian Trail crosses the town.

The main village of the town, where 8,636 people resided at the 2010 census, is defined as the Hanover census-designated place (CDP), and is located at the junctions of New Hampshire routes 10, 10A, and 120. The town also contains the villages of Etna and Hanover Center.

==History==
Hanover was chartered by Governor Benning Wentworth on July 4, 1761, and in 17651766 its first European inhabitants arrived, the majority from Connecticut. Although the surface is uneven, the town developed into an agricultural community. Dartmouth College was established in 1769 beside the Common at a village called the Plainan extensive and level tract of land a mile (1.6 kilometers) from the Connecticut River, and about 150 feet (46 meters) above it. 

At one point in its history, the southwest corner of Hanover was known as Dresden, which in the 1780s joined other disgruntled New Hampshire towns along the Connecticut River that briefly defected to what was then the independent Republic of Vermont. For a time, Dresden was capital of the republic. After various political posturings, however, the towns returned to New Hampshire at the heated insistence of George Washington. One remnant of this era is that the name Dresden is still used in the Dresden School District, an interstate school district serving both Hanover and Norwich, Vermontthe first and one of the few inter-state school districts in the nation.

=== Etymology ===
"Hannover" (as it was spelled in the 1761 charter) was named either after a local parish in Sprague, Connecticut, or after the House of Hanover in honor of the reigning British king, George III. 

While it is likely that the name "Dresden" derived from Dresden in Germany, it has also been suggested that it could derive directly from the old Sorbian word drezg ("forest") or Drezd'ane, for an inhabitant of a forest. The settlers in the riverside forest, an appellation fully compatible with that of the early inhabitants of the Hanover Plain. 

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of 50.3 sqmi, of which 49.0 sqmi is land and 1.3 sqmi is water, comprising 2.52% of the town. The primary settlement in Hanover, where over 75% of the town's population resides, is defined as the Hanover census-designated place (CDP) and contains the areas around Dartmouth College and the intersections of New Hampshire Routes 10, 10A, and 120. The CDP has a total area of 5.0 sqmi, of which 4.6 sqmi is land and 0.4 sqmi is water.

Hanover borders the towns of Lyme, Canaan, and Enfield, New Hampshire; Norwich, Vermont; and the city of Lebanon, New Hampshire. Inside the limits of Hanover are the small rural villages of Etna and Hanover Center.

The highest point in Hanover is the north peak of Moose Mountain, at 2313 ft above sea level. Hanover lies fully within the Connecticut River watershed. 

There are a number of trails and nature preserves in Hanover, and the majority of these trails are suitable for snowshoes and cross-country skis.

===Climate===
Hanover experiences a warm summer continental climate (Kppen Dfb), with long, cold, snowy winters, and warm, humid summers. Temperatures average 19.0 F in January to 70.9 F in July, and the annual mean is 46.0 F. Extremes range from 40 F, recorded on February 16, 1943, to 103 F (39 C), recorded on August 2, 1975. 

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 10,850 people, 2,832 households, and 1,761 families residing in the town. The population density was 221.0 people per square mile (85.3/km2). There were 2,989 housing units at an average density of 60.9 per square mile (23.5/km2). The racial makeup of the town was 87.98% White, 1.74% Black, 0.47% Indigenous American, 6.76% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.88% from other races, and 2.09% from two or more races. 2.54% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 2,832 households out of which 31.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.7% were married couples living together, 4.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.8% were non-families. 25.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.96.

In the town the population was spread out with 15.1% under the age of 18, 37.6% from 18 to 24, 16.6% from 25 to 44, 17.1% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females there were 99.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $72,470, and the median income for a family was $99,158. Males had a median income of $63,409 versus $35,771 for females. The per capita income for the town was $30,393. About 0.6% of families and 9.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 3.0% of those age 65 or over.

===Town center===

As of the census of 2000, there were 8,162 people, 1,829 households, and 967 families residing in the town's central settlement, or census-designated place (CDP). The population density was 1,792.2 people per square mile (692.6/km2). There were 1,891 housing units at an average density of 415.2 per square mile (160.5/km2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 85.27% White, 2.25% Black or African American, 0.61% Native American, 8.18% Asian, 0.09% Pacific Islander, 1.13% from other races, and 2.46% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.17% of the population.

There were 1,829 households out of which 26.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.8% were married couples living together, 4.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 47.1% were non-families. 30.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.95.

In the CDP the population was spread out with 11.1% under the age of 18, 49.0% from 18 to 24, 14.5% from 25 to 44, 12.0% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females there were 98.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.6 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $62,143, and the median income for a family was $90,548. Males had a median income of $56,667 versus $35,682 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $26,426. About 1.0% of families and 14.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 4.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Students playing cricket at Dartmouth College in 1793
;Public schools
* Hanover High School
* Frances C. Richmond Middle School
* Bernice A. Ray Elementary School

;Universities
*Dartmouth College

;Private schools
*The Clark School was at one time located in Hanover but merged with Cardigan Mountain School in the nearby town of Canaan in 1953. 

==Economy==
White Mountains Insurance Group is based in Hanover.

==Infrastructure==
;Water
The Hanover Water Company supplies water for downtown Hanover from several local reservoirs. The company is owned by Dartmouth College (52.8%) and the Town of Hanover (47.2%), with management by the Town of Hanover under a contract. In 2000, all full-time company employees became town employees. In recent years, the town has spent over $20 million to upgrade main water lines, and will undergo another $6 million project to build a new water treatment plant. Outside the downtown area, residents rely on private wells that are not maintained by the town.

;Other utilities
FairPoint Communications furnishes telephone communication. The municipality provides sewage treatment.

== Notable people ==

==Sister cities==
* Joigny, France (1993)
* Nihonmatsu, Japan (1998)

==References==

==External links==
* Town of Hanover official website
* Hanover Area Chamber of Commerce
* Howe Library
* New Hampshire Economic and Labor Market Information Bureau Profile

 



[[HMS Beagle]]

 

HMS Beagle was a Cherokee-class 10-gun brig-sloop of the Royal Navy. The vessel, constructed at a cost of 7,803, was launched on 11 May 1820 from the Woolwich Dockyard on the River Thames. In July of that year she took part in a fleet review celebrating the coronation of King George IV of the United Kingdom, and for that occasion is said to have been the first ship to sail under the old London Bridge. After that there was no immediate need for Beagle so she "lay in ordinary", moored afloat but without masts or rigging. She was then adapted as a survey barque and took part in three expeditions. On the second survey voyage the young naturalist Charles Darwin was on board, and his work made Beagle one of the most famous ships in history. HMS Beagle - Port Cities, London, Royal Museum Greenwich, retrieved 3 February 2013, the story about sailing full-rigged under London Bridge appears on page 332 of William Howitt's 1865 The history of discovery in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand, Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green, London. 

==First voyage (18261830)==
On 27 September 1825 Beagle docked at Woolwich for repairs and fitted out for her new duties at a total cost of 5,913. Her guns were reduced from ten cannons to six and a mizzen mast was added to improve her maneuverability, thereby changing her from a brig to a bark (or barque).

Beagle set sail from Plymouth on 22 May 1826 on her first voyage, under the command of Captain Pringle Stokes. The mission was to accompany the larger ship HMS Adventure (380 tons) on a hydrographic survey of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, under the overall command of the Australian Captain Phillip Parker King, Commander and Surveyor. King was born on Norfolk Island and left for England in 1796. Colonial Secretary Index, 1788-1825, In the New South Wales State Records. 

Faced with the more difficult part of the survey in the desolate waters of Tierra del Fuego, Captain Pringle Stokes fell into a deep depression. At Port Famine on the Strait of Magellan he locked himself in his cabin for 14 days, then after getting over-excited and talking of preparing for the next cruise, shot himself on 2 August 1828. Following four days of delirium Stokes recovered slightly, but then his condition deteriorated and he died on 12 August 1828. Guardian review: Man on a suicide mission Captain Parker King then replaced Stokes with the First Lieutenant of the Beagle, Lieutenant W.G. Skyring as commander, and both ships sailed to Montevideo. On 13 October King sailed the Adventure to Rio de Janeiro for refitting and provisions. During this work Rear Admiral Sir Robert Otway, commander in chief of the South American station, arrived aboard and announced his decision that the Beagle was also to be brought to Montevideo for repairs, and that he intended to supersede Skyring. When the Beagle arrived, Otway put the ship under the command of his aide, Flag Lieutenant Robert FitzRoy. 

The 23-year-old aristocrat FitzRoy proved an able commander and meticulous surveyor. In one incident a group of Fuegians stole a ship's boat, and FitzRoy took their families on board as hostages. Eventually he held two men, a girl and a boy, who was given the name of Jemmy Button, and these four native Fuegians were taken back with them when the Beagle returned to England on 14 October 1830.

During this survey, the Beagle Channel was identified and named after the ship. 

The log book from the first voyage, in Captain FitzRoy's handwriting, was acquired at auction at Sotheby's by the Museo Naval de la Nacin (under the administration of the Argentine Navy) located in Tigre, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina, where it is now preserved. e-mail message dated 16 January 2014 from Pablo Pereyra, muselogo, Museo Naval de la Nacin, to Kenneth Wills 

==Second voyage (18311836)==

Beagle being hailed by native Fuegians during the survey of Tierra del Fuego, painted by Conrad Martens who became ship's artist in 1833.
FitzRoy had been given reason to hope that the South American Survey would be continued under his command, but when the Lords of the Admiralty appeared to abandon the plan, he made alternative arrangements to return the Fuegians. A kind uncle heard of this and contacted the Admiralty. Soon afterwards FitzRoy heard that he was to be appointed commander of HMS Chanticleer to go to Tierra del Fuego, but due to her poor condition Beagle was substituted for the voyage. FitzRoy was re-appointed as commander on 27 June 1831 and the Beagle was commissioned on 4 July 1831 under his command, with Lieutenants John Clements Wickham and Bartholomew James Sulivan. 
Longitudinal section of HMS Beagle as of 1832
Beagle was immediately taken into dock at Devonport for extensive rebuilding and refitting. As she required a new deck, FitzRoy had the upper-deck raised considerably, by 8 in aft and 12 in forward. The Cherokee-class ships had the reputation of being "coffin brigs," which handled badly and were prone to sinking; the raised deck gave the Beagle better handling and made her less liable to become top-heavy and capsize by helping the decks to drain more quickly so that less water would collect in the gunwales. Additional sheathing added to the hull added about seven tons to her burthen and perhaps fifteen to her displacement, and the ship was one of the first to be fitted with the lightning conductor invented by William Snow Harris. FitzRoy spared no expense in her fitting out, which included 22 chronometers, and five examples of the Sympiesometer, a kind of mercury-free barometer patented by Alexander Adie which was favoured by FitzRoy as giving the accurate readings required by the Admiralty. 

FitzRoy had found a need for expert advice on geology during the first voyage, and had resolved that if on a similar expedition, he would "endeavour to carry out a person qualified to examine the land; while the officers, and myself, would attend to hydrography." Command in that era could involve stress and loneliness, as shown by the suicide of Captain Stokes, and FitzRoy's own uncle Viscount Castlereagh had committed suicide under stress of overwork. His attempts to get a friend to accompany him fell through, and he asked his friend and superior, Captain Francis Beaufort, to seek a gentleman naturalist as a self-financing passenger who would give him company during the voyage. A sequence of inquiries led to Charles Darwin, a young gentleman on his way to becoming a rural clergyman, joining the voyage. 
The Beagle Laid Ashore drawn by Conrad Martens (1834) and engraved by Thomas Landseer (1838)
Beagle was originally scheduled to leave on 24 October 1831 but because of delays in her preparations the departure was delayed until December. She attempted to depart on 10 December but ran into bad weather. Finally, on the morning of 27 December, the Beagle left her anchorage in the Barn Pool, under Mount Edgecumbe on the west side of Plymouth Sound, on what was to become a ground breaking scientific expedition. After completing extensive surveys in South America she returned via New Zealand, Sydney, Hobart Town (6 February 1836), to Falmouth, Cornwall, England on 2 October 1836. 

Darwin had kept a diary of his experiences, and rewrote this as the book titled Journal and Remarks, published in 1839 as the third volume of the official account of the expedition. This travelogue and scientific journal was widely popular, and was reprinted many times with various titles, becoming known as The Voyage of the Beagle. This diary is where Darwin drew most of the ideas for his publications. Darwin, Charles. The voyage of the Beagle. Hayes Barton Press, 1989. Darwin attributes his first real trainings in natural history to his voyage on the Beagle. Darwin, Charles. The Voyage of the Beagle. Hayes Barton Press: Hayes Barton Press, 1950. (accessed 17 February 2014). 

==Third voyage (18371843)==
In 1837 HMS Beagle set off on a survey of Australia, shown here in an 1841 watercolour by Owen Stanley.
"General Chart of Australia", showing coasts examined by Beagle during the third voyage in red, from John Lort Stokes' Discoveries in Australia
Six months later, Beagle set off in 1837 to survey large parts of the coast of Australia under the command of Commander John Clements Wickham, who had been a Lieutenant on the second voyage, with assistant surveyor Lieutenant John Lort Stokes who had been a Midshipman on the first voyage of Beagle, then mate and assistant surveyor on the second voyage (no relation to Pringle Stokes). They started with the western coast between the Swan River (modern Perth, Australia) and the Fitzroy River, Western Australia, then surveyed both shores of the Bass Strait at the southeast corner of the continent. To aid Beagle in her surveying operations in Bass Strait, the Colonial cutter Vansittart, of Van Diemens Land, was most liberally lent by His Excellency Sir John Franklin, and placed under the command of Mr Charles Codrington Forsyth, the Senior Mate, assisted by Mr Pasco, another of her Mates. In May 1839 they sailed north to survey the shores of the Arafura Sea opposite Timor. When Wickham fell ill and resigned, the command was taken over in March 1841 by Lieutenant John Lort Stokes who continued the survey. The third voyage was completed in 1843.

Numerous places around the coast were named by Wickham, and subsequently by Stokes when he became captain, often honouring eminent people or the members of the crew. On 9 October 1839 Wickham named Port Darwin, which was first sighted by Stokes, in honour of their former shipmate Charles Darwin. They were reminded of him (and his "geologising") by the discovery there of a new fine-grained sandstone. A settlement there became the town of Palmerston in 1869, and was renamed Darwin in 1911. 

During this survey, the Beagle Gulf was named after the ship. Armstrong, Patrick; All Things Darwin: A-I, Greenwood Publishing Group 2007: "Captain Wickham named the Beagle Gulf, and Port Darwin in what is now Australia's Northern Territory (see Darwin, City of)." 

==Final years==
In 1845 Beagle was refitted as a static coastguard watch vessel like many similar watch ships stationed in rivers and harbours throughout the nation. She was transferred to HM Customs and Excise to control smuggling on the Essex coast in the navigable waterways beyond the north bank of the Thames Estuary. She was moored mid-river in the River Roach which forms part of an extensive maze of waterways and marshes known as The River Crouch and River Roach Tidal River System, located around and to the south and west of Burnham-on-Crouch. This large maritime area has a tidal coastline of 243 km, part of Essex's 565 km of coastline - the largest coastline in the United Kingdom. In 1851, oyster companies and traders who cultivated and harvested the "Walflete" or "Walfleet" oyster Ostrea edulis, petitioned for the Customs and Excise watch vessel WV-7 (ex HMS Beagle) to be removed as she was obstructing the river and its oyster-beds. In the 1851 Navy List dated 25 May, it showed her renamed as Southend "W.V. No. 7" at Paglesham. In 1870, she was sold to "Messrs Murray and Trainer" for breaking up.

==Possible resting place==
Investigations started in 2000 by a team led by Dr Robert Prescott of the University of St Andrews found documents confirming that "W.V. 7" was Beagle, and noted a vessel matching her size shown midstream on the River Roach (in Paglesham Reach) on the 1847 hydrographic survey chart. A later chart showed a nearby indentation to the north bank of Paglesham Reach near the Eastend Wharf and near Waterside Farm. This could have been a dock for W.V. 7 - Beagle. Site investigations found an area of marshy ground some 15 ft deep on the tidal river-bank, about 150 metres west of the boat-house. This discovery matched the chart position and many fragments of pottery of the correct period were found in the same area. "Hunting the lost Beagle" BBC News 9 January 2009 

An atomic dielectric resonance survey carried out in November 2003 found traces of timbers forming the size and shape of the lower hull, indicating a substantial amount of timbers from below the waterline still in place. An old anchor of 1841 pattern was excavated. It was also found that the 1871 census recorded a new farmhouse in the name of William Murray and Thomas Rainer, leading to speculation that the merchant's name was a misprint for T. Rainer. The farmhouse was demolished in the 1940s, but a nearby boathouse incorporated timbers matching knee timbers used in Beagle. Two more large anchors similar to the one excavated from the ship's present location are known to have been found in neighbouring villages. It is believed that there were four anchors in the ship.

Their investigations featured in a BBC television programme which showed how each watch ship would have accommodated seven coastguard officers, drawn from other areas to minimise collusion with the locals. Each officer had about three rooms to house his family, forming a small community. They would use small boats to intercept smugglers, and the investigators found a causeway giving access at low tide across the soft mud of the river bank. Apparently the next coastguard station along was Kangaroo, a sister ship of Beagle.

==Replica==

On 31 December 2011 the Nao Victoria Museum in Punta Arenas announced the building of the first full-scale replica of HMS Beagle. Construction began on 1 November 2012, using Nothofagus dombeyi timber from the local rainforest. In 2013 the Chilean national press started to take an interest in the work in progress. 

==See also==

*Beagle 2 - Mars space probe, which was lost 25 December 2003, was named after HMS Beagle
*Ship's chronometer from HMS Beagle
*The Voyage of the Space Beagle, a science fiction adventure by A. E. van Vogt loosely inspired by Darwin's voyage aboard HMS Beagle.
* European and American voyages of scientific exploration

==Sources and references==

* Marquardt, Karl Heinz; HMS Beagle: Survey Ship "Extraordinary", 2007, ISBN 0-85177-703-1
* Darwin, Charles; The Voyage of the Beagle, (including FitzRoy's commentary on refitting the Beagle from his account of the voyage), Penguin Books, London, 1989, ISBN 0-14-043268-X. Abridged version of Darwin's Journal and Remarks, with introduction by Janet Browne and Michael Neve.

*
*
*

*

*
*John Lort Stokes (1846) Discoveries in Australia, With an Account of the Coasts and Rivers Explored and Surveyed During the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle, in the Years 1837-38-39-40-41-42-43. By Command of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. Also a Narrative of Captain Owen Stanley's Visits to the Islands in the Arafura Sea. Vol. 1 and Vol. 2 London: T. and W. Boone

==External links==

*Darwin Online - bibliography: Proceedings of the first and second expeditions, and Darwin's Journal (The Voyage of the Beagle).
* list includes The Voyage of the Beagle
*John Lort Stokes, Discoveries in Australia, Volume 1, Volume 2.
*Digitised copies of the original logs of HMS Beagle, British Atmospheric Data Centre/The National Archives as part of the CORRAL project
*Robert FitzRoy, 1836, Sketch of the Surveying Voyages of his Majesty's Ships Adventure and Beagle, 1825-1836. Commanded by Captains P. P. King, P. Stokes, and R. Fitz-Roy, Royal Navy. Journal of the Geological Society of London 6: 311-343
*Visit and Testimony of Captain Fitz-Roy
*HMS Beagle - Port Cities
*The sympiesometer of Alexander Adie
*The Journal of Syms Covington - Chapter 1.
*The replica HMS Beagle project
*BBC News - Darwin's Beagle ship 'found'
*The Observer - Evolution of radar points to HMS Beagles resting place.
*BBC News - Plans to build HMS Beagle replica for 2009 Darwin bicentenary.
* Museo Nao Victoria - Official site of the building process for the full size HMS Beagle replica.
*Former official blog of the building process for the full size HMS Beagle replica.

*


[[History of St Albans]]

St Albans is in southern Hertfordshire, England, around 22 miles (35 km) north of London, beside the site of a Catuvellauni settlement and the Roman town of Verulamium and on the River Ver. St Albans is Hertfordshire's oldest town, a modern city shaped by over 2000 years of continuous human occupation.

==Pre-Roman and Roman times==
The town is first recorded as Veralanium, a Celtic British Iron Age settlement whose name means 'the settlement above the marsh'. After the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43, it developed as Verulamium and became one of the largest towns in Roman Britain. Built mainly of wood, it was destroyed during the revolt of Boudica in AD 60-61, but was rebuilt and grew to feature many impressive town houses and public buildings. It was encircled by gated walls in AD 275.

==The Romans leave==
The Roman City of Verulamium slowly declined and fell into decay after the departure of the Roman Army in AD 410. However, its ruined buildings provided building materials to build the new monastic and market settlement of St Albans which was growing on the hill above, close to the site of Saint Alban's execution. In the Norman Abbey tower, you can still see the Roman bricks removed from Verulamium.

Much of the post-Roman development of St Albans was in memorial to Saint Alban, the earliest known British Christian martyr, executed in AD 250 (the exact date is unknown, with scholars suggesting dates of 209, 254 and 304). The town itself was known for some time by the Saxon name 'Verlamchester'. A shrine was built on the site of his death following Emperor Constantine's adoption of Christianity as the religion of the Roman Empire. In the 5th century a Benedictine monastic church was constructed.

==The Abbey is founded==
Another abbey was founded by King Offa of Mercia in 793. The settlement grew up around the precincts of another It was 350 ft long with a tower and seven apses.
 
A nunnery, Sopwell Priory, was founded nearby in 1140 by Abbot Geoffrey de Gorham.

The head of the abbey was confirmed as the premier abbot in England in 1154. The abbey was extended by John of Wallingford (also known as John de Cella) in the 1190s, and again between 1257 and 1320 but financial constraints limited the effectiveness of these later additions.

In August 1213 the first draft of Magna Carta was drawn up in St Albans Abbey.

In 1290 the funeral procession of Eleanor of Castile stopped overnight in the town and an Eleanor cross was put up at a cost of 100 in the Market Place. The cross, which stood for many years in front of the 15th century Clock Tower, was demolished in 1701.

A market was running outside the abbey from the 10th century; it was confirmed by King John of England in 1202 and by a Royal Charter of Edward VI in 1553.

==Conflict==
Abbey Gateway from the 1360s
During the 14th century the Abbey came into increasing conflict with the townsfolk of St Albans, who demanded rights of their own. This led, among other
things, to the construction of a large wall and gate surrounding the Abbey (for instance, the Great Gatehouse, the "Abbey Gateway", which is the only surviving monastic building other than the Abbey Church, dates from 1365).

Richard of Wallingford, a local landowner, who had presented demands to Richard II on behalf of Wat Tyler in London, brought news of this to St Albans and argued with the abbot over the charter. However, this was short lived. Once the 14-year-old king had regained control of the capital and then the whole country, Grindcobbe was tried in the Moot Hall (on the site of the present-day W H Smith stationery shop, where a plaque commemorates the event) and adjudged a 'traitor' alongside John Ball ('the mad priest of Kent', one of the rebel leaders who had escaped from Smithfield, London to Coventry) and more than a dozen others. He was hanged, drawn and quartered in July 1381.

Another notable building dating from around this time, the Clockhouse belfy or Clock Tower, built between 1403 and 1412, seems to have been intended both as a visible and audible statement of the town's continuing civic ambitions against the power of the Abbot.

During the Wars of the Roses two battles were fought in and around St Albans. The First Battle of St Albans on 22 May 1455 was a Lancastrian defeat that opened the war. The Lancastrian army occupied the town but the Yorkist forces broke in and a battle took place in the streets of the town. On 17 February 1461 the Second Battle of St Albans on Bernards Heath north of the town centre resulted in a Lancastrian victory.

Following the Reformation, the Abbey was dissolved in 1539 and the Abbey Church sold to the town in 1553 for 400: it became a Protestant parish church for the borough and the Lady Chapel was used as a school. The Great Gatehouse was used as a prison until the 19th century, when it was taken over by St Albans School. In May 1553, in response to a public petition, the first royal charter for the town was issued by King Edward VI, granting it the status of borough. The charter defined the powers of the mayor and councillors, then known as burgesses, as well as specifying the Wednesday and Saturday market days which continue to this day.

In 1555, during the reign of Queen Mary I, a Protestant Yorkshire baker, George Tankerfield, was brought from London and burnt to death on Romeland because of his refusal to accept the Roman Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation.

During the English Civil War (164245) the town sided with parliament but was largely unaffected by the conflict.

==An early transport hub==
Three main roads date from the medieval period - Holywell Hill, St Peter's Street, and Fishpool Street. These remained the only major streets until around 1800 when London Road was constructed, to be followed by Hatfield Road in 1824 and Verulam Road in 1826.

Verulam Road was created specifically to aid the movement of stage coaches, since St Albans was the first major stop on the coaching route north from London. The large number of coaching inns is, in turn, one reason why the City has so many pubs today (another being that it was, and remains, a major centre for Christian pilgrimage).

The railway arrived in 1868, off-setting the decline in coaching since the 1840s.

Growth was always slow and steady, with no sudden burst: in 1801 there were 6,000 people living in St Albans; in 1850 11,000; in 1931 29,000; and in 1950 44,000.

==The City Charter==
In 1877, in response to a public petition, Queen Victoria issued the second royal charter, which granted city status to the borough and Cathedral status to the former Abbey Church. The new diocese was established in the main from parts of the large Diocese of Rochester. Lord Grimthorpe financed a 130,000 renovation and rebuilding of the then dilapidated cathedral, which is most apparent in his generally poorly regarded Neo-Gothic rebuild of the west front (18801883). However, without Grimthorpe's money, it seems reasonable to assume that the Abbey Church would now almost certainly be a ruin, like many other former monastic churches, despite the work performed under Sir George Gilbert Scott in the years 1860 to 1877.

The city's football club (St Albans City F.C.) was founded in 1880.

Ralph Chubb, the poet and printer, lived on College Street in St Albans from 1892 to 1913, and attended St Albans School. His work frequently references the Abbey of St Albans, and he ascribed mystical significance to the geography and history of the town.

==World War I==
In September 1916, following an attack on St Albans, the German Airship SL 11 became the first airship to be brought down over England.

==Modern growth==

===Between the wars===

St Albans on the 1 inch to the mile map Ordnance Survey map of 1944

In the inter-war years St Albans, in common with much of the surrounding area, became a centre for emerging high-technology industries, most notably aerospace. Nearby Radlett was the base for Handley Page Aircraft Company, while Hatfield became home to de Havilland. St Albans itself became a centre for the Marconi plc company, specifically, Marconi Instruments. Marconi (later part of the General Electric Company) remained the city's largest employer (with two main plants) until the 1990s. A third plant - working on top secret defence work - also existed. Even Marconi staff only found out about this when it closed down. All of these industries are now gone from the area.

In 1936 St Albans was the last but one stop for the Jarrow Crusade.

===Post-war growth===
The City was expanded significantly after World War II, as government policy promoted the creation of New Towns and the expansion of existing towns. Substantial amounts of local authority housing were built at Cottonmill (to the south), Mile House (to the south-east) and New Greens (to the north). The Marshalswick area to the north-east was also expanded, completing a pre-war programme.

In 1974 St Albans City Council, St Albans Rural District Council and Harpenden Town Council were merged to form St Albans District Council (part of a much wider local government reorganisation).

The 2001 census returns show a population of 129,000 for St Albans City and District, which had risen to 140,664 at the 2011 census.

==References==

==External links==
*St Albans History and Archaeology; Chris Saunders.
*St Albans, 1911 Encyclopdia article.
*British History Online - the city of St Albans
*Diocesan House, St Albans
*Verulam House, St Albans

St Albans
 

[[Head end]]

Head end may refer to:

