
=== Newton's binomial series ===

Newton's binomial series, named after Sir Isaac Newton, is a generalization of the binomial theorem to infinite series:

:

The identity can be obtained by showing that both sides satisfy the differential equation (1 + z) f(z) =  f(z).

The radius of convergence of this series is 1. An alternative expression is

:

where the identity

:

is applied.

=== Multiset (rising) binomial coefficient ===

Binomial coefficients count subsets of prescribed size from a given set. A related combinatorial problem is to count multisets of prescribed size with elements drawn from a given set, that is, to count the number of ways to select a certain number of elements from a given set with the possibility of selecting the same element repeatedly. The resulting numbers are called multiset coefficients; . the number of ways to "multichoose" (i.e., choose with replacement) k items from an n element set is denoted .

To avoid ambiguity and confusion with ns main denotation in this article, let f = n = r + (k - 1) and r = f - (k - 1).

Multiset coefficients may be expressed in terms of binomial coefficients by the rule
:::::
One possible alternative characterization of this identity is as follows:
We may define the falling factorial as
:::::,
and the corresponding rising factorial as
:::::;
so, for example,
:::::.
Then the binomial coefficients may be written as 
:::::, 
while the corresponding multiset coefficient is defined by replacing the falling with the rising factorial:
:::::.

==== Generalization to negative integers ====
For any n,

:
In particular, binomial coefficients evaluated at negative integers are given by signed multiset coefficients. In the special case , this reduces to 

For example, if n = -4 and k = 7, then r = 4 and f = 10:
:

=== Two real or complex valued arguments ===
The binomial coefficient is generalized to two real or complex valued arguments using the gamma function or beta function via
:
This definition inherits these following additional properties from :
:
moreover,
:

The resulting function has been little-studied, apparently first being graphed in . Notably, many binomial identities fail: but for n positive (so negative). The behavior is quite complex, and markedly different in various octants (that is, with respect to the x and y axes and the line ), with the behavior for negative x having singularities at negative integer values and a checkerboard of positive and negative regions:
* in the octant it is a smoothly interpolated form of the usual binomial, with a ridge ("Pascal's ridge").
* in the octant and in the quadrant the function is close to zero.
* in the quadrant the function is alternatingly very large positive and negative on the parallelograms with vertices 
* in the octant the behavior is again alternatingly very large positive and negative, but on a square grid.
* in the octant it is close to zero, except for near the singularities.

=== Generalization to q-series ===
The binomial coefficient has a q-analog generalization known as the Gaussian binomial coefficient.

=== Generalization to infinite cardinals ===
The definition of the binomial coefficient can be generalized to infinite cardinals by defining:

:

where A is some set with cardinality . One can show that the generalized binomial coefficient is well-defined, in the sense that no matter what set we choose to represent the cardinal number , will remain the same. For finite cardinals, this definition coincides with the standard definition of the binomial coefficient.

Assuming the Axiom of Choice, one can show that for any infinite cardinal .

==Binomial coefficient in programming languages==
The notation is convenient in handwriting but inconvenient for typewriters and computer terminals. Many programming languages do not offer a standard subroutine for computing the binomial coefficient, but for example both the APL programming language and the (related) J programming language use the exclamation mark: k ! n .

Naive implementations of the factorial formula, such as the following snippet in Python:

from math import factorial
def binomialCoefficient(n, k):
 return factorial(n) // (factorial(k) * factorial(n - k))

are very slow and are useless for calculating factorials of very high numbers (in languages such as C or Java they suffer from overflow errors because of this reason). A direct implementation of the multiplicative formula works well:

def binomialCoefficient(n, k):
 if k n:
 return 0
 if k == 0 or k == n:
 return 1
 diff = n - k
 k = min(k, n - k) # take advantage of symmetry
 c = 1
 for i in range(k):
 c = c * (n - i) / (i + 1)
 return c

(In Python, range(k) produces a list from 0 to k-1.)

Pascal's rule provides a recursive definition which can also be implemented in Python, although it is less efficient:

def binomialCoefficient(n, k):
 if k n:
 return 0
 if k > n - k: # take advantage of symmetry
 k = n - k
 if k == 0 or n <= 1:
 return 1
 return binomialCoefficient(n-1, k) + binomialCoefficient(n-1, k-1)

The example mentioned above can be also written in functional style. The following Scheme example uses the recursive definition
:
Rational arithmetic can be easily avoided using integer division
:
The following implementation uses all these ideas

(define (binomial n k)
;; Helper function to compute C(n,k) via forward recursion
 (define (binomial-iter n k i prev)
 (if (>= i k)
 prev
 (binomial-iter n k (+ i 1) (/ (* (- n i) prev) (+ i 1)))))
;; Use symmetry property C(n,k)=C(n, n-k)
 (if (< k (- n k))
 (binomial-iter n k 0 1)
 (binomial-iter n (- n k) 0 1)))

Another way to compute the binomial coefficient when using large numbers is to recognize that

:

where &thinsp; denotes the natural logarithm of the gamma function at . It is a special function that is easily computed and is standard in some programming languages such as using log_gamma in Maxima, LogGamma in Mathematica, gammaln in MATLAB, or lgamma in R. Roundoff error may cause the returned value to not be an integer.

==See also==
* Binomial transform
* Central binomial coefficient
* Kummer's theorem on prime-power divisors of binomial coefficients
* List of factorial and binomial topics
* Lucas' theorem
* Multiplicities of entries in Pascal's triangle
* Star of David theorem
* Sun's curious identity
* Table of Newtonian series

== Notes ==

== References ==

* Benjamin, Arthur T.; Quinn, Jennifer (2003). Proofs that Really Count: The Art of Combinatorial Proof , Mathematical Association of America.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Calculation of Binomial Coefficient
* 



[[Bill Holbrook]]

Bill Holbrook (born 1958) is an American cartoonist and webcomic writer and artist, best known for his syndicated comic strip On the Fastrack.

Born in Los Angeles, Holbrook grew up in Huntsville, Alabama, and began drawing at an early age. While majoring in illustration and visual design at Auburn University, Holbrook served as art director of the student newspaper, doing editorial cartoons and a weekly comic strip. At the same time, his work was being published in the Huntsville Times and the Monroe Journal. After graduation in 1980, he joined the Atlanta Constitution as an editorial staff artist.

During a 1982 visit to relatives on the West Coast, Holbrook met Peanuts creator, Charles Schulz. Following his advice and encouragement, Holbrook created a strip in the fall of that year about a college graduate working in a rundown diner. It did not stir syndicate interest, but what he learned on the strip helped him when he created On the Fastrack.

Eleven days before On the Fastrack made its syndicated debut (March 19, 1984), Holbrook met Teri Peitso on a blind date. They were married on Pearl Harbor Day, 1985. They have two daughters, Chandler and Haviland. Peitso-Holbrook's novels have been nominated for both Edgar Awards and Agatha Awards. She is currently an assistant professor in literacy education at Georgia State University. The family lives in the Atlanta area.

In October 1989, Holbrook began his second strip, Safe Havens, and his third strip, Kevin and Kell was launched in September 1995. 

==Comic strips==
Every week Holbrook writes the story line for the next three weeks for one of his strips and draws the next three weeks' worth of strips for another. In 2010, characters from On the Fastrack and Safe Havens began appearing in both strips.
* On the Fastrack - About the misadventures at Fastrack, Inc., On the Fastrack has been distributed by King Features Syndicate since 1984. It now appears in 75 newspapers nationwide.
* Safe Havens - Initially about a day care center, this strip evolved into the adventures of Samantha Argus and her friends and is now syndicated nationally to over 50 newspapers.
* Kevin and Kell - Originally an online-only strip but now also published in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Kevin and Kell centers on the mixed marriage between a rabbit, Kevin and a grey wolf, Kell Dewclaw. The plot revolves around species-related humor, satire, and interpersonal conflict.
* Duel In The Somme - Holbrook illustrated a story by Ben Bova and Rob Balder in this strip about a romantic rivalry between a computer-simulation designer and his boss.

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 



[[Bruce Campbell]]

Bruce Lorne Campbell (born June 22, 1958) is an American film and television actor, director, writer, producer and author. As a cult film actor, Campbell is best known for his role as Ash Williams in Sam Raimi's hit Evil Dead series of films and he has starred in many low-budget cult films such as Crimewave, Maniac Cop, Bubba Ho-tep, Escape From L.A. and . He would later spoof his B-movie career in My Name Is Bruce, which he starred and directed. He has since made voice appearances in animated films, including Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs and Cars 2.

In television, Campbell is known for his lead roles in both The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr. and Jack of all Trades, his portrayal of Autolycus (the King of Thieves) in and , and notably for his role as Sam Axe on the USA Network series Burn Notice. 

==Personal life==
Campbell was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, the son of Joanne Louise (ne Pickens), a homemaker, and Charles Newton Campbell, an amateur actor and traveling billboard inspector. He has an older brother, Don, and an older half-brother, Michael Rendine. Bruce Campbell biography, Yahoo! Movies 

Campbell's first wife was Cristine Deveau, whom he married in 1983. They had two children, Rebecca and Andy, before their divorce in 1989. Campbell currently lives in Jacksonville, Oregon, with his second wife, costume designer Ida Gearon, whom he met on the set of the movie Mindwarp.

Campbell is an ordained minister and has married couples. Bruce Campbell interview: Evil Dead, being ordained, making bombs 

==Career==

===Early years===
Campbell signing a VHS copy of The Evil Dead at a fan meet-and-greet
Bruce Campbell began acting as a teenager and soon began making short Super 8 movies with friends. After meeting Sam Raimi in Wylie E. Groves High School, the two became very good friends and started making movies together. Campbell would go on to attend Western Michigan University while he continued to work on his acting career. Campbell and Raimi collaborated on a 30-minute Super 8 version of the first Evil Dead film, titled Within the Woods, which was initially used to attract investors.

===Major film roles===
A few years later, Campbell and Raimi got together with family and friends and began work on The Evil Dead. Campbell starred and worked behind the camera, receiving a "co-executive producer" credit. Raimi wrote, directed and edited, while fellow Michigander Rob Tapert was producer. Following an endorsement by horror writer Stephen King, the film slowly began to receive distribution. Four years following its original release, it became the number one movie in the UK. It then received distribution in the U.S., spawning two sequels: Evil Dead II and Army of Darkness. Campbell's role as Ashley J. "Ash" Williams has since become iconic. The first two films in the series are considered horror classics and are credited with spawning the "horror comedy" genre.

He was also drawn in the Marvel Zombie comics as his character, Ash Williams. He is featured in five comics, all in the series Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness. In the comics he fights alongside the Marvel heroes against the heroes and people who have turned into zombies (deadites) while in search of the Necronomicon (Book of the Dead).

He has appeared in many of Raimi's films outside of the Evil Dead series, notably cameo roles in the Spider-Man film series. Bruce Campbell also joined the cast in Raimi's Darkman and The Quick and the Dead, though having no actual screen time in the latter film's theatrical cut.

Campbell at WonderCon in 2013

Campbell often takes on quirky roles, such as Elvis Presley in the film Bubba Ho-tep, and appears in B-Movies and starred in My Name Is Bruce. Along with Bubba Ho-tep, he also played a supporting role in Sky High, He also was featured in the Jim Carrey drama The Majestic. Campbell also had a key supporting role in the Coen Brothers film The Hudsucker Proxy. Campbell was also the star of the Maniac Cop B-movie series.

Other roles in mainstream films for Campbell included the Michael Crichton adaptation Congo, the film version of McHale's Navy, and Escape From L.A., the sequel to John Carpenter's Escape From New York.

Campbell had a starring voice role in the hit 2009 animated adaptation of the children's book Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, and Cars 2.

In January 2010, he stated in an interview that his new film project is called Bruce vs. Frankenstein. The film is directed and produced by his friend Mike Richardson. 

Campbell produced the remake of The Evil Dead, along with Sam Raimi and Rob Tapert. Campbell made an appearance that may allude to his signature character, Ash, and will reprise his role in Army of Darkness 2. Campbell Confirms He Will Do Army Of Darkness Sequel In an interview with Erin Darling, Campbell announced that Army of Darkness 2 is not happening, saying "It's all internet b.s. There's no reality whatsoever. These random comments slip out of either my mouth, or Sam Raimi's mouth, next thing you know, we're making a sequel."

===Television roles===
Outside of film, Campbell has appeared in a number of television series. He starred in The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr. a boisterous science fiction comedy western created by Jeffrey Boam and Carlton Cuse that ran for one season. He played a lawyer turned bounty hunter who was trying to hunt down John Bly, the man who killed his father. He starred in the television series Jack of All Trades, set on a fictional island, occupied by the French in 1801. Campbell was also credited as co-executive producer, among others. The show was directed by Eric Gruendemann, and was produced by various people, including Sam Raimi. The show aired for two seasons, from 2000 to 2001. He had a recurring role as "Bill Church Jr." based upon the character of Moxie Mannheim's son (Bruno Mannheim) from the Superman comics on .

In 19961997, Campbell was a recurring guest star on the show Ellen as Ed Billik, who becomes Ellen's boss when she sells her bookstore in season four. He is also known for his supporting role as the recurring character Autolycus ("the King of Thieves") on both and , which reunited him with producer Rob Tapert. Campbell played Hercules/Xena series producer Tapert in two episodes of Hercules set in the present. He directed a number of episodes of Hercules and Xena, including the Hercules series finale. Campbell also landed the lead role of race car driver Hank Cooper in the Disney made-for-television remake of The Love Bug.

Campbell made a critically acclaimed dramatic guest role as a grief-stricken detective seeking revenge for his father's murder in a two-part episode of the fourth season of . Campbell later played the part of a bigamous demon in The X-Files episode, "Terms of Endearment". He also starred as Agent Jackman in the episode "Witch Way Now?" of the WB series Charmed, as well as playing a state police officer in an episode of the short-lived series American Gothic titled "Meet the Beetles".

Campbell co-starred on the television series Burn Notice, which aired from 2007 to 2013 on USA Network. He portrayed Sam Axe, a beer-chugging, womanizing former Navy SEAL now working as an unlicensed private investigator and occasional mercenary with his old friend Michael Westen, the show's main character. When working under cover, his character frequently used the alias Chuck Finley. Campbell was the star of a 2011 Burn Notice made-for-television prequel focusing on Sam's Navy SEAL career, titled .

===Voice acting===
Campbell is featured as a voice actor in several video game titles. He provides the voice of Ash in the three games based on the Evil Dead film series: , and . He also provided voice talent in other titles such as , (2002 video game)|Spider-Man: The Movie], Spider-Man 2, Spider-Man 3 and The Amazing Spider-Man.

He provided the voice of main character Jake Logan in the PC title, , the voice of main character Jake Burton in the PlayStation game Broken Helix and the voice of Magnanimous in Megas XLR. Campbell voiced the pulp adventurer Lobster Johnson in and has done voice-over work for the Codemaster's game Hei$t, a game which was announced on the 28 January 2010 to have been "terminated". He also provided the voice of The Mayor in the 2009 film Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs, the voice of Rod "Torque" Redline in Cars 2 and the voice of "Fugax" in the 2006 film The Ant Bully.

Despite the inclusion of his character "Ash Williams" in Telltale Games' Poker Night 2, Campbell does not voice the character in the game.

===Writing===
Bruce Campbell, If Chins Could Kill
In addition to acting and occasionally directing, Campbell has become a writer, starting with an autobiography, If Chins Could Kill: Confessions of a B Movie Actor, published on August 24, 2002. The autobiography was a successful New York Times Best Seller. The paperback version of the book adds a chapter about the reaction of fans at book signings.
Whenever I do mainstream stuff, I think they're pseudo-interested, but they're still interested in seeing weirdo, offbeat stuff. And that's what I'm attracted to.
If Chins Could Kill follows Campbell's career to date as an actor in low-budget films and television, providing his insight into "Blue-Collar Hollywood".

Campbell's next book, Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way was published on May 26, 2005. The book's plot involves Bruce (depicted in a comical way) as the main character struggling to make it into the world of A-list movies. He later recorded an audio play adaptation of Make Love with fellow Michigan actors, including longtime collaborator Ted Raimi. This radio drama was released through the independent label Rykodisc and spans 6 discs with a 6-hour running time.

In addition to his novels, Campbell also wrote a column for X Ray Magazine in 2001, an issue of the popular comic series The Hire, and comic book adaptations of his Man with the Screaming Brain. Most recently he wrote the introduction to Josh Becker's The Complete Guide to Low-Budget Feature Filmmaking.

Campbell maintained a blog on his official website, where he posted mainly about politics and the film industry. Bruce Campbell blog The blog has since been discontinued.

==Filmography==

===Films===

Year Film Role Director Notes 
 1977 It's Murder! Cop on Bicycle Sam Raimi Short film 
 1978 Within the Woods Bruce 
 1979 Attack of the Helping Hand Scott Spiegel Short film 
 Cinematographer only 
 1981 The Evil Dead Ash Williams Sam Raimi 
 1982 Cleveland Smith Josh Becker Short film 
 1983 Going Back Brice Chapman Ron Teachworth 
 1985 Crimewave Renaldo 'The Heel' Sam Raimi 
 Thou Shalt Not Kill... Except Video newscaster Josh Becker 
 1987 Evil Dead II Ash Williams Sam Raimi 
 1988 Maniac Cop Jack Forrest William Lustig 
 1989 Intruder Officer Howard Scott Spiegel 
 Moontrap Ray Tanner Robert Dyke 
 The Dead Next Door Voice J.R. Bookwalter 
 1990 Robert Van Helsing Anthony Hickox 
 Maniac Cop 2 Jack Forrest William Lustig 
 Darkman Final Shemp Sam Raimi Cameo 
 1991 Ray Josh Becker 
 1992 Eddie Presley Asylum Attendant Jeff Burr 
 John Loftmore Anthony Hickox 
 Mindwarp Stover Steve Barnett 
 Army of Darkness Ash Williams/Evil Ash Sam Raimi 
 1994 The Hudsucker Proxy Smitty Joel and Ethan Coen 
 1995 Congo Charles Travis Frank Marshall 
 The Demolitionist Raffle Winner Robert Kurtzman 
 1996 Fargo Soap Opera Actor Joel and Ethan Coen 
 Tornado! Jake Thorne Noel Nosseck Television film 
 Escape from L.A. Surgeon General of Beverly Hills John Carpenter 
 Assault on Dome 4 Alex Windham Gilbert Po Television film 
 1997 In the Line of Duty: Blaze of Glory Jeff Erickson Dick Lowry 
 Menno's Mind Mick Dourif, Rebel Leader Jon Kroll 
 Running Time Carl Josh Becker 
 McHale's Navy Virgil Bryan Spicer 
 The Love Bug Hank Cooper Peyton Reed Television film 
 Pierce Thomas 'PT' Madison John Power 
 1998 The Ice Rink Actor Jean-Philippe Toussaint 
 1999 Barry Scott Spiegel Direct-to-DVD 
 2000 Icebreaker Carl Greig David Giancola 
 Timequest William Roberts Robert Dyke 
 2001 Hubert's Brain Thompson Phil Alden Robinson Voice 
 The Majestic Roland the Intrepid Explorer Frank Darabont 
 2002 Spider-Man Ring Announcer Sam Raimi Cameo 
 Bubba Ho-tep Elvis Presley Don Coscarelli 
 Serving Sara Gordon Moore Reginald Hudlin 
 Terminal Invasion Jack Sean S. Cunningham Television film 
 Fanalysis Himself Documentary 
 2003 Drugs Bruce Chad Peter Direct-to-DVD 
 Intolerable Cruelty Soap opera actor on TV Joel and Ethan Coen 
 2004 The Ladykillers Humane Society Worker 
 Himself Mark Hamill 
 A Community Speaks Himself Documentary 
 Spider-Man 2 Snooty Usher Sam Raimi Cameo 
 2005 Alien Apocalypse Dr. Ivan Hood Josh Becker Television film 
 Man with the Screaming Brain William Cole Himself 
 Sky High Coach Boomer Mike Mitchell 
 2006 The Woods Joe Fasulo Lucky McKee 
 Touch the Top of the World Ed Weihenmayer Peter Winther Television film 
 The Ant Bully Fugax John A. Davis Voice 
 2007 Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Chicken Bittle Matt Maiellaro, Dave Willis 
 Spider-Man 3 Matre d Sam Raimi Cameo 
 My Name Is Bruce Himself 
 2009 Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs Mayor Shelbourne Phil Lord and Chris Miller Voice 
 White on Rice Muramoto Dave Boyle 
 2011 Sam Axe Jeffrey Donovan Television film 
 Cars 2 Rod \"Torque\" Redline John Lasseter, Brad Lewis Voice 
 2012 Tar Goody Various 
 2013 Oz the Great and Powerful Winkie Guard Sam Raimi Cameo 

===TV series===

 Year Title Role Notes 
 1979 Knots Landing Joel Benson 9.07 \"Say Uncle\" 
 1983 Generations Alan Stuart 
 1993 The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr. Brisco County, Jr. Series Lead (19931994) 
 1995 Autolycus 19951999 
 Bill Church Jr. 2.20 \"Individual Responsibility\"; 2.21 \"Whine, Whine, Whine\"; 3.01 \"We Have a Lot to Talk About\" 
 American Gothic Lt. Drey 1.07 \"Meet the Beetles\" 
 1996 Ellen Ed Billik 7 episodes (19961997) 
 Autolycus 19961999 
 Jake Rodzinsky 4.13, 4.14 \"Justice Parts 1 & 2\" 
 1997 Weird Science Gene the Genie 5.11 \"I Dream of Gene\" 
 1998 Rob Tapert 4.15 \"Yes, Virginia, There Is a Hercules\" 
 Timecop Agent Tommy Maddox 1.09 \"The Future, Jack, the Future\" 
 1999 The X Files Wayne Weinsider 6.07 \"Terms of Endearment\" 
 Rob Tapert 5.09 \"For Those of You Just Joining Us..\" 
 2000 Jack of All Trades Jack Stiles / Daring Dragoon Series Lead (20002001) 
 2001 Beggars and Choosers Jack 2.20 \"The Long Goodbye\" 
 The Legend of Tarzan Max Liebling 1.28 \"Tarzan and One Punch Mullargan\" 
 2002 Charmed FBI Agent Jackman 4.22 \"Witch Way Now?\" 
 2003 Duck Dodgers Pork Piggler 1.06 \"K-9 Kaddy/Pig of Action\" 
 My Life as a Teenage Robot Himcules 1.11 \"Daydream Believer/This Time with Feeling\" 
 2004 Megas XLR Magnanimous 1.03 \"Battle Royale\"; 2.02 \"The Return\" 
 2006 Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go! Captain Shuggazoom 4.49 \"Golden Age\" 
 The Replacements Phil Mygrave 5 episodes (20062009) 
 2007 Burn Notice Sam Axe Main Character (20072013) 
 The Industiralist Episode: Burrito's Little Helper/Crouching Tigre, Hidden Dragon 
 2013 1600 Penn Doug 1.6 \"Skip the Tour\" 
 2014 Psych Dr. Ashford N. Simpson 8.10 \"A Nightmare on State Street\" 
 

===Director===

 Year Film Notes 
 2002 Fanalysis Documentary 
 2004 A Community Speaks 
 2005 Man with the Screaming Brain 
 2007 My Name Is Bruce 

===Producer/Executive Producer===

 Year Film Notes 
 1981 The Evil Dead 
 1987 Evil Dead II 
 1991 
 1992 Army of Darkness 
 2002 Fanalysis 
 2004 A Community Speaks 
 2005 Man with the Screaming Brain 
 2007 My Name Is Bruce 
 2011 
 2013 Evil Dead 

===Writer===

 Year Film Notes 
 1985 Thou Shalt Not Kill... Except 
 1992 The Nutt House Credited as R.O.C. Sandstorm 
 2005 Man with the Screaming Brain 
 

==See also==

* (ISBN 0-312-24264-6),
* Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way (ISBN 0-312-31260-1)

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* Salon Interviews Bruce Campbell
* "Not My Job" Bruce Campbell appears on Wait Wait, Don't Tell Me



[[Baron Aberdare]]

Baron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 23 August 1873 for the Liberal politician Henry Bruce. He served as Home Secretary from 1868 to 1873. His grandson, the third Baron, was a soldier, cricketer and tennis player and a member of the International Olympic Committee. His son, the fourth Baron, held office in the Conservative administration of Edward Heath and was later a Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. Lord Aberdare was one of the ninety-two elected hereditary peers that were allowed to remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999. the title is held by his son, the fifth Baron, who succeeded in 2005 and was elected to the House of Lords in 2009.

==Coat of arms==
The heraldic blazon for the coat of arms of the barony is: Or, a saltire gules, on a chief of the last a martlet of the field.

==Barons Aberdare (1873)==
*Henry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare (1815&ndash;1895)
*Henry Campbell Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare (1851&ndash;1914)
*Clarence Napier Bruce, 3rd Baron Aberdare (1885&ndash;1957)
*Morys George Lyndhurst Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare (1919&ndash;2005)
*Alastair John Lyndhurst Bruce, 5th Baron Aberdare (b. 1947)

The heir apparent is the present holder's son the Hon Hector Morys Napier Bruce (b. 1974)

==References==
*Kidd, Charles, Williamson, David (editors). Debrett's Peerage and Baronetage (1990 edition). New York: St Martin's Press, 1990.
*



[[Boy band]]

A boy band (or boyband) is loosely defined as a vocal group consisting of young male singers, usually in their teenage years or in their twenties at the time of formation. Being vocal groups, most boy band members do not play musical instruments, either in recording sessions or on stage, making the term something of a misnomer. However, exceptions do exist. Most boy bands dance as well as sing, usually giving highly choreographed performances.

Some such bands form on their own. They can evolve out of church choral or gospel music groups, but are often created by talent managers or record producers who hold auditions. Due to this and their general commercial orientation towards a female audience of preteens, teenyboppers, or teens, the term may be used with negative connotations in music journalism. Boy bands are similar in concept to their counterparts, girl groups. Boy Bands' popularity peaked twice: in the 1960s (e.g., the Monkees and the Four Seasons) and in the 1990s and early 2000s when acts such as Backstreet Boys, 'N Sync, 98 Degrees, Westlife, LFO, 5ive, among others dominated the top of the Billboard and pop charts.

==History==

===Early history===
The earliest form of boy band music took place in the late 19th century with the use of a capella Barbershop quartets. They were usually a group of males and sang in four part harmonies. The popularity of Barbershop quartets had been prominent into the earlier part of the 20th century. A revival of the male vocal group took place in the late 1940s and 1950s with the use of doo-wop music. Doo-wop bands sang about topics such as love and other themes used in pop music. The earliest traces of boy bands were in the mid-1950s although the term boy band was not used. The Ink Spots was one of the first of what we would now call boy bands. The term boy band was not established until the late 1980s as before that they were called male vocal groups or hep harmony singing groups. 

===1960s: The Osmonds, the Jackson 5 and the Monkees===

The Osmonds
Although the term "boy band" is mostly associated with groups from the 1990s onwards, the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the Osmonds, the Jackson 5, and the Monkees, which helped form the template for boy bands. While the Monkees were originally a manufactured act turned real band that featured members with distinct (albeit fictional) personality types, the Jackson 5 were a family group that established many musical conventions that boy bands follow. For instance, their music featured close harmonies from soul music and catchy pop hooks influenced as much as they were by Motown and acts like the Supremes. All members of the band sang, which is a common convention of a boy band, as opposed to having a front man and the rest on instruments; thus, no one person dominated the stage. Even so, the members conveniently fitted into the convention of having stereotypical personality types (e.g. Michael Jackson being the "cute one").

The Beatles were directly an influence on boy bands that use rock band instrumentation, and played more rock orientated music. The precedent for this was when TV Producers Bert Schneider and Bob Rafelson got four members to perform catchy pop tunes while also acting in a television series. The Monkees are often considered as the original pioneers among boy bands as they were the first example of a manufactured boy band. Formed in 1965 under the supervision of Don Kirshner, the group became dissatisfied with Kirshner's control over them and they became independent two years later working on their own up to 1970.

===1970s and 1980s: Menudo, New Edition, and New Kids on the Block===
Other antecedents (apart from those already mentioned) exist throughout the history of pop music. The genre has been copied into languages and cultures other than the Anglo-American. The Puerto Rican boy band Menudo, appealing to young Latina audiences, was founded in 1977. Menudo had a convention unique among boy bands: when a member turned 16, became too tall, or their voice changed, they were replaced. The members of Menudo were generally aged 1214.

The Bay City Rollers were a Scottish pop band who were most popular in the mid-1970s. The British Hit Singles & Albums noted that they were "tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh", and were "the first of many acts heralded as the 'Biggest Group since The Beatles' and one of the most screamed-at teeny-bopper acts of the 1970s". For a relatively brief but fervent period (nicknamed "Rollermania"), they were worldwide teen idols. The group were one of the first bands like The Monkees before them to take the formula shown by The Beatles and apply it to a teen market. The group achieved the same amount of success but for a limited period of time. At the peak of their popularity in the UK, comparisons were being made to The Beatles. Also by this time, Bay City Roller fans had a completely distinctive style of dress, the main elements of which were ankle-length tartan trousers and tartan scarves, the group using the benefit of merchandise and promotion. 

In the US, the Cleveland-based power pop group Raspberries was generally interpreted as a "teen act", although all the band members played their own music. Vocalist Eric Carmen later commented, "Youd have a thousand screaming girls in the front of the stage and then ten very serious rock critics in the back of the room going, Uh-huh, I think we understand this. And unfortunately the great mass of pot-smoking 18-year-olds that bought albums and made you a substantial commodity in the great marketing world of records never took to us. It was not hip for people to like us, because their little sister liked us." 

New Edition was a R&B group formed in Boston in 1978. The group reached their height of popularity during the 1980s. They were the progenitors of the boy band movement of the 1980s and 1990s in the US. The group recorded mostly as a quintet.

Bros (abbreviation of the word "brothers") were a British boy band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, consisting of twin brothers Matt and Luke Goss along with Craig Logan. Formed in 1986, they scored multiple top 10 hits between 1987 and 1989. In Britain Bros also became the first modern erastyle boyband to have a multiple platinum selling album with Push in 1988, which is still one of the most successful boyband albums in the UK. Other big boybands in Britain during the late eighties were Big Fun and Brother Beyond.

Boston group New Edition is often credited for starting the boy band trend in the 1980s, even though the term "boy band" did not exist until the 1990s. Maurice Starr was influenced by New Edition and popularised it with his protg New Kids on the Block, the first commercially successful modern boy band who formed in 1984 and found international success in 1988. Starr's idea was to take the traditional template from the R&B genre (in this case his teenage band New Edition) and apply it to a pop genre.

===1990s: Boyz II Men, Take That, Backstreet Boys, 'N Sync, and Westlife===
Some managers in Europe soon created their own acts after being inspired by New Kids on the Block. First beginning with Nigel Martin-Smith's Take That in the UK who formed in 1990 and followed by Tom Watkins who had success with Bros in the late eighties and formed East 17 in 1991 who were marketed and pitted against Take That as rivals with a harsher attitude, style and sound. Although in previous years Bros and New Kids on the Block had achieved number one singles in the UK, it was Take That who were the first group to completely dominate the charts. Between their first number one single in 1993 and last in 1996 and before their 2005 reunion only one single failed to reach the top spot. This making them one of the most successful groups in British music chart history and the inspiration for most British pop groups ever since. Irish music manager Louis Walsh, who had witnessed the impact of these two British boy bands, put out an advert for an 'Irish Take That' thereby creating Boyzone in 1993. Let Loose formed in 1993, MN8 and 911 formed in 1995, and Damage formed in 1996 were also boy bands who enjoyed success in Britain; however by the late 1990s all these bands had ran their course and split up.

All these artists were very successful on both the singles and albums charts domestically and internationally however with the emergence of britpop and the commercial co-option of indie rock, many boy bands were ridiculed by the British music press as having no artistic credibility. The media attention was now placed on the Battle of Britpop and the bands Oasis and Blur replaced the importance and rivalry of Take That and East 17 as the two new biggest bands in Britain. However, other boybands found success in the late nineties like Five, Another Level, Point Break and Westlife. In 1995 successful German music manager Frank Farian who had been manager of Boney M and Milli Vanilli put together Latin American band No Mercy who scored a few worldwide hits during the mid nineties.

Although being American and the sons of Tito Jackson, a member of The Jackson 5, 3T had several hits singles across Europe in the mid-1990s, despite limited success in the US, and finished the second biggest selling act of 1996 in Europe behind Spice Girls. 

With the success of North American boybands like New Kids On The Block in East Asia, Japanese entertainment company Johnny & Associates formed SMAP in 1992. The group enjoyed tremendous success and paved the way for more Asian boy bands such as Arashi.

Backstreet Boys are the best-selling boy band in history.
In the mid-1990s in North America, most boy bands were African American and had R&B and gospel elements, such as the group All-4-One formed in 1993 and Boyz II Men formed in 1988. Boyz II Men are also the most successful boy band act on the U.S. Hot 100 as well as the Australian Singles Chart. Although they had success on the Billboard charts, they had been targeted to more of an adult audience and were not marketed for youth. It wasn't until 1997 and the change to pop oriented groups like Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, 'N Sync, The Moffatts, and Hanson that boy bands exploded commercially and dominated the market in the United States. This late nineties era marked the height of boy band popularity in North America which hasn't been seen since.

Arguably the most successful boy band manager from the U.S. was Lou Pearlman, who founded commercially successful acts such as the Backstreet Boys in 1993, 'N Sync and LFO in 1995, O-Town in 2000, and US5 in 2005. Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s until the early 2000s, and Backstreet Boys went on to become the best selling boy band in history with over 130 million records sold. 

In the late nineties in the UK, producer Simon Cowell (noted in the U.S. for the American Idol/X Factor franchise) is also known for having managed British boyband Five which was formed in 1997 and Irish boyband Westlife which was formed in 1998. Westlife was created by Irishman Louis Walsh as a replacement for Boyzone and was initially managed by a former member of the band Ronan Keating. Westlife would eventually overtake Take That in number one's tally in the UK although Take That's overall UK sales are still higher. In 2012, the Official Charts Company revealed the biggest selling singles artists in British music chart history with Take That placed 15th overall and the highest selling boyband act (9 million), followed by Boyzone at 29 (7.1 million) and Westlife at 34 (6.8 million). Even though Cowell is known to have managed several successful boy bands, he is also infamous for passing on signing two of the biggest boybands to emerge from the 1990s and 2000s, Take That and Busted. 

===2000s: Backstreet Boys, Westlife, TVXQ!, Jonas Brothers and F4===
Jonas Brothers are described as pop boy band
With the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Dream Street, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone (better known today as an Internet meme), and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.

At the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like The Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act, featuring members with a distinct fictional type. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb. All of the members of 2gether were actors and have moved onto other projects since the end of the MTV series that followed the made for TV movie.

Since 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described "new boy bands" that are "more likely to resemble Good Charlotte, Simple Plan. 

In 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama Meteor Garden. Their popularity spread throughout Asia. With their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Shinhwa's fourth album, Hey, Come On!, was released on June 8, 2001, debuting at #3 with the lead single "Hey, Come On!" rapidly climbing up the music charts. The album's release coincided with the rise of the Korean Wave, spreading the group's popularity overseas. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group's label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who had 13 members at its peak.

In North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel, enabling them to sell over 180,000 copies of their album in a week in 2008 and hit number one on the American Billboard 200. Other new boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands haven't seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.

In South Korea, TVXQ! rose to fame from their hit single "Rising Sun", in 2005, under SM Entertainment.

===2010s: One Direction, Big Time Rush, NKOTBSB, Backstreet Boys, and comebacks of 1990s-early 2000s boy bands===
Moving into the 2010s, boy bands are still popular especially in the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe due to the continued commercial presence and longevity of nineties boy bands such as Backstreet Boys and Westlife (before they dissolved in 2012), and the successful comeback of Take That in 2005, Boyzone in 2007, and New Kids on the Block in 2008. Some sections of the press have referred to these acts, particularly those who have reformed after a previous split, such as Take That, Boyzone, and 98 Degrees, as 'man bands'. These older generation boy bands chart alongside the new boy bands.

One Direction rose to fame in 2011.
In the early 2010s, there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained, with the emergence of new boy bands like Big Time Rush, The Wanted, and One Direction and the formation of supergroup NKOTBSB which comprised New Kids on the Block and Backstreet Boys. NKOTBSB's success inspired boy bands who were fairly popular during the 1990s and 2000s to make a comeback, such as Blue, 98 Degrees, Five, and 911. Like 2gether and The Monkees, Big Time Rush was a manufactured act created for a television show.

In Southeast Asia, local boy bands also emerged as a result of the continued success of Korean and Japanese boy bands such as Shinhwa, TVXQ!, Arashi, Exile,and Super Junior. One of the boy bands who emerged as a result of Hallyu (Korean wave) is Indonesia's SM*SH who enjoyed prominent success domestically.

==Key factors of the concept==
Seen as important to a "boy band" group's commercial success is the group's image, carefully controlled by managing all aspects of the group's dress, promotional materials (which are frequently supplied to teen magazines), and music videos. The key factor of a boy band is being trendy. This means that the band conforms to the most recent fashion and musical trends in the popular music scene. Typically, each member of the group will have some distinguishing feature and be portrayed as having a particular personality stereotype, such as "the baby," "the bad boy," or "the shy one." While managing the portrayal of popular musicians is as old as popular music, the particular pigeonholing of band members is a defining characteristic of boy and girl bands.

In most cases, their music is written, arranged and produced by a producer who works with the band at all times and controls the group's sound  if necessary, to the point of hiring session singers to record guide vocals for each member of the group to sing individually if the members cannot harmonize well together. However, for clarity of each voice, recording each voice individually is most commonly the norm with most modern vocal groups. In recent years auto-tune has become a popular tool for boy bands who are unable to sing properly. Some boy bands have come under fire for this issue of using auto-tune. Some have also come under fire for lip syncing in their performances as well, for example New Kids on the Block. 

A typical boy band performance features elaborately choreographed dancing, with the members taking turns singing and/or rapping. Boy bands generally do not compose or produce their own material, unless the members lobby hard enough for creative control. However, some bands were created around the talent of a songwriter within the group like Gary Barlow of Take That or Tony Mortimer of East 17. Five were another group who wrote virtually all their own songs. It is not uncommon to find extra songs on an album written by one or more of the band members; however, their producers rarely use these as singles.

Since the 21st century, however, boy bands have been expected to write or at least contribute in some part lyrically to songs. Apart from the groups mentioned above who all had at least one primary songwriter from their beginning, other groups soon caught up. From the late nineties, members of Backstreet Boys who had previously used writers like Max Martin or Gary Baker during their early albums began writing their own songs. Modern groups of the last ten years such as JLS have all made a point from early interviews that they write their own songs and hold their own image as this is an important part of marketing. Some bands like The Wanted have even spent time learning the craft of songwriting. 

Individuals can also go on to achieve greater success as a solo artist coming out of a boy band having used the groups popularity to build on. Usually this signals the end of the group until potential future reunions. Examples of this include Michael Jackson from The Jackson 5, Donny Osmond from The Osmonds, Ricky Martin from Menudo, Justin Timberlake from *NSYNC, Jordan Knight from New Kids on the Block, and Ronan Keating from Boyzone. Sometimes the most successful solo star from a band is not the member most obvious such as Robbie Williams as opposed to lead singer Gary Barlow from Take That. Some boy band members have gone on to successful careers elsewhere in the media. Michael Dolenz of The Monkees went on to become a successful television producer, working for ITV franchises such as LWT and Television South.

==Music genres==
Although most boy bands consist of R&B or pop influences, other music genres, most notably country music and folk music, are also represented. South 65 and Marshall Dyllon, for example, were both country music boy bands. Il Divo, created by Simon Cowell in 2004, are a vocal group that performs operatic pop in several (mainly Italian) languages. Since then operatic/classical boy bands have become quite popular and common, especially in the UK. Since 2001 there has been some crossover with power pop and pop punk from bands that play live instruments. For example, as of 2008, boy bands are often influenced by pop punk, post-grunge and power pop (a perennial genre). Just recently some boy bands decided to go back to their original doo-wop roots, most notably, The Overtones.

==Controversy==
Since the 2000s, groups such as Backstreet Boys and LFO have disliked the term "boy band" and have preferred to be known as a "male vocal group". Being categorized among boy bands was also the main reason The Moffatts split up. Boy bands have been accused by the music press of emphasizing the appearance and marketing of the group above the quality of music, deliberately trying to appeal to a pre-teen audience and for conforming to trends instead of being original. Such criticisms can become extremely scathing. Boy bands are often seen as being short lived, although some acts such as The Jackson 5, Backstreet Boys, Hanson, Human Nature, SMAP,Shinhwa and Westlife (before they split up in 2012) have sustained lasting careers.

==Best-selling boy bands==
Despite negative critical reception, boy bands continue to be generally successful, with some notable ones managing to sell millions of records. Some of the bands like Backstreet Boys, The Jackson 5, and New Kids on the Block are even listed among the world's best selling music artists. The best-selling boy bands based on sales figures are:

 Rank Name Country Records sold Genre Studio albums Members Years active 
 1 Backstreet Boys United States 130 million+ Pop/rock 8 5  4  5 1993present (21 years) 
 2 The Jackson 5 United States 100 million+ Pop/R&B 18 5  6  4 19641990, 2001, 2012-13 (29 years) 
 3 New Kids on the Block United States 80 million+ Pop 8 5  4  5 19841994, 2008present (15 years) 
 4 The Osmonds United States 77 million Pop/rock 22 7 19581980 (22 years) 
 5 Bay City Rollers United Kingdom 70 million+ Pop/rock 16 5 19661981 (15 years) 
 6 The Monkees U.S./U.K. 65 million+ Pop/rock 11 4 19661971, 19861989, 19931997, 20012002, 2010present (17 years) 
 7 Boyz II Men United States 60 million+ R&B 11 5  4  3 1988present (25 years) 
 8 *NSYNC United States 55 million+ Pop 4 5 19952002 (7 years) 
 9 Westlife Ireland 50 million+ Pop 10 5  4 19982012 (14 years) 
 10 Take That United Kingdom 45 million+ Pop/rock 6 5  4  5 19901996, 2005present (14 years) 

==See also==
* All-female band
* Girl group
* List of best-selling girl groups

==References==

==External links==

* Top 10 Boy Bands
* Rolling Stone's The Best Boy Bands of All Time
* Washington Times' Best Boy Bands
* Billboard's 10 Biggest Boy Bands (1987-2012)

 



[[B-tree]]

In computer science, a B-tree is a tree data structure that keeps data sorted and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time. The B-tree is a generalization of a binary search tree in that a node can have more than two children . Unlike self-balancing binary search trees, the B-tree is optimized for systems that read and write large blocks of data. It is commonly used in databases and filesystems.

==Overview==
A B-tree of order 2 or order 5 .
In B-trees, internal (non-leaf) nodes can have a variable number of child nodes within some pre-defined range. When data is inserted or removed from a node, its number of child nodes changes. In order to maintain the pre-defined range, internal nodes may be joined or split. Because a range of child nodes is permitted, B-trees do not need re-balancing as frequently as other self-balancing search trees, but may waste some space, since nodes are not entirely full. The lower and upper bounds on the number of child nodes are typically fixed for a particular implementation. For example, in a 2-3 B-tree (often simply referred to as a 2-3 tree), each internal node may have only 2 or 3 child nodes.

Each internal node of a B-tree will contain a number of keys. The keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: a1 and a2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than a1, all values in the middle subtree will be between a1 and a2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than a2.

Usually, the number of keys is chosen to vary between and , where is the minimum number of keys, and is the minimum degree or branching factor of the tree. In practice, the keys take up the most space in a node. The factor of 2 will guarantee that nodes can be split or combined. If an internal node has keys, then adding a key to that node can be accomplished by splitting the key node into two key nodes and adding the key to the parent node. Each split node has the required minimum number of keys. Similarly, if an internal node and its neighbor each have keys, then a key may be deleted from the internal node by combining with its neighbor. Deleting the key would make the internal node have keys; joining the neighbor would add keys plus one more key brought down from the neighbor's parent. The result is an entirely full node of keys.

The number of branches (or child nodes) from a node will be one more than the number of keys stored in the node. In a 2-3 B-tree, the internal nodes will store either one key (with two child nodes) or two keys (with three child nodes). A B-tree is sometimes described with the parameters  or simply with the highest branching order, .

A B-tree is kept balanced by requiring that all leaf nodes be at the same depth. This depth will increase slowly as elements are added to the tree, but an increase in the overall depth is infrequent, and results in all leaf nodes being one more node farther away from the root.

B-trees have substantial advantages over alternative implementations when otherwise the time to access the data of a node greatly exceeds the time spent processing that data, because then the cost of accessing the node may be amortized over multiple operations within the node. This usually occurs when the node data are in secondary storage such as disk drives. By maximizing the number of keys within each internal node, the height of the tree decreases and the number of expensive node accesses is reduced. In addition, rebalancing of the tree occurs less often. The maximum number of child nodes depends on the information that must be stored for each child node and the size of a full disk block or an analogous size in secondary storage. While 2-3 B-trees are easier to explain, practical B-trees using secondary storage need a large number of child nodes to improve performance.

===Variants===
The term B-tree may refer to a specific design or it may refer to a general class of designs. In the narrow sense, a B-tree stores keys in its internal nodes but need not store those keys in the records at the leaves. The general class includes variations such as the B+-tree and the B*-tree.
* In the B+-tree, copies of the keys are stored in the internal nodes; the keys and records are stored in leaves; in addition, a leaf node may include a pointer to the next leaf node to speed sequential access .
* The B*-tree balances more neighboring internal nodes to keep the internal nodes more densely packed . This variant requires non-root nodes to be at least 2/3 full instead of 1/2 . To maintain this, instead of immediately splitting up a node when it gets full, its keys are shared with a node next to it. When both nodes are full, then the two nodes are split into three. The act of deleting nodes is somewhat more complex than inserting however.
* B-trees can be turned into order statistic trees to allow rapid searches for the Nth record in key order, or counting the number of records between any two records, and various other related operations. Counted B-Trees, retrieved 2010-01-25 

===Etymology===
Rudolf Bayer and Ed McCreight invented the B-tree while working at Boeing Research Labs in 1971 , but they did not explain what, if anything, the B stands for. Douglas Comer explains:
The origin of "B-tree" has never been explained by the authors. As we shall see, "balanced," "broad," or "bushy" might apply. Others suggest that the "B" stands for Boeing. Because of his contributions, however, it seems appropriate to think of B-trees as "Bayer"-trees. 

Donald Knuth speculates on the etymology of B-trees in his May, 1980 lecture on the topic "CS144C classroom lecture about disk storage and B-trees", suggesting the "B" may have originated from Boeing or from Bayer's name. Knuth's video lectures from Stanford 

After a talk at CPM 2013 (24th Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching, Bad Herrenalb, Germany, June 1719, 2013), Ed McCreight answered a question on B-tree's name by Martin Farach-Colton saying: "Bayer and I were in a lunch time where we get to think a name. And we were, so, B, we were thinking B is, you know We were working for Boeing at the time, we couldn't use the name without talking to lawyers. So, there is a B. It has to do with balance, another B. Bayer was the senior author, who did have several years older than I am and had many more publications than I did. So there is another B. And so, at the lunch table we never did resolve whether there was one of those that made more sense than the rest. What really lives to say is: the more you think about what the B in B-trees means, the better you understand B-trees." Talk's video, retrieved 2014-01-17 

==The database problem==
This section describes a problem faced by database designers, outlines a series of increasingly effective solutions to the problem, and ends by describing how the B-tree solves the problem completely.

===Time to search a sorted file===
Usually, sorting and searching algorithms have been characterized by the number of comparison operations that must be performed using order notation. A binary search of a sorted table with records, for example, can be done in roughly comparisons. If the table had 1,000,000 records, then a specific record could be located with at most 20 comparisons: .

Large databases have historically been kept on disk drives. The time to read a record on a disk drive far exceeds the time needed to compare keys once the record is available. The time to read a record from a disk drive involves a seek time and a rotational delay. The seek time may be 0 to 20 or more milliseconds, and the rotational delay averages about half the rotation period. For a 7200 RPM drive, the rotation period is 8.33 milliseconds. For a drive such as the Seagate ST3500320NS, the track-to-track seek time is 0.8 milliseconds and the average reading seek time is 8.5 milliseconds. Seagate Technology LLC, Product Manual: Barracuda ES.2 Serial ATA, Rev. F., publication 100468393, 2008 , page 6 For simplicity, assume reading from disk takes about 10 milliseconds.

Naively, then, the time to locate one record out of a million would take 20 disk reads times 10 milliseconds per disk read, which is 0.2 seconds.

The time won't be that bad because individual records are grouped together in a disk block. A disk block might be 16 kilobytes. If each record is 160 bytes, then 100 records could be stored in each block. The disk read time above was actually for an entire block. Once the disk head is in position, one or more disk blocks can be read with little delay. With 100 records per block, the last 6 or so comparisons don't need to do any disk readsthe comparisons are all within the last disk block read.

To speed the search further, the first 13 to 14 comparisons (which each required a disk access) must be sped up.

===An index speeds the search===
A significant improvement can be made with an index. In the example above, initial disk reads narrowed the search range by a factor of two. That can be improved substantially by creating an auxiliary index that contains the first record in each disk block (sometimes called a sparse index). This auxiliary index would be 1% of the size of the original database, but it can be searched more quickly. Finding an entry in the auxiliary index would tell us which block to search in the main database; after searching the auxiliary index, we would have to search only that one block of the main databaseat a cost of one more disk read. The index would hold 10,000 entries, so it would take at most 14 comparisons. Like the main database, the last 6 or so comparisons in the aux index would be on the same disk block. The index could be searched in about 8 disk reads, and the desired record could be accessed in 9 disk reads.

The trick of creating an auxiliary index can be repeated to make an auxiliary index to the auxiliary index. That would make an aux-aux index that would need only 100 entries and would fit in one disk block.

Instead of reading 14 disk blocks to find the desired record, we only need to read 3 blocks. Reading and searching the first (and only) block of the aux-aux index identifies the relevant block in aux-index. Reading and searching that aux-index block identifies the relevant block in the main database. Instead of 150 milliseconds, we need only 30 milliseconds to get the record.

The auxiliary indices have turned the search problem from a binary search requiring roughly disk reads to one requiring only disk reads where is the blocking factor (the number of entries per block: entries per block; reads).

In practice, if the main database is being frequently searched, the aux-aux index and much of the aux index may reside in a disk cache, so they would not incur a disk read.

===Insertions and deletions cause trouble===
If the database does not change, then compiling the index is simple to do, and the index need never be changed. If there are changes, then managing the database and its index becomes more complicated.

Deleting records from a database doesn't cause much trouble. The index can stay the same, and the record can just be marked as deleted. The database stays in sorted order. If there is a large number of deletions, then the searching and storage become less efficient.

Insertions can be very slow in a sorted sequential file because room for the inserted record must be made. Inserting a record before the first record in the file requires shifting all of the records down one. Such an operation is just too expensive to be practical. A trick is to leave some space lying around to be used for insertions. Instead of densely storing all the records in a block, the block can have some free space to allow for subsequent insertions. Those records would be marked as if they were "deleted" records.

Both insertions and deletions are fast as long as space is available on a block. If an insertion won't fit on the block, then some free space on some nearby block must be found and the auxiliary indices adjusted. The hope is that enough space is nearby such that a lot of blocks do not need to be reorganized. Alternatively, some out-of-sequence disk blocks may be used.

===The B-tree uses all those ideas===
The B-tree uses all of the ideas described above. In particular, a B-tree:
* keeps keys in sorted order for sequential traversing
* uses a hierarchical index to minimize the number of disk reads
* uses partially full blocks to speed insertions and deletions
* keeps the index balanced with an elegant recursive algorithm

In addition, a B-tree minimizes waste by making sure the interior nodes are at least half full. A B-tree can handle an arbitrary number of insertions and deletions.

==Technical description==

===Terminology===
Unfortunately, the literature on B-trees is not uniform in its terminology .

, , and others define the order of B-tree as the minimum number of keys in a non-root node. points out that terminology is ambiguous because the maximum number of keys is not clear. An order 3 B-tree might hold a maximum of 6 keys or a maximum of 7 keys. avoids the problem by defining the order to be maximum number of children (which is one more than the maximum number of keys).

The term leaf is also inconsistent. considered the leaf level to be the lowest level of keys, but Knuth considered the leaf level to be one level below the lowest keys . There are many possible implementation choices. In some designs, the leaves may hold the entire data record; in other designs, the leaves may only hold pointers to the data record. Those choices are not fundamental to the idea of a B-tree. avoided the issue by saying an index element is a (physically adjacent) pair of (x, a) where x is the key, and a is some associated information. The associated information might be a pointer to a record or records in a random access, but what it was didn't really matter. states, "For this paper the associated information is of no further interest." 

There are also unfortunate choices like using the variable k to represent the number of children when k could be confused with the number of keys.

For simplicity, most authors assume there are a fixed number of keys that fit in a node. The basic assumption is the key size is fixed and the node size is fixed. In practice, variable length keys may be employed .

===Definition===
According to Knuth's definition, a B-tree of order m is a tree which satisfies the following properties:

# Every node has at most m children.
# Every non-leaf node (except root) has at least &lceil;&rceil; children.
# The root has at least two children if it is not a leaf node.
# A non-leaf node with k children contains k1 keys.
# All leaves appear in the same level, and internal vertices carry no information.

Each internal nodes keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: a1 and a2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than a1, all values in the middle subtree will be between a1 and a2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than a2.

;Internal nodes
: Internal nodes are all nodes except for leaf nodes and the root node. They are usually represented as an ordered set of elements and child pointers. Every internal node contains a maximum of U children and a minimum of L children. Thus, the number of elements is always 1 less than the number of child pointers (the number of elements is between L1 and U1). U must be either 2L or 2L1; therefore each internal node is at least half full. The relationship between U and L implies that two half-full nodes can be joined to make a legal node, and one full node can be split into two legal nodes (if theres room to push one element up into the parent). These properties make it possible to delete and insert new values into a B-tree and adjust the tree to preserve the B-tree properties.

;The root node
: The root nodes number of children has the same upper limit as internal nodes, but has no lower limit. For example, when there are fewer than L1 elements in the entire tree, the root will be the only node in the tree, with no children at all.

;Leaf nodes
: Leaf nodes have the same restriction on the number of elements, but have no children, and no child pointers.

A B-tree of depth n+1 can hold about U times as many items as a B-tree of depth n, but the cost of search, insert, and delete operations grows with the depth of the tree. As with any balanced tree, the cost grows much more slowly than the number of elements.

Some balanced trees store values only at leaf nodes, and use different kinds of nodes for leaf nodes and internal nodes. B-trees keep values in every node in the tree, and may use the same structure for all nodes. However, since leaf nodes never have children, the B-trees benefit from improved performance if they use a specialized structure.

==Best case and worst case heights==
Let h be the height of the classic B-tree. Let n > 0 be the number of entries in the tree. If n is zero, then no root node is needed, so the height of an empty tree is not well defined. Let m be the maximum number of children a node can have. Each node can have at most m1 keys.

It can be shown (by induction for example) that a B-tree of height h with all its nodes completely filled has n=m'h&minus;1 entries. Hence, the best case height of a B-tree is:
: 

Let d be the minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node can have. For an ordinary B-tree, d=m/2.

 and give the worst case height of a B-tree (where the root node is considered to have height 0) as
: 

==Algorithms==

===Search===
Searching is similar to searching a binary search tree. Starting at the root, the tree is recursively traversed from top to bottom. At each level, the search chooses the child pointer (subtree) whose separation values are on either side of the search value.

Binary search is typically (but not necessarily) used within nodes to find the separation values and child tree of interest.

===Insertion===
A B Tree insertion example with each iteration. The nodes of this B tree have at most 3 children (Knuth order 3).

All insertions start at a leaf node. To insert a new element, search the tree to find the leaf node where the new element should be added. Insert the new element into that node with the following steps:

# If the node contains fewer than the maximum legal number of elements, then there is room for the new element. Insert the new element in the node, keeping the node's elements ordered.
# Otherwise the node is full, evenly split it into two nodes so:
## A single median is chosen from among the leaf's elements and the new element.
## Values less than the median are put in the new left node and values greater than the median are put in the new right node, with the median acting as a separation value.
## The separation value is inserted in the node's parent, which may cause it to be split, and so on. If the node has no parent (i.e., the node was the root), create a new root above this node (increasing the height of the tree).

If the splitting goes all the way up to the root, it creates a new root with a single separator value and two children, which is why the lower bound on the size of internal nodes does not apply to the root. The maximum number of elements per node is U1. When a node is split, one element moves to the parent, but one element is added. So, it must be possible to divide the maximum number U1 of elements into two legal nodes. If this number is odd, then U=2L and one of the new nodes contains (U2)/2 = L1 elements, and hence is a legal node, and the other contains one more element, and hence it is legal too. If U1 is even, then U=2L1, so there are 2L2 elements in the node. Half of this number is L1, which is the minimum number of elements allowed per node.

An improved algorithm supports a single pass down the tree from the root to the node where the insertion will take place, splitting any full nodes encountered on the way. This prevents the need to recall the parent nodes into memory, which may be expensive if the nodes are on secondary storage. However, to use this improved algorithm, we must be able to send one element to the parent and split the remaining U2 elements into two legal nodes, without adding a new element. This requires U = 2L rather than U = 2L1, which accounts for why some textbooks impose this requirement in defining B-trees.

===Deletion===
There are two popular strategies for deletion from a B-tree.

# Locate and delete the item, then restructure the tree to regain its invariants, OR
# Do a single pass down the tree, but before entering (visiting) a node, restructure the tree so that once the key to be deleted is encountered, it can be deleted without triggering the need for any further restructuring

The algorithm below uses the former strategy.

There are two special cases to consider when deleting an element:

# The element in an internal node is a separator for its child nodes
# Deleting an element may put its node under the minimum number of elements and children

The procedures for these cases are in order below.

====Deletion from a leaf node====
# Search for the value to delete.
# If the value is in a leaf node, simply delete it from the node.
# If underflow happens, rebalance the tree as described in section "Rebalancing after deletion" below.

====Deletion from an internal node====
Each element in an internal node acts as a separation value for two subtrees, therefore we need to find a replacement for separation. Note that the largest element in the left subtree is still less than the separator. Likewise, the smallest element in the right subtree is still greater than the separator. Both of those elements are in leaf nodes, and either one can be the new separator for the two subtrees. Algorithmically described below:

# Choose a new separator (either the largest element in the left subtree or the smallest element in the right subtree), remove it from the leaf node it is in, and replace the element to be deleted with the new separator.
# The previous step deleted an element (the new separator) from a leaf node. If that leaf node is now deficient (has fewer than the required number of nodes), then rebalance the tree starting from the leaf node.

====Rebalancing after deletion====
Rebalancing starts from a leaf and proceeds toward the root until the tree is balanced. If deleting an element from a node has brought it under the minimum size, then some elements must be redistributed to bring all nodes up to the minimum. Usually, the redistribution involves moving an element from a sibling node that has more than the minimum number of nodes. That redistribution operation is called a rotation. If no sibling can spare a node, then the deficient node must be merged with a sibling. The merge causes the parent to lose a separator element, so the parent may become deficient and need rebalancing. The merging and rebalancing may continue all the way to the root. Since the minimum element count doesn't apply to the root, making the root be the only deficient node is not a problem. The algorithm to rebalance the tree is as follows:

* If the deficient node's right sibling exists and has more than the minimum number of elements, then rotate left
*# Copy the separator from the parent to the end of the deficient node (the separator moves down; the deficient node now has the minimum number of elements)
*# Replace the separator in the parent with the first element of the right sibling (right sibling loses one node but still has at least the minimum number of elements)
*# The tree is now balanced
* Otherwise, if the deficient node's left sibling exists and has more than the minimum number of elements, then rotate right
*# Copy the separator from the parent to the start of the deficient node (the separator moves down; deficient node now has the minimum number of elements)
*# Replace the separator in the parent with the last element of the left sibling (left sibling loses one node but still has at least the minimum number of elements)
*# The tree is now balanced
* Otherwise, if both immediate siblings have only the minimum number of elements, then merge with a sibling sandwiching their separator taken off from their parent
*# Copy the separator to the end of the left node (the left node may be the deficient node or it may be the sibling with the minimum number of elements)
*# Move all elements from the right node to the left node (the left node now has the maximum number of elements, and the right node  empty)
*# Remove the separator from the parent along with its empty right child (the parent loses an element)
*#* If the parent is the root and now has no elements, then free it and make the merged node the new root (tree becomes shallower)
*#* Otherwise, if the parent has fewer than the required number of elements, then rebalance the parent

:Note: The rebalancing operations are different for B+-trees (e.g., rotation is different because parent has copy of the key) and B*-tree (e.g., three siblings are merged into two siblings).

===Sequential access===
While freshly loaded databases tend to have good sequential behavior, this behavior becomes increasingly difficult to maintain as a database grows, resulting in more random I/O and performance challenges. 

===Initial construction===
In applications, it is frequently useful to build a B-tree to represent a large existing collection of data and then update it incrementally using standard B-tree operations. In this case, the most efficient way to construct the initial B-tree is not to insert every element in the initial collection successively, but instead to construct the initial set of leaf nodes directly from the input, then build the internal nodes from these. This approach to B-tree construction is called bulkloading. Initially, every leaf but the last one has one extra element, which will be used to build the internal nodes.

For example, if the leaf nodes have maximum size 4 and the initial collection is the integers 1 through 24, we would initially construct 4 leaf nodes containing 5 values each and 1 which contains 4 values:

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 

We build the next level up from the leaves by taking the last element from each leaf node except the last one. Again, each node except the last will contain one extra value. In the example, suppose the internal nodes contain at most 2 values (3 child pointers). Then the next level up of internal nodes would be:

 5 10 15 20 
 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 19 21 22 23 24 

This process is continued until we reach a level with only one node and it is not overfilled. In the example only the root level remains:

 15 
 5 10 20 
 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 19 21 22 23 24 

==In filesystems==
In addition to its use in databases, the B-tree is also used in filesystems to allow quick random access to an arbitrary block in a particular file. The basic problem is turning the file block address into a disk block (or perhaps to a cylinder-head-sector) address.

Some operating systems require the user to allocate the maximum size of the file when the file is created. The file can then be allocated as contiguous disk blocks. Converting to a disk block: the operating system just adds the file block address to the starting disk block of the file. The scheme is simple, but the file cannot exceed its created size.

Other operating systems allow a file to grow. The resulting disk blocks may not be contiguous, so mapping logical blocks to physical blocks is more involved.

MS-DOS, for example, used a simple File Allocation Table (FAT). The FAT has an entry for each disk block, For FAT, what is called a "disk block" here is what the FAT documentation calls a "cluster", which is fixed-size group of one or more contiguous whole physical disk sectors. For the purposes of this discussion, a cluster has no significant difference from a physical sector. and that entry identifies whether its block is used by a file and if so, which block (if any) is the next disk block of the same file. So, the allocation of each file is represented as a linked list in the table. In order to find the disk address of file block , the operating system (or disk utility) must sequentially follow the file's linked list in the FAT. Worse, to find a free disk block, it must sequentially scan the FAT. For MS-DOS, that was not a huge penalty because the disks and files were small and the FAT had few entries and relatively short file chains. In the FAT12 filesystem (used on floppy disks and early hard disks), there were no more than 4,080 Two of these were reserved for special purposes, so only 4078 could actually represent disk blocks (clusters). entries, and the FAT would usually be resident in memory. As disks got bigger, the FAT architecture began to confront penalties. On a large disk using FAT, it may be necessary to perform disk reads to learn the disk location of a file block to be read or written.

TOPS-20 (and possibly TENEX) used a 0 to 2 level tree that has similarities to a B-tree. A disk block was 512 36-bit words. If the file fit in a 512 (29) word block, then the file directory would point to that physical disk block. If the file fit in 218 words, then the directory would point to an aux index; the 512 words of that index would either be NULL (the block isn't allocated) or point to the physical address of the block. If the file fit in 227 words, then the directory would point to a block holding an aux-aux index; each entry would either be NULL or point to an aux index. Consequently, the physical disk block for a 227 word file could be located in two disk reads and read on the third.

Apple's filesystem HFS+, Microsoft's NTFS, AIX (jfs2) and some Linux filesystems, such as btrfs and Ext4, use B-trees.

B*-trees are used in the HFS and Reiser4 file systems.

==Variations==

===Access concurrency===
Lehman and Yao showed that all read locks could be avoided (and thus concurrent access greatly improved) by linking the tree blocks at each level together with a "next" pointer. This results in a tree structure where both insertion and search operations descend from the root to the leaf. Write locks are only required as a tree block is modified. This maximizes access concurrency by multiple users, an important consideration for databases and/or other B-tree based ISAM storage methods. The cost associated with this improvement is that empty pages cannot be removed from the btree during normal operations. (However, see http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA232287&Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf for various strategies to implement node merging, and source code at. )

United States Patent 5283894, granted in 1994, appears to show a way to use a 'Meta Access Method' Lockless Concurrent B+Tree to allow concurrent B+Tree access and modification without locks. The technique accesses the tree 'upwards' for both searches and updates by means of additional in-memory indexes that point at the blocks in each level in the block cache. No reorganization for deletes is needed and there are no 'next' pointers in each block as in Lehman and Yao.

==See also==
* R-tree
* 23 tree
* 234 tree

==Notes==

==References==

;General
* 
* .
* . Chapter 18: B-Trees.
* 
* . Section 6.2.4: Multiway Trees, pp. 481491. Also, pp. 476477 of section 6.2.3 (Balanced Trees) discusses 2-3 trees.
* .

===Original papers===
* .
* . November 1112, 1971.

==External links==
* B-tree lecture by David Scot Taylor, SJSU
* B-Tree animation applet by slady
* B-tree and UB-tree on Scholarpedia Curator: Dr Rudolf Bayer
* B-Trees: Balanced Tree Data Structures
* NIST's Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures: B-tree
* B-Tree Tutorial
* The InfinityDB BTree implementation
* Cache Oblivious B(+)-trees
* Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures entry for B*-tree
* Open Data Structures - Section 14.2 - B-Trees
* Counted B-Trees



[[British Museum]]

The centre of the museum was redeveloped in 2001 to become the Great Court, surrounding the original Reading Room.

The British Museum is a museum in London dedicated to human history and culture. Its permanent collection, numbering some 8 million works, is among the largest and most comprehensive in existence and originates from all continents, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present.

The British Museum was established in 1753, largely based on the collections of the physician and scientist Sir Hans Sloane. The museum first opened to the public on 15 January 1759 in Montagu House in Bloomsbury, on the site of the current museum building. Its expansion over the following two and a half centuries was largely a result of an expanding British colonial footprint and has resulted in the creation of several branch institutions, the first being the British Museum (Natural History) in South Kensington in 1881. Some objects in the collection, most notably the Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon, are the objects of controversy and of calls for restitution to their countries of origin.

Until 1997, when the British Library (previously centred on the Round Reading Room) moved to a new site, the British Museum housed both a national museum of antiquities and a national library in the same building. The museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, and as with all other national museums in the United Kingdom it charges no admission fee, except for loan exhibitions. Since 2002 the director of the museum has been Neil MacGregor. 

==History==

===Sir Hans Sloane, founder of the British Museum===
Sir Hans Sloane

Although today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities, the British Museum was founded as a "universal museum". Its foundations lie in the will of the physician and naturalist Sir Hans Sloane (16601753). During the course of his lifetime Sloane gathered an enviable collection of curiosities and, not wishing to see his collection broken up after death, he bequeathed it to King George II, for the nation, for the princely sum of 20,000. 

At that time, Sloane's collection consisted of around 71,000 objects of all kinds including some 40,000 printed books, 7,000 manuscripts, extensive natural history specimens including 337 volumes of dried plants, prints and drawings including those by Albrecht Drer and antiquities from Sudan, Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Ancient Near and Far East and the Americas. Gavin R de Beer, Sir Hans Sloane and the British Museum (London, 1953). 

===Foundation (1753)===
On 7 June 1753, King George II gave his formal assent to the Act of Parliament which established the British Museum. The British Museum Act 1753 also added two other libraries to the Sloane collection, namely the Cottonian Library, assembled by Sir Robert Cotton, dated back to Elizabethan times and the Harleian library, the collection of the Earls of Oxford. They were joined in 1757 by the Royal Library, assembled by various British monarchs. Together these four "foundation collections" included many of the most treasured books now in the British Library Letter to Charles Long (1823), BMCE115/3,10. Scrapbooks and illustrations of the Museum. (Wilson, David, M.) (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, pg 346 including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the sole surviving copy of Beowulf.

Montagu House, c. 1715

The British Museum was the first of a new kind of museum  national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. Sloane's collection, while including a vast miscellany of objects, tended to reflect his scientific interests. The addition of the Cotton and Harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element and meant that the British Museum now became both national museum and library. 

===Cabinet of curiosities (175378)===
The Rosetta Stone on display in the British Museum in 1874
The body of trustees decided on a converted 17th-century mansion, Montagu House, as a location for the museum, which it bought from the Montagu family for 20,000. The Trustees rejected Buckingham House, on the site now occupied by Buckingham Palace, on the grounds of cost and the unsuitability of its location. Wilson, David, M. (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, p. 25 

With the acquisition of Montagu House the first exhibition galleries and reading room for scholars opened on 15 January 1759. The British Museum Opened, History Today In 1757 King George II gave the Old Royal Library and with it the right to a copy of every book published in the country, thereby ensuring that the Museum's library would expand indefinitely. During the few years after its foundation the British Museum received several further gifts, including the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts and David Garrick's library of 1,000 printed plays. The predominance of natural history, books and manuscripts began to lessen when in 1772 the Museum acquired for 8,400 its first significant antiquities in Sir William Hamilton's "first" collection of Greek vases. BM, "Portrait plaque of Sir William Hamilton" British Museum 

===Indolence and energy (17781800)===
From 1778 a display of objects from the South Seas brought back from the round-the-world voyages of Captain James Cook and the travels of other explorers fascinated visitors with a glimpse of previously unknown lands. The bequest of a collection of books, engraved gems, coins, prints and drawings by Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode in 1800 did much to raise the Museum's reputation; but Montagu House became increasingly crowded and decrepit and it was apparent that it would be unable to cope with further expansion. BMCE1/5, 1175 (13 May 1820). Minutes of General Meeting of the Trustees, 175463. (Wilson, David, M. (2002). The British Museum: A History, p. 78) 

The museums first notable addition towards its collection of antiquities, since its foundation, was by Sir William Hamilton (17301803), British Ambassador to Naples, who sold his collection of Greek and Roman artefacts to the museum in 1784 together with a number of other antiquities and natural history specimens. A list of donations to the Museum, dated 31 January 1784 refers to the Hamilton bequest of a "Colossal Foot of an Apollo in Marble". It was one of two antiquities of Hamilton's collection drawn for him by Francesco Progenie, a pupil of Pietro Fabris, who also contributed a number of drawings of Mount Vesuvius sent by Hamilton to the Royal Society in London.

===Growth and change (180025)===
The Elgin Room, 1937
Left to Right: Montagu House, Townley Gallery and Sir Robert Smirke's west wing under construction (July 1828)
The Mausoleum of Halicarnassus Room, 1920s

In the early 19th century the foundations for the extensive collection of sculpture began to be laid and Greek, Roman and Egyptian artefacts dominated the antiquities displays. After the defeat of the French campaign in the Battle of the Nile, in 1801, the British Museum acquired more Egyptian sculptures and in 1802 King George III presented the Rosetta Stone  key to the deciphering of hieroglyphs. Wondrous Curiosities  Ancient Egypt at the British Museum, pp. 6672 (Stephanie Moser, 2006, ISBN 0-226-54209-2) Gifts and purchases from Henry Salt, British consul general in Egypt, beginning with the Colossal bust of Ramesses II in 1818, laid the foundations of the collection of Egyptian Monumental Sculpture. The Story of the British Museum, p. 24 (Marjorie Caygill, 2003, ISBN 0-7141-2772-8) Many Greek sculptures followed, notably the first purpose-built exhibition space, the Charles Towneley collection, much of it Roman Sculpture, in 1805. In 1806, Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803 removed the large collection of marble sculptures from the Parthenon, on the Acropolis in Athens and transferred them to the UK. In 1816 these masterpieces of western art, were acquired by The British Museum by Act of Parliament and deposited in the museum thereafter. The British Museum  The Elgin Marbles, p. 85 (B.F.Cook, 2005, ISBN 0-7141-2134-7 The collections were supplemented by the Bassae frieze from Phigaleia, Greece in 1815. The Ancient Near Eastern collection also had its beginnings in 1825 with the purchase of Assyrian and Babylonian antiquities from the widow of Claudius James Rich. The British Museum  Assyrian Sculpture, pp. 67 (Julian Reade, 2004, ISBN 0-7141-2141-X) 

In 1802 a Buildings Committee was set up to plan for expansion of the museum, and further highlighted by the donation in 1822 of the King's Library, personal library of King George III's, comprising 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, maps, charts and topographical drawings. The neoclassical architect, Sir Robert Smirke, was asked to draw up plans for an eastern extension to the Museum "... for the reception of the Royal Library, and a Picture Gallery over it ..." Wilson, David, M. (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, p. 79 and put forward plans for today's quadrangular building, much of which can be seen today. The dilapidated Old Montagu House was demolished and work on the King's Library Gallery began in 1823. The extension, the East Wing, was completed by 1831. However, following the founding of the National Gallery, London in 1824, the proposed Picture Gallery was no longer needed, and the space on the upper floor was given over to the Natural history collections. The Story of the British Museum, p. 25 (Marjorie Caygill, 2003, ISBN 0-7141-2772-8) 

===The largest building site in Europe (182550)===
The Grenville Library, (1875)
The Museum became a construction site as Sir Robert Smirke's grand neo-classical building gradually arose. The King's Library, on the ground floor of the East Wing, was handed over in 1827, and was described as one of the finest rooms in London although it was not fully open to the general public until 1857, however, special openings were arranged during The Great Exhibition of 1851. In spite of dirt and disruption the collections grew, outpacing the new building.

;Archaeological excavations

In 1840 the Museum became involved in its first overseas excavations, Charles Fellows's expedition to Xanthos, in Asia Minor, whence came remains of the tombs of the rulers of ancient Lycia, among them the Nereid and Payava monuments. In 1857 Charles Newton was to discover the 4th-century BC Mausoleum of Halikarnassos, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. In the 1840s and 1850s the Museum supported excavations in Assyria by A.H. Layard and others at sites such as Nimrud and Nineveh. Of particular interest to curators was the eventual discovery of Ashurbanipal's great library of cuneiform tablets, which helped to make the Museum a focus for Assyrian studies. Reade, Julian (2004). Assyrian Sculpture. London: The British Museum Press, p. 16 

Sir Thomas Grenville (17551846), a Trustee of The British Museum from 1830, assembled a fine library of 20,240 volumes, which he left to the Museum in his will. The books arrived in January 1847 in twenty-one horse-drawn vans. The only vacant space for this large library was a room originally intended for manuscripts, between the Front Entrance Hall and the Manuscript Saloon. The books remained here until the British Library moved to St Pancras in 1998.

===Collecting from the wider world (185075)===
The opening of the forecourt in 1852 marked the completion of Robert Smirke's 1823 plan, but already adjustments were having to be made to cope with the unforeseen growth of the collections. Infill galleries were constructed for Assyrian sculptures and Sydney Smirke's Round Reading Room, with space for a million books, opened in 1857. Because of continued pressure on space the decision was taken to move natural history to a new building in South Kensington, which would later become the British Museum of Natural History.

Roughly contemporary with the construction of the new building was the career of a man sometimes called the "second founder" of the British Museum, the Italian librarian Anthony Panizzi. Under his supervision, the British Museum Library (now the British Library) quintupled in size and became a well-organised institution worthy of being called a national library, the largest library in the world after the National Library of Paris. The quadrangle at the centre of Smirke's design proved to be a waste of valuable space and was filled at Panizzi's request by a circular Reading Room of cast iron, designed by Smirke's brother, Sydney Smirke. 

Until the mid-19th century, the Museum's collections were relatively circumscribed but, in 1851, with the appointment to the staff of Augustus Wollaston Franks to curate the collections, the Museum began for the first time to collect British and European medieval antiquities, prehistory, branching out into Asia and diversifying its holdings of ethnography. Overseas excavations continued and John Turtle Wood discovered the remains of the 4th century BC Temple of Artemis at Ephesos, another Wonder of the Ancient World. South from Ephesus  An Escape From The Tyranny of Western Art, pp. 3334,(Brian Sewell, 2002, ISBN 1-903933-16-1) 

===Scholarship and legacies (18751900)===
The natural history collections were an integral part of the British Museum until their removal to the new British Museum of Natural History, now the Natural History Museum, in 1887. With the departure and the completion of the new White Wing (fronting Montague Street) in 1884, more space was available for antiquities and ethnography and the library could further expand. This was a time of innovation as electric lighting was introduced in the Reading Room and exhibition galleries. 

In 1882 the Museum was involved in the establishment of the independent Egypt Exploration Fund (now Society) the first British body to carry out research in Egypt. A bequest from Miss Emma Turner in 1892 financed excavations in Cyprus. In 1897 the death of the great collector and curator, A.W. Franks, was followed by an immense bequest of 3,300 finger rings, 153 drinking vessels, 512 pieces of continental porcelain, 1,500 netsuke, 850 inro, over 30,000 bookplates and miscellaneous items of jewellery and plate, among them the Oxus Treasure. Caygill, Marjorie (2006). The British Museum: 250 Years. London: The British Museum Press, p. 5 

In 1898 Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild bequeathed the glittering contents from his New Smoking Room at Waddesdon Manor as the Waddesdon Bequest. This consisted of almost 300 pieces of objets d'art et de vertu which included exquisite examples of jewellery, plate, enamel, carvings, glass and maiolica, among them the Holy Thorn Reliquary, probably created in the 1390s in Paris for John, Duke of Berry. The collection was in the tradition of a schatzkammer or treasure house such as those formed by the Renaissance princes of Europe. Baron Ferdinand's will was most specific, and failure to observe the terms would make it void, the collection should be
 These terms are still observed, and the collection occupies room 45.

===New century, new building (190025)===
Opening of The White Wing, King Edward VII's Galleries (1914)
Sir Leonard Woolley holding the famous excavated Sumerian Queen's Lyre, (1922)
By the last years of the 19th century, The British Museum's collections had increased so much that the Museum building was no longer big enough for them. In 1895 the trustees purchased the 69 houses surrounding the Museum with the intention of demolishing them and building around the West, North and East sides of the Museum. The first stage was the construction of the northern wing beginning 1906.

All the while, the collections kept growing. Emily Torday collected in Central Africa, Aurel Stein in Central Asia, D.G. Hogarth, Leonard Woolley and T. E. Lawrence excavated at Carchemish. In 1918, because of the threat of wartime bombing, some objects were evacuated to a Postal Tube Railway at Holborn, the National Library of Wales (Aberystwyth) and a country house near Malvern. On the return of antiquities from wartime storage in 1919 some objects were found to have deteriorated. A temporary conservation laboratory was set up in May 1920 and became a permanent department in 1931. It is today the oldest in continuous existence. Permanent establishment of the Research Laboratory (now the oldest such establishment in continuous existence) In 1923 the British Museum welcomed over one million visitors.

===Disruption and reconstruction (192550)===
New mezzanine floors were constructed and book stacks rebuilt in an attempt to cope with the flood of books. In 1931 the art dealer Sir Joseph Duveen offered funds to build a gallery for the Parthenon sculptures. Designed by the American architect John Russell Pope, it was completed in 1938. The appearance of the exhibition galleries began to change as dark Victorian reds gave way to modern pastel shades. However, in August 1939, due to the imminence of war and the likelihood of air-raids the Parthenon Sculptures along with Museum's most valued collections were dispersed to secure basements, country houses, Aldwych tube station, the National Library of Wales and a quarry. The evacuation was timely, for in 1940 the Duveen Gallery was severely damaged by bombing. Cook, B.F. (2005). The Elgin Marbles. London: The British Museum Press, pg 92 The Museum continued to collect from all countries and all centuries: among the most spectacular additions were the 2600 BC Mesopotamian treasure from Ur, discovered during Leonard Woolley's 192234 excavations. Gold, silver and garnet grave goods from the Anglo-Saxon ship burial at Sutton Hoo (1939) and late Roman silver tableware from Mildenhall, Suffolk (1946). The immediate post-war years were taken up with the return of the collections from protection and the restoration of the museum after the blitz. Work also began on restoring the damaged Duveen Gallery.

===A new public face (195075)===
The re-opened Duveen Gallery, (1980)

In 1953 the Museum celebrated its bicentenary. Many changes followed: the first full-time in house designer and publications officer were appointed in 1964, A Friends organisation was set up in 1968, an Education Service established in 1970 and publishing house in 1973. In 1963 a new Act of Parliament introduced administrative reforms. It became easier to lend objects, the constitution of the Board of Trustees changed and the Natural History Museum became fully independent. By 1959 the Coins and Medals office suite, completely destroyed during the war, was rebuilt and re-opened, attention turned towards the gallery work with new tastes in design leading to the remodelling of Robert Smirke's Classical and Near Eastern galleries. Wilson, David, M. (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, p. 270 In 1962 the Duveen Gallery was finally restored and the Parthenon Sculptures were moved back into it, once again at the heart of the museum.

By the 1970s the Museum was again expanding. More services for the public were introduced; visitor numbers soared, with the temporary exhibition "Treasures of Tutankhamun" in 1972, attracting 1,694,117 visitors, the most successful in British history. In the same year the Act of Parliament establishing the British Library was passed, separating the collection of manuscripts and printed books from the British Museum. This left the Museum with antiquities; coins, medals and paper money; prints & drawings; and ethnography. A pressing problem was finding space for additions to the library which now required an extra 1 miles of shelving each year. The Government suggested a site at St Pancras for the new British Library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997.

===The Great Court emerges (19752000)===
The departure of the British Library to a new site at St Pancras, finally achieved in 1998, provided the space needed for the books. It also created the opportunity to redevelop the vacant space in Robert Smirke's 19th-century central quadrangle into the Queen Elizabeth II Great Court  the largest covered square in Europe  which opened in 2000.

The ethnography collections, which had been housed in the short-lived Museum of Mankind at 6 Burlington Gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries.

The Museum again readjusted its collecting policies as interest in "modern" objects: prints, drawings, medals and the decorative arts reawakened. Ethnographical fieldwork was carried out in places as diverse as New Guinea, Madagascar, Romania, Guatemala and Indonesia and there were excavations in the Near East, Egypt, Sudan and the UK. The Weston Gallery of Roman Britain, opened in 1997, displayed a number of recently discovered hoards which demonstrated the richness of what had been considered an unimportant part of the Roman Empire. The Museum turned increasingly towards private funds for buildings, acquisitions and other purposes. Wilson, David, M. (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, p. 327 

===The Museum today===
Students paint their own icon in the Egyptian sculpture gallery in 2009
Today the museum no longer houses collections of natural history, and the books and manuscripts it once held now form part of the independent British Library. The Museum nevertheless preserves its universality in its collections of artefacts representing the cultures of the world, ancient and modern. The original 1753 collection has grown to over thirteen million objects at the British Museum, 70 million at the Natural History Museum and 150 million at the British Library.

The Round Reading Room, which was designed by the architect Sydney Smirke, opened in 1857. For almost 150 years researchers came here to consult the Museum's vast library. The Reading Room closed in 1997 when the national library (the British Library) moved to a new building at St Pancras. Today it has been transformed into the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Centre.

With the bookstacks in the central courtyard of the museum empty, the process of demolition for Lord Foster's glass-roofed Great Court could begin. The Great Court, opened in 2000, while undoubtedly improving circulation around the museum, was criticised for having a lack of exhibition space at a time when the museum was in serious financial difficulties and many galleries were closed to the public. At the same time the African and Oceanic collections that had been temporarily housed in 6 Burlington Gardens were given a new gallery in the North Wing funded by the Sainsbury family  with the donation valued at 25 million. 

As part of its very large website, the museum has the largest online database of objects in the collection of any museum in the world, with 2,000,000 individual object entries, 650,000 of them illustrated, online at the start of 2012. There is also a "Highlights" database with longer entries on over 4,000 objects, and several specialised online research catalogues and online journals (all free to access). Highlights British Museum, online research catalogues British Museum and online journals British Museum In 2013 the museum's website received 19.5 millions visits, an increase of 47% from the previous year. 

In 2013 the museum received a record 6.7 million visitors, an increase of 20% from the previous year. Popular exhibitions including "Life and Death in Pompeii and Herculaneum" and "Ice Age Art" are credited with helping fuel the increase in visitors. 

==Governance==
The British Museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport through a three-year funding agreement. Its head is the Director. The British Museum was run from its inception by a 'Principal Librarian' (when the book collections were still part of the Museum), a role that was renamed 'Director and Principal Librarian' in 1898, and 'Director' in 1973 (on the separation of the British Library). 

A board of 25 trustees (with the Director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to Government) is responsible for the general management and control of the Museum, in accordance with the British Museum Act 1963 and the Museums and Galleries Act 1992. Prior to the 1963 Act, it was chaired by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor and the Speaker of the House of Commons. The board was formed on the Museum's inception to hold its collections in trust for the nation without actually owning them themselves, and now fulfil a mainly advisory role. Trustee appointments are governed by the regulatory framework set out in the code of practice on public appointments issued by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments. 

==Building==
The entrance to the museum
The Greek Revival faade facing Great Russell Street is a characteristic building of Sir Robert Smirke, with 44 columns in the Ionic order 45 ft high, closely based on those of the temple of Athena Polias at Priene in Asia Minor. The pediment over the main entrance is decorated by sculptures by Sir Richard Westmacott depicting The Progress of Civilisation, consisting of fifteen allegorical figures, installed in 1852.

The construction commenced around the courtyard with the East Wing (The King's Library) in 18231828, followed by the North Wing in 18331838, which originally housed among other galleries a reading room, now the Wellcome Gallery. Work was also progressing on the northern half of the West Wing (The Egyptian Sculpture Gallery) 18261831, with Montagu House demolished in 1842 to make room for the final part of the West Wing, completed in 1846, and the South Wing with its great colonnade, initiated in 1843 and completed in 1847, when the Front Hall and Great Staircase were opened to the public. Building the British Museum, Marjorie Caygill & Christopher Date 1999 The Museum is faced with Portland stone, but the perimeter walls and other parts of the building were built using Haytor granite from Dartmoor in South Devon, transported via the unique Haytor Granite Tramway. 
left

In 1846 Robert Smirke was replaced as the Museum's architect by his brother Sydney Smirke, whose major addition was the Round Reading Room 18541857; at 140 ft in diameter it was then the second widest dome in the world, the Pantheon in Rome being slightly wider.

The next major addition was the White Wing 18821884 added behind the eastern end of the South Front, the architect being Sir John Taylor.

In 1895, Parliament gave the Museum Trustees a loan of 200,000 to purchase from the Duke of Bedford all 69 houses which backed onto the Museum building in the five surrounding streets  Great Russell Street, Montague Street, Montague Place, Bedford Square and Bloomsbury Street. Title deed of the 'perimeter properties' of The British Museum, BM Archives CA TD The Trustees planned to demolish these houses and to build around the West, North and East sides of the Museum new galleries that would completely fill the block on which the Museum stands. The architect Sir John James Burnet was petitioned to put forward ambitious long-term plans to extend the building on all three sides. Most of the houses in Montague Place were knocked down a few years after the sale. Of this grand plan only the Edward VII galleries in the centre of the North Front were ever constructed, these were built 190614 to the design by J.J. Burnet, and opened by King George V and Queen Mary in 1914. They now house the Museum's collections of Prints and Drawings and Oriental Antiquities. There was not enough money to put up more new buildings, and so the houses in the other streets are nearly all still standing.
Proposed British Museum Extension, 1906
The Reading Room and Great Court roof

The Duveen Gallery, sited to the west of the Egyptian, Greek & Assyrian sculpture galleries, was designed to house the Elgin Marbles by the American Beaux-Arts architect John Russell Pope. Although completed in 1938, it was hit by a bomb in 1940 and remained semi-derelict for 22 years, before reopening in 1962. Other areas damaged during World War II bombing included: in September 1940 two unexploded bombs hit the Edward VII galleries, the King's Library received a direct hit from a high explosive bomb, incendiaries fell on the dome of the Round Reading Room but did little damage; on the night of 10 to 11 May 1941 several incendiaries fell on the south west corner of the Museum, destroying the book stack and 150,000 books in the courtyard and the galleries around the top of the Great Staircase  this damage was not fully repaired until the early 1960s. pp. 6566, Building the British Museum, Marjorie Caygill & Christopher Date 1999 

The Queen Elizabeth II Great Court is a covered square at the centre of the British Museum designed by the engineers Buro Happold and the architects Foster and Partners. Norman Foster and the British Museum, Norman Foster, Deyan Sudjic & Spencer de Grey 2001 The Great Court opened in December 2000 and is the largest covered square in Europe. The roof is a glass and steel construction, built by an Austrian steelwork company, with 1,656 uniquely shaped panes of glass. At the centre of the Great Court is the Reading Room vacated by the British Library, its functions now moved to St Pancras. The Reading Room is open to any member of the public who wishes to read there.

Today, the British Museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world, covering an area of over 92,000 m2 (990,000 sq. ft). http://planningonline.camden.gov.uk/MULTIWAM/doc/Supporting%20Documents-2692368.pdf?extension=.pdf&id=2692368&location=VOLUME3&contentType=application/pdf&pageCount=1 In addition to 21,600 m2 (232,000 sq. ft) of on-site storage space, and 9,400 m2 (101,000 sq. ft) of external storage space. Altogether the British Museum showcases on public display less than 1% of its entire collection, approximately 50,000 items. There are nearly one hundred galleries open to the public, representing 2 mi of exhibition space, although the less popular ones have restricted opening times. However, the lack of a large temporary exhibition space has led to the 100 million World Conservation and Exhibition Centre to provide one and to concentrate all the Museum's conservation facilities into one Conservation Centre. This project was announced in July 2007, with the architects Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners. It was granted planning permission in December 2009 and is expected for completion by 2013. 

Blythe House in West Kensington is used by the Museum for off-site storage of small and medium-sized artefacts, and Franks House in East London is used for storage and work on the "Early Prehistory"  Palaeolithic and Mesolithic  and some other collections. 

==Departments==

===Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan===
Room 4  Colossal red granite statue of Amenhotep III (1350 BC)

The British Museum houses the world's largest and most comprehensive collection of Egyptian antiquities (with over 100,000 pieces) outside the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. A collection of immense importance for its range and quality, it includes objects of all periods from virtually every site of importance in Egypt and the Sudan. Together they illustrate every aspect of the cultures of the Nile Valley (including Nubia), from the Predynastic Neolithic period (c. 10,000 BC) through to the Coptic (Christian) times (12th century AD), a time-span over 11,000 years.

Egyptian antiquities have formed part of the British Museum collection ever since its foundation in 1753 after receiving 160 Egyptian objects Reported in the list of Sloane's collection given to his executors in 1753. Reproduced in MacGregor (1994a:29) from Sir Hans Sloane. After the defeat of the Revolutionary Wars: Campaigns of 1799|French] forces under Napoleon at the Battle of the Nile in 1801, the Egyptian antiquities collected were confiscated by the British army and presented to the British Museum in 1803. These works, which included the famed Rosetta Stone, were the first important group of large sculptures to be acquired by the Museum. Thereafter, the UK appointed Henry Salt as consul in Egypt who amassed a huge collection of antiquities. Most of the antiquities Salt collected were purchased by the British Museum and the Muse du Louvre. By 1866 the collection consisted of some 10,000 objects. Antiquities from excavations started to come to the Museum in the later 19th century as a result of the work of the Egypt Exploration Fund under the efforts of E.A. Wallis Budge. The collection stood at 57,000 objects by 1924. Active support by the Museum for excavations in Egypt continued to result in useful acquisitions throughout the 20th century until changes in antiquities laws in Egypt led to the suspension of policies allowing finds to be exported. The size of the Egyptian collections now stands at over 110,000 objects. 

In autumn 2001 the eight million objects forming the Museum's permanent collection were further expanded by the addition of six million objects from the Wendorf Collection of Egyptian and Sudanese Prehistory. These were donated by Professor Fred Wendorf of Southern Methodist University in Texas, and comprise the entire collection of artefacts and environmental remains from his excavations between 1963 and 1997. They are in the care of the Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan.
Room 4  Colossal bust of Ramesses II, the 'Younger Memnon' (1250 BC)

The seven permanent Egyptian galleries at the British Museum, which include its largest exhibition space (Room 4, for monumental sculpture), can display only 4% of its Egyptian holdings. The second-floor galleries have a selection of the Museum's collection of 140 mummies and coffins, the largest outside Cairo. A high proportion of the collection comes from tombs or contexts associated with the cult of the dead, and it is these pieces, in particular the mummies, that remain among the most eagerly sought after exhibits by visitors to the Museum.

Key highlights of the collections include:

*The Rosetta Stone (196 BC)
*The Battlefield Palette, (circa ~3500 to 3000 BC).
*Limestone statue of a husband and wife (1300 BC)
*Colossal bust of Ramesses II, the "Younger Memnon" (1250 BC)
*Colossal red granite statue of Amenhotep III (1350 BC)
*Colossal head from a statue of Amenhotep III (1350 BC)
*Colossal limestone bust of Amenhotep III (1350 BC)
*Saite Sarcophagus of Satsobek
*Mummy of 'Ginger' which dates to about 3300 BC
*List of the kings of Egypt from the Temple of Ramesses II (1250 BC)
*Limestone false door of Ptahshepses (2380 BC)
*Granite statue of Senwosret III (1850 BC)
*Mummy of Cleopatra from Thebes (100 AD)
*Amarna tablets (Collection of 95 out of 382 tablets found, second greatest in the world after the Vorderasiatisches Museum, Berlin (203 tablets) (1350 BC) 
*Obelisk of Pharaoh Nectanebo II (360343 BC)
*Gayer-Anderson cat
*The Meriotic Hamadab Stela from the Kingdom of Kush

File:Rosetta Stone.JPG|Room 4  The Rosetta Stone, 196 BC, key to the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs.
File:London - British Museum - 2273.jpg|Room 4  Three black granite statues of the pharaoh Sesotris III, c.1850 BC
File:British Museum Egypt 086.JPG|Room 4  Colossal statue of Amenhotep III, c.1370 BC
File:ThreeStatuesOfGoddessSakhmet-ProfileView-BritishMuseum-August19-08.jpg|Room 4  Three black granite statues of the goddess Sakhmet, c.1400 BC
File:Quartzite head of Amenhotep III.jpg|Great Court  Colossal quartzite statue of Amenhotep III, c.1350 BC
File:TombofNebamun-2.jpg|Room 61  The famous false fresco 'Pond in a Garden' from the Tomb of Nebamun, c. 1350 BC
File:Egyptian Couple BM (1).JPG|Room 4 - Limestone statue of a husband and wife, 1300-1250 BC

===Department of Greece and Rome===
Room 17  Reconstruction of the Nereid Monument, circa 390 BC
Room 18  Parthenon marbles from the Acropolis of Athens, 447 BC
Room 21  Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, mid- 4th century BC, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World
The British Museum has one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of antiquities from the Classical world, with over 100,000 objects. These mostly range in date from the beginning of the Greek Bronze Age (about 3200 BC) to the reign of the Roman Emperor Constantine I in the 4th century AD.

The Cycladic, Minoan and Mycenaean cultures are represented, and the Greek collection includes important sculpture from the Parthenon in Athens, as well as elements of two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesos.

The Department also houses one of the widest-ranging collections of Italic and Etruscan antiquities and extensive groups of material from Cyprus. The collections of ancient jewellery and bronzes, Greek vases and Roman glass and silver are particularly important.

Key highlights of the collections include:

:;Athenian Akropolis
:The Parthenon Gallery (Elgin Marbles)

:Erechtheion
:*One of six remaining Caryatids
:*Surviving Column

:Athena Nike
:*Surviving Frieze Slabs

:;Bassae Sculptures
:*Twenty three surviving blocks of the frieze from the interior of the temple are exhibited on an upper level.

:;Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
:One of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World
:*Two colossal free-standing figures identified as Maussollos and his wife Artemisia.
:*Part of an impressive horse from the chariot group adorning the summit of the Mausoleum
:*The Amazonomachy frieze  A long section of relief frieze showing the battle between Greeks and Amazons

:;Temple of Artemis in Ephesus
:One of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World
:*One of the sculptured column bases

:;Finds from Knidos in Asia Minor
:*Lion of Knidos
:*Demeter of Knidos

:;Asia Minor
:Nereid Monument
:*Partial reconstruction of the Monument, a large and elaborate Lykian tomb from the site of Xanthos in south-west Turkey
:*Payava Tomb from Xanthos in south west Turkey

:;Wider Museum Collection
:*Material from the Palace of Knossos
:*The Minoan gold treasure from Aegina
:*Portland Vase and Warren Cup
:*Mainz Gladius and Blacas Cameo
:*Braganza Brooch
:*A number of Roman hoards including the treasures of Bursa, Chaourse, Mcon, Arcisate, Caubiac, Beaurains and Chatuzange
:*Silvered bronze horse trappings from Xanten
:*Uerdingen grave group of Roman artefacts
:*Hoard of bronze statuettes from Paramythia
:*Discus-thrower (Discobolos) Tony Kitto, "The celebrated connoisseur: Charles Townley, 17371805" Minerva Magazine May/June 2005, in connection with a British Museum exhibition celebrating the bicentennial of the Townley purchase. Townley marbles Burnley 
:*Towneley Sculptures
:*Sarcophagus of Seianti Hanunia Tlesnasa from Chiusi
:*Contents of the Isis Tomb, Vulci
:*Oscan Tablet, one of the most important inscriptions in the Oscan language
:*Petelia Gold Tablet from southern Italy
:*Bronze head and hand from the Satala Aphrodite
:*Bronze head of Augustus from Mero in north Sudan
:*Vaison Diadumenos from southern France
:*Apollo of Cyrene from Libya
:*Head from the Asclepius of Milos, Greece
:*Dedicatory Inscription by Alexander the Great from Priene

File:BM; RM18 - GR, The Parthenon Galleries 1 Temple of Athena Parthenos (447-438 B.C) + North Slip Room, -Full Elevation & Viewing North-.JPG|Room 18  Parthenon statuary from the east pediment and Metopes from the south wall
File:BM,GNR; The Acropolis & The late 5th C BC ~ Erechtheum Caryatid + Ionic Column (Room 19).jpg|Room 19  Caryatid and Corinthian column from the Erechtheion, Acropolis of Athens, 421 BC
File:Tomb of Payava 2.jpg|Room 20  Tomb of Payava, Lycia, 360 BC
File:Column drum Ephesus.JPG|Room 22  Column from the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, early 4th century, BC
File:Apollo Kitharoidos BM 1380.jpg|Room 22  Apollo of Cyrene (holding a lyre), Roman, circa 2nd century AD
File:Lely Venus BM 1963.jpg|The famous version of the 'Crouching Venus', Roman, circa 1st century AD
File:Spinario-British Museum.jpg|Room 22  Roman marble copy of the famous 'Spinario (Boy with Thorn)', circa 1st century AD
File:Townley Sculptures.JPG| Room 84  Towneley Roman Sculptures
File:Aegina treasure 01.jpg| Room 12  A gold earring from the Aegina Treasure, 1700-1500 BC
File:Colossal statue of a man, traditionnally identified with Maussollos, king of Caria, ca. 350 BC, from the north side of the Mausoleum, Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, British Museum (8244597217).jpg| Room 21  Colossal statue of a man, traditionally identified as Mausolos, king of Caria, ca. 350 BC
File:Fragmentary horse from the colossal four-horses chariot group which topped the podium of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, British Museum (8245662728).jpg| Room 21  Fragmentary horse from the colossal chariot group which topped the podium of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World ca. 350 BC
File:Asklepios Melos BM Sc550.jpg|Room 22 - Colossal head of Asclepius wearing a metal crown (now lost), from a cult statue on Melos 325-300 BC
File:SFEC BritMus Roman 011.JPG|Room 1 - Farnese Hermes in the Enlightenment Gallery
File:Gold wreath BM 1908.4-14.1.jpg|Room 22 - Gold oak wreath with a bee and two cicadas 350-300 BC
File:Etruscan riders BM 3-2.jpg| Room 71 -Silver panels with repouss reliefs overlaid with electrum foil, Etruscan artwork, 540520 BC
File:GladiatorHelmetBM.jpg|Room 69 - Roman gladiator helmet from Pompei, 1st Century AD

===Department of the Middle East===
Room 9  Nineveh Palace Reliefs

Formerly the Department of the Ancient Near East, with a collection numbering some 330,000 works, British Museum  Research the British Museum possesses by far the world's largest and most important collection of Mesopotamian antiquities outside Iraq. A collection of immense importance, the holdings of Assyrian, Babylonian and Sumerian antiquities are among the most comprehensive in the world with entire suites of rooms panelled in alabaster bas-reliefs from highly important sites between the rivers Euphrates and Tigris and include the biblical cities of Nimrud, Nineveh and Khorsabad.

The collections represent the civilisations of the ancient Near East and its adjacent areas. These include Mesopotamia, Persia, the Arabian Peninsula, Anatolia, the Caucasus, parts of Central Asia, Syria, Palestine and Phoenician settlements in the western Mediterranean from the prehistoric period until the beginning of Islam in the 7th century. The collection includes six iconic winged human-headed statues from Nimrud and Khorsabad. Stone bas-reliefs, including the famous Royal Lion Hunt relief's (Room 10), that were found in the palaces of the Assyrian kings at Nimrud and Nineveh. The Royal Library of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh and Sumerian treasures found in Royal Cemetery's at Ur of the Chaldees.

The earliest Mesopotamian objects to enter the collection were purchased by the British Museum in 1772 from Sir William Hamilton. The Museum also acquired at this early date a number of sculptures from Persepolis. The next significant addition (in 1825) was from the collection of Claudius James Rich. The collection was dramatically enlarged by the excavations of A. H. Layard at the Assyrian sites of Nimrud and Nineveh between 1845 and 1851.
Room 6  Pair of Human Headed Winged Lions and Reliefs from Nimrud with the Balawat Gates

At Nimrud, Layard discovered the North-West Palace of Ashurnasirpal II, as well as three other palaces and various temples. He also opened in the Palace of Sennacherib at Nineveh with 'no less than seventy-one halls'. As a result a large numbers of Lamassu's, bas-reliefs, stelae, including the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III were brought to the British Museum. Layard's work was continued by his assistant, Hormuzd Rassam and in 18521854 he went on to discover the North Palace of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh with many magnificent reliefs, including the famous Royal Lion Hunt scenes. He also discovered the Royal Library of Ashurbanipal, a large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance. W. K. Loftus excavated in Nimrud between 1850 and 1855 and found a remarkable hoard of ivories in the Burnt Palace. Between 1878 and 1882 Rassam greatly improved the Museum's holdings with exquisite objects including the Cyrus Cylinder from Babylon, the bronze gates from Balawat, and a fine collection of Urartian bronzes. Rassam collected thousands of cuneiform tablets, today with the acquisition of further tablets in the 20th century, the collection now numbers around 130,000 pieces. In the 20th century excavations were carried out at Carchemish, Turkey, between 1911 and 1914 and in 1920 by D. G. Hogarth and Leonard Woolley, the latter assisted by T. E. Lawrence. The Mesopotamian collections were greatly augmented by excavations in southern Iraq after the First World War. From Tell al-Ubaid in 1919 and 19231924, directed by H. R. Hall came the bronze furnishings of a Sumerian temple, including life-sized lions and a panel featuring the lion-headed eagle Indugud. Woolley went onto to excavate Ur between 1922 and 1934, discovering the 'Royal Cemeteries' of the 3rd millennium BC. Some of the masterpieces include the 'Standard of Ur', the 'Ram in a Thicket', the 'Royal Game of Ur', and two bull-headed lyres.

Although the collections centre on Mesopotamia most of the surrounding areas are well represented. The Achaemenid collection was enhanced with the addition of the Oxus Treasure in 1897, by acquisition from the German scholar Ernst Herzfeld, and then by the work of Sir Aurel Stein. From Palmyra there is a large collection of nearly forty funerary busts, acquired in the 19th century. A group of stone reliefs from the excavations of Max von Oppenheim at Tell Halaf, purchased in 1920. More excavated material from the excavations of Max Mallowan at Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak in 19351938, and from Woolley at Alalakh in the years just before and after the Second World War. The collection of Palestinian material was strengthened with the acquisition in 1980 of around 17,000 objects found at Lachish by the Wellcome-Marston expedition of 19321938.

A representative selection, including the most important pieces, are on display in 13 galleries and total some 4500 objects. The remainder form the study collection which ranges in size from beads to large sculptures. They include approximately 130,000 cuneiform tablets from Mesopotamia. 

The museum's collection of Islamic art, including archaeological material, numbers about 40,000 objects, one of the largest of its kind in the world. As such, it contains a broad range of Islamic pottery, paintings, tiles, metalwork, glass, seals, and inscriptions.

Key highlights of the collections include:
Nimrud:

Alabaster bas-reliefs from:
*The North-West Palace of Ashurnasirpal II
*Central- Palace of Tiglath-Pileser III
*South-West Palace of Esarhaddon
*Palace of Adad-nirari III
*South-East Palace ('Burnt Palace')
*The Nabu Temple (Ezida)
*The Sharrat-Niphi Temple
*Temple of Ninurta

Sculptures:
*Pair of Human Headed 'Lamassu' Lions (883859 BC)
*Human Headed 'Lamassu' Bull (883859 BC), sister piece in The Metropolitan Museum of Art
*Human Headed 'Lamassu' Lion (883859 BC), sister piece in The Metropolitan Museum of Art
*Colossal Statue of a Lion (883859 BC)
*Rare Head of Human Headed 'Lamassu', recovered from the South-West Palace of Esarhaddon
*The Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III (858824 BC)
*Statue of Ashurnasirpal II (883-859 BC)
*Statue of Idrimi (1600 BC)
*Uruk Trough (3300-3000 BC)

;Nineveh:

Alabaster bas-reliefs from:
*North-Palace of Ashurbanipal
*Royal Lion Hunt Scenes
*The 'Dying Lion', long been acclaimed as a masterpiece
*The 'Garden Party' Relief
*South-West Palace of Sennacherib

Royal Library of Ashurbanipal:
*A large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance approximately 22,000 inscribed clay tablets
*The Flood Tablet, relating part of the famous Epic of Gilgamesh

;Khorsabad:
*Alabaster bas-reliefs from the Palace of Sargon II
*Pair of Human Headed Winged 'Lamassu' Bulls

;Wider Collection:
*Cyrus Cylinder, from Babylon
*The Balawat Gates of Shalmaneser III
*A fine collection of Urartian bronzes, which now form the core of the Anatolian collection
*The Oxus Treasure
*The Standard of Ur
*The 'Ram in a Thicket'
*The Royal Game of Ur
*Queen's Lyre
*East India House Inscription from Babylon, Iraq
*The Punic-Libyan Inscription from the Mausoleum of Ateban, Dougga
*Shebna Inscription from Siloam near Jerusalem
*Plastered human skull from Jericho, one of the earliest form of portraiture in the Middle East
*Amran Tablets found near Sana'a, Yemen

File:Winged Human-headed Bulls.JPG|Room 10  Human Headed Winged Bulls from Khorsabad, companion pieces in the Muse du Louvre
File:London 307.JPG|Room 52  The Cyrus Cylinder; is regarded by many as the world's first documented charter of human rights
File:Oxus chariot model.jpg|Room 52  A chariot from the Oxus Treasure, most important surviving collection of Achaemenid Persian metalwork, circa 5th to 4th century BC
File:Raminathicket2.jpg|Room 56  The famous 'Ram in a Thicket' figure, from Ur, circa 2600 BC
File:Ishtar goddess.jpg|Room 56  The famous Babylonian 'Queen of the Night relief' of the goddess Ishtar, circa 1790 BC
File:Standard of Ur - War.jpg|Room 56  The famous 'Standard of Ur' figure, from Ur, circa 2600 BC
File:BM; ANE - RM 55, Cuneiform Tablets Display.1.JPG|Room 55  Cuneiform Collection, including the Epic of Gilgamesh
File:Jehu-on-Obelisk-of-Shalmaneser.jpg|Room 6  Depiction of the hypocrite, Jehu, King of Israel on the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, Nimrud, circa 827 BC

===Department of Prints and Drawings===
The Department of Prints and Drawings holds the national collection of Western Prints and Drawings. It ranks as one of the largest and best print room collections in existence alongside the Albertina in Vienna, the Paris collections and the Hermitage. The holdings are easily accessible to the general public in the Study Room, unlike many such collections. The Department also has its own exhibition gallery in Room 90, where the displays and exhibitions change several times a year. 

Since its foundation in 1808 the Prints and Drawings collection has grown to international renown as one of the richest and most representative collections in the world. There are approximately 50,000 drawings and over two million prints. The collection of drawings covers the period from the 14th century to the present, and includes many works of the highest quality by the leading artists of the European schools. The collection of prints covers the tradition of fine printmaking from its beginnings in the 15th century up to the present, with near complete holdings of most of the great names before the 19th century.

There are groups of drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, (including his only surviving full-scale cartoon), Drer (a collection of 138 drawings is one of the finest in existence), Peter Paul Rubens, Rembrandt, Claude and Watteau, and largely complete collections of the works of all the great printmakers including Drer (99 engravings, 6 etchings and most of his 346 woodcuts), Rembrandt and Goya. More than 30,000 British drawings and watercolours include important examples of work by Hogarth, Sandby, Turner, Girtin, Constable, Cotman, Cox, Gillray, Rowlandson and Cruikshank, as well as all the great Victorians. There are about a million British prints including more than 20,000 satires and outstanding collections of works by William Blake and Thomas Bewick.. The great eleven volume Catalogue of Political and Personal Satires Preserved in the Department of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum compiled between 1870 and 1954 is the definitive reference work for the study of British Satirical prints. Over 500,000 objects from the department are now on the online collection database, many with high quality images. Searches on 8 January 2012 return totals of 700,000, but many are in other departments A 2011 donation of 1 million enabled the museum to acquire a complete set of Pablo Picasso's Vollard Suite. 

File:Il Condottiere.jpg|Leonardo da Vinci  Profile of a warrior in helmet (c. 1472)
File:Adam study - Michelangelo.jpg|Michelangelo  Studies of a reclining male nude: Adam in the fresco 'The Creation of Man' on the vault of the Sistine Chapel (c. 1511)
File:Raffaello, studio per una delle sibille.jpg|Raphael  Study of a Sibyl (recto) (c. 1512-12)
File:Titian - Drowning of the Pharaoh's Host in the Red Sea - WGA22989.jpg|Titian  Drowning of the Pharaoh's Host in the Red Sea (151517)
File:The Lamentation at the Foot of the Cross by Rembrandt van Rijn.jpg|Rembrandt  The Lamentation at the Foot of the Cross (163435)
File:Sir Theodore Mayerne drawing by Peter Paul Rubens.jpg|Rubens  Sir Thodore de Mayerne, a portrait drawing (c. 1630)
File:Albrecht Drer - Walrus - WGA07101.jpg|Drawing of a walrus by Albrecht Drer (1521)

===Department of Prehistory and Europe===
The Department of Prehistory and Europe is responsible for collections that cover a vast expanse of time and geography. It includes the some of the earliest objects made by humans 2 million years ago; the art and archaeology of Europe from the earliest times to the present day, including the history of Britain under Roman occupation. It also includes the national collection of horology. In particular, the British Museum's collections covering the period AD 300 to 1100 are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world, extending from Spain to the Black Sea and from North Africa to Scandinavia.

Key highlights of the collections include:

Prehistoric
*Ringlemere Cup
*Gold cup from the Rillaton Barrow in Cornwall
*Folkton Drums
*Dunaverney flesh-hook found near Ballymoney, Northern Ireland
*Large ceremonial swords or dirks from Oxborough and Beaune
*Bronze shields from Moel Hebog and Rhyd-y-gors, Wales
*Gold lunula from Blessington, Ireland
*Early Bronze Age hoard from Snowshill, Gloucestershire
*Sintra Collar, Portugal
*Terracotta figurine from Vina, Serbia
*Basse Yutz Flagons from Moselle, eastern France
*Cordoba Treasure from Andalusia, Spain
*Orense Torcs from northwest Spain
*Lochar Moss Torc from southwest Scotland and Great Torc from Snettisham in Norfolk
*Bronze Age hoards from Zsujta, Forr and Paks-Dunafldvr in Hungary

Romano-British
*Vindolanda Tablets
*Thetford Hoard
*Capheaton Treasure

Early Mediaeval
*The Sutton Hoo treasure
*Part of the Domagnano, Artres, Sutri, Bergamo and Belluno Treasures
*Lycurgus Cup
*Franks Casket
*Lothair Crystal
*Saint-Denis Crystal
*Kells Crozier
*Bell Shrine of St. Cuilein
*Londesborough Brooch and Breadalbane Brooch
*Fuller and Strickland Brooches
*Lilleberge Viking Burial and Troms Burial from Norway

Mediaeval
*The Lewis chessmen
*Royal Gold Cup
*Holy Thorn Reliquary
*Reliquary of St. Eustace
*Borradaile Triptych
*Wernher Triptych
*John Grandisson Triptych
*Dunstable Swan Jewel

The many hoards of treasure include the Mildenhall Treasure, Esquiline Treasure, Carthage Treasure, First Cyprus Treasure, Lampsacus Treasure, Water Newton Treasure, Hoxne Hoard, and Vale of York Hoard.

File:British Museum Olduvai handaxe.jpg|Room 2  Handaxe, Lower Palaeolithic, Olduvai Gorge, circa 1.2 million years
File:Sleeping Reindeer 4512630872 d31dcb1207 o.jpg|Room 3  Swimming Reindeer carving, France, Ice-Age 13,000 years (both one of the world's oldest works of art, as well as the oldest work of art in the British Museum's collection) http://my.page-flip.co.uk/?userpath=00000013/00012513/00053413/&page=11 
File:Lovers 9000BC british museum.jpg|Room 2  Ain Sakhri lovers, from the cave of Ain Sakhri, near Bethlehem, 11,000 years old (oldest known representation of two people engaged in sexual intercourse) http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/pe_prb/p/ain_sakhri_lovers_figurine.aspx 
File:British Museum gold thing 501594 fh000035.jpg|Room 51  Mold gold cape, North Wales, Bronze Age, c. 19001600 BC (one of the finest examples of prehistoric sheet-gold working)
File:Mosaic2 - plw.jpg|Room 49  Hinton St Mary Mosaic, Roman Britain, circa 4th century (one of the earliest representations of Christ and the only such portrait on a mosaic floor from anywhere in the Roman Empire)
File:Sutton hoo helmet room 1 no flashbrightness ajusted.JPG|Room 2  Sutton Hoo helmet, Angle-Saxon, early 7th century AD
File:British Museum Royal Gold Cup.jpg|Room 40  Royal Gold Cup or Saint Agnes Cup, c. AD 137080 (generally agreed to be the outstanding surviving example of late medieval French plate)
File:Front View of Thorn Reliquary.jpg|Room 45  Holy Thorn Reliquary, Paris, c. AD 1390s

===Department of Asia===

The scope of the Department of Asia is extremely broad, its collections of over 75,000 objects covers the material culture of the whole Asian continent (from East, South, Central and South-East Asia) and from the Neolithic up to the present day. 

Key highlights of the collections include: 

*The most comprehensive collection of sculpture from the Indian subcontinent in the world, including the celebrated Buddhist limestone reliefs from Amaravati 
*An outstanding collection of Chinese antiquities, paintings, and porcelain, lacquer, bronze, jade, and other applied arts
*A fine collection of Buddhist paintings from Dunhuang and the Admonitions Scroll by Chinese artist Gu Kaizhi (344406 AD)
*The most comprehensive collection of Japanese pre-20th century art in the Western world
*The famous Sambas Treasure of buddhist gold and silver figures from west Borneo
*Statue of Tara from Sri Lanka
*The Kulu Vase found near the Gandhola Monastery in Himachel Pradesh
*The Wardak Vase with its important Kharoshthi inscription
*The colossal Amitbha Buddha from Hancui, China
*Seated Luohan from Yixian, one from a set of eight surviving statues
*Huixian Bronze Hu, an identical pair of bronze vessels from the Eastern Zhou Period
*Bronze bell from Klang, Malaysia
*Bracket figure from one of the gateways to the Great Stupa, Sanchi

File:BrMus Amravati.jpg|Amaravati Sculptures, 1st century BC and 3rd century AD
File:Ku K'ai-chih 001.jpg|Section of the Admonitions Scroll by Chinese artist Gu Kaizhi, c. 380 AD
File:Ku K'ai-chih 002.jpg|Further section of the Admonitions Scroll by Chinese artist Gu Kaizhi, c. 380 AD
File:Indischer Maler um 1615 (I) 001.jpg|Portrait of Ibrhm 'dil Shh II (15801626), Mughal Empire of India, 1615 AD
File:CrystalGoose.JPG|A Hamsa sacred swan vessel made of crystal, from Gandhara, 1st century AD
File:Periodo degli zhou dell'est, coppia di vasi rituali hu. V sec. ac. 01.JPG|One of the hu from Huixian
File:Amitabha BM OA 1938.7-15.1.jpg|The Amitbha Buddha from Hancui on display in the museum's stairwell
File:Luhn at British Museum.jpg|The luohan from Yixian made of glazed stoneware

===Department of Africa, Oceania and the Americas===
The British Museum houses one of the world's most comprehensive collections of Ethnographic material from Africa, Oceania and the Americas, representing the cultures of indigenous peoples throughout the world. Over 350,000 objects spanning two million years tells the story of the history of man, from three major continents and many rich and diverse cultures.

The Sainsbury African Galleries display 600 objects from the greatest permanent collection of African arts and culture in the world. The three permanent galleries provide a substantial exhibition space for the Museum's African collection comprising over 200,000 objects. A curatorial scope that encompasses both archaeological and contemporary material, including both unique masterpieces of artistry and objects of everyday life.

Highlights of the African collection include the Benin Bronzes, the beautiful Bronze Head of Queen Idia, a magnificent brass head of a Yoruba ruler from Ife, Nigeria; Asante goldwork from Ghana, the Torday collection of Central African sculpture, textiles and weaponry and the unique Luzira Head from Uganda.

The Americas collection mainly consists of 19th and 20th century items although the Inca, Aztec, Maya, Taino and other early cultures are well represented; they include a spectacular series of Mayan lintels from Yaxchilan, a collection of turquoise Aztec mosaics from Mexico and a group of Zemi Figures from Vere, Jamaica; collecting of modern artefacts is ongoing.

File:Wellcome Trust Gallery + Living & Dying (Room 24).jpg|Room 24  The Wellcome Trust Gallery with Hoa Hakananai'a in the centre
File:Otobo masquerade.jpg|Otobo masquerade

===Department of Coins and Medals===
The British Museum is home to one of the world's finest numismatic collections, comprising about a million objects. The collection spans the entire history of coinage from its origins in the 7th century BC to the present day. There are approximately 9,000 coins, medals and banknotes on display around the British Museum. More than half of these can be found in the HSBC Money Gallery (Gallery 68), while the remainder form part of the permanent displays throughout the Museum. Items from the full collection can be seen by the general public in the Study Room by appointment. 

===Department of Conservation and Scientific Research===
This department was founded in 1920. Conservation has six specialist areas: ceramics & glass; metals; organic material (including textiles); stone, wall paintings and mosaics; Eastern pictorial art and Western pictorial art. The science department British Museum  Conservation and Scientific Research has and continues to develop techniques to date artefacts, analyse and identify the materials used in their manufacture, to identify the place an artefact originated and the techniques used in their creation. The department also publishes its findings and discoveries.

===Libraries and Archives===
This department covers all levels of education, from casual visitors, schools, degree level and beyond. The Museum's various libraries hold in excess of 350,000 books, journals and pamphlets covering all areas of the museum's collection. Also the general Museum archives which date from its foundation in 1753 are overseen by this department; the individual departments have their own separate archives and libraries covering their various areas of responsibility, which can be consulted by the public on application. The Anthropology Library is especially large, with 120,000 volumes See the "Facilities and Services" tab on the home page for each department for details on each library; not all are kept at Bloomsbury. Anthropology Library However, the Paul Hamlyn Library, which had become the central reference library of the British Museum and the only library there freely open to the general public, closed permanently in August 2011. The website and online database of the collection also provide increasing amounts of information.

==British Museum Press==
The British Museum Press (BMP) is the publishing business and a division of the British Museum Company Ltd, a company and a charity (established in 1973) wholly owned by the Trustees of the British Museum. 

The BMP publishes both popular and scholarly illustrated books to accompany the exhibition programme and explore aspects of the general collection. Profits from their sales goes to support the British Museum. 

Scholarly titles are published in the Research Publications series, all of which are peer-reviewed. This series was started in 1978 and was originally called Occasional Papers. The series is designed to disseminate research on items in the collection. Between six and eight titles are published each year in this series. 

==Controversy==
A few of the Elgin Marbles (also known as the Parthenon Marbles) from the East Pediment of the Parthenon.

It is a point of controversy whether museums should be allowed to possess artefacts taken from other countries, and the British Museum is a notable target for criticism. The Elgin Marbles, Benin Bronzes and the Rosetta Stone are among the most disputed objects in its collections, and organisations have been formed demanding the return of these artefacts to their native countries of Greece, Nigeria and Egypt respectively.

The British Museum has refused to return these artefacts, stating that the "restitutionist premise, that whatever was made in a country must return to an original geographical site, would empty both the British Museum and the other great museums of the world". The Museum has also argued that the British Museum Act of 1963 legally prevents any object from leaving its collection once it has entered it. Nevertheless, it has returned items such as the Tasmanian Ashes after a 20-year long battle with Australia. 

The British Museum continues to assert that it is an appropriate custodian and has an inalienable right to its disputed artefacts under British law.

===Disputed items in the collection===
*Elgin Marbles  claimed by Greece and backed by UNESCO among others for restitution Breal's Silver Cup to be displayed at the New Acropolis Museum for one-year period from September 2012 
*Benin Bronzes  claimed by Nigeria, 30 pieces sold already by The British Museum privately in the 1960s 
* Ethiopian Tabots  claimed by Ethiopia 
* 4 stolen drawings (Nazi plunder)  Compensation paid to Uri Peled in the amount of 175,000 by the British Museum 
* Achaemenid empire gold and silver artefacts from the Oxus Treasure  claimed by Tajikistan 
* Aboriginal human remains  returned to Tasmania by the British Museum 
* Rosetta Stone  claimed by Egypt 
* Some 24,000+ scrolls, manuscripts, paintings, scriptures, and relics from the Mogao Caves, including the Diamond Sutra  claimed by the People's Republic of China Larmer, Brook. 2010, "Caves of Faith", p. 136-138, National Geographic Magazine, June 2010. 

==Galleries==
;Building

File:BM, Main Floor Main Entrance Hall ~ South Stairs.6.JPG|Main Staircase, Discobolus of Myron (the Discus-Thrower)
File:British Museum Reading Room Panorama Feb 2006.jpg|British Museum Reading Room
File:British Museum 2010-06-04 B.jpg|Ceiling of the Great Court and the black siltstone obelisks of Nectanebo II, c. 350 BC
File:Flickr - Nic's events - British Museum with Cory and Mary, 6 Sep 2007 - 183.jpg|Detail of an Ionic capital on a pilaster in the Great Court
File:England; London - The British Museum, Facade South Front ~ -Main Entrance + West Wing- Collonade + The Africa Garden.2.JPG|African Garden  created by BBC TV programme Ground Force

;Museum Galleries
Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan

File:BM, AES Egyptian Sculpture (Room 4), View South + Towards Assyrian Sculpture Gallery (Room 6).JPG|Room 4  Egyptian Sculpture, view towards the Assyrian Transept
File:BM, AES Egyptian Sculpture (Room 4), View North.3.JPG|Room 4
File:Egyptian Gallery.JPG|Room 4

Department of the Middle East

File:BM; RM6 - ANE, Assyrian Sculpture 32 -East (N), Centre Island + North Wall- ~ Assyrian Empire + -Lamassu, Stela's, Statue's, Obelisk's, Relief Panel's & Full Projection.1.jpg|The British Museum, Room 6  Assyrian Sculpture
File:BM; RM8 - ANE, Nimrud Palace Reliefs 75 South + East Wall (S) ~ Central Palace of Tiglath-pileser III (744-727 B.C) + Full Elevation & Viewing South.1.JPG| Room 8  Pair of Lamassu from Nimrud & reliefs from the palace of Tiglath-Pileser III
File:BM; RM7 - ANE, Nimrud Palace Reliefs 1 Northwest Palace of Ashurnasirpal II (883-859 B.C) ~ Full Elevation & Viewing South.JPG| Room 7  Reliefs from the North-west palace of Ashurnasirpal II, Nimrud
File:BM; ANE - RM 89, Assyrian Reliefs ~ Nineveh.JPG| Room 89  Nimrud & Nineveh Palace Reliefs
File:BM; ANE - Nineveh, The Royal Lion Hunt (Room 10).JPG| Room 10  Nineveh, The Royal Lion Hunt
File:Dying Lion.R.jpg|Room 55  The Dying Lion, Nineveh, Neo-Assyrian, c. 645 BC (long considered a masterpiece of Assyrian art)

File:Carved ivory depicting a woman at a window.jpg|Carved ivory object from the Nimrud Ivories, Phoenician, Nimrud, 9th8th century BC (the Nimrud Ivories are widely considered to be one of the Ancient Near East's greatest discoveries)

Department of Greece and Rome

File:Parthenon Frieze.JPG|Room 18  Ancient Greece
File:Tomb of Merehi 1.jpg|Room 20a  Tomb of Merehi & Greek Vases, Lycia, 360 BC
File:British Museum - Room 85, Roman Portrait Sculpture.JPG|Room 85  Portrait Sculpture, Roman
File:BM; GMR - RM 83, Roman Sculpture.JPG|Room 83  Roman Sculpture
File:SFEC BritMus Roman 022.JPG|Main Staircase  Discobolus, Roman
File:The Townley Caryatid (anterior).jpg|Main Staircase  Townley Caryatid, Roman, 140160 AD
File:Marble Statue of Demeter.jpg|Room 22  Demeter of Knidos, western Turkey, 350330 BC

Department of Prints and Drawings

File:Leonardo da vinci, Study for the Burlington House Cartoon.jpg|Leonardo da Vinci  The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and the Infant Saint John the Baptist ('The Burlington House Cartoon') (c. 14991500)
File:Michelangelo Epifania.jpg|Room 90  Michelangelo's Epifania  his only surviving large scale cartoon (155053)
File:Raffaello, studio di testa di madonna e bambino.jpg|Raphael  Study of Heads, Mother and Child (c. 1509/11)

Department of Prehistory and Europe

File:Ship Clock at British Museum.jpg|Room 3839  Mechanical Galleon, Augsburg, around AD 1585

;Exhibitions
Forgotten Empire Exhibition (October 2005  January 2006)

File:Forgotten Empire Exhibition, (Room 5).1.JPG | Room 5  Exhibitions Panorama
File:Persepolis.JPG| Room 5  The Persepolis Casts
File:BM; ANE - Forgotten Empire Exhibition, (Room 5).3.JPG | Room 5  Exhibitions Relics
File:BM; ANE - Forgotten Empire Exhibition, The Cyrus Cylinder (Room 5).JPG| Room 5  The Cyrus Cylinder

==See also==
*A History of the World in 100 Objects
*Employees of the British Museum
*People associated with the British Museum
*The British Museum Friends

==Notes==
a. Sculptures and applied art are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum houses earlier art, non-Western art, prints and drawings, and art of a later date is at Tate Modern. The National Gallery, holds the National Collection of Western European Art, with Tate Britain deposited with British Art from 1500.

b. By the Act of Parliament it received a name  the British Museum. The origin of the name is not known; the word 'British' had some resonance nationally at this period, so soon after the Jacobite rebellion of 1745; it must be assumed that the Museum was christened in this light. The question of the use of the term 'British' at this period has recently received some attention, e.g. Colley (1992), 85ff. There never has been a serious attempt to change the Museum's name. 

c. The estimated footage of the various libraries as reported to the Trustees has been summarised by Harris (1998), 3,6: Sloane 4,600, Harley 1,700, Cotton 384, Edwards 576, The Royal Library 1,890.

d. This was perhaps rather unfortunate as the title to the house was complicated by the fact that part of the building had been erected on leasehold property (the Crown lease of which ran out in 1771); perhaps that is why George III paid such a modest price (nominally 28,000) for what was to become Buckingham Palace. See Howard Colvinet al. (1976), 134.

e. Understanding of the foundation of the National Gallery is complicated by the fact that there is no documented history of the institution. At first the National Gallery functioned effectively as part of the British Museum, to which the Trustees transferred most of their most important pictures (ex. portraits). Full control was handed over to the National Gallery in 1868, after the Act of Parliament of 1856 established the Gallery as an independent body.

f. Ashmole, the Keeper of the Greek and Roman Antiquities appreciated the original top-lighting of these galleries and removed the Victorian colour scheme, commenting:
The old Elgin Gallery was painted a deep terracotta red, which, though in some ways satisfactory, diminished its apparent size, and was apt to produce a depressing effect on the visitor. It was decided to experiment with lighter colours, and the walls of the large room were painted with what was, at its first application, a pure cold white, but which after a year's exposure had unfortunately yellowed. The small Elgin Room was painted with pure white tinted with prussian blue, and the Room of the metopes was painted with pure white tinted with cobalt blue and black; it was necessary, for practical reasons, to colour all the dadoes a darker colour Quoted Ashmole (1994), 125 

g. Ashmole had never liked the Duveen Gallery:
It is, I suppose, not positively bad, but it could have been infinitely better. It is pretentious, in that it uses the ancient Marbles to decorate itself. This is a long outmoded idea, and the exact opposite of what a sculpture gallery should do. And, although it incorporates them, it is out of scale, and tends to dwarf them with its bogus Doric features, including those columns, supporting almost nothing which would have made an ancient Greek artist architect wince. The source of daylight is too high above the sculptures, a fault that is only concealed by the amount of reflection from the pinkish marble walls. These are too similar in colour to the marbles...These half-dozen elementary errors were pointed out by everyone in the Museum, and by many scholars outside, when the building was projected. Ashmole (1994), 126 

It was not until the 1980s that the installation, of a lighting scheme removed his greatest criticism of the building.

h. The Cairo Museum has 200,000 artefacts, with leading collections reposited at the Egyptian Museum of Berlin (100,000), Muse du Louvre (60,000), Petrie Museum (80,000), The Metropolitan Museum of art (26,000), University of Pennsylvania (42,000), Ashmolean Museum (40,000), Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (40,000), Museo Egizio, Turin (32,500 objects).

==References==

==Further reading==
*Anderson, Robert (2005). The Great Court and the British Museum. London: The British Museum Press
*Arrowsmith, Rupert Richard. Modernism and the Museum: Asian, African and Pacific Art and the London Avant Garde. Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 103164. ISBN 978-0-19-959369-9.
*Arrowsmith, Rupert Richard. "The Transcultural Roots of Modernism: Imagist Poetry, Japanese Visual Culture, and the Western Museum System", Modernism/modernity Volume 18, Number 1, January 2011, pp. 2742. ISSN: 1071-6068.
*Caygill, Marjorie (2006). The British Museum: 250 Years. London: The British Museum Press
*Caygill, Marjorie (2002). The Story of the British Museum. London: The British Museum Press
*Cook, B. F. (2005). The Elgin Marbles. London: The British Museum Press
*Esdaile, Arundell (1946) . London: Allen & Unwin
*Jenkins, Ian (2006). Greek Architecture and its Sculpture in The British Museum. London: The British Museum Press
*Francis, Frank, ed. (1971) Treasures of the British Museum. London: Thames & Hudson (rev. ed., 1975)
*Moser, Stephanie (2006). Wondrous Curiosities: Ancient Egypt at The British Museum. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
*Reade, Julian (2004). Assyrian Sculpture. London: The British Museum Press
*Reeve, John (2003). The British Museum: Visitor's Guide. London: The British Museum Press
*Wilson, David M. (2002). The British Museum: a history. London: The British Museum Press

==External links==

* Official website
* 360 panoramas and images from 14 rooms in the British Museum
* The British Museum from The Survey of London
* British Museum elevation
*

 



[[Bloody Sunday]]

Bloody Sunday may refer to:

==Events==
* Colfax massacre (1873), a race riot in Louisiana, following a disputed gubernatorial election
* Bloody Sunday (1887), a demonstration in London, England against British repression in Ireland
* Bloody Sunday (1900), a day of high casualties in the Second Boer War, South Africa
* Bloody Sunday (1905), a massacre in Saint Petersburg, Russia that led to the 1905 Russian Revolution.
* Everett massacre (1916), violence in Washington, United States between trade union members and local authorities
* Marburg's Bloody Sunday (1919), a massacre of civilians of German ethnic origin in Maribor during the protest at the central city square
* Bloody Sunday (1920), a day of violence in Dublin, Ireland during the Irish War of Independence
* Bloody Sunday (1921), a day of violence in Belfast, Northern Ireland during the Irish War of Independence
* Bloody Sunday (1923), a day of violence in Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia during miners' strikes
* Bloody Sunday (1926), a day of violence in Alsace
* Altona Bloody Sunday (1932), a bloody confrontation among the Sturmabteilung (SA) and Schutzstaffel (SS), the police, and Communist Party (KPD) supporters in Altona, Hamburg
* Bloody Sunday (1938), police violence against unemployment protesters in Vancouver, Canada
* Bloody Sunday (1939), aka Bromberg Bloody Sunday, a massacre in Bydgoszcz, Poland, at the onset of World War II
* Bloody Sunday (1965), a violent attack during the first of the Selma to Montgomery marches in Alabama, United States
* Bloody Sunday (1969), violence after a protest in Taksim Square, Istanbul, Turkey
* Bloody Sunday (1972), shooting of civilian protesters by the British Army (Parachute Regiment) in Londonderry, Northern Ireland
** Bloody Sunday Inquiry (1998), an inquiry commissioned by Tony Blair to investigate the killings of 1972
* January Events (Lithuania), a January 13, 1991 attack on civilians is referred to as Bloody Sunday in Lithuania

==Music==
Several songs have been written about the Bloody Sunday (1972) in Northern Ireland, including:
* "Sunday Bloody Sunday", a 1972 song from the album Some Time in New York City, by John Lennon & Yoko Ono
* "Bloody Sunday", a 1979 song by Stiff Little Fingers
* "Sunday Bloody Sunday", a 1983 song by U2

==Media==
* Bloody Sunday, a 2006 radio programme on Australian network Triple J
* Sunday Bloody Sunday (film), a 1971 film directed by John Schlesinger
* Bloody Sunday (TV film), a 2002 film depicting a version of events of Bloody Sunday 1972
* , a play by English journalist Richard Norton-Taylor

==See also==
*Black Sunday (disambiguation)



[[Binomial theorem]]

The binomial coefficients appear as the entries of Pascal's triangle where each entry is the sum of the two above it.
In elementary algebra, the binomial theorem describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial. According to the theorem, it is possible to expand the power (x + y)n into a sum involving terms of the form ax'b'y'c, where the exponents b and c are nonnegative integers with b + c n, and the coefficient a of each term is a specific positive integer depending on n and b. When an exponent is zero, the corresponding power is usually omitted from the term. For example,

:

The coefficient a in the term of ax'b'y'c is known as the binomial coefficient or (the two have the same value). These coefficients for varying n and b can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle. These numbers also arise in combinatorics, where gives the number of different combinations of b elements that can be chosen from an n-element set.

==History==
This formula and the triangular arrangement of the binomial coefficients are often attributed to Blaise Pascal, who described them in the 17th century, but they were known to many mathematicians who preceded him. For instance the 4th century B.C. Greek mathematician Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent 2 Binomial Theorem The Story of the Binomial Theorem by J. L. Coolidge, The American Mathematical Monthly 56:3 (1949), pp. 147157 as did the 3rd century B.C. Indian mathematician Pingala to higher orders. A more general binomial theorem and the so-called "Pascal's triangle" were known in the 10th-century A.D. to Indian mathematician Halayudha. Persian mathematician Al-Karaji, in the 11th century was aware of a more general binomial theorem, along with Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam, and in the 13th century to Chinese mathematician Yang Hui, who all derived similar results. Al-Karaji also provided a mathematical proof of both the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, using a primitive form of mathematical induction. 
Sir Isaac Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent.

==Statement of the theorem==
According to the theorem, it is possible to expand any power of x + y into a sum of the form

:

where each is a specific positive integer known as binomial coefficient. This formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity. Using summation notation, it can be written as

:
The final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of x and y in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetrical.

A simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting 1 for y, so that it involves only a single variable. In this form, the formula reads

:

or equivalently

:

==Examples==
Pascal's triangle
The most basic example of the binomial theorem is the formula for the square of x + y:

:

The binomial coefficients 1, 2, 1 appearing in this expansion correspond to the third row of Pascal's triangle. The coefficients of higher powers of x + y correspond to later rows of the triangle:

:
Notice that 
#the powers of x go down until it reaches 0 (), starting value is n (the n in .)
#the powers of y go up from 0 () until it reaches n (also the n in .)
#the nth row of the Pascal's Triangle will be the coefficients of the expanded binomial. (Note that the top is row 0.)
#for each line, the number of products (i.e. the sum of the coefficients) is equal to .
#for each line, the number of product groups is equal to .
The binomial theorem can be applied to the powers of any binomial. For example,

:

For a binomial involving subtraction, the theorem can be applied as long as the opposite of the second term is used. This has the effect of changing the sign of every other term in the expansion:
:

Another useful example is that of the expansion of the following square roots:
:

:

===Geometric explanation===
315px
For positive values of a and b, the binomial theorem with n = 2 is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side a + b can be cut into a square of side a, a square of side b, and two rectangles with sides a and b. With n = 3, the theorem states that a cube of side a + b can be cut into a cube of side a, a cube of side b, three a&times;a&times;b rectangular boxes, and three a&times;b&times;b rectangular boxes.

In calculus, this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative if one sets and interpreting b as an infinitesimal change in a, then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an n-dimensional hypercube, where the coefficient of the linear term (in ) is the area of the n faces, each of dimension 
:
Substituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms  and higher  become negligible, and yields the formula interpreted as
:"the infinitesimal change in volume of an n-cube as side length varies is the area of n of its -dimensional faces".
If one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus, one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula, the integral  see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details. 

==The binomial coefficients==

The coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients. These are usually written , and pronounced n choose k.

===Formulae===
The coefficient of x'n&minus;k'y'k is given by the formula

:,

which is defined in terms of the factorial function n!. Equivalently, this formula can be written

:

with k factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction. Note that, although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient is actually an integer.

===Combinatorial interpretation===
The binomial coefficient can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose k elements from an n-element set. This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write (x + y)n as a product
:
then, according to the distributive law, there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either x or y from each of the binomials of the product. For example, there will only be one term x'n, corresponding to choosing x from each binomial. However, there will be several terms of the form x'n&minus;2y2, one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a y. Therefore, after combining like terms, the coefficient of x'n&minus;2y2 will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly 2 elements from an n-element set.

==Proofs==
===Combinatorial proof===
====Example====
The coefficient of xy2 in

: 

equals because there are three x,y strings of length 3 with exactly two ys, namely,

:

corresponding to the three 2-element subsets of { 1, 2, 3 }, namely,

:

where each subset specifies the positions of the y in a corresponding string.

====General case====
Expanding (x + y)n yields the sum of the 2 n products of the form e1e2 ... e n where each e i is x or y. Rearranging factors shows that each product equals x'n&minus;k'y'k for some k between 0 and n. For a given k, the following are proved equal in succession:
*the number of copies of x'n &minus; k'y'k in the expansion
*the number of n-character x,y strings having y in exactly k positions
*the number of k-element subsets of { 1, 2, ..., n}
* (this is either by definition, or by a short combinatorial argument if one is defining as ).
This proves the binomial theorem.

===Inductive proof===
Induction yields another proof of the binomial theorem (1). When n = 0, both sides equal 1, since x0 = 1 and .
Now suppose that (1) holds for a given n; we will prove it for n + 1.
For j, k  0, let y) jk denote the coefficient of x'j'y'k in the polynomial (x, y).
By the inductive hypothesis, (x + y)n is a polynomial in x and y such that + y)n j,k is if j + k = n, and 0 otherwise.
The identity

:

shows that (x + y)n+1 also is a polynomial in x and y, and

:

If j + k = n + 1, then (j &minus; 1) + k = n and j + (k &minus; 1) = n, so the right hand side is

:

by Pascal's identity. On the other hand, if j +k  n + 1, then (j  1) + k  n and j +(k  1)  n, so we get 0 + 0 = 0. Thus

:

which is the inductive hypothesis with n + 1 substituted for n and so completes the inductive step.

==Generalisations==
===Newton's generalised binomial theorem===

Around 1665, Isaac Newton generalised the formula to allow real exponents other than nonnegative integers, and in fact it can be generalised further, to complex exponents. In this generalisation, the finite sum is replaced by an infinite series. In order to do this one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the above formula with factorials; however factoring out (n  k)! from numerator and denominator in that formula, and replacing n by r which now stands for an arbitrary number, one can define

:

where is the Pochhammer symbol here standing for a falling factorial. Then, if x and y are real numbers with |x| > |y|, This is to guarantee convergence. Depending on r, the series may also converge sometimes when |x| = |y|. and r is any complex number, one has

:
When r is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for k > r are zero, so (2) specializes to (1), and there are at most r + 1 nonzero terms. For other values of r, the series (2) has infinitely many nonzero terms, at least if x and y are nonzero.

This is important when one is working with infinite series and would like to represent them in terms of generalised hypergeometric functions.

Taking r = &minus;s leads to a useful formula:

:

Further specializing to s = 1 yields the geometric series formula.

====Generalisations====
Formula (2) can be generalised to the case where x and y are complex numbers. For this version, one should assume |x| > |y| and define the powers of x + y and x using a holomorphic branch of log defined on an open disk of radius |x| centered at x.

Formula (2) is valid also for elements x and y of a Banach algebra as long as xy = yx, x is invertible, and ||y/x|| < 1.

===The multinomial theorem===

The binomial theorem can be generalised to include powers of sums with more than two terms. The general version is

:

where the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices k1 through k'm such that the sum of all k'i is n. (For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to n). The coefficients are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula

:

Combinatorially, the multinomial coefficient counts the number of different ways to partition an n-element set into disjoint subsets of sizes k1, ..., k'm.

=== The multi-binomial theorem ===
It is often useful when working in more dimensions, to deal with products of binomial expressions. By the binomial theorem this is equal to

:

This may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation, as 

:

==Applications==
===Multiple-angle identities===
For the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with De Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine. According to De Moivre's formula, 
:
Using the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for cos(nx) and sin(nx). For example, since
:
De Moivre's formula tells us that
:
which are the usual double-angle identities. Similarly, since
:
De Moivre's formula yields
:
In general,
:
and
:

===Series for e===
The number e is often defined by the formula

:

Applying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for e. In particular:

:

The kth term of this sum is

:

As n  , the rational expression on the right approaches one, and therefore

:

This indicates that e can be written as a series:

:

Indeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of n, it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to e.

==The binomial theorem in abstract algebra==

Formula (1) is valid more generally for any elements x and y of a semiring satisfying xy = yx. The theorem is true even more generally: alternativity suffices in place of associativity.

The binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence { 1, x, x2, x3, ... } is of binomial type.

==In popular culture==
*The binomial theorem is mentioned in the Major-General's Song in the comic opera The Pirates of Penzance.
*Professor Moriarty is described by Sherlock Holmes as having written a treatise on the binomial theorem.

== See also ==
* A Treatise on the Binomial Theorem
* Binomial approximation
* Binomial distribution
* Binomial inverse theorem
* Binomial probability
* Binomial series
* Combination
* Multinomial theorem
* Negative binomial distribution
* Pascal's triangle
* Stirling's approximation

==Notes==

==References==

*
*
*

== External links ==

*
*Binomial Theorem by Stephen Wolfram, and "Binomial Theorem (Step-by-Step)" by Bruce Colletti and Jeff Bryant, Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007.



[[Balboa]]

Balboa may refer to:
Vasco Nez de Balboa (c. 14701519), Spanish explorer

Balboa may also refer to:

== Places ==
* Balboa, Len, a Spanish village and municipality
* Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach, California, also called Balboa
* Balboa, Cauca, a town and municipality in Colombia
* Balboa High School (California), an American public high school of San Francisco, California
* Balboa Island, Newport Beach, California

* Balboa (lunar crater), a lunar crater that is located near the western limb of the Moon
* Balboa, Panama, a port city in Panama
** Balboa District, a district of Panam Province in Panama
* Balboa Park (disambiguation), any of several
* Balboa (Los Angeles Metro station), a station on the Los Angeles Metro Orange Line
* Balboa, Oregn
* Balboa, Risaralda
* Naval Medical Center San Diego, a US Navy medical treatment facility informally known as "Balboa Hospital"

== People ==
* Vasco Nez de Balboa, a Spanish explorer, governor, and conquistador
* Javier Balboa (born 1985), Equatoguinean football midfielder
* Marcelo Balboa (born 1967), American former soccer defender

== Entertainment ==
* Balboa (dance), a close embrace style of swing dancing
* Balboa (band), a hardcore band from Philadelphia
* Rocky Balboa, protagonist of the Rocky film series
* Balboa, the merged tribe name in 
* Balboa, a probe featured in Alien Planet
* Balboa Film Distributors, a film distribution company

== Other uses ==
* Chrysochlamys, a genus of plants
* Panamanian balboa, the official currency of Panama
* Balboa Beer, a Panamanian Lager Beer



[[Boxing Day]]

:"Christmas box" redirects here. For the genus of shrubs, see Sarcococca. For the film, see Boxing Day.

Boxing Day is traditionally the day following Christmas Day, when servants and tradesmen would receive gifts, known as a "Christmas box", from their bosses or employers. Today, Boxing Day is the bank holiday that generally takes place on 26 December. It is observed in the United Kingdom, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia, New Zealand, Kenya, South Africa, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago and other Commonwealth nations, as well as Norway, France and Sweden.

In South Africa, Boxing Day was renamed Day of Goodwill in 1994. In Ireland, Italy, Finland, and Alsace and Moselle in France, the day is known as St. Stephen's Day (Irish: L Fhile Stiofin) or the Day of the Wren (). In many European countries, including notably Germany, Poland, the Netherlands and those in Scandinavia, 26 December is celebrated as the Second Christmas Day. 

== Origins ==

The exact etymology of the term "boxing day" is unclear. There are several competing theories, none of which is definitive. Boxing Day, The European tradition, which has long included giving money and other gifts to those who were needy and in service positions, has been dated to the Middle Ages, but the exact origin is unknown. It is believed to be in reference to the Alms Box placed in places of worship to collect donations to the poor. Also, it may come from a custom in the late Roman/early Christian era, wherein metal boxes placed outside churches were used to collect special offerings tied to the Feast of Saint Stephen, Collins, 2003, p. 38. which in the Western Church falls on the same day as Boxing Day.

In Britain, it was a custom for tradesmen to collect "Christmas boxes" of money or presents on the first weekday after Christmas as thanks for good service throughout the year. Encyclopdia Britannica, 1953 "Boxing day" This is mentioned in Samuel Pepys' diary entry for 19 December 1663. 
This custom is linked to an older English tradition: since they would have to wait on their masters on Christmas Day, the servants of the wealthy were allowed the next day to visit their families. The employers would give each servant a box to take home containing gifts and bonuses, and maybe sometimes leftover food.

== Date ==

Boxing Day is a secular holiday that is traditionally celebrated on 26 December, the day after Christmas Day, which is also St. Stephen's Day, a religious holiday. American Heritage Dictionary, Fourth Edition  'Boxing Day' Oxford English When 26 December falls on a Sunday, Boxing Day in many Commonwealth countries and former British dominions is moved to 27 December. In the UK, Boxing Day is a bank holiday. If Boxing Day falls on a Saturday, the following Monday is given as a substitute bank holiday. On the occasion when Christmas Day is on a Saturday  with Boxing Day on the Sunday  the following Monday (27) and Tuesday (28) of December both become bank holidays.

In Scotland, Boxing Day has been specified as an additional bank holiday since 1974, by Royal Proclamation under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971. Scottish Government website  bank holidays 

In Ireland  when the island as a whole was part of the United Kingdom  the Bank Holidays Act 1871 established the feast day of St. Stephen as a non-movable public holiday on 26 December. Since the creation of the Republic of Ireland following partition in 1920, Northern Ireland  being part of the United Kingdom  officially reverted to use of the British name 'Boxing Day'.

In Australia, Boxing Day is a federal public holiday. In the Australian state of South Australia, 28 December is a public holiday known as Proclamation Day and Boxing Day is not normally a public holiday. The holiday for Proclamation Day is observed on the first weekday after Christmas Day or the Christmas Day holiday. Public Holidays 
Nowadays Boxing Day is popular in Australia as the first day of a Test cricket match held at the MCG. A Test match is also often held in South Africa starting on Boxing Day.

In New Zealand Boxing Day is a statutory holiday; penalty rates and lieu time are provided to employees who work on the day.

In Canada, Boxing day is a federal statutory holiday. Government offices, banks and post offices/delivery are closed. In some Canadian provinces, Boxing Day is a statutory holiday that is always celebrated on 26 December. In Canadian provinces where Boxing Day was a statutory holiday, and it falls on a Saturday or Sunday, compensation days are given in the following week. 

== Shopping ==

Boxing Day crowds shopping at the Toronto Eaton Centre in Canada, 2007

In Britain, Canada, and some states of Australia, Boxing Day is primarily known as a shopping holiday, much like Black Friday (the day after Thanksgiving) in the US. Boxing Day sales are common in Canada. It is a time where shops have sales, often with dramatic price reductions. For many merchants, Boxing Day has become the day of the year with the greatest amount of returns. In the UK in 2009 it was estimated that up to 12 million shoppers appeared at the sales (a rise of almost 20% compared to 2008, although this was also affected by the fact that the VAT would revert to 17.5% from 1 January, following the temporary reduction to 15%). 

Many retailers open very early (typically 5 am or even earlier) and offer doorbuster deals and loss leaders to draw people to their stores. It is not uncommon for long queues to form early in the morning of 26 December, hours before the opening of shops holding the big sales, especially at big-box consumer electronics retailers. Many stores have a limited quantity of big draw or deeply discounted items. Because of the shoulder-to-shoulder crowds, many choose to stay home and avoid the hectic shopping experience. The local media often cover the event, mentioning how early the shoppers began queueing up, providing video of shoppers queueing and later leaving with their purchased items. Many retailers have implemented practices aimed at managing large numbers of shoppers. They may limit entrances, restrict the number of patrons in a store at a time, provide tickets to people at the head of the queue to guarantee them a hot ticket item or canvass queued-up shoppers to inform them of inventory limitations. 

In recent years, retailers have expanded deals to "Boxing Week". While Boxing Day is 26 December, many retailers will run the sales for several days before or after 26 December, often up to New Year's Eve. Notably, in the recession of late 2008, a record number of retailers were holding early promotions due to a weak economy. Canada's Boxing Day has often been compared with the American Super Saturday, the Saturday before Christmas.

In some areas of Canada, particularly in Atlantic Canada and parts of Northern Ontario (including Sault Ste. Marie and Sudbury), most retailers are prohibited from opening on Boxing Day, either by provincial law or municipal bylaw, or instead by informal agreement among major retailers to provide a day of relaxation following Christmas Day. In these areas, sales otherwise scheduled for 26 December are moved to the 27th. 

In the Republic of Ireland, since 1902, most shops remain closed on St. Stephen's Day. In 2009, some stores decided to open on this day, breaking a 107-year-old tradition.

In 2009, many retailers with both online and High Street stores launched their online sales on Christmas Eve and their High Street sales on Boxing Day. 

== Sport ==
In the United Kingdom, it is traditional for the Premier League (England), Scottish Premiership (Scotland) and NIFL Premiership (Northern Ireland), as well as the lower divisions and rugby leagues, to hold a full programme of football and rugby league matches on Boxing Day. Traditionally, matches on Boxing Day are played against local rivals. This was originally to avoid teams and their fans having to travel a long distance to an away game on the day after Christmas Day. It also makes the day an important one in the sporting calendar. In Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, much anticipated Test matches are played on Boxing Day. Prior to the formation of leagues, a number of important rugby fixtures took place on Boxing Day notably Llanelli v London Welsh and Leicester v The Barbarians.

In horse racing, there is the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park Racecourse in Surrey. It is the second most prestigious chase in Britain, after the Cheltenham Gold Cup.

Boxing Day Meet of the Blencathra Foxhounds in Keswick, 1962

Boxing Day is one of the main days in the hunting calendar for hunts in the UK and US, with most hunts (both mounted foxhound or harrier packs and foot packs of beagles or bassets) holding meets, often in town or village centres.

Australia holds the first day of the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne at the Melbourne Cricket Ground and the start to the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race.

Several ice hockey contests are associated with the day. The IIHF World U20 Championship typically begins on 26 December, while the Spengler Cup also begins on 26 December in Davos, Switzerland; the Spengler Cup competition includes HC Davos, Team Canada, and other top European Hockey teams. The National Hockey League tends to have close to a full slate of games (11 were played in 2010), following the league-wide days off given for Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. In some African Commonwealth nations, particularly Ghana, Uganda, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania, prize fighting contests are held on Boxing Day. This practice has also been followed for decades in Guyana and Italy. 

A notable tradition in Sweden is Annandagsbandy, bandy on Boxing Day, which formerly marked the start of the bandy season and always draw large crowds. Matches traditionally begin at 1:15 pm. 

== References ==
Notes

== External links ==

* Snopes: The Origins of Boxing Day



[[Balochistan, Pakistan]]

Balochistan (Balochi, Pashto:  , , ), is a province of southwestern Pakistan. It spreads primarily along the eastern part of the geographic region of Balochistan. It is the largest of Pakistan's four administrative provinces in terms of area, constituting approximately 44% of the country's total land mass, and the smallest in terms of population, being home to less than 5% of the country's population. Balochistan province is bordered by Afghanistan to the north and north-west, Iran to the south-west, the Arabian Sea to the south, Punjab and Sindh to the east, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the north-east. Quetta is the capital and largest city of Balochistan.

The main ethnic groups in the province are Baloch, Pashtuns and Brahuis, and there are relatively smaller communities of Iranian Baloch, Hazaras, Sindhis and other settlers, including Punjabis, Uzbeks, and Turkmens. The name Balochistan means "the land of the Baloch" in many regional languages.

==History==

A Baloch shepherd, from a 1900 photo
Quetta cantonment in 1889

===Early history===

Balochistan occupies the southeastern most portion of the Iranian Plateau, the site of the earliest known farming settlements in the pre-Indus Valley Civilization era, the earliest of which was Mehrgarh dated at 7000 BC. Balochistan was one of the first places Zoroaster travelled to from Bactria in search of converts to his religion. Some of the first proselytes of his religion lived here before Zoroastrianism spread into western portions of the Iranian plateau. Makran and other parts of Balochistan used to be parts of Maurya, Kushan, Guptas, partly of the empire of Harsha Vardhana and other dynasties of northern India before the advent of Turkic invaders.

Like other nowadays south asian ethnic groups with "Middle Eastern" roots, the Baloch claim Arabian extraction and assert that they are descended from Amir Hamza, a paternal uncle of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad and from a fairy (Pari). They consistently place their first settlement in Aleppo, where they remained until they sided with the sons of Ali, took part in the Battle of Karbala and were expelled by Yazid, the second Umayyad Caliph, in 680 A.D. They went to Kerman, and eventually to Sistan where they were hospitably received by Shams-ud-Din, ruler of that country. According to Mansel Longworth Dames there was a Shams-ud-Din, an independent Malik of Sistan, who died in 1164 A.D. (559 A.H.), almost 500 years after the Baloch migration from Aleppo. Shams-ud-Din claimed to be descent from the Saffarids of Persia. His successor, Badr-ud-Din, appears to be unknown to history, demanded a bride from each of the 44 bolaks or clans of the Baloch. But the Baloch race had never yet been tribute in this form to any ruler, and they sent 44 boys dressed in girls' clothes and fled before the deception could be discovered. Badr-ud-Din sent the boys back but pursued the Baloch, who had fled south-eastwards into Kech-Makran where they defeated him. During this period Mir Jalal Khan, son of Mir Jiand Khan, was the ruler of the Baloch. He left four sons, Rind, Lashar, Hooth, and Korai, and a daughter Jato, who married his nephew Murad. These five are the eponymous founders of the five great divisions of the tribe, the Rinds, Lasharis, Hooths, Korais, and Jatois. Encyclopaedia Of Untouchables Ancient, Medieval And Modern By Raj Kumar, page no. 337|http://books.google.com/books?id=e8o5HyC0-FUC 

However, another theory says that the Baloch have Medes origin,. M. Longworth Dames, Balochi Folklore, Folklore, Vol. 13, No. 3 (29 Sep. 1902), pp. 252274 According to that theory, they were a Kurdish group that has absorbed Dravidian genes and cultural traits, primarily from Brahui people. The northern point of Balochistan known in Pashto as Dzaranga was known as Drangiana to the Greeks and came to be known to the Persians as Saka. The Persian epic of Shahnama does record the Baloch in the Qazvin-Zanjan region of old Iran in the 6th century AD, when they were engaged in battle by the Persian king Chosroes I Anoshirvan, The Shahnama also records its heroes, Rustom and Sohrab, as being Saka and not Persians, making Sistan or the old Sakistan their origin. With time, Baloch tribes linguistically absorbed all the local people in Makran, southern Sistan and the Brahui country, becoming a sizeable group to rival in size the other Iranic group in the region .

In the 7th century, the region was divided into two parts; the south was part of the Kermn Province of the Persian Empire and the north became part of the Persian province Sistan. In early 644, the Islamic Caliph Umar sent Suhail ibn Adi from Busra to conquer the Kerman region of Iran. He was then made governor of that region. From Kerman, he conquered the western Balochistan region, near the Persian frontiers. Ibn Aseer, Vol. 3, p. 17 In the same year, south-western Balochistan was conquered during the campaign in Sistan. In 652 during the reign of Caliph Uthman, Balochistan was reconquered during the counter-revolt in Kerman under the command of Majasha Ibn Masood. This was the first time western Balochistan was directly controlled by the Caliphate and paid taxes on agriculture. Futuh al-Buldan, p. 384 incomplete citation, needs edition statement to identify the page Western Balochistan was included in the dominion of Kerman. In 654, Abdulrehman ibn Samrah, governor of Sistan, sent an Islamic army to crush a revolt in Zaranj, which is now in southern Afghanistan. After conquering Zaranj, a column of the army pushed north, conquering Kabul and Ghazni, in the Hindu Kush mountain range, while another column moved through Quetta District in north-western Balochistan and conquered the area up to the ancient cities of Dawar and Qandabil (Bolan). Tabqat ibn Saad, Vol. 8, p. 471 By 654, the whole of what is now Balochistan was controlled by the Rashidun Caliphate, except for the well-defended mountain town of QaiQan which is now Kalat. However, this town was later conquered during the reign of Caliph Ali. Futuh al-Buldan, p. 386 incomplete citation, needs edition statement to identify the page Abdulrehman ibn Samrah made Zaranj his provincial capital and remained governor of these conquered areas from 654 to 656, until Uthman was murdered.

During the Caliphate of Ali, a region of Balochistan, Makran again revolted. Due to civil war in the Rashidun Caliphate, Ali was unable to deal with these areas until 660, when he sent a large force, under the command of Haris ibn Marah Abdi, towards Makran and Sind. Haris ibn Marah Abdi arrived in Makran and conquered it by force, and then moved northward to north-eastern Balochistan and reconquered Qandabil (Bolan). Finally, he moved south and conquered Kalat after a fierce battle. Rashidun Caliphate and Hind, by Qazi Azher Mubarek Puri, published by Takhliqat, Lahore Pakistan In 663, during the reign of Umayyad Caliph Muawiyah I, Muslims lost control of north-eastern Balochistan and Kalat when Haris ibn Marah and large part of his army died in battle against a revolt in Kalat. Tarikh al Khulfa, Vol. 1, pp. 214215, 229 Muslim forces later regained control of the area during the Umayyad reign. It also remained a part of the Abbasid Caliphate.

In the 15th century, Mir Chakar Khan Rind became the first king of Balochistan, after which the region was dominated by the Timurids, who controlled large most of Central Asia, and west Asia. The Mughal Empire also controlled some parts of the area. When Nadir Shah won the allegiance of the rulers of Balochistan, he ceded Kalhora, one of the Sindh territories of Sibi-Kachi to the Khan of Kalat. Dawn.com Iranica.com Panhwar.org Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Empire, also won the allegiance of that area's rulers. Most of the area would eventually revert to local Baloch control.

===British rule===
During the period of the British Raj, there were four Princely States in Balochistan: Makran, Kharan, Las Bela and Kalat. In 1876, Sir Robert Sandeman made a treaty with the Khan of Kalat and brought his territories, including Kharan, Makran, and Las Bela, under the British suzerainty. After the Second Afghan War was ended by the Treaty of Gandamak in May 1879, the Afghan Emir ceded the districts of Quetta, Pishin, Harnai, Sibi and Thal Chotiali to the British. In 1883, the British took control of the Bolan Pass, south-east of Quetta, from the Khan of Kalat. In 1887, some areas of Balochistan were declared British territory. In 1893, Sir Mortimer Durand negotiated an agreement with the Amir of Afghanistan, Abdur Rahman Khan, to fix the Durand Line running from Chitral to Balochistan as the boundary between the Emirate of Afghanistan and British-controlled areas. Two devastating earthquakes occurred in Balochistan during British colonial rule: the 1935 Balochistan Earthquake, which devastated Quetta, and the 1945 Balochistan Earthquake with its epicentre in the Makran region.

===After independence===
In August 1947, the Chief Commissioner's Province of Balochistan immediately became part of Pakistan. Followed by the princely states of Makran, Kharan, Las Bela and Khanate of Kalat who decided to accede to Pakistan in March 1948. The Khan of Kalat agreed to join Pakistan under the condition that defence, currency, foreign office, and finance would be controlled by the federal government but that the province would remain otherwise autonomous. The four princely states together formed the Balochistan States Union in October 1952. The enclave of Gwadar was excluded from this as it was still part of the Sultanate of Oman.

In October 1955, formation of one unit resulted in the Balochistan States Union and the Chief Commissioner's Province of Balochistan being merged with all the remaining provinces and princely states in other parts of Pakistan to form the province of West Pakistan. The enclave of Gwadar was purchased from Oman in October 1958 and was also merged with West Pakistan. The province was officially dissolved in 1970 and the former Balochistan States Union, former Chief Commissioner's Province of Balochistan were combined to form the new province of Balochistan. The government of Pakistan later decided to incorporate Gwadar in to Balochistan in 1977 thus expanding the Balochistan province to its current form.

==Geography==
Astola Island
Balochistan is situated in the southwest of Pakistan and covers an area of 347,190 km2. It is Pakistan's largest province by area constituting 44% of Pakistan's total land mass. The province is bordered by Afghanistan to the north and north-west, Iran to the south-west, Punjab and Sindh, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the north-east. To the south lies the Arabian Sea. Balochistan is located on the south-eastern part of the Iranian plateau. It borders the geopolitical regions of the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Central Asia and South Asia. Balochistan lies at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz and provides the shortest route from seaports to Central Asia. Its geographical location has placed the otherwise desolate region in the scopes of competing global interests like Afghanistan for all of recorded history.

The capital city Quetta is located in a densely populated portion of the Sulaiman Mountains in the north-east of the province. It is situated in a river valley near the Bolan Pass which has been used as the route of choice from the coast to Central Asia, entering through Afghanistan's Kandahar region. The British and other historic empires have crossed the region to invade Afghanistan by this route. Bolan Pass  Encyclopdia Britannica Eleventh Edition 

Balochistan is rich in exhaustible and renewable resources; it is the second major supplier of natural gas in Pakistan. The province's renewable and human resource potential has not been systematically measured nor exploited due to pressures from within and without Pakistan. Local inhabitants have chosen to live in towns and have relied on sustainable water sources for thousands of years.

===Climate===
The climate of the upper highlands is characterised by very cold winters and hot summers. Weiss, Anita M. and Mughal, Muhammad Aurang Zeb. 2012. Pakistan. Louis Kotz and Stephen Morse (eds), Berkshire Encyclopedia of Sustainability, Vol. 9. Great Barrington, MA: Berkshire, pp. 236-240. In the lower highlands, winters vary from extremely cold in northern districts Ziarat, Quetta, Kalat, Muslim Baagh and Khanozai to milder conditions closer to the Makran coast. Winters are mild on the plains, where temperature never falling below freezing point. Summers are hot and dry, especially in the arid zones of Chaghai and Kharan districts. The plains are also very hot in summer, with temperatures reaching 50 C.The record highest temperature, 53 C, was recorded in Sibi on 26 May 2010, Pakmet.com.pk exceeding the previous record, 52 C. Other hot areas includes, Turbat, and Dalbandin. The desert climate is characterised by hot and very arid conditions. Occasionally strong windstorms make these areas very inhospitable.

==Economy==

The economy of Balochistan is largely based upon the production of natural gas, coal and other minerals. Other important economic sectors include fisheries, mining, manufacturing industries, trade and other services being rendered by public and private sector organisations. Tourism remains limited but has increased due to the exotic appeal of the province. Limited farming in the east and fishing along the Arabian Sea coastline provide income and sustenance for the local population. Due to the tribal lifestyle of many Baloch and Brahui people, animal husbandry and trading bazaars found throughout the province are important.

Though the province remains largely underdeveloped, several major development projects, including the construction of a new deep sea port at the strategically important town of Gwadar, are in progress in Balochistan. The port is projected to be the hub of an energy and trade corridor to and from China and the Central Asian republics. The Mirani Dam on the Dasht River, 50 km west of Turbat in the Makran Division, is being built to provide water to expand agricultural land use by 35000 km2 where it would otherwise be unsustainable. 

===Natural resource extraction===
Balochistan's share of Pakistan's national income has historically ranged between 3.7% to 4.9%. Since 1972, Balochistan's gross income has grown in size by 2.7 times. Siterresources.worldbank.org Outside Quetta, the resource extraction infrastructure of the province is gradually developing but still lags far behind other parts of Pakistan.

There is Chinese involvement in the nearby Saindak gold and copper mining project where deposits exist in the Chagai District in Reko Diq area. The main license is held jointly by the Government of Balochistan (25%), the rest by foreign interests Antofagasta Minerals (37.5%) and Barrick Gold (37.5%). These deposits are comparable in size to those located in Sarcheshmeh, Iran and Escondida, Chile, which are the second and the third largest known deposits of copper in the world. The multinational mining companies BHP Billiton and Tethyan entered into a joint venture with the Balochistan government to extract these deposits. The potential annual copper production has been estimated to be 900,000 to 2.2 million tons. The deposits seem to be largely of porphyry rock nature. The agreements for royalty rights and ownership of these resources were reached during a period of unprecedented natural disasters, economic, social, political, and cultural unrest in Pakistan. The negotiations were widely considered to be insufficiently transparent. 

==Government==

 Provincial symbols of Balochistan 
 Provincial animal Camel 50px 
 Provincial bird Macqueen's bustard 50px 
 Provincial tree Date Palm 50px 
 Provincial flower Ephedra distachya 50px 

In common with the other provinces of Pakistan, Balochistan has a parliamentary form of government. The ceremonial head of the province is the Governor, who is appointed by the President of Pakistan on the advice of the provincial Chief Minister. The Chief Minister, the province's chief executive, is normally the leader of the largest political party or alliance of parties in the provincial assembly.

The unicameral Provincial Assembly of Balochistan comprises 65 seats of which 4% are reserved for non-Muslims and 16% exclusively for women. The judicial branch of government is carried out by the Balochistan High Court, which is based in Quetta and headed by a Chief Justice. For administrative purposes, the province is subdivided into 31 districts: 

left

==Demographics==

 Historical populations 
 Census Population Urban 
 ---- 
 1951 1,167,167 12.38% 
 1961 1,353,484 16.87% 
 1972 2,428,678 16.45% 
 1981 4,332,376 15.62% 
 1998 6,565,885 23.89% 

Balochistan's population density is very low due to the mountainous terrain and scarcity of water. In March 2012, preliminary census figures showed that the population of Balochistan had reached 13,162,222, not including the districts of Khuzdar, Kech and Panjgur, compared to 5,501,164 in 1998, representing approximately 5% of Pakistan's total population. Official estimates of Balochistan's population grew from approximately 7.45 million in 2003 to 7.8 million in 2005. Pakistan Balochistan Economic Report: From Periphery to Core (In Two Volumes)  Volume II: Full Report. The World Bank. May 2008. "The Balochistan population totalled 4.5 million in 1981/82 and 7.8 million in 2004/05..." "NIPS estimates that Balochistan's population growth will slow down to 1.3 percent by 2025..." 

===Ethnolinguistic groups===
According to the 2008 Pakistan Statistical Year Book, households whose primary language is Balochi represent 54.8% of Balochistan's population; 29.6% of households speak Pashto; 5.6% speak Sindhi; 2.5% speak Punjabi; 2.4% speak Saraiki; 1.0% speak Urdu; and 4.1% speak some other language at home. Balochi-speaking people are concentrated in the sparsely populated west, east, south and southeast; Brahui speakers dominate in the centre of the province, while the Pashtuns are the majority in the north. 

Rukhshani is spoken in the sparsely populated west, Sulemani is spoken by the tribal east mainly by Murree Bughtis, and Makrani is mostly spoken in south coastal areas. In addition, the coastal region of Makran is home to communities such as the Siddi and Med, who speak distinct ethnic dialects. Brahui is spoken in the central Baluchistan and Pashto is mainly spoken in the north and north-west including Quetta. In Barkhan and Musakhel districts bordering Punjab, Pashto is the local language. There are also a number of speakers of Hazaragi Persian, Urdu, and Punjabi in the capital Quetta and other areas of Baluchistan. Farsi Persian is also spoken. Sindhi is spoken in the south-east. The Jamot tribes of Sibi Naseerabad and Kachhi region mainly speak Jadgali (Sindhi). The Kalat and Mastung areas speak Brahui. In the Lasbela District, the majority of the population speaks Lasi. 

The 2005 census of Afghans in Pakistan showed that a total of 769,268 Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit (AREU), Afghans in Quetta. Settlements, Livelihoods, Support Networks and Cross-Border Linkages, January 2006, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/47c3f3c412.html 7 January 2013 Afghan refugees were temporarily staying in Balochistan. However, this number is likely to be reduced in 2013 after the repatriation of the refugees to Afghanistan.

==Gallery==

File:Buzi Pass.jpg|Princess of Hope along the N10
File:Quetta Railway Station - 40311.jpg|Quetta Railway Station

==See also==

* Prata Dynasty
* Aprca Dynasty
* Balochistan
* Tourism in Balochistan, Pakistan
* Baloch Nationalism

==References==

==Further reading==
* 

==External links ==

* 
* Guide to Balochistan
* Balochistan Archives- Preserving our Past
* 

 

[[William M. Tweed]]

William Magear Tweed (April 3, 1823  April 12, 1878)  often erroneously referred to as William Marcy Tweed (see below), and widely known as "Boss" Tweed  was an American politician most notable for being the "boss" of Tammany Hall, the Democratic Party political machine that played a major role in the politics of 19th century New York City and State. At the height of his influence, Tweed was the third-largest landowner in New York City, a director of the Erie Railroad, the Tenth National Bank, and the New-York Printing Company, as well as proprietor of the Metropolitan Hotel. Ackerman, p. 2 

Tweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852 and the New York County Board of Supervisors in 1858, the year he became the head of the Tammany Hall political machine. He was also elected to the New York State Senate in 1867, but Tweed's greatest influence came from being an appointed member of a number of boards and commissions, his control over political patronage in New York City through Tammany, and his ability to ensure the loyalty of voters through jobs he could create and dispense on city-related projects.

According to Tweed biographer Kenneth D. Ackerman:It's hard not to admire the skill behind Tweed's system ... The Tweed ring at its height was an engineering marvel, strong and solid, strategically deployed to control key power points: the courts, the legislature, the treasury and the ballot box. Its frauds had a grandeur of scale and an elegance of structure: money-laundering, profit sharing and organization. Boss Tweed: The Rise and Fall of the Corrupt Pol Who Conceived the Soul of Modern New York New York: Carroll & Graf, 2005; quoted in Hammill, Pete, "'Boss Tweed': The Fellowship of the Ring" New York Times (March 27, 2005) 

Tweed was convicted for stealing an amount estimated by an aldermen's committee in 1877 at between $25 million and $45 million from New York City taxpayers through political corruption, although later estimates ranged as high as $200 million. "Boss Tweed", Gotham Gazette, New York, 4 July 2005. Unable to make bail, he escaped from jail once, but was returned to custody. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail.

==Early life==
Tweed was born April 3, 1823 at 1 Cherry Street, Share, Allen J. "Tweed, William M(agear) 'Boss'" in , p.1205-1206 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Son of a third-generation Scottish-Irish chair-maker, Tweed grew up on Cherry Street. Tweed's religious affiliation was not widely known in his lifetime, but at the time of his funeral the New York Times, quoting a family friend, reported that his parents had been Quakers and "members of the old Rose Street Meeting house." "The Death of William M. Tweed.; Crowds Of People Around Mr. Douglass' House No One Admitted Except Relatives Tweed's Religious Faith Politicians Who Feel Relieved A Letter Written By John D. Townsend A Month Ago Asking For Tweed's Release" New York Times. (April 14, 1878) At the age of 11, he left school to learn his father's trade, and then became an apprentice to a saddler. He also studied to be a bookkeeper and worked as a brushmaker for a company he had invested in, before eventually joining in the family business in 1852. On September 29, 1844, he married Mary Jane C. Skaden, and lived with her family on Madison Street for two years.

Ticket to an 1859 "soiree" to benefit Tweed's Americus Engine Co.

Tweed became a member of the Odd Fellows and the Masons, and joined a volunteer fire company, Engine No. 12. In 1848, at the invitation of state assemblyman John J. Reilly, he and some friends organized the Americus Fire Company No. 6, also known as the "Big Six", as a volunteer fire company, which took as its symbol a snarling red Bengal tiger, a symbol which remained associated with Tweed and Tammany Hall for many years. At the time, volunteer fire companies competed vigorously with each other; some were connected with street gangs and had strong ethnic ties to various immigrant communities. The competition could be so fierce that buildings would sometimes burn down while the fire companies fought each other. Burrows & Wallace, pp.654, 724, 823 Tweed became known for his ax-wielding violence, and was soon elected the Big Six foreman. Pressure from Alfred Carlson, the chief engineer, got him thrown out of the crew, but fire companies were also recruiting grounds for political parties at the time, and Tweed's exploits came to the attention of the Democratic politicians who ran the Seventh Ward, who put him up for Alderman in 1850, when Tweed was 26. He lost that election to the Whig candidate Morgan Morgans, but ran again the next year and won, garnering his first political position. Burrows & Wallace, p.823 

Tweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852, but his two-year term was undistinguished. Burrows & Wallace, p.837 In an attempt by Republican reformers in Albany, the state capital, to control the Democratic-dominated New York City government, the power of the New York County Board of Supervisors was beefed up. The board had 12 members, six appointed by the mayor and six elected, and in 1858 Tweed was appointed to the board, which became his first vehicle for large-scale graft; Tweed and other supervisors forced vendors to pay a 15% overcharge to their "ring" in order to do business with the city. By 1853, Tweed was running the seventh ward for Tammany. 

Although he was not trained as a lawyer, Tweed's friend, Judge George G. Barnard, certified him as an attorney, and Tweed opened a law office on Duane Street. He ran for sheriff in 1861 and was defeated, but became the chairman of the Democratic General Committee shortly after the election, and was then chosen to be the head of Tammany's general committee in January 1863. Several months later, in April, he became "Grand Sachem", and began to be referred to as "Boss", especially after he tightened his hold on power by creating a small executive committee to run the club. Tweed then took steps to increase his income: he used his law firm to extort money, which was then disguised as legal services; he had himself appointed deputy street commissioner  a position with considerable access to city contractors and funding; he bought the New-York Printing Company, which became the city's official printer, and the city's stationery supplier, the Manufacturing Stationers' Company, and had both companies begin to overcharge for their goods and services. He also started to form what became known as the "Tweed Ring", by having his friends elected to office: George G. Barnard was elected Recorder of New York City; Peter B. Sweeny was elected New York County District Attorney; and Richard B. Connolly was elected City Comptroller. 

Thomas Nast depicts Tweed in Harper's Weekly

With his new position and wealth came a change in style: Tweed began to favor wearing a large diamond in his shirtfront  a habit that Thomas Nast used to great effect in his attacks on Tweed in Harper's Weekly beginning in 1869  and he bought a brownstone to live in at 41 West 36th Street, then a very fashionable area. He invested his now considerable illegal income in real estate, so that by the late 1860s he ranked among the biggest landowners in New York City. 

Tweed was a member of the New York State Senate (4th D.) from 1868 to 1873, sitting in the 91st, 92nd, 93rd and 94th New York State Legislatures, but not taking his seat in the 95th and 96th New York State Legislatures. In the Senate he helped financiers Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk to take control of the Erie Railroad from Cornelius Vanderbilt by arranging for legislation that legitimized fake Erie stock certificates that Gould and Fisk had issued. In return, Tweed received a large block of stock and was made a director of the company. 

==Corruption==
After the election of 1869, Tweed took control of the New York City government. His protg, John T. Hoffman, the former mayor of the city, won election as governor, and Tweed garnered the support of good government reformers like Peter Cooper and the Union League Club, by proposing a new city charter which returned power to City Hall at the expense of the Republican-inspired state commissions. The new charter passed, thanks in part to $600,000 in bribes Tweed paid to Republicans, and was signed into law by Hoffman in 1870. Mandated new elections allowed Tammany to take over the city's Common Council when they won all fifteen aldermanic contests. Burrows & Wallace, pp.927-928 

The new charter put control of the city's finances in the hands of a Board of Audit, which consisted of Tweed, who was Commissioner of Public Works, Mayor A. Oakey Hall and Comptroller Richard "Slippery Dick" Connolly, both Tammany men. Hall also appointed other Tweed associates to high offices  such as Peter B. Sweeny, who took over the Department of Public Parks  providing the Tweed Ring with even firmer control of the New York City government Paine, p. 140. and enabling them to defraud the taxpayers of many more millions of dollars. In the words of Albert Bigelow Paine, "their methods were curiously simple and primitive. There were no skilful manipulations of figures, making detection difficult ... Connolly, as Controller, had charge of the books, and declined to show them. With his fellows, he also 'controlled' the courts and most of the bar." Paine, p. 143. Contractors working for the city  "Ring favorites, most of them  were told to multiply the amount of each bill by five, or ten, or a hundred, after which, with Mayor Hall's 'O. K.' and Connolly's indorsement, it was paid ... through a go-between, who cashed the check, settled the original bill and divided the remainder ... between Tweed, Sweeny, Connolly and Hall". Paine, p. 144. 

For example, the construction cost of the New York County Courthouse, begun in 1861, grew to nearly $13 million  about $178 million in today's dollars, and nearly twice the cost of the Alaska Purchase in 1867. 
"A carpenter was paid $360,751 (roughly $4.9 million today) for one month's labor in a building with very little woodwork ... a plasterer got $133,187 ($1.82 million) for two days' work". 

Nast depicts the Tweed Ring: "Who stole the people's money?" / "'Twas him."

Tweed and his friends also garnered huge profits from the development of the Upper East Side, especially Yorkville and Harlem. They would buy up undeveloped property, then use the resources of the city to improve the area  for instance by installing pipes to bring in water from the Croton Aqueduct  thus increasing the value of the land, after which they sold and took their profits. The focus on the east side also slowed down the development of the west side, the topography of which made it more expensive to improve. The ring also took their usual percentage of padded contracts, as well as raking off money from property taxes. Despite the corruption of Tweed and Tammany Hall, they did accomplish the development of upper Manhattan, though at the cost of tripling the city's bond debt to almost $90 million. Burrows & Wallace, pp.929-931 

During the Tweed era, the proposal to build a suspension bridge between New York and Brooklyn, then an independent city, was floated by Brooklyn-boosters, who saw the ferry connections as a bottleneck to Brooklyn's further development. In order to ensure that the Brooklyn Bridge project would go forward, State Senator Henry Cruse Murphy approached Tweed to find out whether New York's aldermen would approve the proposal. Tweed's response was that $60,000 for the aldermen would close the deal, and contractor William C. Kingsley put up the cash, which was delivered in a carpet bag. Tweed and two others from Tammany also received over half the private stock of the Bridge Company, the charter of which specified that only private stockholders had voting rights, so that even though the cities of Brooklyn and Manhattan put up most of the money, they essentially had no control over the project. Burrows & Wallace, pp.934-935 

Tweed bought a mansion on Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street, and stabled his horses, carriages and sleighs on 40th Street. By 1871, he was a member of the board of directors of not only the Erie Railroad and the Brooklyn Bridge Company, but also the Third Avenue Railway Company and the Harlem Gas Light Company. He was president of the Guardian Savings Banks and he and his confederates set up the Tenth National Bank to better control their fortunes. 

==Scandal==
Tweed's downfall came in the wake of the Orange riot of 1871, which came after Tammany Hall banned a parade of Irish Protestants celebrating a historical victory against Catholicism, because of a riot the year before in which eight people died when a crowd of Irish Catholic laborers attacked the paraders. Under strong pressure from the newspapers and the Protestant elite of the city, Tammany reversed course, and the march was allowed to proceed, with protection from city policemen and state militia. The result was an even larger riot in which over 60 people were killed and more than 150 injured.

Although Tammany's electoral power base was largely centered in the Irish immigrant population, it also needed the city's elite to acquiesce in its rule, and this was conditional on the machine's ability to control the actions of their people, but the July riot showed that this capability was not nearly as strong as had been supposed. Burrows & Wallace, pp.1003-1008 

Nast shows Tweed's source of power: control of the ballot box. "As long as I count the Votes, what are you going to do about it?"

Tweed had for months been under attack from the New York Times and Thomas Nast, the cartoonist from Harper's Weekly  regarding Nast's cartoons, Tweed reportedly said, "Stop them damned pictures. I don't care so much what the papers say about me. My constituents don't know how to read, but they can't help seeing them damned pictures!"  but their campaign had only limited success in gaining traction. They were able to force an examination of the city's books, but the blue-ribbon commission of six businessmen appointed by Mayor A. Oakey Hall, a Tammany man, which included John Jacob Astor III, banker Moses Taylor and others who benefited from Tammany's actions, found that the books had been "faithfully kept", letting the air out of the effort to dethrone Tweed. Burrows & Wallace, pp.1008-1011 

The response to the Orange riot changed everything, and only days afterwards the Times/Nast campaign began to garner popular support. More importantly, the Times started to receive inside information from County Sheriff James O'Brien, whose support for Tweed had fluctuated during Tammany's reign. O'Brien had tried to blackmail Tammany by threatening to expose the ring's embezzlement to the press, and when this failed he provided the evidence he had collected to the Times. Ellis, pp. 347348. Shortly afterward, county auditor Matthew J. O'Rourke supplied additional details to the Times, which was reportedly offered $5 million to not publish the evidence. Paine, p. 170. The Times also obtained the accounts of the recently deceased James Watson, who was the Tweed Ring's bookkeeper, and these were published daily, culminating in a special four-page supplement on July 29 headlined "Gigantic Frauds of the Ring Exposed". In August, Tweed began to transfer ownership in his real-estate empire and other investments to his family members. 

The exposes provoked an international crisis of confidence in New York City's finances, and, in particular, in its ability to repay its debts. European investors were heavily positioned in the city's bonds and were already nervous about its management  only the reputations of the underwriters were preventing a run on the city's securities. New York's financial and business community knew that if the city's credit was to collapse, it could potentially bring down every bank in the city with it. 

Thus, the city's elite met at Cooper Union in September to discuss political reform: but for the first time, the conversation included not only the usual reformers, but also Democratic bigwigs such as Samuel J. Tilden, who had been thrust aside by Tammany. The general consensus was that the "wisest and best citizens" should take over the governance of the city and attempt to restore investor confidence. The result was the formation of the Executive Committee of Citizens and Taxpayers for Financial Reform of the City (also known as "the Committee of Seventy"), which attacked Tammany by cutting off the city's funding. Property owners refused to pay their municipal taxes, and a judge  Tweed's old friend George Barnard, no less  enjoined the city Comptroller from issuing bonds or spending money. Unpaid workers turned against Tweed, marching to City Hall demanding to be paid. Tweed doled out some funds from his own purse  $50,000  but it was not sufficient to end the crisis, and Tammany began to lose its essential base. 

Shortly thereafter, the Comptroller resigned, appointing Andrew Haswell Green, an associate of Tilden's, as his replacement. Green loosened the purse strings again, allowing city departments not under Tammany control to borrow money to operate. Green and Tilden had the city's records closely examined, and discovered money that went directly from city contractors into Tweed's pocket. The following day, they had Tweed arrested. 

==Imprisonment, escape, and death==
"Stone Walls Do Not a Prison Make": January 1876 editorial cartoon by Thomas Nast depicting Tweed's escape from prison
Tweed was released on $1 million bail, and Tammany set to work to recover its position through the ballot box. Tweed was re-elected to the state senate in November 1871, due to his personal popularity and largesse in his district, but in general Tammany did not do well, and the members of the Tweed Ring began to flee the jurisdiction, many going overseas. Tweed was re-arrested, forced to resign his city positions, and was replaced as Tammany's leader. Once again, he was released on bail  $8 million this time  but Tweed's supporters, such as Jay Gould, felt the repercussions of his fall from power. 

Tweed's first trial, in January 1873, ended when the jury was unable to agree on a verdict. His retrial in November resulted in convictions on 204 of 220 counts, a fine of $12,750 ($225,000 in 2010, adjusted for inflation) and a prison sentence of twelve years; a higher court, however, reduced Tweed's sentence to one year. Lower Manhattan : News | Landmark Tweed Courthouse Has a Checkered History After his release from prison, New York State filed a civil suit against Tweed, attempting to recover $6 million in embezzled funds. Unable to put up the $3 million bail, Tweed was locked up in the Ludlow Street Jail, although he was allowed home visits. On one of these, Tweed escaped and fled to Spain, where he worked as a common seaman on a Spanish ship. The U.S. government discovered his whereabouts and arranged for his arrest once he reached the Spanish border; he was recognized from Nast's political cartoons. He was turned over to an American warship, which delivered him to authorities in New York City on November 23, 1876, and he was returned to prison. 

Desperate and broken, Tweed now agreed to testify about the inner workings of his corrupt Ring to a special committee set up by the Board of Alderman, in return for his release, but after he did so, Tilden, now governor of New York, refused to abide by the agreement, and Tweed remained incarcerated. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail on April 12, 1878 from severe pneumonia, and was buried in the Brooklyn Green-Wood Cemetery. Ackerman, p. 28 Mayor Smith Ely would not allow the flag at City Hall to be flown at half staff. 

==Evaluations ==
In depictions of Tweed and the Tammany Hall organization, historians have emphasized the thievery and conspiratorial nature of Boss Tweed, along with lining his own pockets and those of his friends and allies. The theme is that the sins of corruption so violated American standards of political rectitude that they far overshadow Tweed's positive contributions to New York City.

Although he held numerous important public offices and was one of a handful of senior leaders of Tammany Hall, as well as the state legislature and the state Democratic Party, Tweed was never the sole "boss" of New York City. He shared control of the city with numerous less famous people, such as the villains depicted in the Nast's famous circle of guilt cartoon shown above. Seymour J. Mandelbaum has argued that, apart from the corruption he engaged in, Tweed was a modernizer who prefigured certain elements of the Progressive Era in terms of more efficient city management. Much of the money he siphoned off from the city treasury went to needy constituents who appreciated the free food at Christmas time and remembered it at the next election, and to precinct workers who provided the muscle of his machine. As a legislator he worked to expand and strengthen welfare programs, especially those by private charities, schools, and hospitals. With a base in the Irish Catholic community, he opposed efforts of Protestants to require the reading of the King James Bible in public schools, which was done deliberately to keep out Catholics. He facilitated the founding of the New York Public Library, even though one of its founders, Samuel Tilden, was Tweed's sworn enemy in the Democratic Party. Mandelbaum, Seymour J. Boss Tweed's New York (1965) Muccigrosso, Robert ed., Research Guide to American Historical Biography (1988) 1538-42 

Tweed recognized that the support of his constituency was necessary for him to remain in power, and as a consequence he used the machinery of the city's government to provide numerous social services, including building more orphanages, almshouses and public baths. Tweed also fought for the New York State Legislature to donate to private charities of all religious denominations, and subsidize Catholic schools and hospitals. From 1869 to 1871, under Tweed's influence, the state of New York spent more on charities than for the entire time period from 1852 to 1868 combined. Ackerman, p. 66. Tweed also pushed through funding for a teachers college and prohibition of corporal punishment in schools, as well as salary increases for school teachers.

During Tweed's regime, the main business thoroughfare Broadway was widened between 34th Street and 59th Street, land was secured for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the Upper East Side and Upper West Side were developed and provided the necessary infrastructure  all to the benefit of the purses of the Tweed Ring, but also, ultimately, to the benefit of the people of the city.

According to Leo Hershkowitz in Tweed's New York: Another Look, there is no evidence of any personal financial gain on Tweed's part, despite the implications of Thomas Nast in Harper's Weekly and the editors of the New York Times, which both had ties to the Republican party. In part, the campaign against Tweed diverted public attention from Republican scandals such as the Whiskey Ring. 

Tweed himself wanted no particular recognition of his achievements, such as they were. When it was proposed, in March 1871, when he was at the height of his power, that a statue be erected in his honor, he declared: "Statues are not erected to living men ... I claim to be a live man, and hope (Divine Providence permitting) to survive in all my vigor, politically and physically, some years to come." One of Tweed's unwanted legacies is that he has become "the archetype of the bloated, rapacious, corrupt city boss". 

An 1869 cigar box label featuring Tweed

==Middle name==
Tweed never signed his name with anything other than a plain "M.", and his middle name is often mistakenly listed, "Marcy". The middle name was "Magear", his mother's maiden name; Tweed's son's name was William Magear Tweed, Jr. The confusion derives from a Nast cartoon with a picture of Tweed, supplemented with a quote from William L. Marcy, the former governor of New York. 

==In popular culture==
In 1945 Boss Tweed was portrayed by Noah Beery, Sr. in the Broadway production of Up In Central Park, a musical comedy with music by Sigmund Romberg. Up In Central Park (1945) on Internet Broadway Database The role was played by Malcolm Lee Beggs for a revival in 1947. Up In Central Park (1947) on Internet Broadway Database In the 1948 film version, Tweed is played by Vincent Price.

On the 19631964 CBS TV series The Great Adventure, which presented one hour dramatizations of the lives of historical figures, Edward Andrews portrayed Tweed in the episode "The Man Who Stole New York City", which aired on December 13, 1963. 

The 1976 novel Inferno, by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle, features a cameo appearance by Tweed, being tortured by demons in Hell.

In John Varley's 1977 science-fiction novel The Ophiuchi Hotline, a crooked politician in a 27th-century human settlement on the Moon assumes the name "Boss Tweed" in emulation of the 19th-century politician, and names his lunar headquarters "Tammany Hall".

Tweed was played by Philip Bosco in the 1986 TV movie Liberty, "Characters: Boss Tweed" on IMDb and by Jim Broadbent as a major supporting character in the 2002 film Gangs of New York. Tweed is portrayed as a defender of the rights of minorities and helper of those in need in Pete Hamill's 2003 novel Forever.

== See also ==
* Elbert A. Woodward

==References==
Notes

Bibliography
* Ackerman, K. D. (2005). Boss Tweed: The rise and fall of the corrupt pol who conceived the soul of modern New York. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 0-7867-1435-2.
* 
* The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. High Beam Encyclopedia. 22, November 2008, 
* Ellis, Edward R. (2004). The Epic of New York City: A Narrative History. Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 0-7867-1436-0,
* "Boss Tweed", Gotham Gazette, New York, 4 July 2005.
* Mandelbaum, Seymour J. Boss Tweed's New York, 1965. ISBN 0-471-56652-7
*Paine, Albert B. (1974). Th. Nast, His Period and His Pictures. Princeton: Pyne Press. ISBN 0-87861-079-0 (The original edition, published in 1904, is now in the public domain.)
* Sante, Luc. Low Life: Lures and Snares of Old New York. Farrar, Straus, & Giroux, 2003.

Further reading
* Hershkowitz, Leo. Tweed's New York: Another Look (1977), a favorable biography that minimizes the negative.
* Lynch, Denis T. Boss Tweed The story of a grim generation. Blue Ribbon Books NY first print 1927 copyright Boni & Liveright Inc.

==External links==

*
*
*Green-Wood Cemetery page for WM Tweed 
*Map Showing the Portions of the City of New York and Westchester County under the Jurisdiction of the Department of Public Parks talks about Tweed's takeover of the New York City parks system, from the World Digital Library
*

 
 

 
 



[[Balsall Heath]]

Balsall Heath is a working class, inner-city area of Birmingham, West Midlands, England. It is home to a diverse cultural mix of people and the location of the Balti Triangle.

==History==
Balsall Heath, circa 1890.
Balsall Heath Baths and Library.
Balsall Heath was agricultural land between Moseley village and the city of Birmingham until the 1850s when expansion along Moseley Road joined the two. The area was originally part of the Worcestershire parish of King's Norton, and was added to the county borough of Birmingham in Warwickshire on 1 October 1891.

During negotiations in the previous year it had been promised a public baths and a free library. In 1895 the library was opened on Moseley Road and in 1907 Balsall Heath Baths were opened in an adjoining building. 

In 1900 the city's College of Art was also opened on Moseley Road. By this time the small lake (Lady Pool on old maps) at the end of Ladypool Road had been filled-in to create a park. 

Balsall Heath initially had a reasonably affluent population, which can still be seen in the dilapidated grandeur of some of the larger houses. A railway station on Brighton Road (on the Birmingham to Bristol line) led to further expansion, and the end of the 19th century saw a proliferation of high-density small terraced houses.

A Muslim community was started in June 1940 when two Yemenis purchased an artisan cottage on Mary Street. They went on to establish the first mosque in the city. With the mosque being located in the area, more Muslim immigrants began to move into private lodgings in Balsall Heath. Today, Balsall Heath has one of the largest Muslim communities in Birmingham. It is also home to diverse communities from across the Commonwealth.

By the 1980s, many of Balsall Heath's houses were in a dilapidated condition, some were still without bathrooms or indoor toilets. The local council considered demolishing these properties but chose to refurbish them as part of an urban renewal scheme. Most of these Victorian terraces still exist and, along with more modern social housing, characterise the area today. The area's traditional 'brick' pavements were replaced at this time by the more modern and conventional paving slabs. 

Balsall Heath's low rents also attracted a bohemian student population. Its proximity to the University of Birmingham, the city centre and the 'trendy' area of Moseley were all contributing factors. There was little conflict between the students and locals despite their vastly differing lifestyles. However a knife-incident in 1991 led to an article in Redbrick warning students not to live in the area.

In July 2005 Balsall Heath was hit by a tornado, which devastated many buildings around Church Road and Ladypool Road. Birmingham City Council offered loans to those who were unable to repair their properties, and the area has now made a full recovery.

===Red light era===
Street prostitution first appeared in Balsall Heath during the 1950s. Property values fell, attracting Birmingham's poorer migrants. By the 1970s the area was notorious for street robberies and drug dealing. Cheddar Road was the centre of a red-light district worked by 450 women. About half of the 50 houses on this road had prostitutes advertising themselves in the windows, similar to Amsterdam. It was labelled Britain's busiest cul-de-sac. 

In 1986 an organisation called ANAWIM was formed by the Sisters of Charity to provide outreach support to the prostitutes. 

In September 1992, a report was published encouraging the formation of a zone of tolerance towards prostitution in Balsall Heath. This was opposed by residents and a local police inspector. The following year Samo Paull, a woman working as a prostitute, was abducted from Balsall Heath and murdered. 

In 1994 local residents began to organise street patrols forcing the prostitutes and street criminals out of the area. These patrols had the qualified support of the police but were regarded as vigilantes by some. There was an immediate two-thirds reduction in street and window prostitution. By November 1995 they had been almost completely eliminated.

The area has now enjoyed a slow revival. House prices are now similar to those in other inner-city areas, while the crime rate is amongst the lowest.

==Notable residents==

*Donnaleigh Bailey, Michelle Corrigan in Birmingham based soap Doctors
*Percy Bullock, Worcestershire cricketer
*Howard R. Davies, racing motorcyclist.
*Alan Deakin, former Aston Villa captain
*John Kenneally VC
*David Edgar, playwright
*Don Maclean, comedian
*Conroy Maddox, surrealist artist
*William Mosedale, George Cross recipient
*Sir Robert Howson Pickard FRS Stereochemist and Vice-Chancellor of the University of London 19371939
*Anthony E. Pratt, inventor of the board game Cluedo
*UB40, a reggae band

==References==

* V.M. Hart (1992) Balsall Heath: A History. Brewin Books Limited
* J. Moth (1951) The City of Birmingham Baths Department 1851  1951.

==External links==
*Balsall Heath Local History Society
*About Balsall Heath



[[Bunge y Born]]

Bunge & Born's Buenos Aires headquarters (left).

Bunge y Born was a multinational corporation based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, whose diverse interests included food processing and international trade in grains and oilseeds. It is now known as Bunge Limited.

==History==
Bunge & Born was founded in 1884 by Ernesto Bunge, a German Argentine whose uncle, Carl Bunge, had been Consul General in Argentina for both the Netherlands and Prussia, and his brother-in-law, Jorge Born, who had recently arrived from Antwerp. The company superseded the Bunge Company founded in Amsterdam by Johann Bunge, in 1818. Following the purchase of 60000 ha of prime pampas wheat fields, Bunge & Born established Centenera, their first food processing plant, in 1899. They had one of the largest wheat mills in the country built on a Puerto Madero lot in 1902, and with it, established Molinos Ro de la Plata (later a leader in the local retail foods market). educ.ar - Procesos econmicos en la Argentina: el caso de Bunge y Born 

The company started Argentina's first burlap bag manufacturer, following which they successfully lobbied government policy makers for protective tariffs on the then-critical commercial staple. They established a mortgage bank, the Banco Hipotecario Franco Argentino, and a subsidiary in Brazil in 1905, and by 1910, they reportedly controlled 80% of Argentine cereal exports (Argentina was, by then, the world's third-largest grain exporter). Rock, David. Argentina: 1516-1982. University of California Press, 1987. p.172 They later established paint manufacturer Alba (1925), chemical and fertilizer maker Compaa Qumica, and textile maker Grafa (1932), among others; by the late 1920s, the company's annual export receipts alone reached US$300 million. INDEC: Comercio exterior The company inaugurated its neo-gothic Buenos Aires headquarters on Leandro Alem Avenue, designed by local architect Pablo Naeff, in 1926. 

Bunge & Born's near-monopoly on cereal and flour exports ended with populist President Juan Pern's 1946 establishment of the IAPI, a state agricultural purchasing and export agent. Historical Dictionary of Argentina. London: Scarecrow Press, 1978. The company responded by extending its reach into the country fast-growing retail processed foods market, and though its prominence as the nation's chief exporter was partly restored by Pern's 1955 ouster and the IAPI's liquidation, its focus remained domestic over the next three decades. A privately held company, Bunge & Born did not release periodical financial statements, though it reported US$2 billion in gross receipts in 1962; by then, it had become a leader in commodity futures trading, operating 110 offices worldwide. Business Week. October 19, 1963. 

The Bunge, Born, Hirsch, Engels and De La Tour families remained the company's chief stock-holders, and by extension, leaders in the domestic textile, paint, chemical, fertilizer, and food processing industries. Euromoney: Decline of an Argentine dynasty. January 1999 On September 19, 1974, however, the consortium was shaken by the kidnapping of siblings Jorge and Juan Born by the far-left terrorist group, Montoneros. The Born brothers were kept in a known Argentine State Intelligence safehouse for nine months until their June 1975 release, something made possible without public suspicion of outside involvement by the agency's numerous contacts inside the Montoneros (including the leader, Mario Firmenich). Freed for a US$60 million ransom (the largest on record at that time), the ordeal triggered the company headquarters' relocation to So Paulo, Brazil, and contributed to the March 1976 coup. Andersen, Martin. Dossier Secreto. Westview Press, 1993. 

Retaining their Argentine interests (44 companies, by the 1980s), the families continued to suffer from ongoing disputes, and in 1987, CEO Mario Hirsch died suddenly. The election of Carlos Menem to the Argentine Presidency in May 1989, however, resulted in an agreement between the President-elect and Jorge Born that gave the company partial control over national economic policy. Bunge & Born provided the Menem government with its first two economy ministers, and the combination of large rate increases on public services (around 500%), a simplified exchange rate and a massive, mandatory wage hike led to a sharp economic turnaround between July and November 1989. New York Times: Inflation Unites Peronists and Argentine Business This foray into government policy making, however, ended in a new currency crisis that December and the failure (compounded by the company's lackluster business performance) resulted in Born's 1991 ouster from the board; he was replaced by Chief Operations Officer Octavio Caraballo. 

Beset by the rift between Jorge Born and his brother, Juan, the prior unity between the shareholders disintegrated as Caraballo struggled to modernize the company. Family frictions intensified when Jorge Born formed a business partnership with one of his former kidnappers, erstwhile Montonero strategist Rodolfo Galimberti. 

==Bunge International==
The company was converted into the Bermuda-registered Bunge International in 1994, retaining the Bunge y Born name only in Argentina. Bunge remained a privately held company of 180 shareholders (including the longtime controlling family interests) and divested itself in 1998 of almost all its retail foods interests in favor of a greater role in international agribusiness and commodity markets; by then the company's gross annual turnover had reached US$13 billion. Clarn: La retirada final del grupo Bunge & Born Bunge ultimately went public on the NYSE in 2001, becoming Bunge Limited. Bunge timeline 

==References==



[[Big Apple]]

54th and Broadway

"The Big Apple" is a nickname for New York City. It was first popularized in the 1920s by John J. Fitz Gerald, a sports writer for the New York Morning Telegraph. Its popularity since the 1970s is due to a promotional campaign by the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, known now as NYC & Company.

== New York's nickname ==
Although the history of the Big Apple was once thought a mystery, Why is New York called the Big Apple?, The Straight Dope February 18, 1977. research--primarily by amateur etymologist Barry Popik The Big Apple. This web site, owned and maintained by Barry Popik, contains updated information reflecting research by Popik and others and includes the text of significant examples. and Gerald Cohen of Missouri University of Science and Technology Gerald Cohen, Origin of New York City's Nickname "The Big Apple" (1991), ISBN 3-631-43787-0. --has provided a reasonably clear picture of the term's history. Previously, there were a number of false etymologies, False Etymologies. including a claim that the term derived from a New York brothel whose madam was known as Eve. Why Is New York City Called "The Big Apple"? Wayback Machine archive of earlier version of web page. This was subsequently exposed as a hoax Big Apple Whore Hoax (1800s!). and has been replaced on the source website with more accurate information. Why Is New York City Called "The Big Apple"? 

The earliest citation for "big apple" is the 1909 book The Wayfarer in New York by Edward S. Martin, writing: "Kansas is apt to see in New York a greedy city. It inclines to think that the big apple gets a disproportionate share of the national sap" (emphasis added). William Safire considered this the coinage, but the Random House Dictionary of American Slang considers the usage "metaphorical or perhaps proverbial, rather than a concrete example of the later slang term", and Popik likewise does not consider this the coinage.

In the early 1920s, "apple" was used in reference to the many racing courses in and around New York City. Apple referred to the prizes being awarded for the racesas these were important races, the rewards were substantial.

The New York Mets Home Run Apple located in Citi Field.
The Big Apple was first popularized as a reference to New York City by John J. Fitz Gerald in a number of New York Morning Telegraph articles in the 1920s in reference to New York horse-racing. The earliest of these was a casual reference on May 3, 1921:

J. P. Smith, with Tippity Witchet and others of the L. T. Bauer string, is scheduled to start for "the big apple" to-morrow after a most prosperous Spring campaign at Bowie and Havre de Grace. First Big Apple: May 3, 1921. 

Fitz Gerald referred to the "big apple" frequently thereafter. Numerous 1920s Big Apple citations in the New York Morning Telegraph. He explained his use in a February 18, 1924, column under the headline "Around the Big Apple":

The Big Apple. The dream of every lad that ever threw a leg over a thoroughbred and the goal of all horsemen. There's only one Big Apple. That's New York.

Two dusky stable hands were leading a pair of thoroughbred around the "cooling rings" of adjoining stables at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans and engaging in desultory conversation.

"Where y'all goin' from here?" queried one.

"From here we're headin' for The Big Apple," proudly replied the other.

"Well, you'd better fatten up them skinners or all you'll get from the apple will be the core," was the quick rejoinder. First Big Apple explanation: February 18, 1924. See also the original article image. 

Fitz Gerald's reference to the "dusky" stable hands suggests the term's origin may lie in African-American culture. Support for this is found in the Chicago Defender, an African-American newspaper that had a national circulation. Ragtime Billy Tucker, a vaudeville/ragtime performer and writer for the Defender, there used "big apple" to refer to New York in a non-horse-racing context on September 16, 1922:

I trust your trip to 'the big apple' (New York) was a huge success and only wish that I had been able to make it with you. "Big Apple" antedating; 1920s Vaudeville/Ragtime Big Apple Citations. 

Tucker had earlier used "Big Apple" as a reference to a different city, Los Angeles. This example, from May 15, 1920, is the earliest known use of "Big Apple" to refer to any city. It is possible that the writer simply understood "Big Apple" as an appropriate nickname for any large city:

Dear Pal, Tony: No, Ragtime Billy Tucker hasn't dropped completely out of existence, but is still in the 'Big Apple', Los Angeles. 

By the late 1920s, New York writers other than Fitz Gerald were starting to use "Big Apple" and were using it outside of a horse-racing context. 1920s Non-Horseracing Big Apple Citations. "The Big Apple" was a popular song Big Apple song by Bob Emmerich. and dance Big Apple in the 1930s (Two clubs, plus song and dance). in the 1930s. Walter Winchell and other writers continued to use the name in the 1940s and 1950s. Big Apple in the 1940s-1950s. 

By the 1960s, "the Big Apple" was known only as an old name for New York. Kurt Vonnegut, Slaughterhouse-Five 265 (1969; Delta Trade Paperbacks ed. 1999) ("That's what they used to call New York"). In the early 1970s, however, the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau (now NYC & Company, the official marketing and tourism organization for New York City), About NYC and Company. under the leadership of its president, Charles Gillett, began promoting "the Big Apple" for the city. Big Apple 1970s Revival: Charlie Gillett and Lew Rudin. It has remained popular since then. Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in 1997 signed legislation designating the southwest corner of West 54th Street and Broadway, the corner on which John J. Fitz Gerald lived from 1934 to 1963, as "Big Apple Corner". Mayor's Press Office, Release No. 082-97, Mayor Giuliani Signs Legislation Creating "Big Apple Corner" in Manhattan (Feb. 12, 1997). 

The New York Mets have featured a "Home Run Apple" that rises whenever a Mets player hits a home run. It has become a symbol of the Mets baseball team, recognized throughout Major League Baseball as an iconic feature of the Mets' stadiums. It first appeared in Shea Stadium, and the original can still be seen on display at Citi Field, outside the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. Citi Field now uses a new apple, one that is nearly four times the size of the original.

In Evita, Buenos Aires is referred to as "B.A., Buenos Aires, Big Apple" in the song Eva, Beware of the City. This reference was invented by lyricist Tim Rice and does not reflect preexisting use.

== References ==

== External links ==

* Giuliani creates Big Apple Corner from the February 1997 Archives of the Mayor's Press Office
* "Why Is New York City Called 'The Big Apple'?"
* The Big Apple Detailed research findings on the term's history from amateur etymologist Barry Popik
* Straight Dope article

The term "big apple" was used by Frank Sinatra speaking to opera singer Dorothy Kirsten (who was his co-star in the late 1940s-early 1950s NBC radio program "Light Up Time" on a show that aired on 03/28/1950 at about the 2:30 mark. The show may be heard at the following web site:
http://www.radioechoes.com/frank-sinatra-light-up-time#.U1rXB3ZFe9w

[[Boston Corbett]]

Thomas P. "Boston" Corbett (1832  presumed dead 1894) was an American Union Army soldier who shot and killed Abraham Lincoln's assassin, John Wilkes Booth. He disappeared after 1888, but circumstantial evidence suggests that he died in the Great Hinckley Fire in 1894, although this remains impossible to substantiate.

==Early life==
Corbett was born in London, England. His family emigrated to New York City in 1840. He became a hatter in Troy, New York. It has been suggested that the fumes of mercury used in the hatter's trade caused Corbett's later mental problems. 

===Family and "rebirth"===
Corbett married, but his wife died in childbirth. Following her death, he moved to Boston, and continued working as a hatter. He was confronted by a street preacher one night and his message persuaded him to join the Methodist Episcopal Church, which he did, subsequently changing his name to Boston, the name of the city where he was converted. Harper's Weekly, May 13, 1865 In an attempt to imitate Jesus, he began to wear his hair very long. On July 16, 1858, in order to avoid the temptation of prostitutes, Corbett castrated himself with a pair of scissors. He then ate a meal and went to a prayer meeting before he sought medical treatment. Swanson, p. 329 

==Military career==
===Enlistment in the Union army===
Sgt. Boston Corbett, Union Army.
In April 1861, early in the American Civil War, Corbett enlisted as a private in Company I of the 12 Regiment New York Militia. He was discharged in August, at the end of the regiment's 3 month enlistment. Corbett re-enlisted in August 1863 as a private in Company L, 16th New York Cavalry Regiment. Captured by Confederate Colonel John S. Mosby's men at Culpeper, Virginia, on June 24, 1864, Corbett was held prisoner at Andersonville prison for five months, when he was exchanged. On his return to his company, he was promoted to sergeant. Corbett later testified for the prosecution in the trial of the commandant of Andersonville, Captain Henry Wirz. 

Wanted poster for John Wilkes Booth, John Surratt, and David Herold (1865)

===Pursuit of John Wilkes Booth===
Corbett was a member of the 16th New York Cavalry sent, on April 24, 1865, to apprehend John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of Abraham Lincoln, who was still at large. Two days later the regiment surrounded Booth and his accomplice, David Herold, in a tobacco barn on the Virginia farm of Richard Garrett. The barn was set on fire in an attempt to force them out into the open. Herold surrendered, but Booth remained inside. Corbett was positioned near a large crack in the barn wall. Corbett claimed in an 1878 interview that he saw Booth aim his carbine. At that point, Corbett shot Booth with his Colt revolver despite Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton's orders that Booth should be taken alive. Eyewitness Lieutenant Edward Doherty, the officer in charge of the soldiers who captured Booth and Herold, stated that "the bullet struck Booth in the back of the head, about an inch below the spot where his shot had entered the head of Mr. Lincoln." Booth's spinal cord was severed, and he died two hours later. (Quoting Lieutenant Edward Doherty, officer in charge of the soldiers who captured Booth) 
Boston Corbett
Corbett was immediately arrested for violation of his orders, but Stanton later had the charges dropped. Stanton remarked, "The rebel is dead. The patriot lives." Corbett received his share of the reward money, amounting to $1,653.84 (). Swanson, p. 358 

In his official statement, Corbett claimed he shot Booth because he thought Lincoln's assassin was preparing to use his weapons. This was contradicted by the other witnesses. When asked later why he did it, Corbett answered that "Providence directed me". Swanson, p. 340 

==Corbett's later years==
===Immediate post-war life===
After his discharge from the army in August 1865, Corbett went back to work as a hatter, first in Boston, later in Connecticut, and by 1870 in New Jersey. His life was marked by increasingly erratic behavior. In 1875, he threatened several men with a pistol at a soldier's reunion in Caldwell, Ohio. In 1878, he moved to Concordia, Kansas.

===Madness===
In 1887, because of his fame as Booth's killer, Corbett was appointed assistant doorkeeper of the Kansas House of Representatives in Topeka. One day he overheard a conversation in which the legislature's opening prayer was mocked. He jumped to his feet and brandished a revolver. No one was hurt, but Corbett was arrested and sent to the Topeka Asylum for the Insane. On May 26, 1888, he escaped from the asylum. He went to Neodesha, Kansas, and stayed briefly with Richard Thatcher, whom he had met when they were both prisoners of war. When he left, he told Thatcher he was going to Mexico. His "madness" may have been the result of exposure to mercury, an element commonly used in hat manufacturing. It is so well known for this side effect that it has given rise to the expression "mad as a hatter".

===Presumed fate===
Rather than going to Mexico, Corbett is believed to have settled in a cabin he built in the forests near Hinckley, in Pine County in eastern Minnesota. He is believed to have died in the Great Hinckley Fire of September 1, 1894. Although there is no proof, the name "Thomas Corbett" does appear on the list of dead and missing. Lincoln Herald, Volume 86, Lincoln Memorial University Press., 1984, pp 152155 Kubicek, Earl C, "The Case of the Mad Hatter", Lincoln Herald, Volume 83, Lincoln Memorial University Press, 1981, pp 708719 

===Memorials===
In 1958, Boy Scout Troop 31 of Concordia, Kansas, built a roadside monument to Boston Corbett. It is on Key Road in Concordia. A small sign also was placed to mark the dug hole where Corbett for a time had lived. 

==In popular culture==

In its next-to-the-last episode titled "The Unmasked" (June 17, 1962), the ABC/Warner Bros. western television series Lawman, starring John Russell and Peter Brown, presents an entirely fictitious portrayal of Corbett. Played by character actor Dabbs Greer, Corbett is living under the name "Joe Brockway" and is depicted as a hotel owner in Laramie, Wyoming. In the story line, two former Confederate soldiers from Georgia, played by Barry Atwater and Charles Maxwell, arrive in Laramie in search of "Brockway"; they claim he is the key to the settlement of an estate to which they are all a party, but they have actually been sent to kill him for his role in the death of Lincoln's assassin. 

==References==

==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* Boston Corbett: The Man Who Killed John Wilkes Booth
* Kansas Photo Tour of Boston Corbett Memorial
* Photo on Kansas Memory website

 



[[Berber languages]]

Berber or the Berber languages or dialects (Berber name: Tamazit, Tamazight, ) are a family of similar and closely related languages and dialects indigenous to North Africa. They are spoken by large populations in Algeria and Morocco, and by smaller populations in Libya, Tunisia, Mughal, Muhammad Aurang Zeb. 2012. Tunisia. Steven Danver (ed.), Native Peoples of the World: An Encyclopedia of Groups, Cultures, and Contemporary Issues, Vol. 3. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, pp. 688-689. northern Mali, western and northern Niger, northern Burkina Faso, Mauritania, and in the Siwa Oasis of Egypt. Large Berber-speaking migrant communities have been living in Western Europe since the 1950s. In 2001, Berber became a constitutional national language of Algeria, and in 2011 Berber became a constitutionally official language of Morocco.

Berber constitutes a branch of the Afroasiatic language family, Hayward, Richard J., chapter Afroasiatic in Heine, Bernd & Nurse, Derek, editors, African Languages: An Introduction Cambridge 2000. ISBN 0-521-66629-5. and has been attested since ancient times. The number of ethnic Berbers is much higher than the number of Berber speakers. The bulk of the populations of the Maghreb countries are considered to have Berber ancestors. In Algeria, for example, a majority of the population consists of Arabized Berbers. 

There is a movement among speakers of the closely related varieties of Northern Berber to unite them under a standard language. The name Tamazight, originally the self-name in the Atlas and the Rif regions, is being increasingly used for this Standardized Berber, and even for Berber as a whole, including Tuareg-Berber.

About 90 percent of the Berber-speaking population speak one of six major varieties of Berber, each with at least two million speakers. They are, in the order of demographic weight: Tashelhit (Tacelit), Kabyle (Taqbaylit), Atlas Tamazight (Tamazit), Riffian (Tamazit/Tarifit), Shawi (Tacawit), Tuareg (Tamahaq/Tamaceq).

The Berber languages and dialects have had a written tradition, on and off, for over 2,200 years, although the tradition has been frequently disrupted by invasions. They were first written in the Tifinagh alphabet, still used by the Tuareg. The oldest dated inscription is from about 200 BCE. Later, between about 1000 CE and 1500 CE, they were written in the Arabic script, and since the 20th century in the Berber Latin alphabet, especially among the Kabyle and Riffian communities of Morocco and Algeria. The Berber Latin alphabet was also used by most European and Berber linguists during the 19th and 20th centuries. 

A modernized form of the Tifinagh alphabet was made official in Morocco in 2003. Algerians mostly use the Berber Latin alphabet. Mali and Niger recognize a Tuareg Berber Latin alphabet customized to the Tuareg phonological system. However, traditional Tifinagh is still used in those countries. Both Tifinagh and Berber-Latin alphabets are being increasingly used in Morocco and parts of Algeria, while the Arabic script has been abandoned by Berber writers.

==Terminology==
The term Berber has been used in Europe since at least the 17th century, and is still used today. It was borrowed from either the Arabic designation for these populations, , al-Barbar, see Berber (name); or from the Roman and Greek denominations of the Berber people "Barbaricae".

Etymologically, the Berber root Mazigh (singular noun Amazigh, feminine Tamazight) means "free man", "noble man", or "defender". The feminine Tamazight traditionally referred specifically to the Riffian and Central Morocco Tamazight dialects. Many Berber linguists prefer to consider the term "Tamazight" as a pure Berber word to be used only in Berber text; while using the European word "Berber/ Berbero/ Berbre" in European texts to follow the traditions of European writings about the Berbers. European languages distinguish between the words "Berber" and "barbaric", while Arabic has the same word "al-barbari" for both meanings.

Some other Berber writers, especially in Morocco, prefer to refer to Berber with "Amazigh" when writing about it in French or English.

Traditionally, the term "Tamazight" (in various forms: "thamazighth", "tamasheq", "tamajeq", "tamahaq") was used by many Berber groups to refer to the language they spoke, including the Middle Atlas, the Riffians, the Sened in Tunisia, and the Tuareg.
However, other terms were used by other groups; for instance, some parts of Algeria called their language "Taznatit"( Zenati) or 'Shelha', while the Kabyles called theirs "Taqbaylit", the inhabitants of Siwa "Siwi". In Tunisia, the local Amazigh language is usually referred to as "Shelha", a term which has been observed in Morocco as well. [http://www.rosettaproject.org/live/search/showpages?ethnocode=ZEN&doctype=detail&version=0&scale=six ] 

One group, the Linguasphere Observatory, has attempted to introduce the neologism "Tamazic languages" to refer to the Berber languages.

==Origin==

Berber is a member of the Afroasiatic language family.

Since modern Berber languages are relatively homogeneous, the date of the Proto-Berber language from which the modern group is derived was probably comparatively recent, comparable to the age of the Germanic or Romance families.
By contrast, the split of the group from the other Afro-Asiatic sub-phyla is much earlier, and is sometimes associated with the Mesolithic Capsian culture. 
Louali, N., Philippson, G., 2003, "Les Protomditerranens Capsiens sont-ils des protoberbres ? Interrogations de linguiste.", GALF (Groupement des Anthropologues de Langue Franaise), Marrakech, 22-25 Septembre 2003. 

==Orthography==
Berber language poetry in Arabic script with its translation in French
Document in Berber language of Jebel Nefousa - Libya

There are a number of different scripts with which Berber languages may be written. The choice of writing system is often based on politics rather than practical considerations.

==Status==
After independence, all the Maghreb countries to varying degrees pursued a policy of Arabization, aimed partly at displacing French from its colonial position as the dominant language of education and literacy. Under this policy the use of the Amazigh / Berber languages was suppressed or even banned. This state of affairs has been contested by Berbers in Morocco and Algeriaespecially Kabylieand is now being addressed in both countries by introducing the Berber language in some schools and by recognizing Berber as a "national language" in Algeria,  Loi n 02-03 portent rvision constitutionnelle , adopted on April 10, 2002, allotting in particular to "Tamazight" the status of national language. though not as an official one. The 2011 constitution of Morocco makes "Amazight" an official language alongside Arabic. In Mali and Niger, there are a few schools that teach partially in Tamasheq.

Although Algeria considers Tamazight to be a national language, and regional councils in Libya's Nafusa Mountains affiliated with the National Transitional Council reportedly use the Berber dialect of Nafusi and have called for it to be granted co-official status with Arabic in a prospective new constitution, Morocco is the only country where Tamazight is an official language.

As areas of Libya south and west of Tripoli such as the Nafusa Mountains were liberated from the control of forces loyal to Colonel Gaddafi in early summer 2011, Berber workshops and exhibitions sprang up to share and spread the Tamazight culture and language, after four decades during which there were severe punishments for speaking and writing Tamazight openly. Waiting game for rebels in western Libya, BBC News, John Simpson, 5 July 2011 

On June 17, 2011, King Mohammed VI announced in a speech of new constitutional reform that "Tamazight" became an official language of Morocco alongside Arabic and will be used in all the administrations in the future. [http://news.yahoo.com/s/afp/20110617/wl_africa_afp/moroccopoliticsunrest ] 

On April 30, 2012, Fatima Chahou, alias Tabaamrant, member of Morocco House of Representatives and famous former singer became the first one to ask questions and discuss the minister's answer in Tamazight inside the Parliament of Morocco.

== Population ==

The exact population of Berber speakers is hard to ascertain, since most North African countries do not record language data in their censuses. The Ethnologue provides a useful academic starting point; however, its bibliographic references are inadequate, and it rates its own accuracy at only B-C for the area. Early colonial censuses may provide better documented figures for some countries; however, these are also very much out of date.

: Few census figures are available; all countries (Algeria and Morocco included) do not count Berber languages. The 1972 Niger census reported Tuareg, with other languages, at 127,000 speakers. Population shifts in location and number, effects of urbanization and education in other languages, etc., make estimates difficult. In 1952, Andr Basset (LLB.4) estimated the number of Berberophones at 5,500,000. Between 1968 and 1978 estimates ranged from eight to thirteen million (as reported by Galand, LELB 56, pp. 107, 123-25); Voegelin and Voegelin (1977, p. 297) call eight million a conservative estimate. In 2006, estimated that the Berberophone populations of Kabylie and the three Moroccan groups numbered more than one million each; and that in Algeria, 12,650,000, or one out of three Algerians, speak a Berber language (Chaker 1984, pp. 89). 

Map of Berber-speaking areas in Morocco
* Morocco: In 1952, Andr Basset ("La langue berbre", Handbook of African Languages, Part I, Oxford) estimated that a "small majority" of Morocco's population spoke Berber. The 1960 census claimed that 34 percent of Moroccans spoke Berber, including bi-, tri-, and quadrilinguals. In 2000, Karl Prasse cited "more than half" in an interview conducted by Brahim Karada at Tawalt.com. According to the Ethnologue (by deduction from its Moroccan Arabic figures), the Berber-speaking population should be estimated at 35 percent or around 10.5 million speakers. The Ethnologe, Languages of Morocco However, the figures it gives for individual languages only add up to 7.5 million, divided into three dialects:
** Rif Tamazight in North Morocco: 1.5 million speakers (1991) The Ethnologue (INALCO estimates the number at 3 million) 
** Tashelhit: 3 million (1998) (INALCO estimates the number at 8 million) 
** Atlas Tamazight: 3 million (1998) (INALCO estimates the number at 45 million) 

A survey included in the official Moroccan census of 2004 and published by several Moroccan newspapers gave the following figures: 34 percent of people in rural regions spoke a Berber language and 21 percent in urban zones did, the national average would be 28.4 percent or 8.52 million. It is possible, however, that the survey asked for the language "used in daily life" which would result of course in figures clearly lower than those of native speakers, as the language is not recognized for official purposes and many Berbers who live in an Arabic-speaking environment cannot use it in daily life; also the use of Berber in public was frowned upon until the 1990s and might affect the result of the survey.

Adding up the population (according to the official census of 2004) of the Berber-speaking regions as shown on a 1973 map of the CIA results in at least 10 million speakers, not counting the numerous Berber population which lives outside these regions in the bigger cities.

Mohamed Chafik claims 80 percent of Moroccans are Berbers. It is not clear, however, whether he means "speakers of Berber languages" or "people of Berber descent".

The division of Moroccan Berber dialects in three groups, as used by The Ethnologue is common in linguistic publications, but is significantly complicated by local usage: thus Shilha is subdivided into Shilha of the Dra valley, Tasusit (the language of the Souss) and several other (mountain)-dialects. Moreover, linguistic boundaries are blurred, such that certain dialects cannot accurately be described as either Central Morocco Tamazight (spoken in the Central and eastern Atlas area) or Shilha.
* Algeria: In 1906, the total population speaking Berber languages in Algeria (excluding the thinly populated Sahara) was estimated at 1,305,730 out of 4,447,149, i.e. 29 percent. Central / East part of Algeria.(Doutt & Gautier, Enqute sur la dispersion de la langue berbre en Algrie, faite par l'ordre de M. le Gouverneur Gnral, Alger 1913.) The 1911 census, however, found 1,084,702 speakers out of 4,740,526, i.e. 23 percent; Doutt & Gautier suggest that this was the result of a serious undercounting of Shawiya in areas of widespread bilingualism. A trend was noted for Berber groups surrounded by Arabic (as in Blida) to adopt Arabic, while Arabic speakers surrounded by Berber (as in Sikh ou Meddour near Tizi Ouzou) tended to adopt Berber. In 1952, Andr Basset estimated that about a third of Algeria's population spoke Berber. According to historian Charles-Robert Ageron in 1886, Algeria had around 1,2 million of Berber speakers and 1,1 million of Arab speakers. The Algerian census of 1966 found 2,297,997 out of 12,096,347 Algerians, or 19 percent, to speak "Berber". In 1980, Salem Chaker estimated that "in Algeria, 3,650,000, or one out of five Algerians, speak a Berber language" (Chaker 1984, pp. 89). According to the Ethnologue, more recent estimates include 14 percent (corresponding to the total figures it gives for each Berber language added together, 4 million) and (by deduction from its Algerian Arabic figures) 29 percent (Hunter 1996). Most of these are accounted for by three dialects (percentages based on historical population data from appropriate dates): 
 West / Central part of Algeria.
:* Kabyle: 2,540,000 = 9 percent (Ethnologue, 1995)  6,000,000 = 20 percent (Ethnologue, 1998). Total for all countries (Ethnologue): 3,126,000. (Needless to say, the latter two figures, though cited by the same source, are mutually contradictory.) Mainly in Algiers, Bejaia, Tizi-Ouzou, Bouira, Setif and Boumerdes.
:* Shawiya: ~ 2 million as of 2005, http://www.centrederechercheberbere.fr/chaouia.html equivalent to 8.5 percent of the population. Mainly in Batna, Khenchela, Stif, Souk Ahras, Oum-El-Bouaghi, Tebessa.
:* Shenwa, in the Dahra region, more precisely Jebel Chenoua in Algeria, just west of Algiers in the wilayas of Tipasa, the Chlef and Ain Defla. It is estimated at 56,300 speakers. Two main dialects: Beni Menacer, west and south of Mount Chenoua area, in Mount Chenoua area, 55,250 speakers.

: A fourth group, despite a very small population, accounts for most of the land area where Berber is spoken:
:* Tuareg 25,000 in Algeria (Ethnologue, 1987), mainly in the Ahaggar mountains of the Sahara. Most Tuareg live in Mali and Niger (see below). 

Other Berber dialects spoken in Algeria include: the Tamazight of Blida, the dialects of the Beni Snouss and Beni Bousaid villages in the wilaya of Tlemcen, the Matmata Berber spoken in the Ouarsenis region, the Mozabite language spoken in the wilaya of Mzab region, the dialect of the Ouargla oasis.
* Tunisia: Basset (1952) estimated about 1 percent, as did Penchoen (1968). According to the Ethnologue, there are only 26,000 speakers (1998) of a Berber language it calls "Djerbi", but which Tunisians call "Shelha", in Tunisia, all in the south around Djerba and Matmata. The more northerly enclave of Sened apparently no longer speaks Berber. This would make 0.3 percent of the population.
* Libya: According to the Ethnologue (by deduction from its combined Libyan Arabic and Egyptian Arabic figures) the non-Arabic-speaking population, most of which would be Berber, is estimated at 4 percent (1991, 1996). However, the individual language figures it gives add up to 162,000, i.e. about 3 percent. This is mostly accounted for by the languages:
** Nafusi in Jabal Nafusa and Zuwara Berber in Zuwara in Tripolitania region: 184,000. 
** Tahaggart Tuareg of Ghat: 17,000 (Johnstone 1993).
* Egypt: The oasis of Siwa near the Libyan border speaks a Berber language; according to the Ethnologue, there are 5,000 speakers there (1995). Its population in 1907 was 3884 (according to the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica); the claimed lack of increase seems surprising.
* Mauritania: According to the Ethnologue, only 200-300 speakers of Zenaga remain (1998). It also mentions Tamasheq, but does not provide a population figure for it. Most non-Arabic speakers in Mauritania speak NigerCongo languages.
* Mali: The Ethnologue counts 440,000 Tuareg (1991) speaking:
:: Tamasheq: 250,000
:: Tamajaq: 190,000
* Niger: The Ethnologue counts 720,000 Tuareg (1998) speaking:
:: Tawallamat Tamajaq: 450,000
:: Tayart Tamajeq: 250,000
:: Tamahaq: 20,000
* Burkina Faso: The Ethnologue counts 20,00030,000 Tuareg (SIL 1991), speaking . However the Ethnologue is very inaccurate here appearing to miss the largest group of Tamasheq in Burkina in the province of Oudalan. The Tamasheq speaking population of Burkina is nearer to 100,000 (2005), with around 70,000 Tamasheq speakers in the province of Oudalan, the rest mainly in Seno, Soum, Yagha, Yatenga and Kadiogo provinces. About 10 percent of Burkina Tamasheq speak a version of the Tawallamat dialect.
* Nigeria: The Ethnologue notes the presence of "few" Tuareg, speaking Tawallamat Tamajaq.
* France: The Ethnologue lists 860,000 speakers for Riffian and 537,000 speakers for Kabyle, 150,000 for Central Morocco Tamazight, and no figures for Shilha. For the rest of Europe, it has no figures.
* Spain: Tamazight is spoken amongst Melilla's 80,000 inhabitants but there has been no census as to the percentage of its speakers. A minority of Ceuta's inhabitants speak Berber. 
* Israel: Around two thousand mostly elderly Moroccan-born Israelis of Berber Jewish descent use Judeo-Berber dialects (as opposed to Moroccan Jews who trace descent from Spanish-speaking Sephardi Jews expelled from Spain, or Arabic-speaking Moroccan Jews).

Thus, judging by the not necessarily reliable Ethnologue, the total number of speakers of Berber languages in the Maghreb proper appears to lie anywhere between 16 and 25 million, depending on which estimate is accepted; if we take Basset's estimate, it could be as high as 30 million. The vast majority are concentrated in Morocco and Algeria. The Tuareg of the Sahel add another million or so.

==Grammar==
Kabylian manuscript on the 18th century

===Nouns===

Nouns in the Berber languages vary in gender (masculine versus feminine), in number (singular versus plural) and in state (free state versus construct state). In the case of the masculine, nouns generally begin with one of the three vowels of Berber, a, u or i (in standardised orthography, e represents a schwa inserted for reasons of pronunciation):
::afus "hand"
::argaz "man"
::udem "face"
::ul "heart"
::ixef "head"
::iles "tongue"

While the masculine is unmarked, the feminine (also used to form diminutives and singulatives, like an ear of wheat) is marked with the circumfix t...t. Feminine plural takes a prefix t...:
::afus  tafust
::udem  tudemt
::ixef  tixeft
::ifassen  tifassin

Berber languages have two types of number: singular and plural, of which only the latter is marked. Plural has three forms according to the type of nouns. The first, "regular" type is known as the "external plural"; it consists in changing the initial vowel of the noun, and adding a suffix -n:
::afus  ifassen "hands"
::argaz  irgazen "men"
::ixef  ixfawen "heads"
::ul  ulawen "hearts"
The second form of the plural is known as the "broken plural". It involves only a change in the vowels of the word:
::adrar  idurar "mountain"
::agadir  igudar "wall / castle"
::abaghus  ibughas "monkey"
The third type of plural is a mixed form: it combines a change of vowels with the suffix -n:
::izi  izan "(the) fly"
::azur  izuran "roof"
::iziker  izakaren "rope"

Berber languages also have two types of states or cases of the noun, organized ergatively: one is unmarked, while the other serves for the subject of a transitive verb and the object of a preposition, among other contexts. The former is often called free state, the latter construct state. The construct state of the noun derives from the free state through one of the following rules:
The first involves a vowel alternation, whereby the vowel a becomes u:
::argaz  urgaz
::amghar  umghar
::adrar  udrar
The second involves the loss of the initial vowel, in the case of some feminine nouns:
::tamghart  temghart "woman / mature woman"
::tamdint  temdint "town"
::tarbat  terbat "girl"
The third involves the addition of a semi-vowel (w or y) word-initially:
::asif  wasif "river"
::au  wau "wind"
::iles  yiles "tongue"
::uccen  wuccen "wolf"
Finally, some nouns do not change for free state:
::taddart  taddart "house / village"
::tuccent  tuccent "female wolf"

The following table gives the forms for the noun amghar "old man / leader":

 masculine feminine 
 default agent default agent 
 singular amghar umghar tamghart temghart 
 plural imgharen yimgharen timgharin temgharin 

===Pronouns===
Berber pronouns show gender distinction in the second- and third-persons, but in verbal agreement markers, the distinction is lost in the second-person Bhat, D.N.S. 2004. Pronouns. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 21 

==Subclassification==
Modern Berber languages
There is so little data available on Guanche that any classification is necessarily uncertain; however, it is almost universally acknowledged as Afro-Asiatic on the basis of the surviving glosses, and widely suspected to be Berber. Much the same can be said of the language, sometimes called "Numidian", used in the Libyan or Libyco-Berber inscriptions around the turn of the Common Era, whose alphabet is the ancestor of Tifinagh.

A listing of the other Berber languages is complicated by their closeness; there is little distinction between language and dialect. The primary difficulty of subclassification, however, list in the eastern Berber languages, where there is little agreement. Otherwise there is consensus on the outlines of the family:
* Eastern Berber (scope debated)
* Northern Berber
** Zenati (incl. Riff, Shawiya)
** Kabyle
** Atlas (incl. Shilha, Tamazight)
* Tuareg
* Western Berber (Zenaga)

The various classifications differ primarily in what they consider to be Eastern Berber, and in how many varieties they recognize as distinct languages.

===Kossman (1999)===
Maarten Kossmann (1999) describes Berber as two dialect continua,
* Northern Berber and
* Tuareg,
plus a few peripheral languages, spoken in isolated pockets largely surrounded by Arabic, that fall outside these continua, namely
* Zenaga and
* the Libyan and Egyptian varieties.
Within Northern Berber, however, he recognizes a break in the continuum between Zenati and their non-Zenati neighbors; and in the east, he recognizes a division between Ghadams and Awjila on the one hand and Sokna (Fuqaha, Libya), Siwa, and Djebel Nefusa on the other. The implied tree is:
* NafusiSiwi languages (including Sokna)
* GhadamsAwjila languages
* Northern Berber
** Zenati
** Kabyle and Atlas
* Tuareg
* Zenaga

===Ethnologue===
The Ethnologue, mostly following Aikhenvald and Militarev (1991), treats the eastern varieties differently:
* Guanche
* Eastern Berber
** Siwi
** AwjilaSokna
* Northern Berber (including Nafusi and Ghadames within Zenati)
* Tuareg
* Zenaga

===Blench (2006)===
Blench (ms, 2006) has the following classification: AA list, Blench, ms, 2006 
* Guanche
* East Numidian  Old Libyan
* Berber

and within Berber,
* Eastern Berber
** Siwa
** Awjila
** Sokna
** Ghadames
* Northern Berber (including Nafusi within Zenati)
* Twareg
* Zenaga

==Influence on other languages==
The Berber languages have influenced Maghrebi Arabic dialects, such as Moroccan, Algerian and Tunisian Arabic. Their influence is also seen in some languages in Sub-Saharan Africa. F. W. H. Migeod Migeod, F. W. H., The Languages of West Africa. Kegan, Paul, Trench & Trbner, London 1913. pages 232, 233. pointed to strong resemblances between Berber and Hausa in such words and phrases as these: Berber: ya mut; Hausa ya mutu (he died); Berber: obanis; Hausa obansa (his father); Berber: a bat; Hausa ya bata (he was lost); Berber: eghare; Hausa ya kirra (he called). In addition he notes that the genitive in both languages is formed with n = "of".

==Examples of basic Berber words==

The Berber letter "c" is pronounded like the English "sh".

The Berber "x" is pronounced like the Spanish "j" or the German "ch" in doch.

The Berber "" is pronounced like the French or German "r".

===Numbers===

 English Berber 
 One ijjen / yan / yun / yiwen (fem: ict, yat, yut, yiwet) 
 Two sin (fem: snat) 
 Three kra (fem: krat) 
 Four kku or okkoz (fem: kkut) 
 Five semmus (fem: semmust) 
 Six seis (fem: sist) 
 Seven saa (fem: sat) 
 Eight tam (fem: tamt) 
 Nine ta (fem: tat) 
 Ten mraw (fem: mrawt) 

 English Berber 
 Eleven mraw d ijjen / mraw d yan 
 Twelve mraw d sin 
 Thirteen mraw d kra 
 Fourteen mraw d kku 
 Fifteen mraw d semmus 
 Sixteen mraw d sis 
 Seventeen mraw d sa 
 Eighteen mraw d tam 
 Nineteen mraw d ta 
 Twenty simraw 

 English Berber 
 Twenty-one simraw d ijjen / simraw d yan 
 Twenty-two simraw d sin 
 Twenty-three simraw d kra 
 Twenty-four simraw d kku 
 Twenty-five simraw d semmus 
 Twenty-six simraw d sis 
 Twenty-seven simraw d sa 
 Twenty-eight simraw d tam 
 Twenty-nine simraw d ta 
 Thirty kramraw 

 English Berber 
 one hundred timii 
 one thousand agim / ife 
 two thousand sin igiman / sin ifen 
 two thousand thirteen {2013} sin igiman d mraw d kra 

===Days of the week===

 English Berber 
 Monday Aynas /  
 Tuesday Asinas /  
 Wednesday Akas /  
 Thursday Akwas /  
 Friday Asimwas /  
 Saturday Asiyas /  
 Sunday Asamas /  

==Notes==

==References==

* Medieval Berber Orthography, Boogert, Leiden University PDF
* Brett, Michael; & Fentress, Elizabeth (1997). The Berbers (The Peoples of Africa). ISBN 0-631-16852-4. ISBN 0-631-20767-8 (Pbk).
* Abdel-Masish, Ernest T. 1971. A Reference Grammar of Tamazight (Middle Atlas Berber). Ann Arbor: Center for Near Eastern and North African Studies, The University of Michigan
* Basset, Andr. 1952. La langue berbre. Handbook of African Languages 1, ser. ed. Daryll Forde. London: Oxford University Press
* Chaker, Salem. 1995. Linguistique berbre: tudes de syntaxe et de diachronie. M. S.Ussun amazi 8, ser. ed. Salem Chaker. Paris and Leuven: Uitgeverij Peeters
* Dallet, Jean-Marie. 1982. Dictionnaire kabylefranais, parler des At Mangellet, Algrie. tudes etholinguistiques MaghrebSahara 1, ser. eds. Salem Chaker, and Marceau Gast. Paris: Socit dtudes linguistiques et anthropologiques de France
* de Foucauld, Charles Eugne. 1951. Dictionnaire touaregfranais, dialecte de lAhaggar. 4 vols. : Imprimerie nationale de France
* Delheure, Jean. 1984. Araw n yiwalen: tumabt t-tfransist, Dictionnaire mozabitefranais, langue berbre parle du Mzab, Sahara septentrional, Algrie. tudes etholinguistiques MaghrebSahara 2, ser. eds. Salem Chaker, and Marceau Gast. Paris: Socit dtudes linguistiques et anthropologiques de France
* . 1987. Agerraw n iwalen: teggargrenttaumit, Dictionnaire ouarglifranais, langue parle  Oaurgla et Ngoussa, oasis du Sahara septentrinal, Algrie. tudes etholinguistiques MaghrebSahara 5, ser. eds. Salem Chaker, and Marceau Gast. Paris: Socit dtudes linguistiques et anthropologiques de France
* Kossmann, Maarten G. 1999. Essai sur la phonologie du proto-berbre. Grammatische Analysen afrikanischer Sprachen 12, ser. eds. Wilhelm J. G. Mhlig, and Bernd Heine. Kln: Rdiger Kppe Verlag
* Kossmann, Maarten G., and Hendrikus Joseph Stroomer. 1997. "Berber Phonology". In Phonologies of Asia and Africa (Including the Caucasus), edited by Alan S. Kaye. 2 vols. Vol. 1. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns. 461475
* Nat-Zerrad, Kamal. 1998. Dictionarrie des racines berbres (formes attestes). Paris and Leuven: Centre de Recherche Berbre and Uitgeverij Peeters
* Prasse, Karl-Gottfried, Ghubyd gg-lwli, and Ghbdwan g-Muxmmd. 1998. Asgglalaf: TmaqTfrsist  Lexique touaregfranais. 2nd ed. Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications 24, ser. eds. Paul John Frandsen, Daniel T. Potts, and Aage Westenholz. Kbenhavn: Museum Tusculanum Press
* Quitout, Michel. 1997. Grammaire berbre (rifain, tamazight, chleuh, kabyle). Paris and Montral: ditions lHarmattan
* Rssler, Otto. 1958. "Die Sprache Numidiens". In Sybaris: Festschrift Hans Krahe zum 60. Geburtstag am 7. February 1958, dargebracht von Freunden, Schlern und Kollegen. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz
* Sadiqi, Fatima. 1997. Grammaire du berbre. Paris and Montral: ditions lHarmattan. ISBN 2-7384-5919-6

==External links==



* "What does Berber sound like?" (Thamazight poems as text & MP3)
* Map of Tamazight language from the LL-Map Project
* The Tamazight Language Profile
* Etymolgy of "Berber"
* Etymology of "Amazigh"
* Early Christian history of Berbers
* Tifinagh
* Ancient Scripts
* Imyura Kabyle site about literature
* Amawal: The online open source Berber dictionary

 



[[Bankruptcy]]

Notice of closure attached to the door of a Computer Shop outlet the day after its parent company declared "bankruptcy" (strictly, put into administration) in the United Kingdom
Bankruptcy is a legal status of a person or other entity that cannot repay the debts it owes to creditors. In most jurisdictions, bankruptcy is imposed by a court order, often initiated by the debtor.

Bankruptcy is not the only legal status that an insolvent person or other entity may have, and the term bankruptcy is therefore not a synonym for insolvency. In some countries, including the United Kingdom, bankruptcy is limited to individuals, and other forms of insolvency proceedings (such as liquidation and administration) are applied to companies. In the United States, bankruptcy is applied more broadly to formal insolvency proceedings.

==Etymology==
The word bankruptcy is derived from Italian banca rotta, meaning "broken bench", which may stem from a custom of breaking a moneychanger's bench or counter to signify his insolvency, or which may be only a figure of speech. 

==History==

Failure of John Law's Mississippi Company led to French national bankruptcy in 1720.

In Ancient Greece, bankruptcy did not exist. If a man owed and he could not pay, he and his wife, children or servants were forced into "debt slavery", until the creditor recouped losses through their physical labour. Many city-states in ancient Greece limited debt slavery to a period of five years; debt slaves had protection of life and limb, which regular slaves did not enjoy. However, servants of the debtor could be retained beyond that deadline by the creditor and were often forced to serve their new lord for a lifetime, usually under significantly harsher conditions. An exception to this rule was Athens, which by the laws of Solon forbade enslavement for debt; as a consequence, most Athenian slaves were foreigners (Greek or otherwise).

In the Old Testament, every seventh year is decreed by Mosaic Law as a Sabbatical year wherein the release of all debts that are owed by members of the community (but not "foreigners") is mandated. The seventh Sabbatical year, or forty-ninth year, is then followed by another Sabbatical year known as the Year of Jubilee wherein the release of all debts is mandated, for fellow community members and foreigners alike, and the release of all debt-slaves is also mandated. The Year of Jubilee is announced in advance on the Day of Atonement, or the tenth day of the seventh Biblical month, in the forty-ninth year by the blowing of trumpets throughout the land of Israel.

In Islamic teaching, according to the Qur'an, an insolvent person was deemed to be allowed time to be able to pay out his debt. This is recorded in the Qur'an's second chapter (Sura Al-Baqara), Verse 280, which notes: "And if someone is in hardship, then let there be postponement until a time of ease. But if you give from your right as charity, then it is better for you, if you only knew."

The Statute of Bankrupts of 1542 was the first statute under English law dealing with bankruptcy or insolvency. "Bankruptcy". 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Bankruptcy is also documented in East Asia. According to al-Maqrizi, the Yassa of Genghis Khan contained a provision that mandated the death penalty for anyone who became bankrupt three times.

A failure of a nation to meet bond repayments has been seen on many occasions. Philip II of Spain had to declare four state bankruptcies in 1557, 1560, 1575 and 1596. According to Kenneth S. Rogoff, "Although the development of international capital markets was quite limited prior to 1800, we nevertheless catalog the numerous defaults of France, Portugal, Prussia, Spain, and the early Italian city-states. At the edge of Europe, Egypt, Russia, and Turkey have histories of chronic default as well." Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). "This time is different: eight centuries of financial folly". Princeton University Press. p.30. ISBN 0-691-14216-5 

==Modern law and debt restructuring==
The principal focus of modern insolvency legislation and business debt restructuring practices no longer rests on the elimination of insolvent entities but on the remodelling of the financial and organisational structure of debtors experiencing financial distress so as to permit the rehabilitation and continuation of their business.

For private households, it is argued to be insufficient to merely dismiss debts after a certain period. It is important to assess the underlying problems and to minimise the risk of financial distress to re-occur. It has been stressed that debt advice, a supervised rehabilitation period, financial education and social help to find sources of income and to improve the management of household expenditures need to be equally provided during this period of rehabilitation (Reifner et al., 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). In most EU Member States, debt discharge is conditioned by a partial payment obligation and by a number of requirements concerning the debtor's behaviour. In the United States (US), discharge is conditioned to a lesser extent. The spectrum is broad in the EU, with the UK coming closest to the US system (Reifner et al., 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). Other Member States do not provide the option of a debt discharge. Spain, for example, passed a bankruptcy law (ley concursal) in 2003 which provides for debt settlement plans that can result in a reduction of the debt (maximally half of the amount) or an extension of the payment period of maximally five years (Gerhardt, 2009), but it does not foresee debt discharge. Dubois & Anderson (2010) Managing household debts: Social service provision in the EU. Working paper. Dublin: European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions. eurofound.europa.eu 

==Fraud==
Bankruptcy fraud is a white-collar crime. While difficult to generalise across jurisdictions, common criminal acts under bankruptcy statutes typically involve concealment of assets, concealment or destruction of documents, conflicts of interest, fraudulent claims, false statements or declarations, and fee fixing or redistribution arrangements. Falsifications on bankruptcy forms often constitute perjury. Multiple filings are not in and of themselves criminal, but they may violate provisions of bankruptcy law. In the U.S., bankruptcy fraud statutes are particularly focused on the mental state of particular actions. See 140 Cong. Rec. S14, 461 (daily ed. Oct. 6, 1994). See 18 U.S.C. sec 152. trac.syr.edu. Bankruptcy fraud is a federal crime in the United States.

Bankruptcy fraud should be distinguished from strategic bankruptcy, which is not a criminal act, but may work against the filer.

All assets must be disclosed in bankruptcy schedules whether or not the debtor believes the asset has a net value. This is because once a bankruptcy petition is filed, it is for the creditors, not the debtor, to decide whether a particular asset has value. The future ramifications of omitting assets from schedules can be quite serious for the offending debtor. In the United States, a closed bankruptcy may be reopened by motion of a creditor or the U.S. trustee if a debtor attempts to later assert ownership of such an "unscheduled asset" after being discharged of all debt in the bankruptcy. The trustee may then seize the asset and liquidate it for the benefit of the (formerly discharged) creditors. Whether or not a concealment of such an asset should also be considered for prosecution as fraud and/or perjury would then be at the discretion of the judge and/or U.S. Trustee.

==By country==

===Argentina===
In Argentina the national Act "24.522 de Concursos y Quiebras" regulates the Bankruptcy and the Reorganization of the individuals and companies, public entities are not included.

===Australia===
The Bankruptcy Act 1966 (Commonwealth) is the legislation that governs bankruptcy in Australia. Only individuals can become bankrupt; insolvent companies go into liquidation or administration. There are three "parts" of the act under which the vast majority of "acts of bankruptcy" fall. Part IV (Full Bankruptcy), Part IX Debt Agreements and Part X Personal Insolvency Agreements. Agreements refer specifically to arrangements between creditors and debtors, whereas Part IV relates to full bankruptcy and is generally synonymous with "bankruptcy".

A person or debtor can declare himself or herself bankrupt by lodging a debtor's petition with the Official Receiver, which is the Australian Financial Security Authority (AFSA). A person can also be made bankrupt after a creditor's petition results in the making of a sequestration order in the Federal Magistrates Court. To declare bankruptcy or for a creditors petition to be lodged, a minimum debt of $5,000 is required.

All bankrupts are required to lodge a Statement of Affairs document with AFSA, which includes important information about their assets and liabilities. A bankruptcy cannot be annulled until this document has been lodged.

Ordinarily, a Part IV bankruptcy lasts three years from the filing of the Statement of Affairs with AFSA. In the case of a debtor's petition, the Statement of Affairs is filed with the petition and the three-year period commences immediately. However, in the case of a creditor's petition, the Statement of Affairs will rarely be filed on the same day the court order is made. If the bankrupt fails to lodge the document within a certain period of time, he or she can be prosecuted and fined.

A Bankruptcy Trustee (in most cases this is the Official Receiver) is appointed to deal with all matters regarding the administration of the bankrupt estate. The Trustee's job includes notifying creditors of the estate and dealing with creditor inquiries; ensuring that the bankrupt complies with his or her obligations under the Bankruptcy Act; investigating the bankrupt's financial affairs; realising funds to which the estate is entitled under the Bankruptcy Act and distributing dividends to creditors if sufficient funds become available.

For the duration of their bankruptcy, all bankrupts have certain restrictions placed upon them under the Act. For example, a bankrupt must obtain the permission of his or her trustee to travel overseas. Failure to do so may result in the bankrupt being stopped at the airport by the Australian Federal Police. Additionally, a bankrupt is required to provide his or her trustee with details of income and assets. If the bankrupt does not comply with the Trustee's request to provide details of income, the trustee may have grounds to lodge an Objection to Discharge, which has the effect of extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.

The realisation of funds usually comes from two main sources: the bankrupt's assets and the bankrupt's wages. There are certain assets that are protected, referred to as "protected assets". These include household furniture and appliances, tools of the trade and vehicles up to a certain value. All other assets of value will be sold. If a house or car is above a certain value, the bankrupt can buy the interest back from the estate in order to keep the asset. If the bankrupt does not do this, the interest vests in the estate and the trustee is able to take possession of the asset and sell it.

The bankrupt will have to pay income contributions if his or her income is above a certain threshold. The threshold is indexed biannually in March and September, and varies according to the number of dependants the bankrupt has. The income contributions liability is calculated by halving the amount of income that exceeds the threshold. If the bankrupt fails to pay the contributions due, the trustee can issue a notice to garnishee the bankrupt's wages. If that is not possible, the Trustee may lodge an Objection to Discharge, effectively extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.

Bankruptcies can be annulled prior to the expiration of the normal three-year period if all debts are paid out in full. Sometimes a bankrupt may be able to raise enough funds to make an Offer of Composition to creditors, which would have the effect of paying the creditors some of the money they are owed. If the creditors accept the offer, the bankruptcy can be annulled after the funds are received.

After the bankruptcy is annulled or the bankrupt has been automatically discharged, the bankrupt's credit report status will be shown as "discharged bankrupt" for some years. The number of years varies depending on the company issuing the report, but the report will eventually cease to record that information.

Certain limited information on Bankruptcy Law in Australia can be found at the AFSA web site. 

===Brazil===
In Brazil, the Bankruptcy Law (11.101/05) governs court-ordered or out-of-court receivership and bankruptcy and only applies to public companies (publicly traded companies) with the exception of financial institutions, credit cooperatives, consortia, supplementary scheme entities, companies administering health care plans, equity companies and a few other legal entities. It does not apply to state-run companies.

Current law covers three legal proceedings. The first one is bankruptcy itself ("Falncia"). Bankruptcy is a court-ordered liquidation procedure for an insolvent business. The final goal of bankruptcy is to liquidate company assets and pay its creditors.

The second one is Court-ordered Restructuring (Recuperao Judicial). The goal is to overcome the business crisis situation of the debtor in order to allow the continuation of the producer, the employment of workers and the interests of creditors, leading, thus, to preserving company, its corporate function and develop economic activity. It's a court procedure required by the debtor which has been in business for more than two years and requires approval by a judge.

The Extrajudicial Restructuring (Recuperao Extrajudicial) is a private negotiation that involves creditors and debtors and, as with court-ordered restructuring, also has to be approved by courts. 

===Canada===

Bankruptcy also referred to as Insolvency in Canada is governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act and is applicable to businesses and individuals. The office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy, a federal agency, is responsible for overseeing that bankruptcies are administered in a fair and orderly manner by all licensed Trustees in Canada.

Trustees in bankruptcy, 1041 individuals licensed to administer insolvencies, bankruptcy and proposal estates and are governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada.

Bankruptcy is filed when a person or a company becomes insolvent and cannot pay their debts as they become due and if they have at least $1,000 in debt.

In 2011, the Superintendent of bankruptcy reported that trustees in Canada filed 127,774 Insolvent estates. Consumer estates were the vast majority, with 122 999 estates. The consumer portion of the 2011 volume is divided into 77,993 bankruptcies and 45,006 consumer proposals. This represented a reduction of 8.9% from 2010. Commercial estates filed by Canadian trustees in 2011 4,775 estates, 3,643 bankruptcies and 1,132 Division 1 proposals. This represents a reduction of 8.6% over 2010.

====Duties of trustees====
Some of the duties of the trustee in bankruptcy are to:
* Review the file for any fraudulent preferences or reviewable transactions
* Chair meetings of creditors
* Sell any non-exempt assets
* Object to the bankrupt's discharge
* Distribute funds to creditors

====Creditors' meetings====
Creditors become involved by attending creditors' meetings. The trustee calls the first meeting of creditors for the following purposes:
* To consider the affairs of the bankrupt
* To affirm the appointment of the trustee or substitute another in place thereof
* To appoint inspectors
* To give such directions to the trustee as the creditors may see fit with reference to the administration of the estate.

====Consumer proposals====

In Canada, a person can file a consumer proposal as an alternative to bankruptcy. A consumer proposal is a negotiated settlement between a debtor and their creditors.

A typical proposal would involve a debtor making monthly payments for a maximum of five years, with the funds distributed to their creditors. Even though most proposals call for payments of less than the full amount of the debt owing, in most cases, the creditors will accept the deal, because if they do not, the next alternative may be personal bankruptcy, where the creditors will get even less money. The creditors have 45 days to accept or reject the consumer proposal. Once the proposal is accepted by both the creditors and the Court, the debtor makes the payments to the Proposal Administrator each month (or as otherwise stipulated in their proposal), and the general creditors are prevented from taking any further legal or collection action. If the proposal is rejected, the debtor is returned to his prior insolvent state and may have no alternative but to declare personal bankruptcy.

A consumer proposal can only be made by a debtor with debts to a maximum of $250,000 (not including the mortgage on their principal residence). If debts are greater than $250,000, the proposal must be filed under Division 1 of Part III of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. An Administrator is required in the Consumer Proposal, and a Trustee in the Division I Proposal (these are virtually the same although the terms are not interchangeable). A Proposal Administrator is almost always a licensed trustee in bankruptcy, although the Superintendent of Bankruptcy may appoint other people to serve as administrators.

In 2006, there were 98,450 personal insolvency filings in Canada: 79,218 bankruptcies and 19,232 consumer proposals. "Insolvency in Canada in 2006": Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (Industry Canada). Retrieved 2007-05-30. 

===China===

===Ireland===
Bankruptcy in Ireland applies only to natural persons. Other insolvency processes including liquidation and examinership are used to deal with corporate insolvency.

Irish bankruptcy law has been the subject of significant comment, from both government sources and the media, as being in need of reform. Part 7 of the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 has started this process and the government has committed to further reform.

===India===
India does not have a clear law on corporate bankruptcy even though individual bankruptcy laws have been in existence since 1874. The current law in force was enacted in 1920 called the Provincial Insolvency Act.

The legal definitions of the terms bankruptcy, insolvency, liquidation and dissolution are contested in the Indian legal system. There is no regulation or statute legislated upon bankruptcy which denotes a condition of inability to meet a demand of a creditor as is common in many other jurisdictions.

Winding up of companies is in the jurisdiction of the courts which can take a decade even after the company has actually been declared insolvent. On the other hand, supervisory restructuring at the behest of the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is generally undertaken using receivership by a public entity.

===The Netherlands===
Dutch bankruptcy law is governed by the Dutch Bankruptcy Code (Faillissementswet). The code covers three separate legal proceedings. The first is the bankruptcy (Faillissement). The goal of the bankruptcy is the liquidation of the assets of the company. The bankruptcy applies to individuals and companies. The second legal proceeding in the Faillissementswet is the Surseance. The Surseance only applies to companies. Its goal is to reach an agreement with the creditors of the company. The third proceeding is the Schuldsanering. This proceeding is designed for individuals only.
The individual can travel out of the country freely after the judge's decision on the case. The individual can also buy and sell any property and/or articles.

=== Russia ===

Federal Law  127-FZ "On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)" dated 26 October 2002 (as amended) (the "Bankruptcy Act"), replacing the previous law in 1998, to better address the above problems and a broader failure of the action.
Russian insolvency law is intended for a wide range of borrowers: individuals and companies of all sizes, with the exception of state-owned enterprises, government agencies, political parties and religious organizations. There are also special rules for insurance companies, professional participants of the securities market, agricultural organizations and other special laws for financial institutions and companies in the natural monopolies in the energy industry.
Federal Law  40-FZ "On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)" dated 25 February 1999 (as amended) (the "Insolvency Law of Credit Institutions") contains special provisions in relation to the opening of insolvency proceedings in relation to the credit company. Insolvency Provisions Act, credit organizations used in conjunction with the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act.

Bankruptcy law provides for the following stages of insolvency proceedings:
 Observation Control (nablyudeniye);
 The economic recovery (finansovoe ozdorovleniye);
 External control (vneshneye upravleniye);
 Liquidation (konkursnoye proizvodstvo) and
 Comprehensive Agreement (mirovoye soglasheniye).

The main face of the bankruptcy process is the insolvency officer (trustee in bankruptcy). At various stages of bankruptcy, he has to be determined: the temporary officer, external control, the receiver or administrative officer. During the bankruptcy trustee in bankruptcy (insolvency officer) has a decisive influence on the movement of assets (property) of the debtor - the debtor and has a key influence on the economic and legal aspects of its operations.

===Switzerland===
Bankruptcy according to Salvation Army, Switzerland.

Under Swiss law, bankruptcy can be a consequence of insolvency. It is a court-ordered form of debt enforcement proceedings that applies, in general, to registered commercial entities only. In a bankruptcy, all assets of the debtor are liquidated under the administration of the creditors, although the law provides for debt restructuring options similar to those under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy code.

===Sweden===
In Sweden, bankruptcy (Swedish: konkurs) is a formal process that may involve a company or individual. It is not the same as insolvency, which is inability to pay debts that should have been paid. A creditor or the company itself can apply for bankruptcy. An external bankruptcy manager will take over the company or the assets of the person, trying to sell as much as possible. A person or a company in bankruptcy can not access its assets (with some exceptions).

The formal bankruptcy process is rarely carried out for individuals. Creditors can claim money through the Enforcement Administration anyway, and creditors do not usually benefit from the bankruptcy of individuals because there are costs of a bankruptcy manager which has priority. Unpaid debts remain after bankruptcy for individuals. People who are deeply in debt can obtain a debt arrangement procedure (Swedish: skuldsanering). On application, they obtain a payment plan under which they pay as much as they can for five years, and then all remaining debts are cancelled. Debts that are derived from being subjected to a ban on business operations (issued by court, commonly for tax fraud and/or fraudulent business practices) or owed to a crime victim as compensation for damages, are exempted from this and like before this process was introduced in 2006 will remain lifelong. Debts that have not been claimed during a 3-10 year period will be cancelled. Often crime victims stop their claims after a few years since criminals often do not have job incomes and might be hard to locate, while banks make sure the claims are not cancelled. The most common reasons for personal insolvency in Sweden are illness, unemployment, divorce or company bankruptcy, not the reckless spending claimed by politicians and debt collection agencies when they describe the problem with deep personal debts. 

===United Kingdom===

Bankruptcy in the United Kingdom (in a strict legal sense) relates only to individuals (including sole proprietors) and partnerships. Companies and other corporations enter into differently named legal insolvency procedures: liquidation and administration (administration order and administrative receivership). However, the term 'bankruptcy' is often used when referring to companies in the media and in general conversation. Bankruptcy in Scotland is referred to as sequestration. To apply for your own bankruptcy in Scotland you must have more than 1500 of debt.

A trustee in bankruptcy must be either an Official Receiver (a civil servant) or a licensed insolvency practitioner. Current law in England and Wales derives in large part from the Insolvency Act 1986. Following the introduction of the Enterprise Act 2002, a UK bankruptcy will now normally last no longer than 12 months and may be less, if the Official Receiver files in court a certificate that his investigations are complete. It was expected that the UK Government's liberalisation of the UK bankruptcy regime would increase the number of bankruptcy cases; the Insolvency Service statistics appear to bear this out:

 UK Bankruptcy statistics 
 Year Bankruptcies IVAs Total 
 2004 35,989 10,752 46,741 
 2005 47,291 20,293 67,584 
 2006 62,956 44,332 107,288 
 2007 64,480 42,165 106,645 
 2008 67,428 39,116 106,544 

====Pensions====
The UK bankruptcy law was changed in May 2000, effective May 29, 2000. Debtors may now retain occupational pensions while in bankruptcy, except in rare cases.

====Proposed reform====
The Government are currently considering legislation to 'streamline' the bankruptcy process in the UK. Under the new proposals, struggling borrowers may be able to apply for bankruptcy without necessarily having to go to court, except where a disagreement exists between the debtor and their creditors. "New streamlined application process proposed for bankruptcy and compulsory winding up": The Insolvency Service. 07 November 2011 14:31. Retrieved 2011-11-10. 

===United States===
In 2013, Detroit filed the largest municipal bankruptcy case in U.S. history.
Bankruptcy in the United States is a matter placed under federal jurisdiction by the United States Constitution (in Article 1, Section 8, Clause 4), which allows Congress to enact "uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States". The Congress has enacted statutes governing bankruptcy, primarily in the form of the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code. Federal law is amplified by state law in some places where Federal law fails to speak or expressly defers to state law.

While bankruptcy cases are always filed in United States Bankruptcy Court (an adjunct to the U.S. District Courts), bankruptcy cases, particularly with respect to the validity of claims and exemptions, are often dependent upon State law. State law therefore plays a major role in many bankruptcy cases, and it is often not possible to generalise bankruptcy law across state lines.

Generally, a debtor declares bankruptcy to obtain relief from debt, and this is accomplished either through a discharge of the debt or through a restructuring of the debt. Generally, when a debtor files a voluntary petition, his or her bankruptcy case commences.

====Chapters====
There are six types of bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code:
* Chapter 7: basic liquidation for individuals and businesses; also known as straight bankruptcy; it is the simplest and quickest form of bankruptcy available
* Chapter 9: municipal bankruptcy; a federal mechanism for the resolution of municipal debts
* Chapter 11: rehabilitation or reorganisation, used primarily by business debtors, but sometimes by individuals with substantial debts and assets; known as corporate bankruptcy, it is a form of corporate financial reorganisation which typically allows companies to continue to function while they follow debt repayment plans
* Chapter 12: rehabilitation for family farmers and fishermen;
* Chapter 13: rehabilitation with a payment plan for individuals with a regular source of income; enables individuals with regular income to develop a plan to repay all or part of their debts; also known as Wage Earner Bankruptcy
* Chapter 15: ancillary and other international cases; provides a mechanism for dealing with bankruptcy debtors and helps foreign debtors to clear debts.

The most common types of personal bankruptcy for individuals are Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. As much as 65% of all U.S. consumer bankruptcy filings are Chapter 7 cases. Corporations and other business forms file under Chapters 7 or 11.

In Chapter 7, a debtor surrenders his or her non-exempt property to a bankruptcy trustee who then liquidates the property and distributes the proceeds to the debtor's unsecured creditors. In exchange, the debtor is entitled to a discharge of some debt; however, the debtor will not be granted a discharge if he or she is guilty of certain types of inappropriate behaviour (e.g. concealing records relating to financial condition) and certain debts (e.g. spousal and child support, most student loans), some taxes will not be discharged even though the debtor is generally discharged from his or her debt. Many individuals in financial distress own only exempt property (e.g. clothes, household goods, an older car) and will not have to surrender any property to the trustee. The amount of property that a debtor may exempt varies from state to state. Chapter 7 relief is available only once in any eight-year period. Generally, the rights of secured creditors to their collateral continues even though their debt is discharged. For example, absent some arrangement by a debtor to surrender a car or "reaffirm" a debt, the creditor with a security interest in the debtor's car may repossess the car even if the debt to the creditor is discharged.

The 2005 amendments to the Bankruptcy Code introduced the "means test" for eligibility for chapter 7. An individual who fails the means test will have his or her chapter 7 case dismissed or may have to convert his or her case to a case under chapter 13.

Generally, a trustee will sell most of the debtor's assets to pay off creditors. However, certain assets of the debtor are protected to some extent. For example, Social Security payments, unemployment compensation, and limited values of equity in a home, car, or truck, household goods and appliances, trade tools, and books are protected. However, these exemptions vary from state to state.

In Chapter 13, the debtor retains ownership and possession of all of his or her assets, but must devote some portion of his or her future income to repaying creditors, generally over a period of three to five years. The amount of payment and the period of the repayment plan depend upon a variety of factors, including the value of the debtor's property and the amount of a debtor's income and expenses. Secured creditors may be entitled to greater payment than unsecured creditors. 

Relief under Chapter 13 is available only to individuals with regular income whose debts do not exceed prescribed limits. If you are an individual or a sole proprietor, you are allowed to file for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to repay all or part of your debts. Under this chapter, you can propose a repayment plan in which to pay your creditors over three to five years. If your monthly income is less than the state's median income, your plan will be for three years unless the court finds "just cause" to extend the plan for a longer period. If your monthly income is greater than your state's median income, the plan must generally be for five years. A plan cannot exceed the five-year limitation.

In contrast to Chapter 7, the debtor in Chapter 13 may keep all of his or her property, whether or not exempt. If the plan appears feasible and if the debtor complies with all the other requirements, the bankruptcy court will typically confirm the plan and the debtor and creditors will be bound by its terms. Creditors have no say in the formulation of the plan other than to object to the plan, if appropriate, on the grounds that it does not comply with one of the Code's statutory requirements. Generally, the payments are made to a trustee who in turn disburses the funds in accordance with the terms of the confirmed plan.

When the debtor completes payments pursuant to the terms of the plan, the court will formally grant the debtor a discharge of the debts provided for in the plan. However, if the debtor fails to make the agreed upon payments or fails to seek or gain court approval of a modified plan, a bankruptcy court will often dismiss the case on the motion of the trustee. Pursuant to the dismissal, creditors will typically resume pursuit of state law remedies to the extent a debt remains unpaid.

In Chapter 11, the debtor retains ownership and control of assets and is re-termed a debtor in possession (DIP). The debtor in possession runs the day-to-day operations of the business while creditors and the debtor work with the Bankruptcy Court in order to negotiate and complete a plan. Upon meeting certain requirements (e.g. fairness among creditors, priority of certain creditors) creditors are permitted to vote on the proposed plan. If a plan is confirmed the debtor will continue to operate and pay its debts under the terms of the confirmed plan. If a specified majority of creditors do not vote to confirm a plan, additional requirements may be imposed by the court in order to confirm the plan. Debtors filing for Chapter 11 protection a second time are known informally as "Chapter 22" filers. 

Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 are the efficient bankruptcy chapters often used by most individuals. The chapters which almost always apply to consumer debtors are chapter 7, known as a "straight bankruptcy", and chapter 13, which involves an affordable plan of repayment. An important feature applicable to all types of bankruptcy filings is the automatic stay. The automatic stay means that the mere request for bankruptcy protection automatically stops and brings to a grinding halt most lawsuits, repossessions, foreclosures, evictions, garnishments, attachments, utility shut-offs, and debt collection activity.

====Exemptions====
A Bankruptcy Exemption defines the property a debtor may retain and preserve through bankruptcy. Certain real and personal property can be exempted on "Schedule C" of a debtors bankruptcy forms, and effectively be taken outside the debtor's bankruptcy estate. Bankruptcy Exemptions are available only to individuals filing bankruptcy. There are two alternative systems that can be used to "exempt" property from a bankruptcy estate, Federal Exemptions (available in some states but not all), and State Exemptions (which vary widely between states).

Individuals filing bankruptcy that claim exemptions must have all exemptions agreed upon by their bankruptcy judge (and/or courts) and by their creditors. This step usually requires the help of lawyers, in which the sector of Bankruptcy Law has grown to become a large section of the law field. This sector, the combination of law and finance, has attracted a large number of students in recent years, and has been given a large undertaking for growing the law sector.

====Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act====
The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) of 2005, Pub. L. No. 109-8, 119 Stat. 23 (April 20, 2005) ("BAPCPA"), substantially amended the Bankruptcy Code. Many provisions of BAPCPA were forcefully advocated by consumer lenders and were just as forcefully opposed by many consumer advocates, bankruptcy academics, bankruptcy judges, and bankruptcy lawyers. "Hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Bankruptcy Reform", 109th Cong. February 10, 2005. Retrieved July 30, 2007. The enactment of BAPCPA followed nearly eight years of debate in Congress. According the book The Unwinding, Joe Biden, Chris Dodd, and Hillary Clinton helped pass this bill. Most of the law's provisions became effective on October 17, 2005. Upon signing the bill, President Bush stated:

It was widely claimed by advocates of BAPCPA that its passage would reduce losses to creditors such as credit card companies, and that those creditors would then pass on the savings to other borrowers in the form of lower interest rates. These claims turned out to be false. After BAPCPA passed, although credit card company losses decreased, prices charged to customers increased, and credit card company profits soared. Michael Simkovic, "The Effect of BAPCPA on Credit Card Industry Profits and Prices" Berkeley Business Law Journal, Vol. 6, No. 1, Spring 2009 

Among its many changes to consumer bankruptcy law, BAPCPA enacted a "means test", which was intended to make it more difficult for a significant number of financially distressed individual debtors whose debts are primarily consumer debts to qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. The "means test" is employed in cases where an individual with primarily consumer debts has more than the average annual income for a household of equivalent size, computed over a 180-day period prior to filing. If the individual must "take" the "means test", their average monthly income over this 180 day period is reduced by a series of allowances for living expenses and secured debt payments in a very complex calculation that may or may not accurately reflect that individual's actual monthly budget. If the results of the means test show no disposable income (or in some cases a very small amount) then the individual qualifies for Chapter 7 relief. If a debtor does not qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code, either because of the Means Test or because Chapter 7 does not provide a permanent solution to delinquent payments for secured debts, such as mortgages or vehicle loans, the debtor may still seek relief under Chapter 13 of the Code. A Chapter 13 plan often does not require repayment to general unsecured debts, such as credit cards or medical bills.

BAPCPA also requires individuals seeking bankruptcy relief to undertake credit counselling with approved counselling agencies prior to filing a bankruptcy petition and to undertake education in personal financial management from approved agencies prior to being granted a discharge of debts under either Chapter 7 or Chapter 13. Some studies of the operation of the credit counselling requirement suggest that it provides little benefit to debtors who receive the counselling because the only realistic option for many is to seek relief under the Bankruptcy Code.

===Europe===

During 2004, the number of insolvencies reached all time highs in many European countries. In France, company insolvencies rose by more than 4%, in Austria by more than 10%, and in Greece by more than 20%. The increase in the number of insolvencies, however, does not indicate the total financial impact of insolvencies in each country because there is no indication of the size of each case. An increase in the number of bankruptcy cases does not necessarily entail an increase in bad debt write-off rates for the economy as a whole.

Bankruptcy statistics are also a trailing indicator. There is a time delay between financial difficulties and bankruptcy. In most cases, several months or even years pass between the financial problems and the start of bankruptcy proceedings. Legal, tax, and cultural issues may further distort bankruptcy figures, especially when comparing on an international basis. Two examples:
* In Austria, more than half of all potential bankruptcy proceedings in 2004 were not opened, due to insufficient funding.
* In Spain, it is not economically profitable to open insolvency/bankruptcy proceedings against certain types of businesses, and therefore the number of insolvencies is quite low. For comparison: In France, more than 40,000 insolvency proceedings were opened in 2004, but under 600 were opened in Spain. At the same time the average bad debt write-off rate in France was 1.3% compared to Spain with 2.6%.

The insolvency numbers for private individuals also do not show the whole picture. Only a fraction of heavily indebted households will decide to file for insolvency. Two of the main reasons for this are the stigma of declaring themselves insolvent and the potential business disadvantage.

==See also==
Cartoosh's View
* Bankruptcy Act
* Bankruptcy alternatives
* Creditor's rights
* Debt consolidation
* Debt relief
* Debt restructuring
* Debtor in possession
* Default
* DIP Financing
* Distressed securities
* Financial distress
* Individual voluntary arrangement
* Insolvency
* Judicial estoppel
* Liquidation
* Protected trust deed
* Sole Trader Insolvency (UK)
* Stalking Horse Agreement
* Tools of trade
* Turnaround ADR

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* U.S. Federal Bankruptcy Courts
* Official U.S. Bankruptcy Statistics
* US Courts Bankruptcy Law
* Executive Office for United States Bankruptcy Trustees
* Cornell Bankruptcy Laws
* National Association of Consumer Bankruptcy Attorneys
* Bankruptcy Research Database (WebBRD)
* Website of the Insolvency Service in the UK
* Bankruptcy Statistics in Hong Kong

 



[[Blissymbols]]

Blissymbols or Blissymbolics was conceived as an ideographic writing system called Semantography consisting of several hundred basic symbols, each representing a concept, which can be composed together to generate new symbols that represent new concepts. Blissymbols differ from most of the world's major writing systems in that the characters do not correspond at all to the sounds of any spoken language.

==History==
Blissymbols was invented by Charles K. Bliss (18971985), born Karl Kasiel Blitz in the Austro-Hungarian city of Czernowitz (at present the Ukrainian city of Chernivtsi), which had a mixture of different nationalities that hated each other, mainly because they spoke and thought in different languages. Grant Stott (1997). A Great Australian. The Inventor of Semantography (Blissymbolics). Retrieved 18 October 2011. 
Bliss graduated as a chemical engineer at the Vienna University of Technology, and joined an electronics company as a research chemist. 

As the German Army invaded Austria in 1938, he was sent to the concentration camps of Dachau and Buchenwald. His German wife Claire managed to get him released, and they finally became exiles in Shanghai, where Bliss had a cousin. 

Bliss devised Blissymbols while a refugee at the Shanghai Ghetto and Sydney, from 1942 to 1949. He wanted to create an easy-to-learn international auxiliary language to allow communication between different linguistic communities. He was inspired by Chinese characters, with which he became familiar at Shanghai.

Blisss system was explained in his work Semantography (1949, Bliss, C. K. (1949). Semantography, a non-alphabetical symbol writing, readable in all languages; a practical tool for general international communication, especially in science, industry, commerce, traffic, etc., and for semantical education, based on the principles of ideographic writing and chemical symbolism. Sydney: Institute for Semantography. OCoLC: 26684585. 2nd ed. 1965, Bliss, C. K. (1965). Semantography (Blissymbolics). 2d enlarged edition. A simple system of 100 logical pictorial symbols, which can be operated and read like 1+2=3 in all languages (...). Sydney: Semantography (Blissymbolics) Publications. OCoLC: 1014476. 3rd ed. 1978. Bliss, C. K. (1978). Semantography: Blissymbolics. 3rd enlarged edition. Sydney: Semantography-Blissymbolics Publications. ISBN 0-9595870-0-4. )
It had several names:

As the tourist explosion took place in the 1960s, a number of researchers were looking for new standard symbols to be used at roads, stations, airports, etc. Bliss then adopted the name Blissymbolics in order that no researcher could plagiarize his system of symbols.

Since the 1960s/1970s, Blissymbols have become popular as a method to teach disabled or handicapped people to communicate.
In 1971 Shirley McNaughton started a pioneer program at the Ontario Crippled Childrens Centre (OCCC), aimed at children with cerebral palsy, from the approach of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC). According to Arika Okrent, Bliss used to complain about the way the teachers at the OCCC were using the symbols, in relation with the proportions of the symbols and other questions: for example, they used fancy terms like nouns and verbs, to describe what Bliss called things and actions. Okrent, Arika (2009), In the land of invented languages. New York : Spiegel & Grau. pp. 175-6. ISBN 978-0-385-52788-0. (2009, p. 173-4).
The ultimate objective of the OCCC program was to use Blissymbols as a practical way to teach the children to express themselves in their mother tongue, since the Blissymbols provided visual keys to understand the meaning of the English words, especially the abstract words.

In his work Semantography Bliss had not provided a systematic set of definitions for his symbols (there was a provisional vocabulary index instead (1965, pp. 82767)), so McNaughtons team might often interpret a certain symbol in a way that Bliss would later criticize as a misinterpretation. For example, they might interpret a tomato as a vegetable &mdash;according to the English definition of tomato&mdash; even though the ideal Blissymbol of vegetable was restricted by Bliss to just vegetables growing underground. Eventually the OCCC staff modified and adapted Blisss system in order to make it serve as a bridge to English. (2009, p. 189) Bliss complaints about his symbols being abused by the OCCC became so intense that the director of the OCCC told Bliss, on his 1974 visit, never to come back. In spite of this, in 1975 Bliss granted an exclusive world license, for use with handicapped children, to the new Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton (later called Blissymbolics Communication International, BCI). Nevertheless, in 1977 Bliss claimed that this agreement was violated so that he was deprived of effective control of his symbol system. 

According to Okrent (2009, p. 190), there was a final period of conflict, as Bliss would make continuous criticisms to McNaughton often followed by apologies. Bliss finally brought his lawyers back to the OCCC, and both parts reached a settlement:

Blissymbolic Communication International now claims an exclusive license from Bliss, for the use and publication of Blissymbols for persons with communication, language and learning difficulties. 

The Blissymbol method has been used in Canada, Sweden, and a few other countries. Practitioners of Blissymbolics (that is, speech and language therapists and users) maintain that some users who have learned to communicate with Blissymbolics find it easier to learn to read and write traditional orthography in the local spoken language than do users who did not know Blissymbolics.

== The speech question ==
Unlike similar constructed languages like aUI, Blissymbolics was conceived as a purely visual, speech-less language, on the premise that interlinguistic communication is mainly carried on by reading and writing. Nevertheless, Bliss suggested that a set of international words could be adopted, so that a kind of spoken language could be established  as a travelling aid only. (1965, p. 89-90).

So, whether Blissymbolics constitutes an unspoken language is a controversial question, whatever its practical utility may be. Some linguists, such as John DeFrancis DeFrancis, John (1984), The Chinese language : fact and fantasy. Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-0866-5. DeFrancis, John (1989), Visible speech : the diverse oneness of writing systems. Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1207-7. and J. Marshall Unger have argued that genuine ideographic writing systems with the same capacities as natural languages do not exist.

== Semantics ==
Blisss concern about semantics finds an early referent in John Locke, Locke, J. (1690). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. London. whose Essay Concerning Human Understanding prevented people from those "vague and insignificant forms of speech" that may give the impression of being deep learning.

Another vital referent is Leibnizs project of an ideographic language called "universal character", based on the principles of Chinese characters. It would contain small figures representing "visible things by their lines, and the invisible, by the visible which accompany them", as well as adding "certain additional marks, suitable to make understood the flexions and the particles." (1965, p. 569). Bliss stated that his own work was an attempt to take up the thread of Leibnizs project.

Finally there is a strong influence by the work The Meaning of Meaning by C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards, C. K. Ogden & I. A. Richard (1923). The meaning of meaning; a study of the influence of language upon thought and of the science of symbolism. London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & co., ltd; New York, Harcourt, Brace & company, inc. LC: 23009064. which was considered a standard work on semantics. Bliss found especially useful their "triangle of reference": the physical thing or "referent" that we perceive would be represented at the right angle; the meaning that we know by experience (our implicit definition of the thing), at the top angle; and the physical word that we speak or write, at the left angle. The reversed process would happen when we read or listen to words: from the words, we recall meanings, related to referents which may be real things or unreal "fictions". Bliss was particularly concerned with political propaganda, whose discourses would tend to contain words that correspond to unreal or ambiguous referents.

== Grammar ==
The grammar of Blissymbols is based on a certain interpretation of nature, dividing it into matter (material things), energy (actions), and human values (mental evaluations). In an ordinary language, these would give place respectively to substantives, verbs, and adjectives. In Blissymbols, they are marked respectively by a small square symbol, a small cone symbol, and a small V or inverted cone. These symbols may be placed above any other symbol, turning it respectively into a thing, an action, and an evaluation:

When a symbol is not marked by any of the three grammar symbols (square, cone, inverted cone), they may be a non material thing, a grammatical particle, etc.

== Examples ==
50px

The symbol above represents the expression "world language", which was a first tentative name for Blissymbols.
It combines the symbol for "writing tool" or "pen" (a line inclined, as a pen being used) with the symbol for "world", which in its turn combines "ground" or "earth" (a horizontal line below) and its counterpart derivate "sky" (a horizontal line above). Thus the world would be seen as "what is among the ground and the sky", and "Blissymbols" would be seen as "the writing tool to express the world". This is clearly distinct from the symbol of "language", which is a combination of "mouth" and "ear". Thus natural languages are mainly oral, while Blissymbols is just a writing system dealing with semantics, not phonetics.

The 900 individual symbols of the system are called "Bliss-characters"; these may be "ideographic" - representing abstract concepts, "pictographic" - a direct representation of objects, or "composite" - in which two or more existing Bliss-characters have been superimposed to represent a new meaning. Size, orientation and relation to the "skyline" and "earthline" affects the meaning of each symbol. (pp. 7-9) A single concept is called a "Bliss-word", which can consist of one or more Bliss-characters. In the case of multiple character Bliss-words, the main character is called the "classifier" which "indicates the semantic or grammatical category to which the Bliss-word belongs". To this can be added Bliss-characters as prefixes or suffixes called "modifiers" which amend the meaning of the first symbol. A further symbol, called an "indicator" can be added adjacent to the Bliss-word; these are used as "grammatical and/or semantic markers." Rules of Blissymbolics pp. 11-18 

"I want to go to the cinema." in blissymbols
This sentence means "I want to go to the cinema." This example shows several features of Blissymbolics:
* The pronoun "I" is formed of the Bliss-character for "person" and the number 1 (the first person). Using the number 2 would give the symbol for singular "You"; adding the plural indicator (a small cross at the top) would produce the pronouns "We" and plural "You".
* The Bliss-word for "to want" contains the heart which symbolizes "feeling" (the classifier), plus the serpentine line which symbolizes "fire" (the modifier), and the verb (called "action") indicator at the top.
* The Bliss-word for "to go" is composed of the Bliss-character for "leg" and the verb indicator.
* The Bliss-word for "movie theater" is composed of the Bliss-character for "house" (the classifier), and "film" (the modifier); "film" is a composite character composed of "camera" and the arrow indicating movement.

== Towards the international standardization of the script ==
As told above, Blissymbolics was used in 1971 to help children at the Ontario Crippled Childrens Centre (OCCC, now the Bloorview Kids Rehab) in Toronto, Canada. Since it was important that the children see consistent pictures, OCCC had a draftsman named Jim Grice draw the symbols. Both Charles K. Bliss and Margrit Beesley at the OCCC worked with Grice to ensure consistency. In 1975, a new organization named Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton led this effort. Over the years, this organization changed its name to Blissymbolics Communication Institute, Easter Seal Communication Institute, and ultimately to Blissymbolics Communication International (BCI).

BCI is an international group of people who act as an authority regarding the standardization of the Blissymbolics language. It has taken responsibility for any extensions of the Blissymbolics language as well as any maintenance needed for the language. BCI has coordinated usage of the language since 1971 for augmentative and alternative communication. BCI received a licence and copyright through legal agreements with Charles K. Bliss in 1975 and 1982. Limiting the count of Bliss-characters (there are currently about 900) is very useful in order to help the user community. It also helps when implementing Blissymbolics using technology such as computers.

In 1991, BCI published a reference guide Wood, Storr, & Reich (1992) Blissymbol Reference Guide. Toronto: Blissymbolics Communication International. ISBN 0-9690516-9-7. containing 2300 vocabulary items and detailed rules for the graphic design of additional characters, so they settled a first set of approved Bliss-words for general use.
The Standards council of Canada then sponsored, on January 21, 1993, the registration of an encoded character set for use in ISO/IEC 2022, in the ISO-IR international registry of coded character sets.
After many years of requests, the Blissymbolic language was finally approved as an encoded language, with code zbl, into the ISO 639-2 and ISO 639-3 standards.

A proposal was posted by Michael Everson for the Blissymbolics script to be included in the Universal Character Set (UCS) and encoded for use with the ISO/IEC 10646 and Unicode standards. Michael Everson (1998). Encoding Blissymbolics in Plane 1 of the UCS. Retrieved 19 October 2011. BCI would cooperate with the Unicode Technical Committee (UTC) and the ISO Working Group.
The proposed encoding does not use the lexical encoding model used in the existing ISO-IR/169 registered character set, but instead applies the Unicode and ISO character-glyph model to the Bliss-character model already adopted by BCI, since this would significantly reduce the number of needed characters. Bliss-characters can now be used in a creative way to create many new arbitrary concepts, by surrounding the invented words with special Bliss indicators (similar to punctuation), something which was not possible in the ISO-IR/169 encoding. 

However, at the end of 2009, the Blissymbolic script is still not encoded in the UCS. Some questions are still unanswered, such as the inclusion in the BCI repertoire of some characters (currently about 24) that are already encoded in the UCS (like digits, punctuation signs, spaces and some markers), but whose unification may cause problems due to the very strict graphical layouts required by the published Bliss reference guides. In addition, the character metrics use a specific layout where the usual baseline is not used, and the ideographic em-square is not relevant for Bliss character designs, that use additional "earth line" and "sky line" to define the composition square. 
Some fonts supporting the BCI repertoire are available and usable with texts encoded with private-use assignments (PUA) within the UCS. But only the private BCI encoding based on ISO-IR/169 registration is available for text interchange.

== See also ==
* iConji
* Isotype

== References ==

== External links ==
* 
** Blissymbol Communication UK
* An Introduction to Blissymbols (PDF file)
* Standard two-byte encoded character set for Blissymbols, from the ISO-IR international registry of character sets, registration number 169 (1993-01-21).
* Michael Everson's First proposed encoding into Unicode and ISO/IEC 10646 of Blissymbolics characters, based on the decomposition of the ISO-IR/169 repertoire.
* Radiolab program about Charles Bliss - Broadcast December 2012 - the item about Charles Bliss starts after 5 minutes and is approx 30 mins long.
* On-line tool for creating Blisscharts



[[Bessel function]]

Bessel functions, first defined by the mathematician Daniel Bernoulli and generalized by Friedrich Bessel, are the canonical solutions y(x) of Bessel's differential equation

: 

for an arbitrary complex number  (the order of the Bessel function). The most important cases are for  an integer or half-integer.

Although  and  produce the same differential equation for real , it is conventional to define different Bessel functions for these two values in such a way that the Bessel functions are mostly smooth functions of . Bessel functions are also known as cylinder functions or the cylindrical harmonics because they appear in the solution to Laplace's equation in cylindrical coordinates.

==Applications of Bessel functions==
Bessel's equation arises when finding separable solutions to Laplace's equation and the Helmholtz equation in cylindrical or spherical coordinates. Bessel functions are therefore especially important for many problems of wave propagation and static potentials. In solving problems in cylindrical coordinate systems, one obtains Bessel functions of integer order ( = n); in spherical problems, one obtains half-integer orders ( = n+1/2). For example:
* Electromagnetic waves in a cylindrical waveguide
* Pressure amplitudes of inviscid rotational flows
* Heat conduction in a cylindrical object
* Modes of vibration of a thin circular (or annular) artificial membrane (such as a drum or other membranophone)
* Diffusion problems on a lattice
* Solutions to the radial Schrdinger equation (in spherical and cylindrical coordinates) for a free particle
* Solving for patterns of acoustical radiation
* Frequency-dependent friction in circular pipelines
* Dynamics of floating bodies

Bessel functions also appear in other problems, such as signal processing (e.g., see FM synthesis, Kaiser window, or Bessel filter).

==Definitions==
Because this is a second-order differential equation, there must be two linearly independent solutions. Depending upon the circumstances, however, various formulations of these solutions are convenient. Different variations are described below.

===Bessel functions of the first kind : J===
Bessel functions of the first kind, denoted as J(x), are solutions of Bessel's differential equation that are finite at the origin (x = 0) for integer or positive , and diverge as x approaches zero for negative non-integer . It is possible to define the function by its Taylor series expansion around x = 0: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 360, 9.1.10. 

:

where (z) is the gamma function, a shifted generalization of the factorial function to non-integer values. The Bessel function of the first kind is an entire function if  is an integer. The graphs of Bessel functions look roughly like oscillating sine or cosine functions that decay proportionally to 1/x (see also their asymptotic forms below), although their roots are not generally periodic, except asymptotically for large x. (The Taylor series indicates that J1(x) is the derivative of J0(x), much like sin(x) is the derivative of cos(x); more generally, the derivative of Jn(x) can be expressed in terms of J'n1(x) by the identities below.)

Plot of Bessel function of the first kind, J(x), for integer orders  = 0, 1, 2

For non-integer , the functions J(x) and J(x) are linearly independent, and are therefore the two solutions of the differential equation. On the other hand, for integer order , the following relationship is valid (note that the Gamma function has simple poles at each of the non-positive integers): Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 358, 9.1.5. 

:

This means that the two solutions are no longer linearly independent. In this case, the second linearly independent solution is then found to be the Bessel function of the second kind, as discussed below.

====Bessel's integrals====
Another definition of the Bessel function, for integer values of n, is possible using an integral representation: 

:

Another integral representation is: 

:

This was the approach that Bessel used, and from this definition he derived several properties of the function. The definition may be extended to non-integer orders by (for Re(x) > 0), one of Schfli's integrals: 

: Watson, p. 176 http://www.math.ohio-state.edu/~gerlach/math/BVtypset/node122.html http://www.nbi.dk/~polesen/borel/node15.html Arfken & Weber, exercise 11.1.17. 

====Relation to hypergeometric series====
The Bessel functions can be expressed in terms of the generalized hypergeometric series as Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 362, 9.1.69. 

:

This expression is related to the development of Bessel functions in terms of the BesselClifford function.

====Relation to Laguerre polynomials====
In terms of the Laguerre polynomials Lk and arbitrarily chosen parameter t, the Bessel function can be expressed as Szeg, G. Orthogonal Polynomials, 4th ed. Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., 1975. 
:

===Bessel functions of the second kind : Y===
The Bessel functions of the second kind, denoted by Y(x), occasionally denoted instead by N(x), are solutions of the Bessel differential equation that have a singularity at the origin (x = 0). These are sometimes called Weber functions after Heinrich Martin Weber, and also Neumann functions after Carl Neumann.

Plot of Bessel function of the second kind, Y(x), for integer orders  = 0, 1, 2.

For non-integer , Y(x) is related to J(x) by:

:

In the case of integer order n, the function is defined by taking the limit as a non-integer  tends to n:

:

There is also a corresponding integral formula (for Re(x) > 0), Watson, p. 178. 

:

Y(x) is necessary as the second linearly independent solution of the Bessel's equation when  is an integer. But Y(x) has more meaning than that. It can be considered as a 'natural' partner of J(x). See also the subsection on Hankel functions below.

When  is an integer, moreover, as was similarly the case for the functions of the first kind, the following relationship is valid:

:

Both J(x) and Y(x) are holomorphic functions of x on the complex plane cut along the negative real axis. When  is an integer, the Bessel functions J are entire functions of x. If x is held fixed, then the Bessel functions are entire functions of .

Other choices are possible for the Bessel functions of the second kind, as any linearly independent solution may be used. This is the second alternative for the second solution in Fuchs's theorem when  is an integer.

===Hankel functions: H(1), H(2)===
Another important formulation of the two linearly independent solutions to Bessel's equation are the Hankel functions H(1)(x) and H(2)(x), defined by: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 358, 9.1.3, 9.1.4. 

:
:

where i is the imaginary unit. These linear combinations are also known as Bessel functions of the third kind; they are two linearly independent solutions of Bessel's differential equation. They are named after Hermann Hankel.

The importance of Hankel functions of the first and second kind lies more in theoretical development rather than in application. These forms of linear combination satisfy numerous simple-looking properties, like asymptotic formulae or integral representations. Here, 'simple' means an appearance of the factor of the form eif(x). The Bessel function of the second kind then can be thought to naturally appear as the imaginary part of the Hankel functions.

The Hankel functions are used to express outward- and inward-propagating cylindrical wave solutions of the cylindrical wave equation, respectively (or vice versa, depending on the sign convention for the frequency).

Using the previous relationships they can be expressed as:

:
:

If  is an integer, the limit has to be calculated. The following relationships are valid, whether  is an integer or not: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 358, 9.1.6. 

:
:

In particular, if  = m + 1/2 with m a nonnegative integer, the above relations imply directly that

:
:

These are useful in developing the spherical Bessel functions (below).

The Hankel functions admit the following integral representations for Re(x) > 0: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 360, 9.1.25. 

:
:

where the integration limits indicate integration along a contour that can be chosen as follows: from  to 0 along the negative real axis, from 0 to i along the imaginary axis, and from i to +i along a contour parallel to the real axis. Watson, p. 178 

===Modified Bessel functions : I, K===
The Bessel functions are valid even for complex arguments x, and an important special case is that of a purely imaginary argument. In this case, the solutions to the Bessel equation are called the modified Bessel functions (or occasionally the hyperbolic Bessel functions) of the first and second kind, and are defined by: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 375, 9.6.2, 9.6.10, 9.6.11. 

:
:

when  is not an integer; when  is an integer, then the limit is used. These are chosen to be real-valued for real and positive arguments x. The series expansion for I(x) is thus similar to that for J(x), but without the alternating (1)m factor.

If  < arg(x)  /2, K(x) can be expressed as a Hankel function of the first kind:
:
and if /2 < arg(x)  , it can be expressed as a Hankel function of the second kind:
:

We can express the first and second Bessel functions in terms of the modified Bessel functions (these are valid if  < arg(z)  /2):

:

I(x) and K(x) are the two linearly independent solutions to the modified Bessel's equation: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 374, 9.6.1. 

:

Unlike the ordinary Bessel functions, which are oscillating as functions of a real argument, I and K are exponentially growing and decaying functions, respectively. Like the ordinary Bessel function J, the function I goes to zero at x = 0 for  > 0 and is finite at x = 0 for  = 0. Analogously, K diverges at x = 0.

 Modified Bessel functions of 1st kind, I(x), for  = 0, 1, 2, 3 Modified Bessel functions of 2nd kind, K(x), for  = 0, 1, 2, 3 

Two integral formulas for the modified Bessel functions are (for Re(x) > 0): Watson, p. 181. 

:
:

Modified Bessel functions K1/3 and K2/3 can be represented in terms of rapidly converged integrals M.Kh.Khokonov. Cascade Processes of Energy Loss by Emission of Hard Photons, JETP, V.99, No.4, pp. 690-707 (2004). Derived from formulas sourced to I. S. Gradshten and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products (Fizmatgiz, Moscow, 1963; Academic, New York, 1980). 

:

The modified Bessel function of the second kind has also been called by the now-rare names:
* Basset function after Alfred Barnard Basset
* Modified Bessel function of the third kind
* Modified Hankel function Referred to as such in: Teichroew, D. The Mixture of Normal Distributions with Different Variances, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics. Vol. 28, No. 2 (Jun., 1957), pp. 510512 
* Macdonald function after Hector Munro Macdonald
* Weber function http://www.mhtlab.uwaterloo.ca/courses/me755/web_chap4.pdf 
* Neumann function 

===Spherical Bessel functions: jn, yn===
Spherical Bessel functions of 1st kind, jn(x), for n = 0, 1, 2
Spherical Bessel functions of 2nd kind, yn(x), for n = 0, 1, 2
When solving the Helmholtz equation in spherical coordinates by separation of variables, the radial equation has the form:

:

The two linearly independent solutions to this equation are called the spherical Bessel functions j'n and y'n, and are related to the ordinary Bessel functions J'n and Y'n by: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 437, 10.1.1. 

:
:

yn is also denoted nn or n; some authors call these functions the spherical Neumann functions.

The spherical Bessel functions can also be written as (Rayleigh's formulas): Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 439, 10.1.25, 10.1.26; 
:
:

The first spherical Bessel function j0(x) is also known as the (unnormalized) sinc function. The first few spherical Bessel functions are:
:
:
: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 438, 10.1.11. 
:
and
:
:
: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 438, 10.1.12; 
:

====Generating function====
The spherical Bessel functions have the generating functions Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 439, 10.1.39. 
:
:

====Differential relations====
In the following fn is any of for 
: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 361, 9.1.30. 

===Spherical Hankel functions: h'n(1), h'n(2)===
There are also spherical analogues of the Hankel functions:

:
:

In fact, there are simple closed-form expressions for the Bessel functions of half-integer order in terms of the standard trigonometric functions, and therefore for the spherical Bessel functions. In particular, for non-negative integers n:

:

and is the complex-conjugate of this (for real x). It follows, for example, that and , and so on.

The spherical Hankel functions appear in problems involving spherical wave propagation, for example in the multipole expansion of the electromagnetic field.

===Riccati&ndash;Bessel functions: S'n, C'n, n, n===
Riccati&ndash;Bessel functions only slightly differ from spherical Bessel functions:

:
:
:
:

They satisfy the differential equation:

:

This differential equation, and the Riccati&ndash;Bessel solutions, arises in the problem of scattering of electromagnetic waves by a sphere, known as Mie scattering after the first published solution by Mie (1908). See e.g., Du (2004) Hong Du, "Mie-scattering calculation," Applied Optics 43 (9), 1951&ndash;1956 (2004) for recent developments and references.

Following Debye (1909), the notation is sometimes used instead of .

==Asymptotic forms==
The Bessel functions have the following asymptotic forms for non-negative . For small arguments , one obtains: Arfken & Weber. 

:

:

where  is the EulerMascheroni constant (0.5772...) and  denotes the gamma function. For large real arguments , one cannot write a true asymptotic form for Bessel functions of the first and second kind (unless  is half-integer) because they have zeros all the way out to infinity which would have to be matched exactly by any asymptotic expansion. However, for a given value of arg(z) one can write an equation containing a term of order |z|1: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 364, 9.2.1; 

:

(For  = 1/2 the last terms in these formulas drop out completely; see the spherical Bessel functions above.) Even though these equations are true, better approximations may be available for complex z. For example, J0(z) when z is near the negative real line is approximated better by 

: 

than by 

:

The asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions are:

:

These can be extended to other values of arg(z) using equations relating and to H(1)(z) and H(2)(z). NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, Section 10.11. 
It is interesting that although the Bessel function of the first kind is the average of the two Hankel functions, J(z) is not asymptotic to the average of these two asymptotic forms when z is negative (because one or the other will not be correct there, depending on the arg(z) used). But the asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions permit us to write asymptotic forms for the Bessel functions of first and second kinds for complex (non-real) z so long as |z| goes to infinity at a constant phase angle arg z (using the square root having positive real part):

:

For the modified Bessel functions, Hankel developed asymptotic expansions as well:

: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 377, 9.7.1; 

: Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 378, 9.7.2; 

When  = 1/2 all the terms except the first vanish and we have

:

For small arguments , we have:

:

:

==Properties==
For integer order  = n, J'n is often defined via a Laurent series for a generating function:

:

an approach used by P. A. Hansen in 1843. (This can be generalized to non-integer order by contour integration or other methods.) Another important relation for integer orders is the JacobiAnger expansion:

:

and

:

which is used to expand a plane wave as a sum of cylindrical waves, or to find the Fourier series of a tone-modulated FM signal.

More generally, a series

:

is called Neumann expansion of . The coefficients for  = 0 have the explicit form

: 

where Ok is Neumann's polynomial. Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 363, 9.1.82 ff. 

Selected functions admit the special representation

:

with

:

due to the orthogonality relation 

:

More generally, if  has a branch-point near the origin of such a nature that 

: 

then

:

or

:

where is f's Laplace transform. E. T. Whittaker, G. N. Watson, A course in modern Analysis p. 536 

Another way to define the Bessel functions is the Poisson representation formula and the Mehler-Sonine formula:

:

where  > 1/2 and z  C. I.S. Gradshteyn (.. ), I.M. Ryzhik (.. ); Alan Jeffrey, Daniel Zwillinger, editors. Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, seventh edition. Academic Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-12-373637-6. Equation 8.411.10 This formula is useful especially when working with Fourier transforms.

The functions J, Y, H(1), and H(2) all satisfy the recurrence relations:

:
:

where Z denotes J, Y, H(1), or H(2). (These two identities are often combined, e.g. added or subtracted, to yield various other relations.) In this way, for example, one can compute Bessel functions of higher orders (or higher derivatives) given the values at lower orders (or lower derivatives). In particular, it follows that:

:
:

Modified Bessel functions follow similar relations :

:

and

:

The recurrence relation reads

:
:

where C denotes I or ei'K. These recurrence relations are useful for discrete diffusion problems.

Because Bessel's equation becomes Hermitian (self-adjoint) if it is divided by x, the solutions must satisfy an orthogonality relationship for appropriate boundary conditions. In particular, it follows that:

:

where  > 1, m,n is the Kronecker delta, and u, m is the m-th zero of J(x). This orthogonality relation can then be used to extract the coefficients in the FourierBessel series, where a function is expanded in the basis of the functions J(x u, m) for fixed  and varying m.

An analogous relationship for the spherical Bessel functions follows immediately:

:

Another orthogonality relation is the closure equation: Arfken & Weber, section 11.2 

:

for  > 1/2 and where  is the Dirac delta function. This property is used to construct an arbitrary function from a series of Bessel functions by means of the Hankel transform. For the spherical Bessel functions the orthogonality relation is:

:

for  > 1.

Another important property of Bessel's equations, which follows from Abel's identity, involves the Wronskian of the solutions:

:

where A and B are any two solutions of Bessel's equation, and C is a constant independent of x (which depends on  and on the particular Bessel functions considered). For example, if A = J and B = Y, then C is 2/. This also holds for the modified Bessel functions; for example, if A = I and B = K, then C is 1.

(There are a large number of other known integrals and identities that are not reproduced here, but which can be found in the references.)

==Multiplication theorem==
The Bessel functions obey a multiplication theorem

:

where  and  may be taken as arbitrary complex numbers, see Abramowitz and Stegun, p. 363, 9.1.74. C. Truesdell, "On the Addition and Multiplication Theorems for the Special Functions", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Mathematics, (1950) pp.752757. The above expression also holds if is replaced by . The analogous identities for modified Bessel functions are

:

and

:

==Bourget's hypothesis==
Bessel himself originally proved that for non-negative integers n, the equation J'n(x) = 0 has an infinite number of solutions in x. F. Bessel, Untersuchung des Theils der planetarischen Strungen, Berlin Abhandlungen (1824), article 14. When the functions J'n(x) are plotted on the same graph, though, none of the zeros seem to coincide for different values of n except for the zero at x = 0. This phenomenon is known as Bourget's hypothesis after the nineteenth century French mathematician who studied Bessel functions. Specifically it states that for any integers n  0 and m  1, the functions Jn(x) and J'n+m(x) have no common zeros other than the one at x = 0. The hypothesis was proved by Carl Ludwig Siegel in 1929. Watson, pp. 4845 

==Selected identities See, for example, Lide DR. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics: a ready-reference book of chemical CRC Press, 2004, ISBN 0-8493-0485-7, p. A-95 ==

:

==See also==
* Anger function
* BesselClifford function
* Bessel polynomials
* FourierBessel series
* Frequency modulation
* HahnExton q-Bessel function
* Hankel transform
* Jackson q-Bessel function
* Kelvin functions
* LercheNewberger sum rule
* Lommel function
* Lommel polynomial
* Neumann polynomial
* Propagator
* Sonine formula
* Struve function
* Vibrations of a circular drum
* Weber function
* Wright generalized Bessel function

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* Arfken, George B. and Hans J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 6th edition (Harcourt: San Diego, 2005). ISBN 0-12-059876-0.
* Bayin, S.S. Mathematical Methods in Science and Engineering, Wiley, 2006, Chapter 6.
* Bayin, S.S., Essentials of Mathematical Methods in Science and Engineering, Wiley, 2008, Chapter 11.
* Bowman, Frank Introduction to Bessel Functions (Dover: New York, 1958). ISBN 0-486-60462-4.
* G. Mie, "Beitrge zur Optik trber Medien, speziell kolloidaler Metallsungen", Ann. Phys. Leipzig 25 (1908), p. 377.
*
* 
* B Spain, M.G. Smith, Functions of mathematical physics, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, London, 1970. Chapter 9 deals with Bessel functions.
* N. M. Temme, Special Functions. An Introduction to the Classical Functions of Mathematical Physics, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1996. ISBN 0-471-11313-1. Chapter 9 deals with Bessel functions.
* Watson, G.N., A Treatise on the Theory of Bessel Functions, Second Edition, (1995) Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-48391-3.

==External links==
* 
*
*
* Wolfram function pages on Bessel J and Y functions, and modified Bessel I and K functions. Pages include formulas, function evaluators, and plotting calculators.
*Wolfram Mathworld  Bessel functions of the first kind
*Bessel functions J, Y, I and K in Librow Function handbook.



[[Brahui language]]

Brahui or Brhu (Brahui:  brhv) is a Dravidian language spoken by the Brahui people in the central Balochistan region of Pakistan and Afghanistan, and by expatriate Brahui communities in Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Iraq, and Iran. It is isolated from the nearest Dravidian-speaking neighbour population of South India by a distance of more than 1500 km. Kalat and Mastung districts of Balochistan are predominantly Brahui-speaking.

==Distribution==
Brahui is spoken in the central part of Pakistani Balochistan, mainly in Kalat and Mastung districts but also in smaller numbers in neighboring districts, as well as in Afghanistan and Iran which border Pakistani Balochistan; however, many members of the ethnic group no longer speak Brahui. The 2013 edition of Ethnologue reports that there are some 4.2 million speakers; 4 million live in Pakistan, mainly in the province of Balochistan. 

==Classification==
Brahui belongs, with Kurukh (Oraon) and Malto, to the northern subfamily of the Dravidian family of languages. It has been influenced by the Iranian languages spoken in the area, especially Balochi. 

==Dialects==
Kalat, Jhalawan, and Sarawan, with Kalat as the standard dialect. 

==Orthography==
Brahui is the only Dravidian language which has not been written in a Brahmi-based script in the recent past; instead, it is written in the Arabic script. More recently, a Roman-based orthography named Brolikva which is short form of Brahui Roman Likvar has been developed by the Brahui Language Board of the University of Balochistan in Quetta, and adopted by Talr.

Below is the new promoted Brhu Bgal Brolikva orthography: 

b  p  s y  v x e z   f  m n l g c t  r  d o  h j k a i u   

==Basic words and phrases==
From :
*one - asi
*two - ira
*three - musi
*what - anth
*say - par
*eat - kunak
*Drink - kunak

==Endangerment==

According to a 2009 UNESCO report, Brahui is one of the 27 languages of Pakistan that are facing the danger of extinction. They classify it in "unsafe" status, the least endangered level out of the five levels of concern (Unsafe, Definitely Endangered, Severely Endangered, Critically Endangered, and Extinct). 

===Publications===
Hafta Talr recently became the first ever daily newspaper in Brahui language. It uses the new Roman orthography, and is "an attempt to standardize and develop Brahui language to meet the requirements of modern political, social and scientific discourse." 

==History==
There is no consensus as to whether Brahui is a relatively recent language introduced into Balochistan or remnant of an older widespread Dravidian language family. Some scholars see it as a recent migrant language to its present region. They postulate, that Brahui could only have migrated to Balochistan from central India after 1000 CE. The absence of any older Iranian (Avestan) loanwords in Brahui supports this hypothesis. The main Iranian contributor to Brahui vocabulary, Balochi, is a Northwestern Iranian language, and moved to the area from the west only around 1000 CE. , which cites One scholar places the migration s late as the 13th or 14th century. However, a few scholars have hypothesised that Brahui is a remnant of a formerly widespread Dravidian language family that is believed to have been reduced or replaced during the influx of Iranian/Indo-Aryan languages upon their arrival in South Asia.

==Notes and references==

==Bibliography==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

*Online Brahui Dictionary
*Handbook of the Birouhi languageBy Allh Baksh (1877)
*Brahui Language Board
*Brhu Bgal (Brahui Alphabet)
*Profile of the Brahui language
*Partial bibliography of scholarly works on Brahui
*Britannica Brahui language
* Brahui basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database



[[Berkeley DB]]

Berkeley DB (BDB) is a software library that provides a high-performance embedded database for key/value data.
Berkeley DB is written in C with API bindings for C++, C#, PHP, Java, Perl, Python, Ruby, Tcl, Smalltalk, and many other programming languages. BDB stores arbitrary key/data pairs as byte arrays, and supports multiple data items for a single key. Berkeley DB is not a relational database. Berkeley DB Reference Guide: What is Berkeley DB not?. Doc.gnu-darwin.org (2001-05-31). Retrieved on 2013-09-18. 

BDB can support thousands of simultaneous threads of control or concurrent processes manipulating databases as large as 256 terabytes, http://doc.gnu-darwin.org/am_misc/dbsizes.html Berkeley DB Reference Guide: Database limits Retrieved on 2013-09-19 on a wide variety of operating systems including most Unix-like and Windows systems, and real-time operating systems. Berkeley DB is also used as the common name for three distinct products; Oracle Berkeley DB, Berkeley DB Java Edition, and Berkeley DB XML. These three products all share a common ancestry and are currently under active development at Oracle Corporation.

== Origin ==
Berkeley DB originated at the University of California, Berkeley as part of the transition (1986 to 1994) from 4.3BSD to 4.4BSD and of the effort to remove AT&T-encumbered code. The first code, due to Seltzer and Yigit, attempted to create a disk hash table that performed better than any of the existing Dbm libraries. In 1996 Netscape requested that the authors of Berkeley DB improve and extend the library, then at version 1.86, to suit Netscape's requirements for an LDAP server and for use in the Netscape browser. That request led to the creation of Sleepycat Software. This company was acquired by Oracle Corporation in February 2006, which continues to develop and sell Berkeley DB.

Since its initial release, Berkeley DB has gone through various versions. Each major release cycle has introduced a single new major feature generally layering on top of the earlier features to add functionality to the product. The 1.x releases focused on managing key/value data storage and are referred to as "Data Store" (DS). The 2.x releases added a locking system enabling concurrent access to data. This is what is known as "Concurrent Data Store" (CDS). The 3.x releases added a logging system for transactions and recovery, called "Transactional Data Store" (TDS). The 4.x releases added the ability to replicate log records and create a distributed highly available single-master multi-replica database. This is called the "High Availability" (HA) feature set. Berkeley DB's evolution has sometimes led to minor API changes or log format changes, but very rarely have database formats changed. Berkeley DB HA supports online upgrades from one version to the next by maintaining the ability to read and apply the prior release's log records.

The FreeBSD and OpenBSD operating systems continue to use Berkeley DB 1.8x for compatibility reasons; Linux-based operating systems commonly include several versions to accommodate for applications still using older interfaces/files.

Starting with the 6.0/12c releases, all Berkeley DB products are licensed under the GNU AGPL. &#91;Berkeley DB Announce&#93; Major Release: Berkeley DB 12gR1 (12.1.6.0). Retrieved July 5, 2013. Up until then Berkeley DB was redistributed under the Sleepycat Public License, which is an OSI-approved open source license as well as an FSF-approved free software license. The product ships with complete source code, build script, test suite, and documentation. The code quality and general utility along with the licensing terms have led to its use in a multitude of free and open source software. Those who do not wish to abide by the terms of the GNU AGPL, or use an older version with the Sleepycat Public License, have the option of purchasing another proprietary license for redistribution from Oracle Corporation. This technique is called dual licensing.

Berkeley DB includes compatibility interfaces for some historic Unix database libraries: dbm, ndbm and hsearch (a System V library for creating in-memory hash tables).

==Architecture==
Berkeley DB has an architecture notably simpler than that of other database systems like relational database management systems. For example, like SQLite, it does not provide support for network access  programs access the database using in-process API calls. Oracle added support for SQL in 11g R2 release based on the popular SQLite API by including a version of SQLite in Berkeley DB. There is third party support for PL/SQL in Berkeley DB via a commercial product named Metatranz StepSqlite. 

A program accessing the database is free to decide how the data is to be stored in a record. Berkeley DB puts no constraints on the record's data. The record and its key can both be up to four gigabytes long.

Despite having a simple architecture, Berkeley DB supports many advanced database features such as ACID transactions, fine-grained locking, hot backups and replication.

==Editions==
The name Berkeley DB encompasses three different products:

# Berkeley DB
# Berkeley DB Java Edition
# Berkeley DB XML

Each edition has separate database libraries, despite the common branding. The first is the traditional Berkeley DB, written in C. It contains several database implementations, including a B-Tree and one built around extendible hashing. It supports multiple language bindings, including C/C++, Java (via JNI), C# .NET, Perl and Python.

Berkeley DB Java Edition (JE) is a pure Java database. Its design resembles that of Berkeley DB without replicating it exactly, and has a feature set that includes many of those found in the traditional Berkeley DB and others that are specific to the Java Edition. Since it is written in pure Java, no native code is required. It has a log structured storage architecture, which gives it different performance and concurrency characteristics. Three APIs are availablea Direct Persistence Layer which is "Plain Old Java Objects" (POJO); one which is based on the Java Collections Framework (an object persistence approach); and one based on the traditional Berkeley DB API. The Berkeley DB Java Edition High Availability option (Replication) is available. Note that traditional Berkeley DB also supports a Java API, but it does so via JNI and thus requires an installed native library.

The Berkeley DB XML database specializes in the storage of XML documents, supporting XQuery via XQilla. It is implemented as an additional layer on top of (a legacy version of) Berkeley DB and the Xerces library. DB XML is written in C++ and supports multiple language bindings, including C++, Java (via JNI), Perl and Python.

== Programs that use Berkeley DB ==

Berkeley DB provides the underlying storage and retrieval system of several LDAP servers, database systems, and many other proprietary and free/open source applications. Notable software that use Berkeley DB for data storage include:

* 389 Directory Server - An open-source LDAP server from the Fedora Project.
* ARC - Advanced Resource Connector open source grid middleware introduced by NorduGrid, use BerkeleyDB in several services.
* Asterisk PBX - A free/open source PBX.
* Bitcoin - A distributed peer-to-peer open source digital currency.
* Bogofilter  A free/open source spam filter that saves its wordlists using Berkeley DB.
* Carbonado  An open source relational database access layer.
* Citadel  A free/open source groupware platform that keeps all of its data stores, including the message base, in Berkeley DB.
* Cyrus IMAP Server  A free/open source IMAP and POP3 server, developed by Carnegie Mellon University
* Evolution - A free/open source mail client; contacts are stored in addressbook.db using Berkeley DB
* GlusterFS - Prior to v3.4, GlusterFS included a BDB storage translator.
* GRAMPS - Free genealogy software.
* Jabberd2  An Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol server
* KDevelop  An IDE for Linux and other Unix-like operating systems
* KLibido  A free/open source Newsgroup reader tailored for binary downloads
* Movable Type (until version 4.0)  A proprietary weblog publishing system developed by California-based Six Apart
* memcachedb - A persistence-enabled variant of memcached
* MySQL database system  Prior to v5.1, MySQL included a BDB data storage backend.
* OpenCOBOL - A free/open source COBOL implementation.
* OpenDS and OpenDJ - open source directory servers.
* OpenLDAP  A free/open source implementation of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
* Oracle NoSQL - A NoSQL distributed key-value database
* Papyrus Platform  The ISIS Papyrus Platform uses BerkeleyDB for its distributed object-relational transaction kernel for adaptive content and process management in enterprise applications
* PiSi  The package management system of Pardus
* Postfix  A fast, secure, easy-to-administer MTA for Linux/Unix systems
* Parallel Virtual File System (PVFS)  A parallel file system for HPC clusters. RCE 35: PVFS Parallel Virtual FileSystem 
* Red Dwarf - A server framework originally developed by Sun, now open sourced, commonly used for game development.
* Redland  A RDF Application Framework can use BDB for persistent storage (triplestore)
* RPM  The RPM Package Manager uses Berkeley DB to retain its internal database of packages installed on a system
* Spamassassin  An anti-spam application
* squidGuard - squidGuard is a URL redirector software, which can be used for content control of websites users can access. SquidGuard. SquidGuard. Retrieved on 2013-09-18. 
* Subversion  A version control system designed specifically to replace CVS
* Sun Grid Engine  A free and open source distributed resource management system.
* Wialon - a GPS tracking and fleet management software with Web-interface http://gurtam.com/en/products/earn/get_wialon/wialon_pro.html 

== Licensing ==
Oracle Corporation makes versions 2.0 and higher of Berkeley DB available under a dual license. The sleepycat license license is a 2-clause BSD license with an additional copyleft clause similar to the GNU GPL version 2's Section 3, requiring source code of an application using Berkeley DB to be made available for a nominal fee.

As of Berkeley DB release 6.0, the Oracle Corporation has relicensed Berkeley DB under the GNU AGPL v3. 

, Oracle's list price for non-copyleft Berkeley DB licenses varies between 900 and 13,800 USD per processor. http://www.oracle.com/us/corporate/pricing/technology-price-list-070617.pdf 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Oracle Berkeley DB Site
* Berkeley DB Programmer's Reference Guide
* Licensing pitfalls for Oracle Technology Products
* The Berkeley DB Book by Himanshu Yadava
* Launchpad.net - Berkeley DB at Launchpad
* Oracle Licensing Knowledge Net



[[Boolean satisfiability problem]]

In computer science, Boolean, or propositional, satisfiability (often written SATISFIABILITY or abbreviated SAT) is the problem of determining if there exists an interpretation that satisfies a given Boolean formula. In other words, it establishes if the variables of a given Boolean formula can be assigned in such a way as to make the formula evaluate to TRUE. If no such assignments exist, the function expressed by the formula is identically FALSE for all possible variable assignments. In this latter case, it is called unsatisfiable, otherwise satisfiable. For example, the formula "a AND NOT b" is satisfiable because one can find the values a = TRUE and b = FALSE, which make (a AND NOT b) = TRUE. In contrast, "a AND NOT a" is unsatisfiable.

SAT was the first known example of an NP-complete problem. That briefly means that there is no known algorithm that efficiently solves all instances of SAT, and it is generally believed (but not proven, see P versus NP problem) that no such algorithm can exist. Furthermore, a wide range of other naturally occurring decision and optimization problems can be transformed into instances of SAT. A class of algorithms called SAT solvers can efficiently solve a large enough subset of SAT instances to be useful in various practical areas such as circuit design and automatic theorem proving, by solving SAT instances made by transforming problems that arise in those areas. Extending the capabilities of SAT solving algorithms is an ongoing area of research. However, no current such methods can efficiently solve all SAT instances.

==Basic definitions and terminology==
A propositional logic formula, also called Boolean expression, is built from variables, operators AND (conjunction, also denoted by ), OR (disjunction, ), NOT (negation, ), and parentheses.
A formula is said to be satisfiable if it can be made TRUE by assigning appropriate logical values (i.e. TRUE, FALSE) to its variables.
The Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) is, given a formula, to check whether it is satisfiable.
This decision problem is of central importance in various areas of computer science, including theoretical computer science, complexity theory, algorithmics, and artificial intelligence.

There are several special cases of the Boolean satisfiability problem in which the formulas are required to have a particular structure.
A literal is either a variable, then called positive literal, or the negation of a variable, then called negative literal. 
A clause is a disjunction of literals (or a single literal).
A clause is called Horn clause if it contains at most one positive literal.
A formula is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of clauses (or a single clause).
For example, "x1" is a positive literal, "x2" is a negative literal, "x1  x2" is a clause, and "(x1  x2)  (x1  x2  x3)  x1" is a formula in conjunctive normal form, its 1st and 3rd clause are Horn clauses, but its 2nd clause is not. The formula is satisfiable, choosing x1=FALSE, x2=FALSE, and x3 arbitrarily, since (FALSE  FALSE)  (FALSE  FALSE  x3)  FALSE evaluates to (FALSE  TRUE)  (TRUE  FALSE  x3)  TRUE, and in turn to TRUE  TRUE  TRUE (i.e. to TRUE). In contrast, the CNF formula a  a, consisting of two clauses of one literal, is unsatisfiable, since for a=TRUE and a=FALSE it evaluates to TRUE  TRUE (i.e. to FALSE) and FALSE  FALSE (i.e. again to FALSE), respectively.

For some versions of the SAT problem,

it is useful to define the notion of a generalized conjunctive normal form formula, viz. as a conjunction of arbitrarily many generalized clauses, the latter being of the form R(l1,...,l'n) for some boolean operator R and (ordinary) literals l'i. Different sets of allowed boolean operators lead to different problem versions.

As an example, R(x,a,b) is a generalized clause, and R(x,a,b)  R(b,y,c)  R(c,d,z) is a generalized conjunctive normal form. This formula is used below, with R being the ternary operator that is TRUE just if exactly one of its arguments is.

Using the laws of Boolean algebra, every propositional logic formula can be transformed into an equivalent conjunctive normal form, which may, however, be exponentially longer. For example, transforming the formula 
(x1y1)  (x2y2)  ...  (x'ny'n)
into conjunctive normal form yields 
(x1x2x'n) 
(y1x2x'n)  
(x1y2x'n)  
(y1y2x'n)  ... 
(x1x2y'n) 
(y1x2y'n)  
(x1y2y'n)  
(y1y2y'n); 
while the former is a disjunction of n conjunctions of 2 variables, the latter consists of 2n clauses of n variables.

==Complexity and restricted versions==

===Unrestricted satisfiability (SAT)===

SAT was the first known NP-complete problem, as proved by Stephen Cook in 1971 and independently by Leonid Levin in 1973. (pdf) , translated into English by Until that time, the concept of an NP-complete problem did not even exist. 
The proof shows how every decision problem in the complexity class NP can be reduced to the SAT problem for CNF The SAT problem for arbitrary formulas is NP-complete, too, since it is easily shown to be in NP, and it cannot be easier than SAT for CNF formulas. formulas. 
A useful property of Cook's reduction is that it preserves the number of accepting answers. For example, deciding whether a given graph has a 3-coloring is another problem in NP; if a graph has 17 valid 3-colorings, the SAT formula produced by the CookLevin reduction will have 17 satisfying assignments.

NP-completeness only refers to the run-time of the worst case instances. Many of the instances that occur in practical applications can be solved much more quickly. See Algorithms for solving SAT below.

SAT is trivial if the formulas are restricted to those in disjunctive normal form, that is, they are disjunction of conjunctions of literals. Such a formula is indeed satisfiable if and only if at least one of its conjunctions is satisfiable, and a conjunction is satisfiable if and only if it does not contain both x and NOT x for some variable x. This can be checked in linear time. Furthermore, if they are restricted to being in full disjunctive normal form, in which every variable appears exactly once in every conjunction, they can be checked in constant time (each conjunction represents one satisfying assignment). But it can take exponential time and space to convert a general SAT problem to disjunctive normal form; for an example exchange "" and "" in the above exponential blow-up example for conjunctive normal forms.

===3-satisfiability===
The 3-SAT instance (xxy)  (xyy)  (xyy) reduced to a clique problem. The green vertices form a 3-clique and correspond to the satisfying assignment x=FALSE, y=TRUE.
Like the satisfiability problem for arbitrary formulas, determining the satisfiability of a formula in conjunctive normal form where each clause is limited to at most three literals is NP-complete also; this problem is called 3-SAT, 3CNFSAT, or 3-satisfiability.
To reduce the unrestricted SAT problem to 3-SAT, transform each clause "l1  ...  l'n" to a conjunction of n-2 clauses 
"(l1  l2  x2) 
(x2  l3  x3)  
(x3  l4  x4)  ...  
(x'n-3  l'n-2  x'n-2)  
(x'n-2  l'n-1  ln)", where x2,...,x'n-2 are fresh variables not occurring elsewhere.
Although both formulas are not logically equivalent, they are equisatisfiable. The formula resulting from transforming all clauses is at most 3 times as long as its original, i.e. the length growth is polynomial. ; here: Thm.10.4 

3-SAT is one of Karp's 21 NP-complete problems, and it is used as a starting point for proving that other problems are also NP-hard. i.e. at least as hard as every other problem in NP. A problem is NP-complete if and only if it is in NP and is NP-hard. This is done by polynomial-time reduction from 3-SAT to the other problem. An example of a problem where this method has been used is the clique problem: given a CNF formula consisting of c clauses, the corresponding graph consists of a vertex for each literal, and an edge between each two non-contradicting i.e. such that one literal isn't the negation of the other literals from different clauses, cf. picture. The graph has a c-clique if and only if the formula is satisfiable.

There is a simple randomized algorithm due to Schning (1999) that runs in time (4/3)n where n is the number of clauses and succeeds with high probability to correctly decide 3-SAT. 

The exponential time hypothesis is that no algorithm can solve 3-SAT faster than o(exp(n)).

Selman, Mitchell, and Levesque (1996) give empirical data on the difficulty of randomly generated 3-SAT formulas, depending on their size parameters.
Difficulty is measured in number recursive calls made by a DPLL algorithm. 

3-satisfiability can be generalized to k-satisfiability (k-SAT), when formulas in CNF are considered with each clause containing up to k literals.
However, since for any k3, this problem can neither be easier than 3-SAT nor harder than SAT, and the latter two are NP-complete, so must be k-SAT.

Some authors restrict k-SAT to CNF formulas with exactly k literals. This doesn't lead to a different complexity class either, as each clause "l1  ...  l'j" with j<k literals can be padded with fixed dummy variables to
"l1  ...  l'j  d'j+1  ...  d'k".
After padding all clauses, 2k-1 extra clauses viz. all maxterms that can be built with d1,...,d'k, except "d1...d'k" have to be appended to ensure that only d1=...=dk=FALSE can lead to a satisfying assignment. Since k doesn't depend on the formula length, the extra clauses lead to a constant increase in length. For the same reason, it does not matter whether duplicate literals are allowed in clauses (like e.g. "x  y  y"), or not.

===Exactly-1 3-satisfiability===
Left: Schaefer's reduction of a 3-SAT clause xyz. The result of R is if exactly one of its arguments is TRUE, and otherwise. All 8 combinations of values for x,y,z are examined, one per line. The fresh variables a,...,f can be chosen to satisfy all clauses (exactly one argument for each R) in all lines except the first, where xyz is FALSE. Right: A simpler reduction with the same properties.
A variant of the 3-satisfiability problem is the one-in-three 3-SAT (also known variously as 1-in-3-SAT and exactly-1 3-SAT).
Given a conjunctive normal form, the problem is to determine whether there exists a truth assignment to the variables so that each clause has exactly one TRUE literal (and thus exactly two FALSE literals). In contrast, ordinary 3-SAT requires that every clause has at least one TRUE literal. 
Formally, a one-in-three 3-SAT problem is given as a generalized conjunctive normal form with all generalized clauses using a ternary operator R that is TRUE just if exactly one of its arguments is. When all literals of a one-in-three 3-SAT formula are positive, the satisfiability problem is called one-in-three positive 3-SAT.

One-in-three 3-SAT, together with its positive case, is listed as NP-complete problem "LO4" in the standard reference, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness
by Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. One-in-three 3-SAT was proved to be NP-complete by Thomas J. Schaefer as a special case of Schaefer's dichotomy theorem, which asserts that any problem generalizing Boolean satisfiability in a certain way is either in the class P or is NP-complete. 

Schaefer gives a construction allowing an easy polynomial-time reduction from 3-SAT to one-in-three 3-SAT. Let "(x or y or z)" be a clause in a 3CNF formula. Add six fresh boolean variables a, b, c, d, e, and f, to be used to simulate this clause and no other. 

Then the formula R(x,a,d)  R(y,b,d)  R(a,b,e)  R(c,d,f)  R(z,c,FALSE) is satisfiable by some setting of the fresh variables if and only if at least one of x, y, or z is TRUE, see picture (left). Thus any 3-SAT instance with m clauses and n variables may be converted into an equisatisfiable one-in-three 3-SAT instance with 5m clauses and n+6m variables. (Schaefer, 1978), p.222, Lemma 3.5 
Another reduction involves only four fresh variables and three clauses: R(x,a,b)  R(b,y,c)  R(c,d,z), see picture (right).

===2-satisfiability===

SAT is easier if the number of literals in a clause is limited to at most 2, in which case the problem is called 2-SAT. This problem can be solved in polynomial time, and in fact is complete for the complexity class NL. If additionally all OR operations in literals are changed to XOR operations, the result is called exclusive-or 2-satisfiability, which is a problem complete for the complexity class SL = L.

===Horn-satisfiability===

The problem of deciding the satisfiability of a given conjunction of Horn clauses is called Horn-satisfiability, or HORN-SAT.
It can be solved in polynomial time by a single step of the Unit propagation algorithm, which produces the single minimal model of the set of Horn clauses (w.r.t. the set of literals assigned to TRUE).
Horn-satisfiability is P-complete. It can be seen as P's version of the Boolean satisfiability problem.

Horn clauses are of interest because they are able to express implication of one variable from a set of other variables. Indeed, one such clause x1  ...  x'n  y can be rewritten as x1  ...  x'n  y, that is, if x1,...,x'n are all TRUE, then y needs to be TRUE as well.

A generalization of the class of Horn formulae is that of renamable-Horn formulae, which is the set of formulae that can be placed in Horn form by replacing some variables with their respective negation. 
For example, (x1  x2)  (x1  x2  x3)  x1 is not a Horn formula, but can be renamed to the Horn formula (x1  x2)  (x1  x2  y3)  x1 by introducing y3 as negation of x3.
In contrast, no renaming of (x1  x2  x3)  (x1  x2  x3)  x1 leads to a Horn formula.
Checking the existence of such a replacement can be done in linear time; therefore, the satisfiability of such formulae is in P as it can be solved by first performing this replacement and then checking the satisfiability of the resulting Horn formula.

 A formula with 2 clauses may be unsatisfied (red), 3-satisfied (green), xor-3-satisfied (blue), or/and 1-in-3-satisfied (yellow), depending on the TRUE-literal count in the 1st (hor) and 2nd (vert) clause. 

===XOR-satisfiability===

 Solving an XOR-SAT exampleby Gaussian elimination 
 Given formula (\\"\\" means XOR, the is optional) (acd)  (bcd)  (abd)  (abc) 
 Equation system (\\"1\\" means TRUE, \\"0\\" means FALSE) Each clause leads to one equation. a  c  d = 1 b   c  d = 1 a  b   d = 1 a   b   c = 1 
 Normalized equation system using properties of Boolean rings (x=1x, xx=0) a  c  d = 1 b  c  d = 0 a  b  d = 0 a  b  c = 1 (If the is present, contradicts the last black one, so the system is unsolvable. Therefore, Gauss' algorithm is used only for the black equations.) 
 Associated coefficient matrix a b c d line 1 0 1 1 1 A 0 1 1 1 0 B 1 1 0 1 0 C 1 1 1 0 1 D 
 Transforming to echelon form a b c d operation 1 0 1 1 1 A 1 1 0 1 0 C 1 1 1 0 1 D 0 1 1 1 0 B (swapped) 1 0 1 1 1 A 0 1 1 0 1 E = CA 0 1 0 1 0 F = DA 0 1 1 1 0 B 1 0 1 1 1 A 0 1 1 0 1 E 0 0 1 1 1 G = FE 0 0 0 1 1 H = BE 
 Transforming to diagonal form a b c d operation 1 0 1 0 0 I = AH 0 1 1 0 1 E 0 0 1 0 0 J = GH 0 0 0 1 1 H 1 0 0 0 0 K = IJ 0 1 0 0 1 L = EJ 0 0 1 0 0 J 0 0 0 1 1 H 
 Solution: If the is present: Unsolvable Else: a = 0 = FALSE b = 1 = TRUE c = 0 = FALSE d = 1 = TRUE As a consequence: R(a,c,d)  R(b,c,d)  R(a,b,d)  R(a,b,c) is not 1-in-3-satisfiable, while (acd)  (bcd)  (abd)  (abc) is 3-satisfiable with a=c=FALSE and b=d=TRUE. 

Another special case is the class of problems where each clause contains XOR (i.e. exclusive or) rather than (plain) OR operators. Formally, generalized conjunctive normal forms with a ternary boolean operator R are employed, which is TRUE just if 1 or 3 of its arguments is. An input clause with more than 3 literals can be transformed into an equisatisfiable conjunction of clauses  3 literals similar to above; i.e. XOR-SAT can be reduced to XOR-3-SAT. 
This is in P, since an XOR-SAT formula can also be viewed as a system of linear equations mod 2, and can be solved in cubic time by Gaussian elimination; . see the box for an example. This recast is based on the kinship between Boolean algebras and Boolean rings, and the fact that arithmetic modulo two forms a finite field. Since a XOR b XOR c evaluates to TRUE if and only if exactly 1 or 3 members of {a,b,c} are TRUE, each solution of the 1-in-3-SAT problem for a given CNF formula is also a solution of the XOR-3-SAT problem, and in turn each solution of XOR-3-SAT is a solution of 3-SAT, cf. picture. As a consequence, for each CNF formula, it is possible to solve the XOR-3-SAT problem defined by the formula, and based on the result infer either that the 3-SAT problem is solvable or that the 1-in-3-SAT problem is unsolvable.

Provided that the complexity classes P and NP are not equal, neither 2-, nor Horn-, nor XOR-satisfiability is NP-complete, unlike SAT. The assumption that P and NP are not equal is currently not proven.

===Schaefer's dichotomy theorem===

The restrictions above (CNF, 2CNF, 3CNF, Horn, XOR-SAT) bound the considered formulae to be conjunction of subformulae; each restriction states a specific form for all subformulae: for example, only binary clauses can be subformulae in 2CNF.

Schaefer's dichotomy theorem states that, for any restriction to Boolean operators that can be used to form these subformulae, the corresponding satisfiability problem is in P or NP-complete. The membership in P of the satisfiability of 2CNF, Horn, and XOR-SAT formulae are special cases of this theorem.

==Extensions of SAT==
An extension that has gained significant popularity since 2003 is Satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) that can enrich CNF formulas with linear constraints, arrays, all-different constraints, uninterpreted functions, R. E. Bryant, S. M. German, and M. N. Velev, Microprocessor Verification Using Efficient Decision Procedures for a Logic of Equality with Uninterpreted Functions, in Analytic Tableaux and Related Methods, pp. 113, 1999. etc. Such extensions typically remain NP-complete, but very efficient solvers are now available that can handle many such kinds of constraints.

The satisfiability problem becomes more difficult if both "for all" () and "there exists" () quantifiers are allowed to bind the Boolean variables. 
An example of such an expression would be "x y z (x  y  z)  (x  y  z)"; it is valid, since for all values of x and y, an appropriate value of z can be found, viz. z=TRUE if both x and y are FALSE, and z=FALSE else.
SAT itself (tacitly) uses only  quantifiers. 
If only  quantifiers are allowed instead, the so-called tautology problem is obtained, which is Co-NP-complete. 
If both quantifiers are allowed, the problem is called the quantified Boolean formula problem (QBF), which can be shown to be PSPACE-complete. It is widely believed that PSPACE-complete problems are strictly harder than any problem in NP, although this has not yet been proved.

A number of variants deal with the number of variable assignments making the formula TRUE. Ordinary SAT asks if there is at least one such assignment. MAJ-SAT, which asks if the majority of all assignments make the formula TRUE, is complete for PP, a probabilistic class. The problem of how many variable assignments satisfy a formula, not a decision problem, is in #P. UNIQUE-SAT is the problem of determining whether a formula has exactly one assignment; it is complete for US, the complexity class describing problems solvable by a non-deterministic polynomial time Turing machine that accepts when there is exactly one nondeterministic accepting path and rejects otherwise. When the input is restricted to formulas having at most one satisfying assignment (or none), the problem is called UNAMBIGOUS-SAT. A solving algorithm for UNAMBIGOUS-SAT is allowed to exhibit any behavior, including endless looping, on a formula having several satisfying assignments. Although this problem seems easier, Valiant and Vazirani have shown that if there is a practical (i.e. randomized polynomial-time) algorithm to solve it, then all problems in NP can be solved just as easily.

The maximum satisfiability problem, an FNP generalization of SAT, asks for the maximum number of clauses which can be satisfied by any assignment. It has efficient approximation algorithms, but is NP-hard to solve exactly. Worse still, it is APX-complete, meaning there is no polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) for this problem unless P=NP.

Other generalisations include satisfiability for first- and second-order logic, constraint satisfaction problems, 0-1 integer programming.

==Self-reducibility==
The SAT problem is self-reducible, that is, each algorithm which correctly answers if an instance of SAT is solvable can be used to find a satisfying assignment. First, the question is asked on the given formula . If the answer is "no", the formula is unsatisfiable. Otherwise, the question is asked on the partly instantiated formula {x1=TRUE}, i.e.  with the first variable x1 replaced by TRUE, and simplified accordingly. If the answer is "yes", then x1=TRUE, otherwise x1=FALSE. Values of other variables can be found subsequently in the same way. In total, n+1 runs of the algorithm are required, where n is the number of distinct variables in .

This property of self-reducibility is used in several theorems in complexity theory:

: NP  P/poly  PH = 2 (KarpLipton theorem)
: NP  BPP  NP = RP
: P = NP  FP = FNP

==Algorithms for solving SAT==

Since the SAT problem is NP-complete, only algorithms with exponential worst-case complexity are known for it. In spite of this state of the art in complexity theory, efficient and scalable algorithms for SAT were developed over the last decade and have contributed to dramatic advances in our ability to automatically solve problem instances involving tens of thousands of variables and millions of constraints (i.e. clauses). . Examples of such problems in electronic design automation (EDA) include formal equivalence checking, model checking, formal verification of pipelined microprocessors, automatic test pattern generation, routing of FPGAs, planning, and scheduling problems, and so on. A SAT-solving engine is now considered to be an essential component in the EDA toolbox.

There are two classes of high-performance algorithms for solving instances of SAT in practice: the conflict-driven clause learning algorithm, which can be viewed as a modern variant of the DPLL algorithm (well known implementations include Chaff and GRASP ) and stochastic local search algorithms, such as WalkSAT.

A DPLL SAT solver employs a systematic backtracking search procedure to explore the (exponentially sized) space of variable assignments looking for satisfying assignments. The basic search procedure was proposed in two seminal papers in the early 1960s (see references below) and is now commonly referred to as the DavisPutnamLogemannLoveland algorithm ("DPLL" or "DLL"). Theoretically, exponential lower bounds have been proved for the DPLL family of algorithms.

In contrast, randomized algorithms like the PPSZ algorithm by Paturi, Pudlak, Saks, and Zane set variables in a random order according to some heuristics, for example bounded-width resolution. If the heuristic can't find the correct setting, the variable is assigned randomly. The PPSZ algorithm has a runtime of for 3-SAT with a single satisfying assignment. Currently this is the best known runtime for this problem. In the setting with many satisfying assignments the randomized algorithm by Schning has a better bound. "An improved exponential-time algorithm for k-SAT", Paturi, Pudlak, Saks, Zani 

Modern SAT solvers (developed in the last ten years) come in two flavors: "conflict-driven" and "look-ahead". Conflict-driven solvers augment the basic DPLL search algorithm with efficient conflict analysis, clause learning, non-chronological backtracking (aka backjumping), as well as "two-watched-literals" unit propagation, adaptive branching, and random restarts. These "extras" to the basic systematic search have been empirically shown to be essential for handling the large SAT instances that arise in electronic design automation (EDA). Look-ahead solvers have especially strengthened reductions (going beyond unit-clause propagation) and the heuristics, and they are generally stronger than conflict-driven solvers on hard instances (while conflict-driven solvers can be much better on large instances which actually have an easy instance inside).

Modern SAT solvers are also having significant impact on the fields of software verification, constraint solving in artificial intelligence, and operations research, among others. Powerful solvers are readily available as free and open source software. In particular, the conflict-driven MiniSAT, which was relatively successful at the 2005 SAT competition, only has about 600 lines of code. A modern Parallel SAT solver is ManySAT. It can achieve super linear speed-ups on important classes of problems. An example for look-ahead solvers is march_dl, which won a prize at the 2007 SAT competition.

Certain types of large random satisfiable instances of SAT can be solved by survey propagation (SP). Particularly in hardware design and verification applications, satisfiability and other logical properties of a given propositional formula are sometimes decided based on a representation of the formula as a binary decision diagram (BDD).

Almost all SAT solvers include time-outs, so they will terminate in reasonable time even if they cannot find a solution. 
Different SAT solvers will find different instances easy or hard, and some excel at proving unsatisfiability, and others at finding solutions. 
All of these behaviors can be seen in the SAT solving contests. 

==See also==
*Unsatisfiable core
*Satisfiability Modulo Theories
*Counting SAT
*KarloffZwick algorithm

==Notes==

==References==

References are ordered by date of publication:

* A9.1: LO1  LO7, pp. 259  260.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== See also ==
* Circuit satisfiability

==External links==

=== SAT problem format ===
A SAT problem is often described in the DIMACS-CNF format: an input file in which each line represents a single disjunction. For example, a file with the two lines 
 1 -5 4 0
 -1 5 3 4 0
represents the formula "(x1  x5  x4)  (x1  x5  x3  x4)".

Another common format for this formula is the 7-bit ASCII representation "(x1 | ~x5 | x4) & (~x1 | x5 | x3 | x4)".
* BCSAT is a tool that converts input files in human-readable format to the DIMACS-CNF format.

=== Online SAT solvers ===
* BoolSAT  Solves formulas in the DIMACS-CNF format or in a more human-friendly format: "a and not b or a". Runs on a server.
* minisat-in-your-browser  Solves formulas in the DIMACS-CNF format. Runs on the browser.
* SATRennesPA - Solves formulas written in a user-friendly way. Runs on a server.

=== Offline SAT solvers ===
* MiniSAT  DIMACS-CNF format.
* Lingeling  won a gold medal in a 2011 SAT competition. 
** PicoSAT  an earlier solver from the Lingeling group.
* Sat4j  DIMACS-CNF format. Java source code available.
* Glucose  DIMACS-CNF format.
* RSat  won a gold medal in a 2007 SAT competition.
* UBCSAT. Supports unweighted and weighted clauses, both in the DIMACS-CNF format. C source code hosted on GitHub.
* CryptoMiniSat  won a gold medal in a 2011 SAT competition. C++ source code hosted on GitHub. Tries to put many useful features of MiniSat 2.0 core, PrecoSat ver 236, and Glucose into one package, adding many new features
* Spear  Supports bit-vector arithmetic. Can use the DIMACS-CNF format or the Spear format.
** HyperSAT  Written to experiment with B-cubing search space pruning. Won 3rd place in a 2005 SAT competition. An earlier and slower solver from the developers of Spear.
* BASolver
* ArgoSAT
* Fast SAT Solver  based on genetic algorithms.
* zChaff  not supported anymore.
* BCSAT  human-readable boolean circuit format (also converts this format to the DIMACS-CNF format and automatically links to MiniSAT or zChaff).

=== SAT applications ===
* WinSAT v2.04: A Windows-based SAT application made particularly for researchers.

=== Conferences ===
International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing:
* SAT 2013
* SAT 2012
* SAT 2011
* SAT 2010
* SAT 2009
* SAT 2008
* SAT 2007

=== Publications ===
* Journal on Satisfiability, Boolean Modeling and Computation
* Survey Propagation

=== Benchmarks ===
* Forced Satisfiable SAT Benchmarks
* SATLIB
* Software Verification Benchmarks
* Fadi Aloul SAT Benchmarks
SAT solving in general:
* http://www.satlive.org
* http://www.satisfiability.org

=== Evaluation of SAT solvers ===
* Yearly evaluation of SAT solvers
* SAT solvers evaluation results for 2008
* International SAT Competitions
* History

More information on SAT:
* SAT and MAX-SAT for the Lay-researcher
----

This article includes material from a column in the ACM SIGDA e-newsletter by Prof. Karem Sakallah 
Original text is available here



[[Bohemian]]

Bohemian () refers to a resident of the former Kingdom of Bohemia, either in a narrow sense as the region of Bohemia proper or in a wider meaning as the whole country, now known as the Czech Republic. In English, the word "Bohemian" was used to denote the Czech people as well as the Czech language before the word "Czech" became prevalent. 

In a separate meaning derived from the French word referring to "gypsies," or Romani people, "Bohemian" may also denote "a socially unconventional person, especially one who is involved in the arts." (see Bohemianism). "Bohemian", Oxford Dictionaries online, Oxford University Press, Retrieved on: 2011-09-14 

== Etymology ==
The name "Bohemia" derives from the name of the Boii, a Celtic tribe who inhabited that area towards the later La Tne period. The toponym Boiohaemum, first attested by Tacitus, Tacitus, Germania 28. is commonly taken to mean "home of the Boii" (from the Germanic root *haima- meaning "world, home"). The word "Bohemian" was never used by the local Czech (Slavic) population. In Czech, the region since the early Middle Ages has been called echy ("Czechia") but also, especially during the period of restoration/emancipation of the Czech language and nation, as echie. Another term, stressing the importance of the state/nation, is Krlovstv esk ("Czech Kingdom") in Czech, or Bhmen (Knigreich) in German. Its mainly Czech-speaking inhabitants were called echov (in modern Czech ei).

In most other Western European vernaculars and in Latin (as Bohemi), the word "Bohemian" or a derivate was used. If the Czech ethnic origin was to be stressed, combinations such as "Bohemian of Bohemian language" (ech eskho jazyka), "a real Bohemian" (prav ech), etc. were used.

It was not until the 19th century that other European languages began to use words related to "Czechs" (as in English, Tschechen in German, Tchques in French) in a deliberate (and successful) attempt to distinguish between Slavic Bohemians (i.e. ethnic Bohemians) and other inhabitants of Bohemia. The latter were mostly ethnic Germans, who identified as Deutschbhmen. In many parts of Europe, state citizenship was not identical with ethnicity and language, and the various peoples were usually identified by their language.

Currently, the word "Bohemians" is sometimes used when speaking about persons from Bohemia of all ethnic origins, especially before the year 1918, when the Kingdom of Bohemia ceased to exist. It is also used to distinguish between inhabitants of the western part (Bohemia proper) of Czechia, and the eastern (Moravia) or north-eastern (Silesia) parts.

The term "Bohemianism", as associated with "social unconventionality", comes from the French bohmien. This referred to Gypsy "because Romani people were thought to come from Bohemia, or because they perhaps entered the West through Bohemia". 

== See also ==
* Name of the Czech Republic

== References ==
;Notes

 Bohemian


[[Bob Jones University]]

Bob Jones University (BJU) is a private, non-denominational Protestant university in Greenville, South Carolina, U.S. ;: "The flourishing status of an institution committed to a militant theological and cultural conservatism marks Bob Jones University as worthy of note for observers of American religion." 

Since 2005 BJU has been accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. "Accreditation under TRACS will enable our graduates to realize the benefits of accreditation without compromise to the University's Bible-based philosophy and practices. We waited many years to seek accreditation," said then President Stephen Jones, "and went forward only when we were confident we could attain it without losing our independence."TRACS website; Press release announcing accreditation; Greenville News editorial on BJU accreditation; TRACS website. The university enrolls approximately 3,800 National Center for Educational Statistics students representing every state and fifty foreign countries, employs a staff of 1,450, and conducts precollege education from pre-kindergarten through high school. Greenville News, 20 September 2006, 9A. In 2006 there were approximately 1,600 pre-college students. In 2008, the university estimated the number of its graduates at 35,000. "Investing in Lives for Eternity", BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 6, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. 

BJU's athletic teams compete in Division I of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and are collectively known as the Bruins.

==History==
Bob Jones, Sr., the university's founder
Founded in 1927, by evangelist Bob Jones, Sr., near Panama City, on the Florida panhandle, Bob Jones College moved to Cleveland, Tennessee in 1933, and to its present campus in Greenville, South Carolina in 1947, where it became Bob Jones University. On the move to Greenville see, John Matzko, "'This Is It, Isn't It, Brother Stone?' The Move of Bob Jones University from Cleveland, Tennessee, to Greenville, 1946-47," South Carolina Historical Magazine, 108 (July 2007), 235-256. The former Cleveland campus currently serves as the home of Lee University, an institution supported by the Church of God. There have been five presidents: Bob Jones, Sr. (19271947); Bob Jones, Jr. (19471971); Bob Jones III, (19712005); Stephen Jones (20052014); and Steve Pettit, (2014 to the present). BJU Presidential Announcement 

From its inception, BJU has been located in the South "but has never had a predominantly southern constituency." . In 2006, the state with the largest number of students enrolled was South Carolina, but many of these were married students who had moved from other parts of the country to attend the University. Other states with large representations in the student body are Michigan, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Ohio. . 

==Campus==
The university occupies 205 acres at the eastern city limit of Greenville. The institution moved into its initial 25 buildings during the 1947-48 school year. Additional buildings have been constructed on an average of more than one per year, and most have been faced with light yellow brick similar to that chosen for the original buildings. The University has recently updated their dining common and snack bar. The snack bar now includes Chick Fil' A, Brody's Grill, and Papa Johns. BJU Catalog (2011-12), 235; John Matzko, "'This is it, Isn't it, Brother, Stone?' The Move of Bob Jones University from Cleveland, Tennessee, to Greenville, 1946-47," South Carolina Historical Magazine 108:3 (July 2007), 255-56. 

===Museum and gallery===
Bob Jones, Jr. was a connoisseur of European art and began collecting after World War II on about $30,000 a year authorized by the University Board of Directors. A Collectors Dream Greenville Piedmont, 9 February 1989, A1. Jones first concentrated on the Italian Baroque, a style then out of favor and relatively inexpensive in the years immediately following the war. Fifty years after the opening of the gallery, the BJU collection included more than 400 European paintings from the 14th to through the 19th centuries (mostly pre-19th century), period furniture, and a notable collection of Russian icons. Museum & Gallery Collections The museum also includes a variety of Holy Land antiquities collected in the early 20th century by missionaries Frank and Barbara Bowen. 
Not surprisingly, the gallery is especially strong in Baroque paintings and includes notable works by Rubens, Tintoretto, Veronese, Cranach, Gerard David, Murillo, Mattia Preti, Ribera, van Dyck, and Gustave Dor. Included in the Museum & Gallery collection are seven very large canvases, part of a series by Benjamin West painted for George III, called "The Progress of Revealed Religion," which are displayed in the War Memorial Chapel. BJU Museum & Gallery website history of the West paintings. (Baroque art was created duringand often forthe Counter-Reformation and so, ironically, BJU has been criticized by some other fundamentalists for promoting false Catholic doctrine through its art gallery.) Example of fundamentalist criticism of BJU for promoting Catholicism. David Gibson, "Looking for Catholic art? Fundamentalist Bob Jones University has it" Christian Century, Nov 22, 2011. 

After the death of Bob Jones, Jr., Erin Jones, the wife of BJU president Stephen Jones, became director. According to David Steel, curator of European art at the North Carolina Museum of Art, Erin Jones "brought that museum into the modern era," employing "a top-notch curator, John Nolan," and following "best practices in conservation and restoration." The museum now regularly cooperates with other institutions, lending works for outside shows such as a Rembrandt exhibit in 2011. David Gibson, "Looking for Catholic art? Fundamentalist Bob Jones University has it" Christian Century, Nov 22, 2011. 

In 2008, the BJU Museum & Gallery opened a satellite location, the "Museum & Gallery at Heritage Green" near downtown Greenville, which features rotating exhibitions from the main museum as well as interactive children's activities. The Heritage Green building, an extensively remodeled Coca-Cola bottling plant, joined the neighboring Upcountry History Museum and the Greenville Children's Museum, all of which feature "the latest in museum technology." "Extraordinary art made more accessible,"Greenville News, March 17, 2008; "Sacred art museum opens today", Greenville News, April 19, 2008. Greenville News April 19, 2009 

Each Easter season, the university and the Museum & Gallery present the Living Gallery, a series of tableaux vivants recreating noted works of religious art using live models disguised as part of two-dimensional paintings. Greenville News, April 9, 2006; "A dramatic transformation: BJU's 'Living Gallery' breathes life into religious masterworks," Greenville News, March 25, 2008. 

===Library===
Jerusalem Chamber, Mack Library, containing a collection of rare Bibles.
The 90000 sqft Mack Library (named for John Sephus Mack) holds a collection of more than 300,000 books and includes seating for 1,200 as well as a computer lab and a computer classroom. (Its ancillary, a music library, is included in the Gustafson Fine Arts Center.) Mack Library's Special Collections includes an American Hymnody Collection of about 700 titles. American Hymnody Collection. The "Jerusalem Chamber is a replica of the room in Westminster Abbey in which work on the King James Version of the Bible was conducted, and it displays a collection of rare Bibles. J.S. Mack Library  Jerusalem Chamber An adjoining Memorabilia Room commemorates the life of Bob Jones, Sr. and the history of the University. J.S. Mack Library  Archives. 

The library's Fundamentalism File collects periodical articles and ephemera about social and religious matters of interest to evangelicals and fundamentalists. The Fundamentalism File, created in 1978, has more than 100,000 non-book items, mostly articles listed under 5,000 subject headings; it also contains the papers of three notable 20th-century fundamentalists: G. Archer Weniger (1915-1982), W. O. H. Garman (1899-1983), and Gilbert Stenholm (1915-1989). BJU Library website, Fundamentalism File, Introduction to the File The university Archives holds copies of all university publications, oral histories of faculty and staff members, surviving remnants of university correspondence, and pictures and artifacts related to the Jones family and the history of the university. BJU Archives Research. For instance, the archives hold decades of working scripts for university stage performances. 

==Academics==
The university consists of seven colleges and schools that offer more than 60 undergraduate majors, including fourteen associate degree programs. BJU website Although BJU has an unranked and untenured faculty, most University employees consider their positions as much ministries as jobs. : "Bob Jones University has a scholarly, dedicated faculty who regard teaching as not just a profession but as a Christian calling." It is common for retiring professors to have served the university for thirty, forty, and even occasionally, fifty years, a circumstance that has contributed to the stability and conservatism of an institution of higher learning that has virtually no endowment and at which faculty salaries are "sacrificial." Voice of the Alumni of the BJU Alumni Association, 1996-2006. In 1993, the CFO Roy Barton said that teachers' salaries were kept as "low as possible in order to offer affordable higher education to Christians." Barton said he could name "dozens of people who work here for half or a third of what they could be earning on the outside, but they are here because of a desire to be part of the ministry of training young people." Greenville News, April 18, 1993, "Upstate Business," 11. In the same Greenville News issue, Bob Jones III said, "Everyone here is like a missionary." (10) 

===Religious education===
The School of Religion includes majors for both men and women, although only men (approximately 500 per year) train as ministerial students. BJU School of Religion. Many of these students go on to a seminary after completing their undergraduate degree. Others take ministry positions straight from college, and rising juniors participate in a church internship program to prepare them for the pastoral ministry. In 1995 there were 1,290 BJU graduates serving as senior or associate pastors in churches across the United States. 
The seminary building at Bob Jones

===Fine Arts===
The Division of Fine Arts has the largest faculty of the university's six undergraduate schools. Of the approximately 350 faculty members listed in the 2007-08 catalog, about a hundred, or roughly 30% taught in the Division of Fine Arts. Bob Jones University Catalog, 2007-08, 341-47. Each year the university presents an opera in the spring semester and Shakespearean plays in both the fall and spring semesters. Concert, opera, & drama series, BJU website. In 2011 the university won second place in the professional division of the National Opera Association 2009-10 video competition for its production of Samson et Dalila. NOA website. A service called Vespers, presented occasionally throughout the school year, combines music, speech, and drama. . Turner gives a detailed description of the development of Vespers from a recital potpourri to a themed program with a specific Christian message. BJU website The Division of Fine Arts includes an RTV department with a campus radio and television station, WBJU. More than a hundred concerts, recitals, and laboratory theater productions are also presented annually. 

Each fall, as a recruiting tool, the university sponsors a "High School Festival" in which students compete in music, art, and speech (including preaching) contests with their peers from around the country. High school students to compete in Fall Festival Article from BJU website by Jeanne Petrizzo describing the festival In the spring, a similar competition sponsored by the American Association of Christian Schools, and hosted by BJU since 1977, brings thousands of national finalists to the university from around the country. In 2005, 120 of the finalists from previous years returned to BJU as freshmen. BJU Collegian article from BJU website 

===Science===
Howell Memorial Science Building

Bob Jones University supports young-earth creationism, all their faculty are young Earth creationists and the university rejects evolution, calling it "at best an unsupportable and unworkable hypothesis". 

The school offers undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics and also offers courses in astronomy. In 2008 no member of the BJU science faculty held a degree in geology, BJU science faculty. and the university offered only one introductory course in the subject. Bob Jones University Catalog, 2007-08, 90. Although ten of the sixteen members of the science faculty have undergraduate degrees from BJU, all earned their doctorates from accredited, non-religious institutions of higher learning. 

The university's nursing major is approved by the South Carolina State Board of Nursing, and a BJU graduate with a BSN is eligible to take the National Council Licensure Examination to become a registered nurse. The BJU engineering program was accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). http://blogs.bju.edu/pr/2013/08/07/bju-engineering-program-earns-abet-accreditation/ 

===Rankings and accreditation===
Bob Jones, Sr. was leery of academic accreditation almost from the founding of the college, and by the early 1930s, he had publicly stated his opposition to holding regional accreditation. However, in the earliest college catalog (called An Epoch in Education) Jones wrote, Having met all the requirements, we have made application for admission to the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools. (32) Not surprisingly, Jones and the college were criticized for this stance, and academic recognition, as well as student and faculty recruitment, were hindered. 

In 1944, Jones wrote to John Walvoord of Dallas Theological Seminary that while the university had "no objection to educational work highly standardized.We, however, cannot conscientiously let some group of educational experts or some committee of experts who may have a behavioristic or atheistic slant on education control or even influence the administrative policies of our college." Jones to Walwoord, May 8, 1944 in Five years later, Jones reflected that it cost us something to stay out of an association, but we stayed out. We have lived up to our convictions. Jones to James O. Buswell, May 12, 1949, in In any case, lack of accreditation seems to have made little difference during the post-war period, when the university more than doubled in size. 

Because graduates did not have the benefit of accredited degrees, the faculty felt an increased responsibility to prepare their students. Early in the history of the college, there had been some hesitancy on the part of other institutions to accept BJC credits at face value, but by the 1960s, BJU alumni were being accepted by most of the major graduate and professional schools in the United States. "BJU's reputation in academic circles gradually became more respected for the intellectual preparation and strong character of its graduates. By the 1960s several graduate schools actively courted university alumni, and BJU graduates were accepted into most of the major graduate programs in the country despite the school's opposition to regional accreditation." Undoubtedly helpful was that some of the universitys strongest programs were in the areas of music, speech, and art, disciplines in which ability could be measured by audition or portfolio rather than through paper qualifications. Michael Collins, "Accreditation at Bob Jones University" (2007), unpublished paper, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. 

By the early 2000s (decade), however, the university quietly reexamined its position on accreditation as degree mills proliferated and various government bureaucracies, such as law enforcement agencies, began excluding BJU graduates on the grounds that the university did not appear on appropriate federal lists. In 2004, the university began the process of joining the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. Candidate statuseffectively, accreditationwas obtained in April 2005, and full membership in the Association was conferred in November 2006. BJU is also a founding member of the American Association of Christian Colleges and Seminaries, a small group of institutions "clearly identified with the historic Christian fundamentalist tradition."American Association of Christian Colleges and Seminaries. In December 2011, BJU announced its intention to apply for regional accreditation with the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS). Greenville News, December 7, 2011. The university said that "significant changes" in SACS' approach to accreditation, including "respect the stated mission of the institution, including religious mission had addressed its earlier concerns about regional accreditation. BJU website. 

In Forbes national university ranking, Bob Jones was unranked in 2011, #606 in 2010, and #279 in 2009. 

==Extracurriculars==
Davis Field House BJU abandoned intercollegiate sports in 1933. The university's intramural sports program includes competition in soccer, basketball, softball, volleyball, tennis, badminton, flag football, table tennis, racquetball, and water polo. The university competes in intercollegiate debate within the National Educational Debate Association, in intercollegiate mock trial and computer science competitions, and at South Carolina Student Legislature. BJU Catalog (2008-09), 323-27; "BJU debate team wins national award," Greenville News, April 25, 2008. The BJU debate team "received NEDA's President's Award three years in a row in recognition of the school's outstanding debate program." "Investing in Lives for Eternity," BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 6, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. In 2012, BJU joined the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and restarted its intercollegiate sports program. Greenville News, December 6, 2011 

The university requires all unmarried incoming freshman students under the age of 23 to join one of 45 "societies." BJU Catalog, 2011-12, 243. Societies meet approximately every other Friday for entertainment and fellowship; societies also hold a weekly prayer meeting. Societies field sports, debate, and Scholastic Bowl teams. The latter compete in an annual single-elimination tournament that concludes with a clash between the top two teams before a university-wide audience on the Thursday before Commencement. Questions include a wide range of biblical and academic topicsbut none from popular culture. BJU Catalog, 2011-12, 240. The university also has a student-staffed newspaper (The Collegian), The Collegian Online and yearbook (Vintage). BJU Catalog, 2011-12, 244. 

Early in December, thousands of students, faculty, and visitors gather around the front campus fountain for an annual Christmas carol sing and lighting ceremony, culminating in the illumination of tens of thousands of Christmas lights. Jeanne Petrizzo, "Nearly 100,000 lights to illuminate campus" Collegian article On December 3, 2004, the ceremony broke the Guinness World Record for Christmas caroling with 7,514 carolers. Guinness World Records. In November 2007, BJU also broke a previous record (set a year earlier in Rochester, New York) for the largest kazoo ensemble. That year during the annual Turkey Bowl game in Alumni Stadium, 3,800 students, staff and visitors played kazoos as part of the halftime entertainment. "BJU enters Guinness Book for second time", Greenville News, July 25, 2008. 

In place of a spring break, students and faculty are required to attend a six-day Bible Conference in late March. BJU Catalog, 2007-08, 320-21. The Conference attracts fundamentalist preachers and laymen from around the country, and some BJU class reunions are held during the week. BJU Catalog, 2007-08, 326, 329. 

==Ancillary ministries==

===Unusual Films===
Both Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. believed that film could be an excellent medium for mass evangelism, and in 1950, the university established Unusual Films within the School of Fine Arts. (The studio name derives from a former BJU promotional slogan, "The World's Most Unusual University".) Bob Jones, Jr. selected a speech teacher, Katherine Stenholm, as the first director. Although she had no experience in cinema, she took summer courses at the University of Southern California and received personal instruction from Hollywood specialists, such as Rudolph Sternad. ; biographical information on Sternad 

Unusual Films has produced seven feature-length films, each with an evangelistic emphasis: Wine of Morning, Red Runs the River, Flame in the Wind, Sheffey, Beyond the Night, The Printing, and Milltown Pride. List of movies produced by Unusual Films Wine of Morning (1955), based on a novel by Bob Jones, Jr., represented the United States at the Cannes Film Festival. "Wine of Morning was selected by the University Film Producers Association to represent the United States at the International Congress of Motion Picture and Television Schools in Cannes, France, and following a showing at the Congress, garnered praise from the international film community. Wine of Morning was also awarded four 'Christian Oscars' from the National Evangelical Film Foundation for Best Film, Best Actor, Best Director, and Best Producer." . There may have been some Cold War posturing involved in the nomination of this film. The president of the UFPA wrote to Stenholm that the "excellence of your production, Wine of Morning...will provide the high quality which it is desirable to use in these international showings. We feel that the contrast between your film with its religious background and Russian entry would be most revealing and that the contrast would reflect credit on our way of life." ("Bob Jones Religious Film To Represent US Colleges," The (Columbia, SC) State, May 2, 1958, 12C). The first four films are historical dramas set, respectively, in the time of Christ, the U.S. Civil War, 16th-century Spain, and the late 19th-century Souththe latter a fictionalized treatment of the life of Methodist evangelist, Robert Sayers Sheffey. Beyond the Night closely follows an actual 20th-century missionary saga in Central Africa, and The Printing uses composite characters to portray the persecution of believers in the former Soviet Union. In 1999, Unusual Films began producing feature film for children, including "The Treasure Map", "Project Dinosaur", and "Appalachian Trial". They also released a short animated film for children, "The Golden Rom". Unusual Films returned to their customary format in 2011 with their release of "Milltown Pride", a historical film set in 1920s Upstate South Carolina. 

Unusual Films also maintains a student film production program. The Cinema Production program is designed to give professional training in all facets of motion picture production. This training combines classroom instruction with hands-on experience in a variety of areas including directing, editing, and cinematography. Before graduation, seniors produce their own high definition short film in which they write, direct, and edit. 

===BJU Press===

BJU Press originated in the need for textbooks for the burgeoning Christian school movement, and today it is the largest book publisher in South Carolina. Although it published its first trade book, a history of fundamentalism, in 1973, its first text was George Mulfinger and Emmet Williams, Physical Science for Christian Schools published in 1974. The Press publishes a full range of K-12 textbooks. More than a million pre-college students around the world use BJU textbooks, and the Press has approximately 2,500 titles in print.

BJU Press also offers distance learning courses via online, DVD, and hard drive. Until May 2009, BJU Press offered elementary and high school classes via satellite over the BJ HomeSat Network and BJ LINC (Live Interactive Network Classroom), an interactive satellite system that allowed a teacher in Greenville to communicate with Christian school students across the country. In 2006, about 45,000 students participated in BJU's distance-learning programs.; Greenville News, 20 September 2006, 9A; BJU Catalog, 2007-08, 329. Another ancillary, the Academy of Home Education, is a "service organization for homeschooling families," that maintains student records, administers achievement testing, and issues high school diplomas. The Press sold its music division, SoundForth, to Lorenz Publishing on October 1, 2012. 

===Pre-college programs===
The university operates Bob Jones Academy, an elementary, middle, and high school. BJA website. The school of approximately 1500 students is the largest K-12 private school in the Carolinas and one of the largest in the Southeast. Greenville News, February 19, 2011. About 30% of BJA students are children of BJU staff members. 

==Controversies==

===Religious===

====Billy Graham====
Billy Graham, who attended BJU for one semester, was later at odds with the University
One of the earliest controversies to center on BJU was the break that occurred in the late 1950s between separatist fundamentalists and neo-evangelicals represented by the newly prominent evangelist Billy Graham. Graham had briefly attended Bob Jones College, and the university conferred an honorary degree on him in 1948. During the 1950s, however, Graham began distancing himself from the older fundamentalism and, in preparation for his 1957 New York Crusade, he sought broad ecumenical sponsorship. "The Protestant Council leadership was made up largely of clergy who denied the virgin birth of Christ, His deity, His bodily resurrection from the dead...and virtually every other historic Christian doctrine for which Bob Jones, Sr., his university, and other Fundamentalist leaders had fought....To further increase the breadth of his appeal, Graham began to accept invitations to speak at liberal seminaries in the NortheastUnion, Colgate, and other centers of American Modernism." (174) William Martin, A Prophet with Honor: The Billy Graham Story (New York: William Morrow, 1991), 98. 

Bob Jones, Sr. argued that if members of Grahams campaign executive committee had rejected major tenets of orthodox Christianity, such as the virgin birth and the deity of Christ, then Graham had violated 2 John 9-11, which prohibits receiving in fellowship those who do not abide in the teaching of Christ. In the 1960s, Graham further irritated fundamentalists by gaining the endorsement of Cardinal Richard Cushing for his Boston campaign and accepting honorary degrees from two Roman Catholic colleges. 

As was his policy, Graham ignored criticism of his campaigns Lewis F. Brabham, A New Song in the South: The Story of the Greenville S.C. Billy Graham Crusade (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1966), 128. and, in 1966, claimed not to know why the University opposed them; "When Billy Graham arrived in Greenville for the March 1966 crusade, he issued a statement to the Greenville newspapers saying he really did not know what accounted for the split between him and Bob Jones University." but members of his staff openly accused Jones of jealousy on the grounds that Joness evangelistic meetings had never been as large as Grahams. Graham associate T. W. Wilson, who had attended BJC, wrote Bob Jones, Sr., "What is the matter? Many times I have heard you say, 'I have preached to more people than any man in America.' Now that you can say this no longer, could it be that you have actually let the green-eyed old Monster of Jealousy creep into your heart?" Wilson to Jones, May 21, 1957, quoted in Grahams father-in-law, L. Nelson Bell, mailed a fiery ten-page letter to most members of the BJU faculty and student body (as well as to thousands of pastors across the country) accusing Jones of hatred, distortions, jealousies, envying, malice, false witnessing, and untruthfulness. 

In what seemed to the Joneses to be a deliberate affront, Graham held his only American campaign of 1966 in Greenville, South Carolina. Graham had only three campaigns scheduled that year: London, Berlin, and Greenville, South Carolina. Under penalty of expulsion, the university forbade any BJU dormitory student from attending the Graham meetings. "No Bob Jones University dormitory student will be permitted to go to a single meeting of the Greenville crusade. No Bob Jones University adult student, if he is married or lives in town, may attend the crusade and remain as a student." Bob Jones, Jr., Chapel talk, February 8, 1965, Mack Library Archives, quoted in . An exception was made for Bob Jones Academy students who lived in town with their parents. In a four-page position paper delivered to students in 1965, Bob Jones, Jr., condemned Billy Graham's "ecumenical evangelism" as unscriptural and "heretical," noting that Graham shared his platform with Catholic priests and that one could not "be a good Catholic and a good, spiritual Christian." When Graham arrived in Greenville, Jones, Jr. emphasized that the basis of the university's position was scriptural and not personal. "The Bible commands that false teachers and men who deny the fundamentals of the faith should be accursed; that is, they shall be criticized and condemned. Billy approves them, Billy condones them, Billy recommends them....I think that Dr. Graham is doing more harm in the cause of Jesus Christ than any living man; that he is leading foolish and untaught Christians, simple people that do not know the Word of God, into disobedience to the Word of God." Jones, "The Position of Bob Jones University in Regard to the Proposed Billy Graham Crusade in Greenville, A Chapel Talk by Dr. Bob Jones, Jr., on February 8, 1965"; Greenville News, March 4, 1966, quoted in 

The negative publicity caused by the rift with Graham, itself a reflection of a larger division between separatist fundamentalists and neo-evangelicals, precipitated a decline in BJU enrollment of about 10% in the years 1956-59. Seven members of the university board (of about a hundred) also resigned in support of Graham, including Graham himself and two of his staff members. By 1966, when Graham appeared in Greenville, BJU enrollment had strongly rebounded and continued to grow thereafter until the mid-1980s. 

====King James Version of the Bible====
King James Version of the Bible
The university requires use of the King James Version (KJV) of the Bible in its services and classrooms, but it does not hold that the KJV is the only acceptable English translation or that it has the same authority as the original Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. "Statement about Bible Translations," BJU website. The King-James-Only Movementor more correctly, movements, since it has many variationsbecame a divisive force in fundamentalism only as conservative modern Bible translations, such as the New American Standard Bible (NASB) and the New International Version (NIV) began to appear in the 1970s. BJU has taken the position that orthodox Christians of the late 19th and early 20th centuries (including fundamentalists) agreed that while the KJV was a substantially accurate translation, only the original manuscripts of the Bible written in Hebrew and Greek were infallible and inerrant. Bob Jones, Jr. called the KJV-only position a "heresy" and "in a very definite sense, a blasphemy." 

The university's stand has been condemned by some other fundamentalists. In 1998, Pensacola Christian College produced a widely distributed videotape, arguing that this "leaven of fundamentalism" was passed from the 19th-century Princeton theologian Benjamin B. Warfield (18511921) to Charles Brokenshire (18851954), who served BJU as Dean of the School of Religion, and then to current BJU faculty members and graduates. Documents on the BJU-Pensacola controversy archived on a private website. Ironically, Peter Ruckman, a BJU graduate, has argued the most extreme version of the KJV-only position, that all translations of the Bible since the KJV have been of satanic origin. 

====Criticism of Catholicism and Mormonism====
The three Bob Joneses, especially Bob Jones, Jr., sharply criticized the Roman Catholic Church. For instance, Jones, Jr. once said that Catholicism was "not another Christian denomination. It is a satanic counterfeit, an ecclesiastic tyranny over the souls of men....It is the old harlot of the book of the Revelation'the Mother of Harlots.'" All popes, Jones asserted, "are demon possessed." Philip Jenkins, (Oxford University Press, 2004), 24. "Pope Paul VI, archpriest of Satan, a deceiver and an anti-Christ, has, like Judas, gone to his own place.... "pope must be an opportunist, a tyrant, a hypocrite, and a deceiver or he cannot be a pope....A pope claims to be Christ's vice-regent on earth; that is, he blasphemously and arrogantly claims to have the divine prerogatives to forgive sins, to assign his enemies to hell...and to speak on matters of faith and morals with the same infallibility as the Holy Bible."(1978)Faith for the Family (October 1978, 2, 4) In 2000, then-president Bob Jones III referred, on the university's web page, to Mormons and Catholics as "cults which call themselves Christian." Beliefnet.com Furthermore, in 1966, BJU awarded an honorary doctorate to the Rev. Ian Paisley, future British MP, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party, and Moderator of the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, who has referred to the Pope as a "Roman anti-Christ." The Independent, March 25, 2007. After the death of Pope John XXIII in 1963, Paisley held a rally objecting to the lowering of the Union flag at Belfast City Hall in conjunction with "the lying eulogies now being paid to the Roman Antichrist". 
Bob Jones III has argued that the university is not so much anti-Catholic or anti-Mormon as it is opposed to the idea that all men, regardless of religious beliefs, will eventually get to heaven: "Our shame would be in telling people a lie, and thereby letting them go to hell without Christ because we loved their goodwill more than we loved them and their souls. All religion, including Catholicism, which teaches that salvation is by religious works or church dogma is false. Religion that makes the words of its leader, be he Pope or other, equal with the Word of God is false. Sola Scriptura. From the time of the Protestant Reformation onward, it has been understood that there is no commonality between the Bible way, which is justification by faith in the shed blood of Jesus Christ, and salvation by works, which the faithful, practicing Catholic embraces." Sullivan County News; Greenville News, February 18, 2002 

====Sexual abuse study====
In 2012, following allegations of sexual abuse and the mishandling of sexual abuse reports, the university hired a third-party, Godly Response to Abuse in the Christian Environment (GRACE), to conduct an impartial investigation. On January 27, 2014, the university abruptly terminated the contract with GRACE a month before the results of the study were to be published, then a month later rehired the group.
 New York Times, February 12, 2014;Washington Post, February 7, 2014; Religion News, February 25, 2014. 

===Racial===

====Segregation====
Although BJU admitted Asians and other ethnic groups from its inception, it did not enroll black students until 1971, eight years after the University of South Carolina and Clemson University had been integrated by court order. From 1971 to 1975, BJU admitted only married blacks, although the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had already determined in 1970 that "private schools with racially discriminatory admissions policies" were not entitled to federal tax exemption. Late in 1971, BJU filed suit to prevent the IRS from taking its tax exemption, but in 1974, in Bob Jones University v. Simon, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the university did not have standing to sue until the IRS actually assessed taxes. BOB JONES UNIVERSITY v. SIMON, 416 U.S. 725 (1974) Over a year later, on May 29, 1975, the University Board of Trustees authorized a change in policy to admit "students of any race," a move that occurred shortly before the announcement of the Supreme Court decision in Runyon v. McCrary (427 U.S. 160 ), which prohibited racial exclusion in private schools. 

In May 1975, as it prepared to allow unmarried blacks to enroll, BJU adopted more detailed rules prohibiting interracial dating and marriagethreatening expulsion for any student who dated or married interracially, who advocated interracial marriage, who was "affiliated with any group or organization which holds as one of its goals or advocates interracial marriage," or "who espouse, promote, or encourage others to violate the university's dating rules and regulations." Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574, 581) In 1982 BJU's then-president Bob Jones III, during interviews in which he defended the school's tax-exempt status, cited nine passages from the Bible - drawn both from the Old and New Testaments - which he claimed demonstrated that God intended races to be segregated: Associated Press "Theologians dispute Jones' Theory". The Daily Item, Sumter. February 2, 1982 "The Bible clearly teaches, starting in the 10th chapter of Genesis and going all the way through, that God has put differences among people on the earth to keep the earth divided", he said, adding that inter-racial marriage was "playing into the hands of the antichrist and the one-world system." Christopher Connell, "Uniqueness caused Bob Jones University to lose tax status". The Times-News, November 24, 1982. 

Later, in a 2000 interview, Bob Jones III said that interracial dating had been prohibited since the 1950s and that the policy had originated in a complaint by parents of a male Asian student who believed that their son had "nearly married" a white girl. Christianity Today article;"Larry King Live" transcript He also admitted: "We can't point to a verse in the Bible that says you shouldn't date or marry inter-racial." 

====Bob Jones University v. United States (1983)====

Rodeheaver Auditorium
On January 19, 1976, the Internal Revenue Service notified the university that its tax exemption had been revoked retroactively to December 1, 1970. The school appealed the IRS decision all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing that the University met all other criteria for tax-exempt status and that the school's racial discrimination was based on sincerely held religious beliefs, that "God intended segregation of the races and that the Scriptures forbid interracial marriage." Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574 @725) The university was not challenged about the origin of its interracial dating policy, and the District Court accepted "on the basis of a full evidentiary record" BJU's argument that the rule was a sincerely held religious conviction, a finding affirmed by all subsequent courts. Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574, footnote 28) In December 1978, the federal district court ruled in the university's favor; two years later, that decision was overturned by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals.

On January 8, 1982, just before the case was to be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court, President Ronald Reagan authorized his Treasury and Justice Departments to ask that the BJU case be dropped and that the previous court decisions be vacated. Political pressure quickly brought the Reagan administration to reverse itself and to ask the Court to reinstate the case. Then, in a virtually unprecedented move, the Court invited William T. Coleman, Jr. to argue the government's position in an amicus curiae brief, thus ensuring that the prosecution's position would be the one the Court wished to hear. "On April 19, the Court announced that it would not allow the NAACP to join the case, and in a step considered unprecedented by legal scholars and 'extraordinary' even to the NAACP's leadership, the Supreme Court Appointed a prosecutor of its ownblack attorney and civil rights activist William T. Coleman. Bob Jones III commented that 'this puts the court in the position of creating an issue to be litigated and insisting that an issue be heard when one of the two litigants declares "no contest."'" The case was heard on October 12, 1982, and on May 24, 1983, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against Bob Jones University in Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574). The university refused to reverse its interracial dating policy and (with difficulty) paid a million dollars in back taxes. Also, in the year following the Court decision, contributions to the university declined by 13 percent. 

====Dropping the no-interracial-dating rule (2000)====
In 2000, following a media uproar prompted by the visit of presidential candidate George W. Bush to the university, Bob Jones III abruptly dropped the interracial dating rule, announcing the change on CNN's "Larry King Live". For negative commentary on this announcement by Bob Jones III, see Anonymous BJU Graduate, "Dancing with Compromise" (April 2000), The Multiracial Activist. Five years later when asked for his view of the rule change, the current president, Stephen Jones, replied, "I've never been more proud of my dad than the night he...lifted that policy." Susannah Meadows, "Passing the Torch at Bob Jones U." Newsweek Web Exclusive link expired, January 29, 2005, hard copy at Fundamentalism File, Mack Library, BJU. 

====Apology for "racially hurtful" policies (2008)====
In November 2008, the university declared itself "profoundly sorry" for having allowed "institutional policies to remain in place that were racially hurtful." USA Today, November 24, 2008; Statement about Race at Bob Jones University. In the statement, the university admitted to having "conformed to the culture" rather than providing "a clear Christian counterpoint to it." Earlier that year some BJU alumni expressed concern that the university had never repudiated its racist past and petitioned the school to make a formal apology. Greenville News, November 22, 2008. That year BJU enrolled students from fifty states and nearly fifty countries, representing diverse ethnicities and cultures, and the BJU administration declared itself "committed to maintaining on the campus the racial and cultural diversity and harmony characteristic of the true Church of Jesus Christ throughout the world." Statement about Race at Bob Jones University. 

By 2005, the university had established two 501(c)(3) charitable organizations to provide scholarship assistance solely for minority students. Financial Aid. The Minority Scholarship Fund provides scholarship assistance to African-American, African, Pacific Islander, Asian, and Native American students; and the Hispanic Assistance Fund provides funds for students of Hispanic heritage. "Investing in Lives for Eternity," BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 11-12, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. For a more jaundiced view of BJU's adaptation to a growing black presence on campus see Florence Williams, "Being Black at Bob Jones U.," August 14, 2003,KillingtheBuddha.com Although BJU never reapplied for federal tax-exempt status, and it continues to pay federal taxes, a number of its ancillaries, including Bob Jones Academy and the BJU Museum & Gallery, are tax-exempt entities. BJU webpage; "Investing in Lives for Eternity," BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 15, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. The University's endowment is only $7.5 million, and donations account for only two to three percent of the budget.Greenville Journal, December 11, 2009, 27. 

===Political===
As a twelve-year-old, Bob Jones, Sr. made a twenty-minute speech in defense of the Populist Party. Jones was a friend and admirer of William Jennings Bryan but also campaigned throughout the South for Herbert Hoover (and against Al Smith) during the 1928 presidential election. Even the authorized history of BJU notes that both Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. played political hardball when dealing with the three municipalities in which the school was successively located. For instance, in 1962, Bob Jones, Sr. warned the Greenville City Council that he had four hundred votes in his pocket and in any election he would have control over who would be elected. 

====Republican powerhouse====
Both Ronald Reagan (left) and Strom Thurmond (right) played influential roles in the political life of BJU
From the inception of Bob Jones College, a majority of students and faculty were northerners, and therefore many were already Republicans living in the "Solid South." Turner, 246; Interviews of Mary Gaston Stollenwerck Jones by Margaret Beall Tice, (SeptemberOctober 1973), University Archives, Mack Library, BJU. Bob Jones, Sr. had held many evangelistic campaigns in the North prior to founding the college, and he correctly guessed that a new college in Florida would be more attractive to northerners than a new college in his home state of Alabama. After South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond switched his allegiance to the Republican Party in 1964, BJU faculty members became increasingly influential in the new state Republican party, and BJU alumni were elected to local political and party offices. In 1976, candidates supported by BJU faculty and alumni captured the local Republican party with unfortunate short-term political consequences, but by 1980 the religious right and the "country club" Republicans had joined forces. Alan Ehrenhalt, The United States of Ambition: Politicians, Power and the Pursuit of Office (New York: Random House, 1991), 98-99. "With its factions bitterly opposed to each other, the Republican party lost virtually all its state legislative seats in Greenville County, even as Gerard Ford was carrying the county against Jimmy Carter by more than 3,000 votes." (98) From then on, most Republican candidates for local and statewide offices sought the endorsement of Bob Jones III and greeted faculty/staff voters at the University Dining Common. "As late as 1978 the state representative for most of the Bob Jones precincts was Sylvia Dreyfus, a liberal Jewish Democrat. That does not happen anymore. These days, when elections are held in the districts that surround the university, anybody who does not have a Bob Jones connection does not have a realistic chance." Ehrenhalt, 99. 

National Republicans soon followed. Ronald Reagan spoke at the school in 1980, although the Joneses supported his opponent, John Connally, in the South Carolina primary. "GOP debaters politick in state," Greenville News, February 29, 1980. Reagan said he was "surprised" by Jones's endorsement of Connally. (Later, Bob Jones III denounced Reagan as "a traitor to God's people" for choosing George H.W. Bushwhom Jones called a "devil"as his vice president. Even later, Jones III shook Bush's hand and thanked him for being a good president.) Washington Post, May 4, 2005 In the 1990s, other Republicans such as Dan Quayle, Pat Buchanan, Phil Gramm, Bob Dole, and Alan Keyes also spoke at BJU. Democrats were rarely invited to speak at the university, in part because they took political and social positions (especially support for abortion rights) opposed by the Religious Right. . As Bob Jones Jr. wrote in his memoirs, "While the lecture platform of Bob Jones University will never be open to dishonest Liberals like Ted Kennedy, conservative politicians and honorable statesmen have been speaking from that platform for many years." 

====2000 election====
On February 2, 2000, George W. Bush, as candidate for President, spoke during school's chapel hour. New York Times website Bush gave a standard stump speech making no specific reference to the university. His political opponents quickly noted his non-mention of the university's ban on interracial dating. During the Michigan primary, Bush was also criticized for not stating his opposition to the university's anti-Catholicism. (The John McCain campaign targeted Catholics with a "Catholic Voter Alert," phone calls reminding voters of Bush's visit to BJU.) CNN website Bush denied that he either knew of or approved what he regarded as BJU's intolerant policies. On February 26, Bush issued a formal letter of apology to Cardinal John Joseph O'Connor of New York for failing to denounce Bob Jones University's history of anti-Catholic statements. At a news conference following the letter's release, Bush said, "I make no excuses. I had an opportunity and I missed it. I regret that....I wish I had gotten up then and seized the moment to set a tone, a tone that I had set in Texas, a positive and inclusive tone." Also during the 2000 Republican primary campaign in South Carolina, Richard Hand, a BJU professor, spread a false e-mail rumor that John McCain had fathered an illegitimate child. (The McCains have an adopted daughter from Bangladesh, and later push polling also implied that the child was biracial.) CNN website 

====Withdrawal from politics====
Although the March 2007 issue of Foreign Policy listed BJU as one of "The World's Most Controversial Religious Sites" because of its past influence on American politics, "The World's Most Controversial Religious Sites". The others mentioned were the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo; Potala Palace in Tibet; Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh state, India; and the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif in Jerusalem. BJU has seen little political controversy since Stephen Jones became president. When asked by a Newsweek reporter if he wished to play a political role, Stephen Jones replied, "It would not be my choice." Further, when asked if he felt ideologically closer to his father's engagement with politics or to other evangelicals who have tried to avoid civic involvement, he answered, "The gospel is for individuals. The main message we have is to individuals. Were not here to save the culture." Susannah Meadows, "Passing the Torch at Bob Jones U." Newsweek "Web Exclusive" link expired, January 29, 2005, hard copy at Fundamentalist File, Mack Library, BJU. In a 2005 Washington Post interview, Jones dodged political questions and even admitted that he was embarrassed by "some of the more vitriolic comments" made by his predecessors. "I don't want to get specific," he said, "But there were things said back then that I wouldn't say today." Washington Post, April 4, 2005. In October 2007 when Bob Jones III, as "a private citizen," endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination for president, Stephen Jones made it clear that he wished "to stay out of politics" and that neither he nor the university had endorsed anyone. Greenville News, October 21, 2007. Despite a hotly contested South Carolina primary, none of the candidates appeared on the platform of BJU's Founders' Memorial Amphitorium during the 2008 election cycle. Candidate Ron Paul did speak in a large classroom to an overflow crowd. BJU's vice president for administration said, We purposefully chose a room in the Alumni building because we do not want candidates to hold rallies on campus. We want interested students, faculty and staff to benefit from the educational experience of listening to a candidate, and hopefully, as a result, be able to make a more informed voting decision. BJU Collegian, January 25, 2008. In April 2008 Stephen Jones told a reporter, "I don't think I have a political bone in my body." Greenville Journal (April 4, 2008), 32. 

==Student life==

===Religious atmosphere===

 \"I believe in the inspiration of the Bible (both the Old and the New Testaments); the creation of man by the direct act of God; the incarnation and virgin birth of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ; His identification as the Son of God; His vicarious atonement for the sins of mankind by the shedding of His blood on the cross; the resurrection of His body from the tomb; His power to save men from sin; the new birth through the regeneration by the Holy Spirit; and the gift of eternal life by the grace of God.\" 
  BJU Creed 

Religion is a major aspect of life and curriculum at BJU. The BJU Creed, written in 1927 by journalist and prohibitionist Sam Small, is recited by students and faculty four days a week at chapel services. BJU website. 

The university also encourages church planting in areas of the United States "in great need of fundamental churches," and it has provided financial and logistical assistance to ministerial graduates in starting more than a hundred new churches. BJU website on church planting Bob Jones III has also encouraged non-ministerial students to put their career plans on hold for two or three years to provide lay leadership for small churches. Students of various majors participate in Missions Advance (formerly Mission Prayer Band), an organization that prays for missionaries and attempts to stimulate campus interest in world evangelism. BJU Student Life; Collegian, 24 (February 4, 2011), 1. During summers and Christmas breaks, approximately 150 students participate in teams that use their musical, language, trade, and aviation skills to promote Christian missions around the world. Although a separate nonprofit corporation, Gospel Fellowship Association, an organization founded by Bob Jones Sr. and associated with BJU, is one of the largest fundamentalist mission boards in the country. GFA Missions websiteBJU website. BJU's website calls it an "additional ministry." Through its "Timothy Fund," the university also sponsors international students who are training for the ministry. BJU website; "Timothy program offers foreign students Bible training," Collegian, April 12, 2007. 

===Rules of conduct===
Strict rules govern student life at BJU. Student Handbook (pdf) (Archive). In January 2012, College Magazine.com identified BJU as number 1 among the "Ten Most Prude Colleges" ahead of other religious universities such as Bringham Young (3) and Notre Dame (6). Some of these are based directly on the university's interpretation of the Bible. For instance, the 2011-12 Student Handbook states, "Students are to avoid any types of entertainment that could be considered immodest or that contain profanity, scatological realism, sexual perversion, erotic realism, lurid violence, occultism and false philosophical or religious assumptions." Grounds for immediate dismissal include stealing, immorality (including sexual relations between unmarried students), possession of hard-core pornography, use of alcohol or drugs, and participating in a public demonstration for a cause the university opposes. BJU Student Handbook, 2011-12, 28,45. Similar "moral failures" are grounds for terminating the employment of faculty and staff. In 1998, a homosexual alumnus was threatened with arrest if he visited the campus. Christianity Today website: "In October, alumnus Wayne Mouritzen, a 60-year-old retired pastor, received a letter from the fundamentalist school's dean of students saying "as long as you are living as a homosexual, you, of course, would not be welcome on the campus and would be arrested for trespassing if you did visit." The ban does not apply to the campus art museum, which could lose its tax-exempt status for such action." 

Other rules are not based on a specific biblical passage. For instance, the Handbook notes that "there is no specific Bible command that says, 'Thou shalt not be late to class,' but a student who wishes to display orderliness and concern for others will not come in late to the distraction of the teacher and other students." BJU Day Student Handbook, 07-08, 7. In 2008 a campus spokesman also said that one goal of the dress code was "to teach our young people to dress professionally" on campus while giving them "the ability to...choose within the biblically accepted options of dress" when they were off campus. "BJU Changes Dress Code," Greenville Journal, May 2, 2008, 18. 

Additional rules include the requirement that freshman resident hall students sign out before leaving campus and that resident hall students abide by a campus curfew of 10:30 pm, with lights out at midnight. "Student Expectations," BJU website Students are forbidden to go to movie theaters while in residence, or listen to most contemporary popular music. BJU Student Handbook, 2011-12, 28-29.. "While students are at the University, our goal is to teach them to appreciate music that is spiritually edifying and culturally valuable. For the BJU student, this precludes most of the music of our popular culture including rock, rap, jazz and country, as well as religious music that borrows from these styles." Bob Jones University Student Handbook (2010-11), 28. Male students are required to have conservative hairstyles, and facial hair is prohibited for students under 25. BJU Student Handbook, 2012-13, p. 39. Women are expected to dress modestly and wear knee-length dresses or skirts to class and religious services. BJU Student Handbook, 2011-12, 31-33. The university prohibits students from wearing clothing that displays the logos of Abercrombie & Fitch or its subsidiary Hollister because these companies have "shown an unusual degree of antagonism to biblical morality." BJU Student Handbook, 2011-12, 32. 

==Athletics==
BJU's athletic teams compete in Division I of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and are collectively known as the Bruins. The school began its inaugural intercollegiate season with four teams: men's soccer, men's basketball, women's soccer, and women's basketball. Intercollegiate golf and cross country teams were added in the 2013-2014 school year. 

==Notable people==

===Faculty===
Christian novelist Jamie Langston Turner (an alumna) teaches poetry and writing at BJU. She is the winner of a Christy Award and her novel Winter Birds was named one of the "one hundred best books" of 2006 by Publishers Weekly.Publishers Weekly Best Books list 

===Alumni===

A number of BJU graduates have become influential within fundamentalist and evangelical Christianity, including Ken Hay, the founder of The Wilds Christian camps; Billy Kim, former president of Baptist World Alliance; and Moiss Silva, president of the Evangelical Theological Society. BJU alumni also include the former president of Northland Baptist Bible College Les Ollila, late president of Baptist Bible College Ernest Pickering, and the former president of Clearwater Christian College Richard Stratton. 

One BJU alumnus, Asa Hutchinson, has served in Congress, and several others have served in state government: Michigan state senator Alan Cropsey, Pennsylvania state representative Gordon Denlinger, Pennsylvania state representative Mark M. Gillen, former Speaker Pro Tempore of the South Carolina House of Representatives Terry Haskins, member of the South Carolina House of Representatives Wendy Nanney, Pennsylvania state representative Sam Rohrer, member of the Missouri House of Representatives Ryan Silvey, Maryland state senator Bryan Simonaire, South Carolina state senator Danny Verdin.

==Footnotes==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Bob Jones University website
* BJU Press website
* Bob Jones Museum & Gallery website
* Organs of Bob Jones University

 



[[British Empire]]

The British Empire comprised the dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandates and other territories ruled or administered by the United Kingdom. It originated with the overseas possessions and trading posts established by England between the late 16th and early 18th centuries. At its height, it was the largest empire in history and, for over a century, was the foremost global power. By 1922 the British Empire held sway over about 458 million people, one-fifth of the world's population at the time. Maddison 2001, pp. 98, 242. The empire covered more than 33700000 km2, almost a quarter of the Earth's total land area. Ferguson 2004, p. 15. Elkins2005, p. 5. As a result, its political, legal, linguistic and cultural legacy is widespread. At the peak of its power, the phrase "the empire on which the sun never sets" was often used to describe the British Empire, because its expanse across the globe meant that the sun was always shining on at least one of its territories.

During the Age of Discovery in the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal and Spain pioneered European exploration of the globe, and in the process established large overseas empires. Envious of the great wealth these empires generated, England, France, and the Netherlands began to establish colonies and trade networks of their own in the Americas and Asia. Ferguson 2004, p. 2. A series of wars in the 17th and 18th centuries with the Netherlands and France left England (and then, following union between England and Scotland in 1707, Great Britain) the dominant colonial power in North America and India.

The independence of the Thirteen Colonies in North America in 1783 after the American War of Independence caused Britain to lose some of its oldest and most populous colonies. British attention soon turned towards Asia, Africa, and the Pacific. Following the defeat of Napoleonic France in 1815, Britain enjoyed a century of almost unchallenged dominance and expanded its imperial holdings across the globe. Increasing degrees of autonomy were granted to its white settler colonies, some of which were reclassified as dominions.

By the start of the twentieth century Germany and the United States had eroded some of Britain's economic lead. Subsequent military and economic tensions between Britain and Germany were major causes of the First World War, during which Britain relied heavily upon its empire. The conflict placed enormous financial and population strain on Britain. Although the empire achieved its largest territorial extent immediately after World War I, Britain was no longer a peerless industrial or military power. In the Second World War, Britain's colonies in South-East Asia were occupied by Japan. Despite the eventual victory of Britain and its allies, this damaged British prestige and accelerated the decline of the empire.
British India, Britain's most valuable and populous possession, achieved independence as part of a larger decolonisation movement in which Britain also granted independence to most of the territories of the British Empire. The political transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997 marked for many the end of the British Empire. Fourteen overseas territories remain under British sovereignty. After independence, many former British colonies joined the Commonwealth of Nations, a free association of independent states. Sixteen Commonwealth nations share their head of state, Queen Elizabeth II, as Commonwealth realms.

== Origins (14971583) ==
A replica of The Matthew, John Cabot's ship used for his second voyage to the New World

The foundations of the British Empire were laid when England and Scotland were separate kingdoms. In 1496 King Henry VII of England, following the successes of Spain and Portugal in overseas exploration, commissioned John Cabot to lead a voyage to discover a route to Asia via the North Atlantic. Ferguson 2004, p. 3. Cabot sailed in 1497, five years after the European discovery of America, and although he successfully made landfall on the coast of Newfoundland (mistakenly believing, like Christopher Columbus, that he had reached Asia), Andrews 1985, p. 45. there was no attempt to found a colony. Cabot led another voyage to the Americas the following year but nothing was heard of his ships again. Ferguson 2004, p. 4. 

No further attempts to establish English colonies in the Americas were made until well into the reign of Elizabeth I, during the last decades of the 16th century. Canny, p. 35. The Protestant Reformation had made enemies of England and Catholic Spain. In 1562, the English Crown sanctioned the privateers John Hawkins and Francis Drake to engage in slave-raiding attacks against Spanish and Portuguese ships off the coast of West Africa Thomas, pp. 155158 with the aim of breaking into the Atlantic trade system. This effort was rebuffed and later, as the Anglo-Spanish Wars intensified, Elizabeth lent her blessing to further privateering against Spanish ports in the Americas and shipping that was returning across the Atlantic, laden with treasure from the New World. Ferguson 2004, p. 7. At the same time, influential writers such as Richard Hakluyt and John Dee (who was the first to use the term "British Empire") Canny, p. 62. were beginning to press for the establishment of England's own empire. By this time, Spain had become the dominant power in the Americas and was exploring the Pacific, Portugal had established trading posts and forts from the coasts of Africa and Brazil to China, and France had begun to settle the Saint Lawrence River, later to become New France. Lloyd, pp. 48. 

=== Plantations of Ireland ===
Although England trailed behind other European powers in establishing overseas colonies, it had been engaged during the 16th century in the settlement of Ireland with Protestants from England and Scotland, drawing on precedents dating back to the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169. Canny, p. 7. Kenny, p. 5. Several people who helped establish the Plantations of Ireland also played a part in the early colonisation of North America, particularly a group known as the West Country men. Taylor, pp. 119,123. 

== First British Empire (15831783) ==

In 1578, Elizabeth I granted a patent to Humphrey Gilbert for discovery and overseas exploration. Andrews, p. 187. That year, Gilbert sailed for the West Indies with the intention of engaging in piracy and establishing a colony in North America, but the expedition was aborted before it had crossed the Atlantic. Andrews, p. 188. Canny, p. 63. In 1583 he embarked on a second attempt, on this occasion to the island of Newfoundland whose harbour he formally claimed for England, although no settlers were left behind. Gilbert did not survive the return journey to England, and was succeeded by his half-brother, Walter Raleigh, who was granted his own patent by Elizabeth in 1584. Later that year, Raleigh founded the colony of Roanoke on the coast of present-day North Carolina, but lack of supplies caused the colony to fail. Canny, pp. 6364. 

In 1603, James VI, King of Scots ascended to the English throne and in 1604 negotiated the Treaty of London, ending hostilities with Spain. Now at peace with its main rival, English attention shifted from preying on other nations' colonial infrastructure to the business of establishing its own overseas colonies. Canny, p. 70. The British Empire began to take shape during the early 17th century, with the English settlement of North America and the smaller islands of the Caribbean, and the establishment of private companies, most notably the English East India Company, to administer colonies and overseas trade. This period, until the loss of the Thirteen Colonies after the American War of Independence towards the end of the 18th century, has subsequently been referred to as the "First British Empire". Canny, p. 34. 

=== Americas, Africa and the slave trade ===

The Caribbean initially provided England's most important and lucrative colonies, James, p. 17. but not before several attempts at colonisation failed. An attempt to establish a colony in Guiana in 1604 lasted only two years, and failed in its main objective to find gold deposits. Canny, p. 71. Colonies in St Lucia (1605) and Grenada (1609) also rapidly folded, but settlements were successfully established in St. Kitts (1624), Barbados (1627) and Nevis (1628). Canny, p. 221. The colonies soon adopted the system of sugar plantations successfully used by the Portuguese in Brazil, which depended on slave labour, andat firstDutch ships, to sell the slaves and buy the sugar. Lloyd, pp. 2223. To ensure that the increasingly healthy profits of this trade remained in English hands, Parliament decreed in 1651 that only English ships would be able to ply their trade in English colonies. This led to hostilities with the United Dutch Provincesa series of Anglo-Dutch Warswhich would eventually strengthen England's position in the Americas at the expense of the Dutch. Lloyd, p. 32. In 1655, England annexed the island of Jamaica from the Spanish, and in 1666 succeeded in colonising the Bahamas. Lloyd, pp. 33, 43. 

Map of British colonies in North America, 17631776
England's first permanent settlement in the Americas was founded in 1607 in Jamestown, led by Captain John Smith and managed by the Virginia Company. Bermuda was settled and claimed by England as a result of the 1609 shipwreck there of the Virginia Company's flagship, and in 1615 was turned over to the newly formed Somers Isles Company. Lloyd, pp. 1520. The Virginia Company's charter was revoked in 1624 and direct control of Virginia was assumed by the crown, thereby founding the Colony of Virginia. Andrews, pp. 316, 324326. The London and Bristol Company was created in 1610 with the aim of creating a permanent settlement on Newfoundland, but was largely unsuccessful. Andrews, pp. 2022. In 1620, Plymouth was founded as a haven for puritan religious separatists, later known as the Pilgrims. James, p. 8. Fleeing from religious persecution would become the motive of many English would-be colonists to risk the arduous trans-Atlantic voyage: Maryland was founded as a haven for Roman Catholics (1634), Rhode Island (1636) as a colony tolerant of all religions and Connecticut (1639) for Congregationalists. The Province of Carolina was founded in 1663. With the surrender of Fort Amsterdam in 1664, England gained control of the Dutch colony of New Netherland, renaming it New York. This was formalised in negotiations following the Second Anglo-Dutch War, in exchange for Suriname. Lloyd, p. 40. In 1681, the colony of Pennsylvania was founded by William Penn. The American colonies were less financially successful than those of the Caribbean, but had large areas of good agricultural land and attracted far larger numbers of English emigrants who preferred their temperate climates. Ferguson 2004, pp. 7273. 
African slaves working in 17th-century Virginia, by an unknown artist, 1670
In 1670, Charles II incorporated by royal charter the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC), granting it a monopoly on the fur trade in the area known as Rupert's Land, which would later form a large proportion of the Dominion of Canada. Forts and trading posts established by the HBC were frequently the subject of attacks by the French, who had established their own fur trading colony in adjacent New France. Buckner, p. 25. 

Two years later, the Royal African Company was inaugurated, receiving from King Charles a monopoly of the trade to supply slaves to the British colonies of the Caribbean. Lloyd, p. 37. From the outset, slavery was the basis of the British Empire in the West Indies. Until the abolition of the slave trade in 1807, Britain was responsible for the transportation of 3.5 million African slaves to the Americas, a third of all slaves transported across the Atlantic. Ferguson 2004, p. 62. To facilitate this trade, forts were established on the coast of West Africa, such as James Island, Accra and Bunce Island. In the British Caribbean, the percentage of the population of African descent rose from 25 percent in 1650 to around 80 percent in 1780, and in the 13 Colonies from 10 percent to 40 percent over the same period (the majority in the southern colonies). Canny, p. 228. For the slave traders, the trade was extremely profitable, and became a major economic mainstay for such western British cities as Bristol and Liverpool, which formed the third corner of the so-called triangular trade with Africa and the Americas. For the transported, harsh and unhygienic conditions on the slaving ships and poor diets meant that the average mortality rate during the middle passage was one in seven. Marshall, pp. 44064. 

In 1695, the Scottish parliament granted a charter to the Company of Scotland, which established a settlement in 1698 on the isthmus of Panama. Besieged by neighbouring Spanish colonists of New Granada, and afflicted by malaria, the colony was abandoned two years later. The Darien scheme was a financial disaster for Scotlanda quarter of Scottish capital Magnusson, p. 531. was lost in the enterpriseand ended Scottish hopes of establishing its own overseas empire. The episode also had major political consequences, persuading the governments of both England and Scotland of the merits of a union of countries, rather than just crowns. Macaulay, p. 509. This occurred in 1707 with the Treaty of Union, establishing the Kingdom of Great Britain.

=== Rivalry with the Netherlands in Asia ===
Fort St. George was founded at Madras in 1639.

At the end of the 16th century, England and the Netherlands began to challenge Portugal's monopoly of trade with Asia, forming private joint-stock companies to finance the voyagesthe English, later British, East India Company and the Dutch East India Company, chartered in 1600 and 1602 respectively. The primary aim of these companies was to tap into the lucrative spice trade, an effort focused mainly on two regions; the East Indies archipelago, and an important hub in the trade network, India. There, they competed for trade supremacy with Portugal and with each other. Lloyd, p. 13. Although England would ultimately eclipse the Netherlands as a colonial power, in the short term the Netherlands' more advanced financial system Ferguson 2004, p. 19. and the three Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th century left it with a stronger position in Asia. Hostilities ceased after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 when the Dutch William of Orange ascended the English throne, bringing peace between the Netherlands and England. A deal between the two nations left the spice trade of the East Indies archipelago to the Netherlands and the textiles industry of India to England, but textiles soon overtook spices in terms of profitability, and by 1720, in terms of sales, the British company had overtaken the Dutch. 

=== Global conflicts with France ===
Defeat of French fireships at Quebec in 1759
Peace between England and the Netherlands in 1688 meant that the two countries entered the Nine Years' War as allies, but the conflictwaged in Europe and overseas between France, Spain and the Anglo-Dutch allianceleft the English a stronger colonial power than the Dutch, who were forced to devote a larger proportion of their military budget on the costly land war in Europe. Canny, p. 441. The 18th century would see England (after 1707, Britain) rise to be the world's dominant colonial power, and France becoming its main rival on the imperial stage. Pagden, p. 90. 

The death of Charles II of Spain in 1700 and his bequeathal of Spain and its colonial empire to Philippe of Anjou, a grandson of the King of France, raised the prospect of the unification of France, Spain and their respective colonies, an unacceptable state of affairs for England and the other powers of Europe. In 1701, England, Portugal and the Netherlands sided with the Holy Roman Empire against Spain and France in the War of the Spanish Succession, which lasted until 1714.

At the concluding Treaty of Utrecht, Philip renounced his and his descendants' right to the French throne and Spain lost its empire in Europe. Shennan, pp. 1117. The British Empire was territorially enlarged: from France, Britain gained Newfoundland and Acadia, and from Spain, Gibraltar and Minorca. Gibraltar became a critical naval base and allowed Britain to control the Atlantic entry and exit point to the Mediterranean. Spain also ceded the rights to the lucrative asiento (permission to sell slaves in Spanish America) to Britain. James, p. 58. 

Robert Clive's victory at the Battle of Plassey established the Company as a military as well as a commercial power.
During the middle decades of the 18th century, there were several outbreaks of military conflict on the Indian subcontinent, the Carnatic Wars, as the English East India Company (the Company) and its French counterpart, the Compagnie franaise des Indes orientales, struggled alongside local rulers to fill the vacuum that had been left by the decline of the Mughal Empire. The Battle of Plassey in 1757, in which the British, led by Robert Clive, defeated the Nawab of Bengal and his French allies, left the Company in control of Bengal and as the major military and political power in India. Smith, p. 17. France was left control of its enclaves but with military restrictions and an obligation to support British client states, ending French hopes of controlling India. Bandyopdhya, pp. 4952 In the following decades the Company gradually increased the size of the territories under its control, either ruling directly or via local rulers under the threat of force from the British Indian Army, the vast majority of which was composed of Indian sepoys. Smith, pp. 1819. 

The British and French struggles in India became but one theatre of the global Seven Years' War (17561763) involving France, Britain and the other major European powers. The signing of the Treaty of Paris (1763) had important consequences for the future of the British Empire. In North America, France's future as a colonial power there was effectively ended with the recognition of British claims to Rupert's Land, and the ceding of New France to Britain (leaving a sizeable French-speaking population under British control) and Louisiana to Spain. Spain ceded Florida to Britain. Along with its victory over France in India, the Seven Years' War therefore left Britain as the world's most powerful maritime power. Pagden, p. 91. 

== Rise of the Second British Empire (17831815) ==

=== Loss of the Thirteen American Colonies ===

During the 1760s and early 1770s, relations between the Thirteen Colonies and Britain became increasingly strained, primarily due to resentment of the British Parliament's attempts to govern and tax American colonists without their consent. Ferguson 2004, p. 84. This was summarised at the time by the slogan "No taxation without representation", a perceived violation of the guaranteed Rights of Englishmen. The American Revolution began with rejection of Parliamentary authority and moves towards self-government. In response Britain sent troops to reimpose direct rule, leading to the outbreak of war in 1775. The following year, in 1776, the United States declared independence. The entry of France to the war in 1778 tipped the military balance in the Americans' favour and after a decisive defeat at Yorktown in 1781, Britain began negotiating peace terms. American independence was acknowledged at the Peace of Paris in 1783. Marshall, pp. 312-23. 

Surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown. The loss of the American colonies marked the end of the "first British Empire".
The loss of such a large portion of British America, at the time Britain's most populous overseas possession, is seen by historians as the event defining the transition between the "first" and "second" empires, Canny, p. 92. in which Britain shifted its attention away from the Americas to Asia, the Pacific and later Africa. Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, had argued that colonies were redundant, and that free trade should replace the old mercantilist policies that had characterised the first period of colonial expansion, dating back to the protectionism of Spain and Portugal. James, p. 120. The growth of trade between the newly independent United States and Britain after 1783 seemed to confirm Smith's view that political control was not necessary for economic success. James, p. 119. Marshall, p. 585. 

Events in America influenced British policy in Canada, where between 40,000 and 100,000 Zolberg, p. 496. defeated Loyalists had migrated from America following independence. Games, pp. 4648. The 14,000 Loyalists who went to the Saint John and Saint Croix river valleys, then part of Nova Scotia, felt too far removed from the provincial government in Halifax, so London split off New Brunswick as a separate colony in 1784. Kelley & Trebilcock, p. 43. The Constitutional Act of 1791 created the provinces of Upper Canada (mainly English-speaking) and Lower Canada (mainly French-speaking) to defuse tensions between the French and British communities, and implemented governmental systems similar to those employed in Britain, with the intention of asserting imperial authority and not allowing the sort of popular control of government that was perceived to have led to the American Revolution. Smith, p. 28. 

Tensions between Britain and the United States escalated again during the Napoleonic Wars, as Britain tried to cut off American trade with France and boarded American ships to impress into the Royal Navy men of British birth. The U.S. declared war, the War of 1812, and invaded Canadian territory, but the pre-war boundaries were reaffirmed by the 1814 Treaty of Ghent, ensuring Canada's future would be separate from that of the United States. Latimer, pp. 8, 3034, 38992. Marshall, pp. 388. 

=== Exploration of the Pacific ===
James Cook's mission was to find the alleged southern continent Terra Australis.

Since 1718, transportation to the American colonies had been a penalty for various criminal offences in Britain, with approximately one thousand convicts transported per year across the Atlantic. Smith, p. 20. Forced to find an alternative location after the loss of the 13 Colonies in 1783, the British government turned to the newly discovered lands of Australia. Smith, pp. 2021. The western coast of Australia had been discovered for Europeans by the Dutch explorer Willem Jansz in 1606 and was later named New Holland by the Dutch East India Company, Mulligan & Hill, pp. 2023. but there was no attempt to colonise it. In 1770 James Cook discovered the eastern coast of Australia while on a scientific voyage to the South Pacific Ocean, claimed the continent for Britain, and named it New South Wales. Peters, pp. 523. In 1778, Joseph Banks, Cook's botanist on the voyage, presented evidence to the government on the suitability of Botany Bay for the establishment of a penal settlement, and in 1787 the first shipment of convicts set sail, arriving in 1788. James, p. 142. Britain continued to transport convicts to New South Wales until 1840. Britain and the Dominions, p. 159. The Australian colonies became profitable exporters of wool and gold, Fieldhouse, pp. 145149 mainly due to gold rushes in the colony of Victoria, making its capital Melbourne the richest city in the world and the largest city after London in the British Empire. Statesmen's Year Book 1889 

During his voyage, Cook also visited New Zealand, first discovered by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman in 1642, and claimed the North and South islands for the British crown in 1769 and 1770 respectively. Initially, interaction between the indigenous Mori population and Europeans was limited to the trading of goods. European settlement increased through the early decades of the 19th century, with numerous trading stations established, especially in the North. In 1839, the New Zealand Company announced plans to buy large tracts of land and establish colonies in New Zealand. On 6 February 1840, Captain William Hobson and around 40 Maori chiefs signed the Treaty of Waitangi. Smith, p. 45. This treaty is considered by many to be New Zealand's founding document, but differing interpretations of the Maori and English versions of the text Porter, p. 579. have meant that it continues to be a source of dispute. Mein Smith, p. 49. 

=== War with Napoleonic France ===

Britain was challenged again by France under Napoleon, in a struggle that, unlike previous wars, represented a contest of ideologies between the two nations. James, p. 152. It was not only Britain's position on the world stage that was threatened: Napoleon threatened to invade Britain itself, just as his armies had overrun many countries of continental Europe.

The Battle of Waterloo ended in the defeat of Napoleon.
The Napoleonic Wars were therefore ones in which Britain invested large amounts of capital and resources to win. French ports were blockaded by the Royal Navy, which won a decisive victory over a Franco-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in 1805. Overseas colonies were attacked and occupied, including those of the Netherlands, which was annexed by Napoleon in 1810. France was finally defeated by a coalition of European armies in 1815. Lloyd, pp. 115118. Britain was again the beneficiary of peace treaties: France ceded the Ionian Islands, Malta (which it had occupied in 1797 and 1798 respectively), Mauritius, St Lucia, and Tobago; Spain ceded Trinidad; the Netherlands Guyana, and the Cape Colony. Britain returned Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana, and Runion to France, and Java and Suriname to the Netherlands, while gaining control of Ceylon (17951815). James, p. 165. 

=== Abolition of slavery ===

Under increasing pressure from the British abolitionist movement, the British government enacted the Slave Trade Act in 1807 which abolished the slave trade in the empire. In 1808, Sierra Leone was designated an official British colony for freed slaves. Porter, p. 14. The Slavery Abolition Act passed in 1833 abolished slavery in the British Empire on 1 August 1834 (with the exception of St. Helena, Ceylon and the territories administered by the East India Company, though these exclusions were later repealed). Under the Act, slaves were granted full emancipation after a period of 4 to 6 years of "apprenticeship". Hinks, p. 129. 

== Britain's imperial century (18151914) ==

An elaborate map of the British Empire in 1886, marked in the traditional colour for imperial British dominions on maps

Between 1815 and 1914, a period referred to as Britain's "imperial century" by some historians, Hyam, p. 1. Smith, p. 71. around 10,000,000 sqmi of territory and roughly 400 million people were added to the British Empire. Parsons, p. 3. Victory over Napoleon left Britain without any serious international rival, other than Russia in central Asia. Porter, p. 401. Unchallenged at sea, Britain adopted the role of global policeman, a state of affairs later known as the Pax Britannica, Porter, p. 332. and a foreign policy of "splendid isolation". Lee 1994, pp. 254257. Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies, Britain's dominant position in world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of many countries, such as China, Argentina and Siam, which has been characterised by some historians as "informal empire". Porter, p. 8. Marshall, pp. 15657. 

British imperial strength was underpinned by the steamship and the telegraph, new technologies invented in the second half of the 19th century, allowing it to control and defend the empire. By 1902, the British Empire was linked together by a network of telegraph cables, the so-called All Red Line. Dalziel, pp. 8891. 

=== East India Company in Asia ===

An 1876 political cartoon of Benjamin Disraeli (18041881) making Queen Victoria Empress of India. The caption was "New crowns for old ones!"
The East India Company drove the expansion of the British Empire in Asia. The Company's army had first joined forces with the Royal Navy during the Seven Years' War, and the two continued to cooperate in arenas outside India: the eviction of Napoleon from Egypt (1799), the capture of Java from the Netherlands (1811), the acquisition of Singapore (1819) and Malacca (1824) and the defeat of Burma (1826). 

From its base in India, the Company had also been engaged in an increasingly profitable opium export trade to China since the 1730s. This trade, illegal since it was outlawed by the Qing dynasty in 1729, helped reverse the trade imbalances resulting from the British imports of tea, which saw large outflows of silver from Britain to China. Martin, pp. 146148. In 1839, the confiscation by the Chinese authorities at Canton of 20,000 chests of opium led Britain to attack China in the First Opium War, and resulted in the seizure by Britain of Hong Kong Island, at that time a minor settlement. Janin, p. 28. 

During the late 18th and early 19th centuries the British Crown began to assume an increasingly large role in the affairs of the Company. A series of Acts of Parliament were passed, including the Regulating Act of 1773, Pitt's India Act of 1784 and the Charter Act of 1813 which regulated the Company's affairs and established the sovereignty of the Crown over the territories that it had acquired. Keay, p. 393 The Company's eventual end was precipitated by the Indian Rebellion, a conflict that had begun with the mutiny of sepoys, Indian troops under British officers and discipline. Parsons, pp. 4446. The rebellion took six months to suppress, with heavy loss of life on both sides. The following year the British government dissolved the Company and assumed direct control over India through the Government of India Act 1858, establishing the British Raj, where an appointed governor-general administered India and Queen Victoria was crowned the Empress of India. Smith, pp. 5057. India became the empire's most valuable possession, "the Jewel in the Crown", and was the most important source of Britain's strength. Brown, p. 5. 

A series of serious crop failures in the late 19th century led to widespread famines on the subcontinent in which it is estimated that over 15 million people died. The East India Company had failed to implement any coordinated policy to deal with the famines during its period of rule. Later, under direct British rule, commissions were set up after each famine to investigate the causes and implement new policies, which took until the early 1900s to have an effect. Marshall, pp. 13334. 

=== Rivalry with Russia ===

British cavalry charging against Russian forces at Balaclava in 1854
During the 19th century, Britain and the Russian Empire vied to fill the power vacuums that had been left by the declining Ottoman Empire, Qajar dynasty and Qing dynasty. This rivalry in Eurasia came to be known as the "Great Game". Hopkirk, pp. 112. As far as Britain was concerned, defeats inflicted by Russia on Persia and Turkey demonstrated its imperial ambitions and capabilities and stoked fears in Britain of an overland invasion of India. James, p. 181. In 1839, Britain moved to pre-empt this by invading Afghanistan, but the First Anglo-Afghan War was a disaster for Britain. James, p. 182. 

When Russia invaded the Turkish Balkans in 1853, fears of Russian dominance in the Mediterranean and Middle East led Britain and France to invade the Crimean Peninsula in order to destroy Russian naval capabilities. The ensuing Crimean War (185456), which involved new techniques of modern warfare, Royle, preface. and was the only global war fought between Britain and another imperial power during the Pax Britannica, was a resounding defeat for Russia. The situation remained unresolved in Central Asia for two more decades, with Britain annexing Baluchistan in 1876 and Russia annexing Kirghizia, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan. For a while it appeared that another war would be inevitable, but the two countries reached an agreement on their respective spheres of influence in the region in 1878 and on all outstanding matters in 1907 with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente. The destruction of the Russian Navy by the Japanese at the Battle of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War of 190405 also limited its threat to the British. Hodge, p. 47. 

=== Cape to Cairo ===
The Rhodes ColossusCecil Rhodes spanning "Cape to Cairo"

The Dutch East India Company had founded the Cape Colony on the southern tip of Africa in 1652 as a way station for its ships travelling to and from its colonies in the East Indies. Britain formally acquired the colony, and its large Afrikaner (or Boer) population in 1806, having occupied it in 1795 in order to prevent its falling into French hands, following the invasion of the Netherlands by France. Smith, p. 85. British immigration began to rise after 1820, and pushed thousands of Boers, resentful of British rule, northwards to found their ownmostly short-livedindependent republics, during the Great Trek of the late 1830s and early 1840s. Smith, pp. 8586. In the process the Voortrekkers clashed repeatedly with the British, who had their own agenda with regard to colonial expansion in South Africa and with several African polities, including those of the Sotho and the Zulu nations. Eventually the Boers established two republics which had a longer lifespan: the South African Republic or Transvaal Republic (185277; 18811902) and the Orange Free State (18541902). Lloyd, pp. 168, 186, 243. In 1902 Britain occupied both republics, concluding a treaty with the two Boer Republics following the Second Boer War (18991902). Lloyd, p. 255. 

In 1869 the Suez Canal opened under Napoleon III, linking the Mediterranean with the Indian Ocean. Initially the Canal was opposed by the British; Tilby, p. 256. but once opened, its strategic value was quickly recognised and became the "jugular vein of the Empire". Roger 1986, p. 718. In 1875, the Conservative government of Benjamin Disraeli bought the indebted Egyptian ruler Isma'il Pasha's 44 percent shareholding in the Suez Canal for 4 million ( in 2013). Although this did not grant outright control of the strategic waterway, it did give Britain leverage. Joint Anglo-French financial control over Egypt ended in outright British occupation in 1882. Ferguson 2004, pp. 23033. The French were still majority shareholders and attempted to weaken the British position, James, p. 274. but a compromise was reached with the 1888 Convention of Constantinople, which made the Canal officially neutral territory. 

With French, Belgian and Portuguese activity in the lower Congo River region undermining orderly incursion of tropical Africa, the Berlin Conference of 188485 was held to regulate the competition between the European powers in what was called the "Scramble for Africa" by defining "effective occupation" as the criterion for international recognition of territorial claims. Herbst, pp. 7172. The scramble continued into the 1890s, and caused Britain to reconsider its decision in 1885 to withdraw from Sudan. A joint force of British and Egyptian troops defeated the Mahdist Army in 1896, and rebuffed a French attempted invasion at Fashoda in 1898. Sudan was nominally made an Anglo-Egyptian Condominium, but a British colony in reality. Vandervort, pp. 169183. 

British gains in southern and East Africa prompted Cecil Rhodes, pioneer of British expansion in Africa, to urge a "Cape to Cairo" railway linking the strategically important Suez Canal to the mineral-rich South. James, p. 298. During the 1880s and 1890s, Rhodes, with his privately owned British South Africa Company, occupied and annexed territories subsequently named after him, Rhodesia. Lloyd, p. 215. 

=== Changing status of the white colonies ===
Canada's major industry in terms of employment and value of the product was the timber trade. Ontario c. 1900.

The path to independence for the white colonies of the British Empire began with the 1839 Durham Report, which proposed unification and self-government for Upper and Lower Canada, as a solution to political unrest there. Smith, pp. 2829. This began with the passing of the Act of Union in 1840, which created the Province of Canada. Responsible government was first granted to Nova Scotia in 1848, and was soon extended to the other British North American colonies. With the passage of the British North America Act, 1867 by the British Parliament, Upper and Lower Canada, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia were formed into the Dominion of Canada, a confederation enjoying full self-government with the exception of international relations. Porter, p. 187 Australia and New Zealand achieved similar levels of self-government after 1900, with the Australian colonies federating in 1901. Smith, p. 30. The term "dominion status" was officially introduced at the Colonial Conference of 1907. 

The last decades of the 19th century saw concerted political campaigns for Irish home rule. Ireland had been united with Britain into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland with the Act of Union 1800 after the Irish Rebellion of 1798, and had suffered a severe famine between 1845 and 1852. Home rule was supported by the British Prime Minister, William Gladstone, who hoped that Ireland might follow in Canada's footsteps as a Dominion within the empire, but his 1886 Home Rule bill was defeated in Parliament. Although the bill, if passed, would have granted Ireland less autonomy within the UK than the Canadian provinces had within their own federation, Lloyd, p. 213 many MPs feared that a partially independent Ireland might pose a security threat to Great Britain or mark the beginning of the break-up of the empire. James, p. 315. A second Home Rule bill was also defeated for similar reasons. A third bill was passed by Parliament in 1914, but not implemented due to the outbreak of the First World War leading to the 1916 Easter Rising. Smith, p. 92. 

== World wars (19141945) ==

By the turn of the 20th century, fears had begun to grow in Britain that it would no longer be able to defend the metropole and the entirety of the empire while at the same time maintaining the policy of "splendid isolation". O'Brien, p. 1. Germany was rapidly rising as a military and industrial power and was now seen as the most likely opponent in any future war. Recognising that it was overstretched in the Pacific Brown, p. 667. and threatened at home by the Imperial German Navy, Britain formed an alliance with Japan in 1902 and with its old enemies France and Russia in 1904 and 1907, respectively. Lloyd, p. 275. 

=== First World War ===

Soldiers of the Australian 5th Division, waiting to attack during the Battle of Fromelles, 19 July 1916

Britain's fears of war with Germany were realised in 1914 with the outbreak of the First World War. Britain quickly invaded and occupied most of Germany's overseas colonies in Africa. In the Pacific, Australia and New Zealand occupied German New Guinea and Samoa respectively. Plans for a post-war division of the Ottoman Empire, which had joined the war on Germany's side, were secretly drawn up by Britain and France under the 1916 SykesPicot Agreement. This agreement was not divulged to the Sharif of Mecca, who the British had been encouraging to launch an Arab revolt against their Ottoman rulers, giving the impression that Britain was supporting the creation of an independent Arab state. Brown, pp. 494-495. 

The British declaration of war on Germany and its allies also committed the colonies and Dominions, which provided invaluable military, financial and material support. Over 2.5 million men served in the armies of the Dominions, as well as many thousands of volunteers from the Crown colonies. Marshall, pp. 7879. The contributions of Australian and New Zealand troops during the 1915 Gallipoli Campaign against the Ottoman Empire had a great impact on the national consciousness at home, and marked a watershed in the transition of Australia and New Zealand from colonies to nations in their own right. The countries continue to commemorate this occasion on ANZAC Day. Canadians viewed the Battle of Vimy Ridge in a similar light. Lloyd, p. 277. The important contribution of the Dominions to the war effort was recognised in 1917 by the British Prime Minister David Lloyd George when he invited each of the Dominion Prime Ministers to join an Imperial War Cabinet to coordinate imperial policy. Lloyd, p. 278. 

Under the terms of the concluding Treaty of Versailles signed in 1919, the empire reached its greatest extent with the addition of 1800000 sqmi and 13 million new subjects. Ferguson 2004, p. 315. The colonies of Germany and the Ottoman Empire were distributed to the Allied powers as League of Nations Mandates. Britain gained control of Palestine, Transjordan, Iraq, parts of Cameroon and Togo, and Tanganyika. The Dominions themselves also acquired mandates of their own: the Union of South Africa gained South-West Africa (modern-day Namibia), Australia gained German New Guinea, and New Zealand Western Samoa. Nauru was made a combined mandate of Britain and the two Pacific Dominions. Fox, pp. 2329, 35, 60. 

=== Inter-war period & Irish War of Independence ===

The changing world order that the war had brought about, in particular the growth of the United States and Japan as naval powers, and the rise of independence movements in India and Ireland, caused a major reassessment of British imperial policy. Goldstein, p. 4. Forced to choose between alignment with the United States or Japan, Britain opted not to renew its Japanese alliance and instead signed the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty, where Britain accepted naval parity with the United States. Louis, p. 302. This decision was the source of much debate in Britain during the 1930s Louis, p. 294. as militaristic governments took hold in Japan and Germany helped in part by the Great Depression, for it was feared that the empire could not survive a simultaneous attack by both nations. Louis, p. 303. Although the issue of the empire's security was a serious concern in Britain, at the same time the empire was vital to the British economy. Lee 1996, p. 305. 

In 1919, the frustrations caused by delays to Irish home rule led members of Sinn Fin, a pro-independence party that had won a majority of the Irish seats at Westminster in the 1918 British general election, to establish an Irish assembly in Dublin, at which Irish independence was declared. The Irish Republican Army simultaneously began a guerrilla war against the British administration. Brown, p. 143. The Anglo-Irish War ended in 1921 with a stalemate and the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, creating the Irish Free State, a Dominion within the British Empire, with effective internal independence but still constitutionally linked with the British Crown. Smith, p. 95. Northern Ireland, consisting of six of the 32 Irish counties which had been established as a devolved region under the 1920 Government of Ireland Act, immediately exercised its option under the treaty to retain its existing status within the United Kingdom. Magee, p. 108. 

George V with the British and Dominion prime ministers at the 1926 Imperial Conference
A similar struggle began in India when the Government of India Act 1919 failed to satisfy demand for independence. Ferguson 2004, p. 330. Concerns over communist and foreign plots following the Ghadar Conspiracy ensured that war-time strictures were renewed by the Rowlatt Acts. This led to tension, James, p. 416. particularly in the Punjab region, where repressive measures culminated in the Amritsar Massacre. In Britain public opinion was divided over the morality of the event, between those who saw it as having saved India from anarchy, and those who viewed it with revulsion. The subsequent non-cooperation movement was called off in March 1922 following the Chauri Chaura incident, and discontent continued to simmer for the next 25 years. 

In 1922, Egypt, which had been declared a British protectorate at the outbreak of the First World War, was granted formal independence, though it continued to be a British client state until 1954. British troops remained stationed in Egypt until the signing of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty in 1936, Smith, p. 104. under which it was agreed that the troops would withdraw but continue to occupy and defend the Suez Canal zone. In return, Egypt was assisted to join the League of Nations. Brown, p. 292. Iraq, a British mandate since 1920, also gained membership of the League in its own right after achieving independence from Britain in 1932. Smith, p. 101. In Palestine, Britain was presented with the problem of mediating between the Arab and Jewish communities. The 1917 Balfour Declaration, which had been incorporated into the terms of the mandate, stated that a national home for the Jewish people would be established in Palestine, and Jewish immigration allowed up to a limit that would be determined by the mandatory power. Louis, p. 271. This led to increasing conflict with the Arab population, who openly revolted in 1936. As the threat of war with Germany increased during the 1930s, Britain judged the support of the Arab population in the Middle East as more important than the establishment of a Jewish homeland, and shifted to a pro-Arab stance, limiting Jewish immigration and in turn triggering a Jewish insurgency. 

The ability of the Dominions to set their own foreign policy, independent of Britain, was recognised at the 1923 Imperial Conference. McIntyre, p. 187. Britain's request for military assistance from the Dominions at the outbreak of the Chanak crisis the previous year had been turned down by Canada and South Africa, and Canada had refused to be bound by the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. Brown, p. 68. McIntyre, p. 186. After pressure from Ireland and South Africa, the 1926 Imperial Conference issued the Balfour Declaration, declaring the Dominions to be "autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another" within a "British Commonwealth of Nations". Brown, p. 69. This declaration was given legal substance under the 1931 Statute of Westminster. Rhodes, Wanna & Weller, pp. 515. The parliaments of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, the Irish Free State and Newfoundland were now independent of British legislative control, they could nullify British laws and Britain could no longer pass laws for them without their consent. Turpin & Tomkins, p. 48. Newfoundland reverted to colonial status in 1933, suffering from financial difficulties during the Great Depression. Lloyd, p. 300. Ireland distanced itself further from Britain with the introduction of a new constitution in 1937, making it a republic in all but name. Kenny, p. 21. 

=== Second World War ===

The Eighth Army was made up of units from across the empire and fought in the Western Desert and Italy.

Britain's declaration of war against Nazi Germany in September 1939 included the Crown colonies and India but did not automatically commit the Dominions. Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland and South Africa all soon declared war on Germany, but the Irish Free State chose to remain legally neutral throughout the war. Lloyd, pp. 31314. After the German occupation of France in 1940, Britain and the empire stood alone against Germany, until the entry of the Soviet Union to the war in 1941. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill successfully lobbied President Franklin D. Roosevelt for military aid from the United States, but Roosevelt was not yet ready to ask Congress to commit the country to war. Gilbert, p. 234. In August 1941, Churchill and Roosevelt met and signed the Atlantic Charter, which included the statement that "the rights of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live" should be respected. This wording was ambiguous as to whether it referred to European countries invaded by Germany, or the peoples colonised by European nations, and would later be interpreted differently by the British, Americans, and nationalist movements. Lloyd, p. 316. James, p. 513. 

In December 1941, Japan launched, in quick succession, attacks on British Malaya, the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, and Hong Kong. Churchill's reaction to the entry of the United States into the war was that Britain was now assured of victory and the future of the empire was safe, Gilbert, p. 244. but the manner in which the British rapidly surrendered irreversibly harmed Britain's standing and prestige as an imperial power. Louis, p. 337. Brown, p. 319. Most damaging of all was the fall of Singapore, which had previously been hailed as an impregnable fortress and the eastern equivalent of Gibraltar. James, p. 460. The realisation that Britain could not defend its entire empire pushed Australia and New Zealand, which now appeared threatened by Japanese forces, into closer ties with the United States. This resulted in the 1951 ANZUS Pact between Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America. 

== Decolonisation and decline (19451997) ==
Though Britain and the empire emerged victorious from the Second World War, the effects of the conflict were profound, both at home and abroad. Much of Europe, a continent that had dominated the world for several centuries, was in ruins, and host to the armies of the United States and the Soviet Union, who now held the balance of global power. Abernethy, p. 146. Britain was left essentially bankrupt, with insolvency only averted in 1946 after the negotiation of a $US 4.33 billion loan (US$56 billion in 2012) from the United States, Brown, p. 331. the last instalment of which was repaid in 2006. At the same time, anti-colonial movements were on the rise in the colonies of European nations. The situation was complicated further by the increasing Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union. In principle, both nations were opposed to European colonialism. In practice, however, American anti-Communism prevailed over anti-imperialism, and therefore the United States supported the continued existence of the British Empire to keep Communist expansion in check. Levine, p. 193. The "wind of change" ultimately meant that the British Empire's days were numbered, and on the whole, Britain adopted a policy of peaceful disengagement from its colonies once stable, non-Communist governments were available to transfer power to. This was in contrast to other European powers such as France and Portugal, Abernethy, p. 148. which waged costly and ultimately unsuccessful wars to keep their empires intact. Between 1945 and 1965, the number of people under British rule outside the UK itself fell from 700 million to five million, three million of whom were in Hong Kong. Brown, p. 330. 

=== Initial disengagement ===

The pro-decolonisation Labour government, elected at the 1945 general election and led by Clement Attlee, moved quickly to tackle the most pressing issue facing the empire: that of Indian independence. Lloyd, p. 322. India's two independence movementsthe Indian National Congress and the Muslim Leaguehad been campaigning for independence for decades, but disagreed as to how it should be implemented. Congress favoured a unified secular Indian state, whereas the League, fearing domination by the Hindu majority, desired a separate Islamic state for Muslim-majority regions. Increasing civil unrest and the mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy during 1946 led Attlee to promise independence no later than 1948. When the urgency of the situation and risk of civil war became apparent, the newly appointed (and last) Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, hastily brought forward the date to 15 August 1947. Smith, p. 67. The borders drawn by the British to broadly partition India into Hindu and Muslim areas left tens of millions as minorities in the newly independent states of India and Pakistan. Lloyd, p. 325. Millions of Muslims subsequently crossed from India to Pakistan and Hindus vice versa, and violence between the two communities cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Burma, which had been administered as part of the British Raj, and Sri Lanka gained their independence the following year in 1948. India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka became members of the Commonwealth, while Burma chose not to join. McIntyre, pp. 355356. 

The British Mandate of Palestine, where an Arab majority lived alongside a Jewish minority, presented the British with a similar problem to that of India. Lloyd, p. 327. The matter was complicated by large numbers of Jewish refugees seeking to be admitted to Palestine following the Holocaust, while Arabs were opposed to the creation of a Jewish state. Frustrated by the intractability of the problem, attacks by Jewish paramilitary organisations and the increasing cost of maintaining its military presence, Britain announced in 1947 that it would withdraw in 1948 and leave the matter to the United Nations to solve. Lloyd, p. 328. The UN General Assembly subsequently voted for a plan to partition Palestine into a Jewish and an Arab state.

Following the defeat of Japan in the Second World War, anti-Japanese resistance movements in Malaya turned their attention towards the British, who had moved to quickly retake control of the colony, valuing it as a source of rubber and tin. Lloyd, p. 335. The fact that the guerrillas were primarily Malayan-Chinese Communists meant that the British attempt to quell the uprising was supported by the Muslim Malay majority, on the understanding that once the insurgency had been quelled, independence would be granted. The Malayan Emergency, as it was called, began in 1948 and lasted until 1960, but by 1957, Britain felt confident enough to grant independence to the Federation of Malaya within the Commonwealth. In 1963, the 11 states of the federation together with Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo joined to form Malaysia, but in 1965 Chinese-majority Singapore was expelled from the union following tensions between the Malay and Chinese populations. Lloyd, p. 364. Brunei, which had been a British protectorate since 1888, declined to join the union Lloyd, p. 396. and maintained its status until independence in 1984.

=== Suez and its aftermath ===

British Prime Minister Anthony Eden's decision to invade Egypt during the Suez Crisis ended his political career and revealed Britain's weakness as an imperial power.

In 1951, the Conservative Party returned to power in Britain, under the leadership of Winston Churchill. Churchill and the Conservatives believed that Britain's position as a world power relied on the continued existence of the empire, with the base at the Suez Canal allowing Britain to maintain its pre-eminent position in the Middle East in spite of the loss of India. However, Churchill could not ignore Gamal Abdul Nasser's new revolutionary government of Egypt that had taken power in 1952, and the following year it was agreed that British troops would withdraw from the Suez Canal zone and that Sudan would be granted self-determination by 1955, with independence to follow. Brown, pp. 33940. Sudan was granted independence on 1 January 1956.

In July 1956, Nasser unilaterally nationalised the Suez Canal. The response of Anthony Eden, who had succeeded Churchill as Prime Minister, was to collude with France to engineer an Israeli attack on Egypt that would give Britain and France an excuse to intervene militarily and retake the canal. James, p. 581. Eden infuriated US President Dwight D. Eisenhower, by his lack of consultation, and Eisenhower refused to back the invasion. Ferguson 2004, p. 355. Another of Eisenhower's concerns was the possibility of a wider war with the Soviet Union after it threatened to intervene on the Egyptian side. Eisenhower applied financial leverage by threatening to sell US reserves of the British pound and thereby precipitate a collapse of the British currency. Ferguson 2004, p. 356. Though the invasion force was militarily successful in its objectives, James, p. 583. UN intervention and US pressure forced Britain into a humiliating withdrawal of its forces, and Eden resigned. Combs, pp. 161163. 

The Suez Crisis very publicly exposed Britain's limitations to the world and confirmed Britain's decline on the world stage, demonstrating that henceforth it could no longer act without at least the acquiescence, if not the full support, of the United States. Brown, p. 342. Smith, p. 105. Burk, p. 602. The events at Suez wounded British national pride, leading one MP to describe it as "Britain's Waterloo" Brown, p. 343. and another to suggest that the country had become an "American satellite". James, p. 585. Margaret Thatcher later described the mindset she believed had befallen the British political establishment as "Suez syndrome", from which Britain did not recover until the successful recapture of the Falkland Islands from Argentina in 1982. Thatcher. 

While the Suez Crisis caused British power in the Middle East to weaken, it did not collapse. Smith, p. 106. Britain again deployed its armed forces to the region, intervening in Oman (1957), Jordan (1958) and Kuwait (1961), though on these occasions with American approval, James, p. 586. as the new Prime Minister Harold Macmillan's foreign policy was to remain firmly aligned with the United States. Britain maintained a military presence in the Middle East for another decade. In January 1968, a few weeks after the devaluation of the pound, Prime Minister Harold Wilson and his Defence Secretary Denis Healey; announced that British troops would be withdrawn from major military bases East of Suez, which included the ones in the Middle East, and primarily from Malaysia and Singapore. Pham 2010 The British withdrew from Aden in 1967, Bahrain in 1971, and Maldives in 1976. Lloyd, pp. 370371. 

=== Wind of change ===

British decolonisation in Africa. By the end of the 1960s, all but Rhodesia (the future Zimbabwe) and the South African mandate of South West Africa (Namibia) had achieved recognised independence.

Macmillan gave a speech in Cape Town, South Africa in February 1960 where he spoke of "the wind of change blowing through this continent." James, p. 616. Macmillan wished to avoid the same kind of colonial war that France was fighting in Algeria, and under his premiership decolonisation proceeded rapidly. Louis, p. 46. To the three colonies that had been granted independence in the 1950sSudan, the Gold Coast and Malayawere added nearly ten times that number during the 1960s. Lloyd, pp. 427433. 

Britain's remaining colonies in Africa, except for self-governing Southern Rhodesia, were all granted independence by 1968. British withdrawal from the southern and eastern parts of Africa was not a peaceful process. Kenyan independence was preceded by the eight-year Mau Mau Uprising. In Rhodesia, the 1965 Unilateral Declaration of Independence by the white minority resulted in a civil war that lasted until the Lancaster House Agreement of 1979, which set the terms for recognised independence in 1980, as the new nation of Zimbabwe. James, pp. 618621. 

In the Mediterranean, a guerrilla war waged by Greek Cypriots ended (1960) in an independent Cyprus, with the UK retaining the military bases of Akrotiri and Dhekelia. The Mediterranean islands of Malta and Gozo were amicably granted independence from the UK in 1964, though the idea had been raised in 1955 of integration with Britain. Springhall, pp. 100102. 

Most of the UK's Caribbean territories achieved independence after the departure in 1961 and 1962 of Jamaica and Trinidad from the West Indies Federation, established in 1958 in an attempt to unite the British Caribbean colonies under one government, but which collapsed following the loss of its two largest members. Knight & Palmer, pp. 1415. Barbados achieved independence in 1966 and the remainder of the eastern Caribbean islands in the 1970s and 1980s, but Anguilla and the Turks and Caicos Islands opted to revert to British rule after they had already started on the path to independence. Clegg, p. 128. The British Virgin Islands, Lloyd, p. 428. Cayman Islands and Montserrat opted to retain ties with Britain, James, p. 622. while Guyana achieved independence in 1966. Britain's last colony on the American mainland, British Honduras, became a self-governing colony in 1964 and was renamed Belize in 1973, achieving full independence in 1981. A dispute with Guatemala over claims to Belize was left unresolved. Lloyd, pp. 401, 427429. 

British territories in the Pacific acquired independence in the 1970s beginning with Fiji in 1970 and ending with Vanuatu in 1980. Vanuatu's independence was delayed due to political conflict between English and French-speaking communities, as the islands had been jointly administered as a condominium with France. Macdonald, pp. 171191. Fiji, Tuvalu, the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea chose to become Commonwealth realms.

=== End of empire ===

The independence of Rhodesia (as Zimbabwe), the New Hebrides (as Vanuatu) in 1980, and Belize in 1981 meant that, aside from a scattering of islands and outposts (and the acquisition in 1955 of an uninhabited rock in the Atlantic Ocean, Rockall), the process of decolonisation that had begun after the Second World War was largely complete. In 1982, Britain's resolve in defending its remaining overseas territories was tested when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands, acting on a long-standing claim that dated back to the Spanish Empire. James, pp. 624625. Britain's ultimately successful military response to retake the islands during the ensuing Falklands War was viewed by many to have contributed to reversing the downward trend in Britain's status as a world power. James, p. 629. The same year, the Canadian government severed its last legal link with Britain by patriating the Canadian constitution from Britain. The 1982 Canada Act passed by the British parliament ended the need for British involvement in changes to the Canadian constitution. Brown, p. 594. Equivalent acts were passed for Australia and New Zealand in 1986. Brown, p. 689. 

In September 1982, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher travelled to Beijing to negotiate with the Chinese government on the future of Britain's last major and most populous overseas territory, Hong Kong. Brendon, p. 654. Under the terms of the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, Hong Kong Island itself had been ceded to Britain in perpetuity, but the vast majority of the colony was constituted by the New Territories, which had been acquired under a 99-year lease in 1898, due to expire in 1997. Joseph, p. 355. Rothermund, p. 100. Thatcher, seeing parallels with the Falkland Islands, initially wished to hold Hong Kong and proposed British administration with Chinese sovereignty, though this was rejected by China. Brendon, pp. 65455. A deal was reached in 1984under the terms of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, Hong Kong would become a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China, maintaining its way of life for at least 50 years. Brendon, p. 656. The handover ceremony in 1997 marked for many, Brendon, p. 660. including Charles, Prince of Wales, who was in attendance, "the end of Empire". 

== Legacy ==

Britain retains sovereignty over 14 territories outside the British Isles, which were renamed the British Overseas Territories in 2002. House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee Overseas Territories Report, pp. 145147 Some are uninhabited except for transient military or scientific personnel; the remainder are self-governing to varying degrees and are reliant on the UK for foreign relations and defence. The British government has stated its willingness to assist any Overseas Territory that wishes to proceed to independence, where that is an option. House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee Overseas Territories Report, pp. 146,153 British sovereignty of several of the overseas territories is disputed by their geographical neighbours: Gibraltar is claimed by Spain, the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands are claimed by Argentina, and the British Indian Ocean Territory is claimed by Mauritius and Seychelles. The British Antarctic Territory is subject to overlapping claims by Argentina and Chile, while many countries do not recognise any territorial claims in Antarctica. House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee Overseas Territories Report, p. 136 

The fourteen British Overseas Territories
Most former British colonies and protectorates are members of Commonwealth of Nations, a non-political, voluntary association of equal members. Sixteen members of the Commonwealth, including the UK, continue to share their head of state as Commonwealth realms. 

Decades, and in some cases centuries, of British rule and emigration have left their mark on the independent nations that arose from the British Empire. The empire established the use of English in regions around the world. Today it is the primary language of up to 400 million people and is spoken by about one and a half billion as a first, second or foreign language. Hogg, p. 424 chapter 9 English Worldwide by David Crystal: "approximately one in four of the worlds population are capable of communicating to a useful level in English." The spread of English from the latter half of the 20th century has been helped in part by the cultural influence of the United States, itself originally formed from British colonies. Except in Africa where nearly all the former colonies have adopted the presidential system, the English parliamentary system has served as the template for the governments for many former colonies, and English common law for legal systems. Ferguson 2004, p. 307. The British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council still serves as the highest court of appeal for several former colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific. British Protestant missionaries who travelled across the globe often in advance of soldiers and civil servants spread the Anglican Communion to all continents. British colonial architecture, such as in churches, railway stations and government buildings, can be seen in many cities that were once part of the British Empire. Marshall, pp. 23840. Individual and team sports developed in Britainparticularly football, cricket, rugby, lawn tennis and golfwere also exported. Torkildsen, p. 347. The British choice of system of measurement, the imperial system, continues to be used in some countries in various ways. The convention of driving on the left hand side of the road has been retained in much of the former empire. Parsons, p. 1. 

Political boundaries drawn by the British did not always reflect homogeneous ethnicities or religions, contributing to conflicts in formerly colonised areas. The British Empire was also responsible for large migrations of peoples. Millions left the British Isles, with the founding settler populations of the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand coming mainly from Britain and Ireland. Tensions remain between the white settler populations of these countries and their indigenous minorities, and between white settler minorities and indigenous majorities in South Africa and Zimbabwe. Settlers in Ireland from Great Britain have left their mark in the form of divided nationalist and unionist communities in Northern Ireland. Millions of people moved to and from British colonies, with large numbers of Indians emigrating to other parts of the empire, such as Malaysia and Fiji, and Chinese people to Malaysia, Singapore and the Caribbean. Marshall, p. 286. The demographics of Britain itself was changed after the Second World War owing to immigration to Britain from its former colonies. Dalziel, p. 135. 

== See also ==

*All-Red Route
*British Empire and Commonwealth Museum
*British Empire Exhibition
*British Empire in fiction
*Colonial Office
*Flags of the British Empire
*Foreign relations of the United Kingdom
*Government Houses of the British Empire and Commonwealth
*Historiography of the British Empire
*History of capitalism
*Indirect rule
*List of British Empire-related topics
*Order of the British Empire

== References ==

== Further reading ==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

== External links ==

*
*
*The British Empire. An Internet Gateway
*The British Empire
*The British Empire audio resources at TheEnglishCollection.com

 



[[Batman (1989 film)]]

Batman is a 1989 American superhero film directed by Tim Burton and produced by Jon Peters, based on the DC Comics character of the same name. It is the first installment of Warner Bros.' initial Batman film series. The film stars Jack Nicholson, Michael Keaton in the title role, Kim Basinger, Robert Wuhl, Pat Hingle, Billy Dee Williams, Michael Gough, and Jack Palance. In the film, Batman deals with the rise of a costumed criminal known as "The Joker".

After Burton was hired as director in 1986, Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay. Batman was not greenlit until after the success of Burton's Beetlejuice (1988). Numerous A-list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Keaton was cast. Keaton's casting caused a controversy since, by 1988, he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role. Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary, a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule. The tone and themes of the film were influenced in part by Alan Moore's The Killing Joke and Frank Miller's The Dark Knight Returns. 

Filming took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989. The budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million, while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out. Uncredited rewrites were performed by Warren Skaaren, Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems.

Batman was a critical and financial success, earning over $400 million in box office totals. The film received several Saturn Award nominations and a Golden Globe nomination, and won an Academy Award. It also inspired the equally successful , paving the way for the DC animated universe, and has influenced Hollywood's modern marketing and development techniques of the superhero film genre.

==Plot==
The mayor of Gotham City orders District Attorney Harvey Dent (Billy Dee Williams) and Police Commissioner James Gordon (Pat Hingle) to increase police activity and combat crime in preparation for the city's bicentennial. Reporter Alexander Knox (Robert Wuhl) and photojournalist Vicki Vale (Kim Basinger) begin to investigate reports of a vigilante nicknamed "Batman", who is targeting the city's criminals.

Mob boss Carl Grissom (Jack Palance), who has already been targeted by Dent, discovers his mistress is involved with his second-in-command, Jack Napier (Jack Nicholson). With the help of corrupt policeman Max Eckhardt (William Hootkins), Grissom sets up Napier to be murdered during a raid at the Axis Chemicals plant. During the ensuing shootout, Napier kills Eckhardt, after which Batman suddenly appears. The two struggle, and Napier is accidentally knocked into a vat of chemical waste. Batman flees, and Napier is thought to be dead.

Batman is in actuality Bruce Wayne (Michael Keaton), a billionaire industrialist who, as a child, witnessed his parents' murder at the hands of a mugger. Bruce meets and falls for Vicki at a fundraiser, and the two begin a relationship. Meanwhile, Napier survives the accident, but is horribly disfigured with chalk-white skin, emerald-green hair and a permanent ruby-red grin. Driven insane by his reflection, he reinvents himself as "the Joker", kills Grissom and usurps his criminal empire.

The Joker begins to spread terror in the city, first by lacing hygiene products with a deadly chemical known as "Smilex", which causes victims to laugh to death when used in certain combinations. The Joker then sets a trap at the Gotham Museum of Art for Vicki, and he and his henchmen vandalize the surrounding works of art. Batman arrives and rescues Vicki, and the pair escape in the Batmobile. Batman gives information about Smilex to Vicki so she can warn the city via Gotham newspapers about the poisoned products.

Bruce meets with Vicki at her apartment, prepared to tell her that he is Batman. They are interrupted by the Joker, who asks Bruce, "Have you ever danced with the devil by the pale moonlight?" before shooting him. Bruce, who was wearing body armor, escapes, and recollects that the man who killed his parents asked him the same question; he realizes that the Joker killed his parents. Vicki suddenly appears in the Batcave, having been let in by Bruce's butler, Alfred Pennyworth (Michael Gough). After avouching himself to Vicki, Bruceas Batmanleaves to destroy the Axis Chemical plant. Meanwhile, the Joker lures the townspeople to a nighttime parade with a promise to give away $20 million in cash. When the citizens arrive, however, he attacks them with Smilex gas spewing it from his floats. Batman arrives on the scene and saves Gotham City from the attack using the Batwing, but the Joker kidnaps Vicki and takes her to the top of a cathedral.

Batman pursues the two, and at the top of the dusty edifice, he and the Joker confront each other in single combat. When the Joker attempts an escape via a helicopter, Batman grapples the Joker's leg to a heavy stone sculpture, causing him to fall to his death. Commissioner Gordon unveils the Bat-Signal along with a note from Batman read by Harvey Dent, promising to defend Gotham whenever crime strikes again.

==Cast==

*Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne/Batman
*Jack Nicholson as Jack Napier/The Joker
*Kim Basinger as Vicki Vale
*Robert Wuhl as Alexander Knox
*Pat Hingle as Commissioner Gordon
*Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent
*Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth
*Jack Palance as Carl Grissom
*Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt
*Tracey Walter as Bob the Goon
*Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg 
*William Hootkins as Lt. Max Eckhardt
*Hugo E. Blick as Young Jack Napier
*Charles Roskilly as Young Bruce Wayne
*David Baxt as Thomas Wayne
*Sharon Holm as Martha Wayne

==Themes==
"The duel of the freaks" 
When discussing the central theme of Batman, director Tim Burton explained, "the whole film and mythology of the character is a complete duel of the freaks. It's a fight between two disturbed people", adding that "The Joker is such a great character because there's a complete freedom to him. Any character who operates on the outside of society and is deemed a freak and an outcast then has the freedom to do what they want... They are the darker sides of freedom. Insanity is in some scary way the most freedom you can have, because you're not bound by the laws of society". 

Burton saw Bruce Wayne as the bearer of a double identity, exposing one while hiding the reality from the world. Burton biographer Ken Hanke wrote that Bruce Wayne, struggling with his alter-ego as Batman, is depicted as an antihero. Hanke felt that Batman has to push the boundaries of civil justice to deal with certain criminals, such as the Joker. Kim Newman theorized that "Burton and the writers saw Batman and the Joker as a dramatic antithesis, and the film deals with their intertwined origins and fates to an even greater extent". 

A visual motif is present in the scene of Batman's first major act of vigilantism at Axis Chemicals, wherein he is carefully framed so that the single word AXIS, in gigantic red neon letters, looms over him, comparing his acts to those of the totalitarian governments of World War II and thus implying that the dangers of these actions include the transformation of Jack Napier into the Joker. Batman also conveys trademarks found in 1930s pulp magazines, notably the design of Gotham City stylized with Art Deco design. Richard Corliss, writing for Time, observed that Gotham's design was a reference to films such as Metropolis (1927) and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920). "Gotham City, despite being shot on a studio backlot", he continued, "is literally another character in the script. It has the demeaning presence of German Expressionism and fascist architecture, staring down at the citizens." Hanke further addressed the notions of Batman being a period piece, in that "The citizens, cops, people and the black-and-white television looks like it takes place in 1939"; but later said: "Had the filmmakers made Vicki Vale a femme fatale rather than a damsel in distress, this could have made Batman as a homage and tribute to classic film noir." Portions of the climax pay homage to Vertigo. 

==Production==

===Development===

After the financial success of Pee-wee's Big Adventure (1985), Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct Batman. Burton had then-girlfriend Julie Hickson write a new 30-page film treatment, feeling the previous script by Tom Mankiewicz was campy. The success of The Dark Knight Returns and The Killing Joke rekindled Warner Bros.' interest in a film adaptation. Burton was initially not a comic book fan, but he was impressed by the dark and serious tone found in both The Dark Knight Returns and The Killing Joke. Warner Bros. enlisted the aid of Steve Englehart to write a new treatment in March 1986. It included the Joker and Rupert Thorne as the main villains, with a cameo appearance by the Penguin. Silver St. Cloud and Dick Grayson were key supporting roles. It followed the similar storyline from Englehart's own Strange Apparitions (ISBN 1-56389-500-5). Warner Bros. was impressed, but Englehart felt there were too many characters. He removed the Penguin and Dick Grayson in his second treatment, finishing in May 1986. 

Burton approached Sam Hamm, a comic book fan, to write the screenplay. Hamm decided not to use an origin story, feeling that flashbacks would be more suitable and that "unlocking the mystery" would become part of the storyline. He reasoned, "You totally destroy your credibility if you show the literal process by which Bruce Wayne becomes Batman." Hamm replaced Silver St. Cloud with Vicki Vale and Rupert Thorne with his own creation, Carl Grissom. He completed his script in October 1986, which demoted Dick Grayson to a cameo rather than a supporting character. One scene in Hamm's script had a young James Gordon on duty the night of the murder of Bruce Wayne's parents. When Hamm's script was rewritten, the scene was deleted but retaken to Batman Begins. 

Warner Bros. was less willing to move forward on development, despite their enthusiasm for Hamm's script, which Batman co-creator Bob Kane greeted with positive feedback. Hamm's script was then bootlegged at various comic book stores in the United States. Batman was finally given the greenlight to commence pre-production in April 1988, after the success of Burton's Beetlejuice (1988). When comic book fans found out about Burton directing the film with Michael Keaton starring in the lead role, controversy arose over the tone and direction Batman was going in. Hamm explained, "they hear Tim Burton's name and they think of Pee-wee's Big Adventure. They hear Keaton's name and they think of any number of Michael Keaton comedies. You think of the 1960s version of Batman, and it was the complete opposite of our film. We tried to market it with a typical dark and serious tone, but the fans didn't believe us." To combat negative reports on the film's production, Kane was hired as creative consultant. 

===Casting===
Parallel to the Superman casting, a who's who of Hollywood top stars were considered for the role of Batman, with the likes of Mel Gibson, Kevin Costner, Charlie Sheen, Pierce Brosnan, Tom Selleck and Bill Murray being considered. Tim Burton was pressured to cast an obvious action movie star. Producer Jon Peters favored Keaton, arguing he had the right "edgy, tormented quality." Having directed Keaton in Beetlejuice, Burton agreed. 

Keaton's casting caused a controversy among comic book fans, with 50,000 protest letters sent to Warner Bros. offices. Tim Burton, Sam Hamm, Mark Canton, Michael Keaton, Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight&mdash;The Gathering Storm, 2005, Warner Home Video Bob Kane, Sam Hamm and Michael Uslan also heavily questioned the casting. Burton acknowledged, "Obviously there was a negative response from the comic book people. I think they thought we were going to make it like the 1960s TV series, and make it campy, because they thought of Michael Keaton from Mr. Mom and Night Shift and stuff like that." Keaton studied The Dark Knight Returns for inspiration. 

Tim Curry, Willem Dafoe, David Bowie, John Lithgow and James Woods were considered for the Joker. Burton wanted to cast Brad Dourif, but the studio refused. Robin Williams lobbied hard for the part. Jack Nicholson had been producer Michael Uslan's and Bob Kane's choice since 1980. Peters approached Nicholson as far back as 1986, during filming of The Witches of Eastwick. Nicholson had what was known as an "off-the-clock" agreement. His contract specified the number of hours he was entitled to have off each day, from the time he left the set to the time he reported back for filming, as well as being off for Los Angeles Lakers home games. Nicholson demanded to have all of his scenes shot in a three-week block, but the schedule lapsed into 106 days. He received a $6 million salary, as well as a large percentage of the box office gross estimated at $60 million to $90 million. 

Sean Young was originally cast as Vicki Vale, but was injured in a horse-riding accident prior to commencement of filming. Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight, "Part 2: The Gathering Storm", DVD documentary, 2005 Burton suggested replacing Young with Michelle Pfeiffer but Keaton, who was in a relationship with Pfeiffer, believed it would be too awkward. She went on to portray Catwoman in Batman Returns. Young's departure necessitated an urgent search for an actress who, besides being right for the part, could commit to the film at very short notice. Peters suggested Kim Basinger: she was able to join the production immediately and was cast. As a fan of Michael Gough's work in various Hammer Film Productions, Burton cast Gough as Bruce Wayne's butler, Alfred Pennyworth. Tim Burton, DVD audio commentary, 2005, Warner Home Video Robert Wuhl was cast as reporter Alexander Knox. His character was originally supposed to die by the Joker's poison gas in the climax, but the filmmakers "liked character so much," Wuhl said "that they decided to let me live." Robert Wuhl, Billy Dee Williams, Pat Hingle, Batman: The Heroes, 2005, Warner Home Video Tim Burton chose Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent because he wanted to include the villain Two-Face in a future film using the concept of an African-American Two-Face for the black and white concept, Batman Special Edition DVD/Blu-ray, Tim Burton Commentary but Tommy Lee Jones was later cast in the role for Batman Forever, which disappointed Williams. Nicholson convinced the filmmakers to cast Tracey Walter as the Joker's henchman, Bob; in real life, Nicholson and Walter are close friends. Jack Nicholson, Tracey Walter, Batman: The Villains, 2005, Warner Home Video Kiefer Sutherland was considered as Robin before the character was deleted from the shooting script. The rest of the cast included Pat Hingle as Commissioner Gordon, Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt, Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg, William Hootkins as Lt. Max Eckhardt, and Jack Palance as crime boss Carl Grissom.

===Filming===
Knebworth House served as the Wayne Manor.
The filmmakers considered filming Batman entirely on the Warner Bros. backlot in Burbank, California, but media interest in the film made them change the location. It was shot at Pinewood Studios in England from October 1988 to January 1989. 18 sound stages were used, almost the entirety of Pinewood's 95-acre backlot. Locations included Knebworth House and Hatfield House doubling for Wayne Manor, plus Acton Lane Power Station and Little Barford Power Station. Hanke, p.87-96 The original production budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million. Filming was highly secretive. The unit publicist was offered and refused 10,000 for the first pictures of Jack Nicholson as the Joker. The police were later called in when two reels of footage (about 20 minutes' worth) were stolen. With various problems during filming, Burton called it "torture. The worst period of my life!" 

Hamm was not allowed to perform rewrites during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike. Jonathan Gems, Warren Skaaren and Charles McKeown rewrote the script during filming. Salisbury, Burton, p.145 Hamm criticized the rewrites, but blamed the changes on Warner Bros. Burton explained, "I don't understand why that became such a problem. We started out with a script that everyone liked, although we recognized it needed a little work." Dick Grayson appeared in the shooting script but was deleted, as the filmmakers felt he was irrelevant to the plot. Bob Kane supported this decision. 

Originally in the climax, the Joker was to kill Vicki Vale, sending Batman into a vengeful fury. Jon Peters reworked the climax without telling Burton and commissioned production designer Anton Furst to create a 38 ft model of the cathedral. This cost $100,000 when the film was already well over budget. Burton disliked the idea, having no clue how the scene would end: "Here were Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger walking up this cathedral, and halfway up Jack turns around and says, 'Why am I walking up all these stairs? Where am I going?' 'We'll talk about it when you get to the top!' I had to tell him that I didn't know." 

===Design===

Burton was impressed with Anton Furst's designs in The Company of Wolves, and previously failed to hire Furst as production designer for Beetlejuice. Furst had been too committed on High Spirits, a choice he later regretted. Furst enjoyed working with Burton. "I don't think I've ever felt so naturally in tune with a director", he said; "Conceptually, spiritually, visually, or artistically. There was never any problem because we never fought over anything. Texture, attitude and feelings are what Burton is a master at." 
The Batsuit, worn by Michael Keaton.
Furst and the art department deliberately mixed clashing architectural styles to "make Gotham City the ugliest and bleakest metropolis imaginable". Anton Furst, Derek Meddings, Visualizing Gotham: The Production Design of Batman, 2005, Warner Home Video Furst continued, "we imagined what New York City might have become without a planning commission. A city run by crime, with a riot of architectural styles. An essay in ugliness. As if hell erupted through the pavement and kept on going". The 1985 film Brazil by Terry Gilliam was also a notable influence upon the film's production design, as both Burton and Furst studied it as a reference. Derek Meddings served as the visual effects supervisor, while Keith Short helped construct the newly created 1989 Batmobile, adding two Browning machine guns. Keith Short, Building the Batmobile, 2005, Warner Home Video On designing the Batmobile, Furst explained, "We looked at jet aircraft components, we looked at war machines, we looked at all sorts of things. In the end, we went into pure expressionism, taking the Salt Flat Racers of the 30s and the Sting Ray macho machines of the 50s". The car was built upon a Chevrolet Impala when previous development with a Jaguar and Ford Mustang failed. 

Costume designer Bob Ringwood turned down the chance to work on Licence to Kill in favor of Batman. Ringwood found it difficult designing the Batsuit because "the image of Batman in the comics is this huge, big six-foot-four hunk with a dimpled chin. Michael Keaton is a guy with average build", he stated. "The problem was to make somebody who was average-sized and ordinary-looking into this bigger-than-life creature." Burton commented, "Michael is a bit claustrophobic, which made it worse for him. The costume put him in a dark, Batman-like mood though, so he was able to use it to his advantage". Burton's idea was to use an all-black suit, and was met with positive feedback by Bob Kane. Jon Peters wanted to use a Nike product placement with the Batsuit. Bob Ringwood, Tim Burton, Designing the Batsuit, 2005, Warner Home Video Ringwood studied over 200 comic book issues for inspiration. 28 sculpted latex designs were created; 25 different cape looks and 6 different heads were made, accumulating a total cost of $250,000. Comic book fans initially expressed negative feedback against the Batsuit. Burton opted not to use tights, spandex, or underpants as seen in the comic book, feeling it was not intimidating. Prosthetic makeup designer Nick Dudman used acrylic-based makeup paint called PAX for Nicholson's chalk-white face. Part of Nicholson's contract was approval over the makeup designer. 

===Music===

Burton hired Danny Elfman, his collaborator on Pee-wee's Big Adventure and Beetlejuice, to compose the music score. For inspiration, Elfman was given The Dark Knight Returns. Elfman was worried, as he had never worked on a production this large in budget and scale. Danny Elfman, Tim Burton, Nocturnal Overtures: The Music of Batman, 2005, Warner Home Video In addition, producer Jon Peters was skeptical of hiring Elfman, but was later convinced when he heard the opening number. Peters and Peter Guber wanted Prince to write music for the Joker and Michael Jackson to do the romance songs. Elfman would then combine the style of Prince and Jackson's songs together for the entire film score. 

Burton protested the ideas, citing "my movies aren't commercial like Top Gun." Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange the compositions for the orchestra. Elfman was later displeased with the audio mixing of his film score. "Batman was done in England by technicians who didn't care, and the non-caring showed," he stated. "I'm not putting down England because they've done gorgeous dubs there, but this particular crew elected not to." Batman was one of the first films to spawn two soundtracks. One of them featured songs written by Prince while the other showcased Elfman's score. Both were successful, and compilations of Elfman's opening credits were used in the title sequence theme for , also composed by Shirley Walker. 

==Marketing==
Production designer Anton Furst designed the poster, which he called "evocative but ubiquitous. Only featuring the Bat-Symbol. Not too much and not too little". Earlier designs "had the word 'Batman' spelled in RoboCop or Conan the Barbarian-type font". Jon Peters unified all the film's tie-ins, even turning down $6 million from General Motors to build the Batmobile because the car company would not relinquish creative control. 

During production, Peters read in The Wall Street Journal that comic book fans were unsatisfied with the casting of Michael Keaton. In response, Peters rushed the first film trailer that played in thousands of theaters during Christmas. It was simply an assemblage of scenes without music, but happened to create enormous anticipation for the film. DC Comics allowed screenwriter Sam Hamm to write his own comic book miniseries. Hamm's stories were collected in the graphic novel Batman: Blind Justice (ISBN 978-1563890475). Denys Cowan and Dick Giordano illustrated the artwork. Blind Justice tells the story of Bruce Wayne trying to solve a series of murders connected to Wayne Enterprises. It also marks the first appearance of Henri Ducard, who was later used in the rebooted Batman Begins, albeit as an alias for the more notable Ra's al Ghul. 

In the months pre-dating Batmans release in June 1989, a popular culture phenomenon rose known as "Batmania". Over $750 million worth of merchandise was sold. Cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith remembered: "That summer was huge. You couldn't turn around without seeing the Bat-Signal somewhere. People were cutting it into their fucking heads. It was just the summer of Batman and if you were a comic book fan it was pretty hot." Kevin Smith, An Evening with Kevin Smith, 2002, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment Hachette Book Group USA published a novelization, Batman written by Craig Shaw Gardner. It remained on the New York Times Best Seller list throughout June 1989. Burton admitted he was annoyed by the publicity. David Handelman of The New York Observer categorized Batman as a high concept film. He believed "it is less movie than a corporate behemoth". 

==Reception==

===Box office===
Batman opened on June 23, 1989, grossing $43.6 million in 2,194 theaters during its opening weekend. This broke the opening weekend record, set by Ghostbusters II one week earlier, with $29.4 million. Batman would eventually gross $251.2 million in North America and $160.15 million internationally, totaling $411.35 million. Batman was the first film to earn $100 million in its first ten days of release, and was the highest grossing film based on a DC comic book until 2008's The Dark Knight. The film's gross is the 66th highest ever in North American ranks. Although Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade made the most money worldwide in 1989, Batman was able to beat The Last Crusade in North America, and made a further $150 million in home video sales. Jeffrey Resner (August 1992). "Three Go Mad in Gotham", Empire, pp. 44-52. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 

===Critical reaction===
Batman was criticized in some quarters for being "too dark". Many observed that Burton was more interested in the Joker and the art and set production design than Batman or anything else in terms of characterization and screentime. Comic book fans reacted negatively over the Joker murdering Thomas and Martha Wayne; in the comic book, Joe Chill is responsible. Writer Sam Hamm, who is a comic book fan, said it was Burton's idea to have the Joker murder Wayne's parents. "The Writer's Strike was going on," Hamm said, "and Tim had the other writers do that. I also hold innocent to Alfred letting Vicki Vale into the Batcave. Fans were ticked off with that, and I agree. That would have been Alfred's last day of employment at Wayne Manor." Tim Burton, Sam Hamm, Danny Elfman, Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight&mdash;The Legend Reborn, 2005, Warner Home Video 

The songs written by Prince were criticized for being "too out of place". While Burton has stated he had no problem with the Prince songs, he was less enthusiastic with their use in the film. On the film, Burton remarked, "I liked parts of it, but the whole movie is mainly boring to me. It's OK, but it was more of a cultural phenomenon than a great movie." Nonetheless, it received mostly positive reviews. Based on 57 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, 70% of reviewers reacted positively to Batman. By comparison, Metacritic has collected an average score of 66, based on 17 reviews. 

Burton biographer Alison McMahan wrote, "fans of the Batman franchise complained when they heard of Michael Keaton's casting. However, no one complained when they saw his performance." James Berardinelli called the film entertaining, with the highlight being the production design. However, he concluded, "the best thing that can be said about Batman is that it led to Batman Returns, which was a far superior effort." Variety felt "Jack Nicholson stole every scene" but still greeted the film with positive feedback. Roger Ebert was highly impressed with the production design, but claimed "Batman is a triumph of design over story, style over substance, a great-looking movie with a plot you can't care much about." He also called the film "a depressing experience". His reviewing partner Gene Siskel disagreed, describing the film as having a 'refreshingly adult' approach with performances, direction and set design that 'draws you into a psychological world'. Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader called it "watchable enough". 

===Legacy===
Anton Furst and Peter Young won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction, while Nicholson was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor (Musical or Comedy). The British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated Batman in six categories (Production Design, Visual Effects, Costume Design, Makeup, Sound and Actor in a Supporting Role for Nicholson), but it won none of the categories. Nicholson, Basinger, the make-up department and costume designer Bob Ringwood all received nominations at the Saturn Awards. The film was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation. 

The success of Batman prompted Warner Bros. Animation to create the acclaimed , as a result beginning the long-running DC animated universe and helped establish the modern day superhero film genre. Series co-creator Bruce Timm stated the television show's Art Deco design was inspired from the film. Timm commented, "our show would never have gotten made if it hadn't been for that first Batman movie." Batman initiated the original Batman film series. Burton joked, "ever since I did Batman, it was like the first dark comic book movie. Now everyone wants to do a dark and serious superhero movie. I guess I'm the one responsible for that trend." 

Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker filed a breach of contract lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court on March 26, 1992. Uslan and Melniker claimed to be "the victims of a sinister campaign of fraud and coercion that has cheated them out of continuing involvement in the production of Batman and its sequels. We were denied proper credits, and deprived of any financial rewards for our indispensable creative contribution to the success of Batman." A superior court judge rejected the lawsuit. Total revenues of Batman have topped $2 billion, with Uslan claiming to have "not seen a penny more than that since our net profit participation has proved worthless." Warner Bros. offered the pair an out-of-court pay-off, a sum described by Uslan and Melniker's attorney as "two popcorns and two Cokes". Olly Richards (September 1992). "Trouble in Gotham", Empire, pp. 21-23. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 

Reflecting on the twentieth anniversary of its release in a retrospective article on Salon.com, film commentator Scott Mendelson noted the continuing impact that Batman has had on the motion film industry, including the increasing importance of opening weekend box office receipts; the narrowing window between a film's debut and its video release that caused the demise of second-run movie theaters; the accelerated acquisition of pre-existing, pre-sold properties for film adaptations that can be readily leveraged for merchandizing tie-ins; the primacy of the MPAA PG-13 as the target rating for film producers; and more off-beat, non-traditional casting opportunities for genre films. 

The film also received recognition from the American Film Institute. Batman was anointed the 46th greatest movie hero on AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains. http://connect.afi.com/site/DocServer/handv100.pdf?docID=246 The Joker was anointed the 45th greatest movie villain on the same list. In 2008, Batman was selected by Empire magazine as number 458 of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time. 

;American Film Institute lists
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  Nominated http://www.afi.com/Docs/100Years/movies400.pdf 
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  Nominated 
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
**The Joker  #45 Villain
**Batman  #46 Hero
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** "Have you ever danced with the Devil in the pale moonlight?"  Nominated 
* AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  Nominated 
* AFI's 10 Top 10  Nominated Fantasy Film 

===Home video===
Many versions of the film have been released. Included are VHS, Laserdisc, single-disc DVD, special edition DVD and an anthology set. The Batman: The Motion Picture Anthology released in 2005 included 2-disc special edition DVDs of the Tim Burton/Joel Schumacher Batman films. This anthology set was re-released on Blu-ray on March 10, 2009.

On May 19, 2009 a 20th anniversary stand-alone edition was released. This stand-alone version contains exactly the same special features as its anthology set (both DVD and Blu-ray) counterparts. There are two differences: This version includes a 50-page booklet guide to the film, and a slight variation in packaging from normal Blu-ray cases (i.e. a Warner Bros. digibook). They both include a digital copy of the film.

The film was also included in The Tim Burton Collection DVD/Blu-ray set in 2012, alongside its sequel, Batman Returns, and several other Burton films.

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Script review of The Batman IGN reviews Tom Mankiewicz's unproduced script
* Behind-the-scenes photos
* Screenshots



[[Batman (1966 film)]]

Batman, often promoted as Batman: The Movie, is a 1966 film based on the Batman television series, and the first full-length theatrical adaptation of the DC Comics character Batman. Released by 20th Century Fox, the film starred Adam West as Batman and Burt Ward as Robin. 

Released in July, the film hit theaters over a month after the of Batman television episodes #Season 1: 1966|last episode of the first season] of the television series. The film includes most members of the original TV cast, with the exception of Lee Meriwether as Catwoman, the character previously played at this point by Julie Newmar in two episodes of the series' first season.

==Plot==
When Batman (West) and Robin (Ward) get a tip that Commodore Schmidlapp (Reginald Denny) is in danger aboard his yacht, they launch a rescue mission using the batcopter. As Batman descends on the bat-ladder to land on the yacht it suddenly vanishes beneath him. He rises out of the sea with a shark attacking his leg. After Batman dislodges it with bat-shark repellant, the shark explodes. Batman and Robin head back to Commissioner Gordon's office, where they deduce that the tip was a set-up by the United Underworld, a gathering of four of the most powerful villains in Gotham City (Joker, Penguin, Riddler and Catwoman).

The United Underworld equip themselves with a dehydrator that can turn humans into dust (an invention of Commodore Schmidlapp, who is unaware he has been kidnapped), a submarine made to resemble a penguin, and their three pirate henchmen (Bluebeard, Morgan and Quetch). It is revealed the yacht was really a projection. When The Dynamic Duo return to a buoy concealing a projector, they are trapped on the buoy by a magnet and targeted by torpedoes. They use a radio-detonator to destroy two of the missiles, and a porpoise sacrifices itself to intercept the last one. Catwoman, disguised as Soviet journalist "Miss Kitka", helps the group kidnap Bruce Wayne and pretends to be kidnapped with him, as part of a plot to lure Batman and finish him off with another of Penguin's explosive animals (not knowing that Wayne is Batman's alter-ego). After Wayne escapes captivity, Penguin disguises himself as the Commodore and schemes his way into the Batcave along with five dehydrated henchmen. This plan fails when the henchmen unexpectedly disappear into antimatter once struck: Penguin mistakenly rehydrated them with heavy water, used to recharge the Batcave's atomic pile.

Ultimately the Duo are unable to prevent the kidnapping of the dehydrated United World Organization's Security Council. Giving chase in the batboat to retrieve them (and Miss Kitka, presumed by the duo as still captive), Robin uses a sonic charge weapon to disable Penguin's submarine and force it to surface, where a fist fight ensues. Although Batman and Robin win the fight, Batman is heartbroken to find out that his "true love" Miss Kitka is actually Catwoman when her mask falls off. Commodore Schmidlapp accidentally breaks the vials containing the powdered Council members, mixing them together.

Batman sets to work, constructing an elaborate filter to separate the mingled dust. Robin asks him whether it might be in the world's best interests for them to alter the dust samples, so that humans can no longer harm one another. In response, Batman says that they cannot do so, reminding Robin of the fate of Penguin's henchmen and their tainted rehydration, and can only hope for people in general to learn to live together peacefully on their own.

With the world watching, the Security Council is re-hydrated. All of the members are restored alive and well, continuing to squabble among themselves and totally oblivious of their surroundings, but each of them now speaks the language and displays the stereotypical mannerisms of a nation other than their own. Batman quietly expresses his sincere hope to Robin that this "mixing of minds" does more good than it does harm. The duo quietly leave United World Headquarters by climbing out of the window.

==Cast==
The Penguin (Burgess Meredith), the Riddler (Frank Gorshin) and the Joker (Cesar Romero) in 1966. These actors also played the television roles.
Lee Meriwether acted as Catwoman in the film (pictured), replacing Julie Newmar, who played Catwoman in the first two seasons of the television series.
* Adam West as Bruce Wayne / Batman
* Burt Ward as Dick Grayson / Robin
* Lee Meriwether as Catwoman
* Cesar Romero as The Joker
* Burgess Meredith as The Penguin
* Frank Gorshin as The Riddler
* Alan Napier as Alfred Pennyworth
* Neil Hamilton as Commissioner James Gordon
* Stafford Repp as Chief Miles O'Hara
* Madge Blake as Aunt Harriet Cooper
* Reginald Denny as Commodore Schmidlapp
* Milton Frome as Vice Admiral Fangschleister
* Gil Perkins as Bluebeard
* Dick Crockett as Morgan
* George Sawaya as Quetch
* William Dozier as Desmond the Narrator (uncredited)
* Van Williams as President Lyndon B. Johnson (voice, uncredited) Van Hise, James, "The man who played The Green Hornet" , The Green Hornet Book, Shuster and Shuster, Inc., 1988, p.16. 

The film includes most members of the original TV cast: the actors for Batman, Robin, Alfred, Commissioner Gordon, Chief O'Hara, Aunt Harriet, the Joker, the Penguin and the Riddler all reprised their roles. Though Julie Newmar had at this point played the Catwoman in two episodes of the TV series, she had other commitments at that time Garcia, Bob, "Batman: Catwoman," Cinefantastique, Vol. 26, #6/Vol. 7, #1 (double issue), February 1994, p. 19 (interview with Julie Newmar). and was replaced by Lee Meriwether in the film. Meriwether stated in an interview that Newmar had hurt her back and was unable to reprise the role. Catwoman was then played by Newmar in eleven episodes of of Batman television episodes #Season 2: 196667|season two] of the series; Eartha Kitt would then play the character in three episodes on of Batman television episodes #Season 3: 196768|season three]. 

In his autobiography, Adam West writes of his asking for more money to do the film and that the producers countered with the fact that another actor would be hired. Batman was Reginald Denny's final appearance in film. Jack LaLanne has a cameo as a man on a roof top with girls. 

==Production==

William Dozier wanted to make a big-screen film to generate interest in his proposed Batman TV series to have the feature in theaters while the first season of the series was rolling before the cameras. The studio, 20th Century Fox, refused because, while a network would have to cover the entire cost of a movie, they would only have to share the cost of a TV series (a much less risky proposition). Garcia, Bob, "Batman: Making the Original Movie", Cinefantastique, Volume 24, #6/Vol. 25, #1 (double issue), February 1994, p. 55. So it was not filmed until the end of the first season of Batman, the TV series (between April 25 and May 31, 1966 at an estimated $1,377,800).

Portions of the film, including the sequence where Batman desperately tries to dispose of a live bomb, were filmed at waterfront locations in Santa Barbara, California.

The film featured many characters from the show. It was written by series writer Lorenzo Semple, Jr. and directed by Leslie H. Martinson (who won a Golden Gryphon). Martinson had directed a pair of the television series episodes: "The Penguin Goes Straight" and "Not Yet, He Ain't" (both from season one).

===Tone===
Like the television series, the movie featured saturated colors, campy dialogue and special effects, and exaggeration in acting performances, as well as the occasional breaking of the fourth wall effectively being a tongue-in-cheek parody. It also began with a dedication to law enforcement members and 'lovers of action films.' Another line in the outset of the film goes "If we missed mentioning any other groups of lovers, we're sorry", following a quick spotlight on a kissing couple. 

Even though it is often described (like many contemporary shows) as a parody of a popular comic-book character, some commentators believe that its comedy is not so tightly confined. They felt the film's depiction of the Caped Crusader "captured the feel of the contemporary comics perfectly". Stomp Tokyo Video Reviews - Batman (1966). Retrieved 2011-01-14. The film was, they remind us, made at a time when "the Batman of the Golden Age comics was already essentially neutered." GrouchoReviews.com Review of 'Batman' 

Certain elements verge into direct parody of the history of Batman. The movie, like the TV series, is strongly influenced by the comparatively obscure 1940s serials of Batman, such as the escapes done almost out of luck. The penchant for giving devices a "Bat-" prefix and the dramatic use of stylized title cards during fight scenes acknowledge some of the conventions that the character had accumulated in various media. However, the majority of Batman's campier moments can be read as a broader parody on contemporary mid-1960s culture in general. 

Furthermore, the movie represented Batman's first major foray into Cold War issues paying heavy attention to Polaris Missiles, war surplus submarines and taking a poke at the Pentagon. The inclusion of a glory-hunting presidential character and the unfavorable portrayal of Security Council Members marked Batman's first attempts to poke fun at domestic and international politics. Batman at 45: A Milestone Tribute to Pow, Bam and Zap!, Chris Gould, 2011 

===Vehicles===
The Batmobile as seen in the 1960s Batman TV series. Photo by Jennifer Graylock
Besides the Batmobile, other vehicles used by The Dynamic Duo include:
*Batcycle with side car
*Batboat, provided by Glastron
*Batcopter

Of the three new Batvehicles which first appeared in the Batman film, only the Batcycle properly crossed over into the TV series as the budgetary limits of the TV series precluded the full use of the others. While the Batcopter and Batboat from the movie appeared briefly in episodes (including a use of the Batboat in the conclusion of the first post-film two-parter: "Walk the Straight and Narrow"), they primarily did in the form of stock-footage scenes from the film intercut into the series.

==Release==
The 105-minute Batman opened at the Paramount Theatre in Austin, Texas on Saturday, July 30, 1966 (between the first and second seasons of the TV series); it was moderately successful at the box office. The Batboat featured in the film was created by Austin-based company Glastron, whose payment was in having the film premiere in their hometown. In conjunction with the premiere, Jean Boone of Austin CBS affiliate station KTBC interviewed the film's cast, including Lee Meriwether, Cesar Romero, and Adam West. 

ABC, the network which previously aired the Batman television series, first broadcast the movie version on the July 4, 1971 edition of The ABC Sunday Night Movie; the film was quickly rebroadcast on ABC September 4 of that year. The film was released on VHS in 1985 by Playhouse Video, in 1989 by CBS/Fox Video, and in 1994 by Fox Video. On August 21, 2001 this film was released on DVD; it was re-released July 1, 2008 on DVD and on Blu-ray. 

==Reception==
Batman: The Movie has received more positive than negative reviews over the years, with an average rating from all critics of 6.2/10 and 79% on Rotten Tomatoes. Bill Gibron of Filmcritic.com gave the film 3 out of 5 stars: "Unlike other attempts at bringing these characters to life...the TV cast really captures the inherent insanity of the roles." Variety magazine stated on their review that "the intense innocent enthusiasm of Cesar Romero, Burgess Meredith and Frank Gorshin as the three criminals is balanced against the innocent calm of Adam West and Burt Ward, Batman and Robin respectively." 

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* Batman The Movie @ BYTB: Batman Yesterday, Today and Beyond
* kiddiematinee.com: BATMAN (1966, U.S.)



[[Batman Returns]]

Batman Returns is a 1992 American superhero fantasy film produced and directed by Tim Burton, based upon the Batman character appearing in magazines published by DC Comics. It is the second installment of Warner Bros.' initial Batman film series, with Michael Keaton reprising the title role of Bruce Wayne/Batman. The film introduces the characters of Max Shreck (Christopher Walken), a business tycoon who teams up with the Penguin (Danny DeVito) to take over Gotham City, as well as the character of Catwoman (Michelle Pfeiffer).

Burton originally did not want to direct another Batman film because of his mixed emotions toward the previous film in 1989. Daniel Waters delivered a script that satisfied Burton; Wesley Strick did an uncredited rewrite, removing the characters of Harvey Dent and Robin and rewriting the climax. Before Pfeiffer's casting, Demi Moore and Nicole Kidman were each offered the role of Catwoman, but both of them turned it down. Filming of Batman Returns started in Burbank, California in June 1991.

Batman Returns was released on June 19, 1992 and was a critical and financial success. The film's budget was an estimated $80 million, while it made $45,687,710 in the United States during its opening weekend (June 1921, 1992), grossing $282,800,000 worldwide. The film was nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects and Best Makeup, as well as winning the Saturn Award for Best Makeup. It was also nominated for a Saturn Award in the categories of Best Fantasy Film, Best Director for Burton, Best Supporting Actor for DeVito and Best Costume.

==Plot==
A couple throws their child into the sewers because he is deformed like a penguin, however, a flock of penguins living in the sewers rescue him and raise him. 33 years later, the child becomes the supervillain, Penguin (Danny DeVito). He kidnaps businessman Max Shreck (Christopher Walken), blackmailing him into helping him become a citizen of Gotham City using evidence of his corporate crimes. Meanwhile, Max finds out his secretary, Selina Kyle (Michelle Pfeiffer), has found out he is planning to build a power plant which will drain Gotham City of its electricity. Max pushes her out of a window, ensuring that she will not tell anyone. However, a flock of alley cats lick her corpse, reviving her. She returns home, suffering a mental breakdown, becoming the supervillain, Catwoman. 

Penguin makes one of his costumed henchman to kidnap the mayor's baby while he "saves" him, becoming a hero in the eyes of the people however, billionaire Bruce Wayne (Michael Keaton) is suspicious of the Penguin and finds out that he is the leader of the Red Triangle Circus Gang who commits crimes throughout Gotham. As Batman, Bruce decides to protect Gotham from the gang. After Penguin finds out his parents are dead and his name is Oswald Cobblepot, Max decides to make Penguin the mayor of Gotham City because the current mayor (Michael Murphy) will not approve Max's power plant. To do this, Penguin makes the Red Triangle Circus Gang create a riot, making the people lose all faith in the mayor but Batman stops it. During the riot, Catwoman vandalizes Shreck's Department Store to gain revenge on Max. When Batman and Penguin confront each other, she intervenes before the store blows up. Penguin escapes but Catwoman fights Batman. Batman pushes her off a rooftop but a litterbox on a truck saves her. 

The next day, Penguin and Catwoman form a diabolical plan to destroy Batman. Bruce and Selina also have a romantic relationship. Penguin and Catwoman kidnap the Ice Princess (Cristi Conaway) an actress chosen to turn on the Gotham City Christmas Tree Lights, framing Batman for it. Batman finds her but Catwoman takes her to a rooftop where Penguin releases a swarm of flying bats which make the Princess retreat backwards, falling off, making the people believe Batman killed her. Catwoman rejects Penguin's advances, prompting him to kill her, unsuccessfully though. Batman enters the Batmobile and finds out that Penguin has control over it. Penguin takes it on a devastating rampage but Batman regains control over it, escaping death.

During the rampage, Batman recorded Penguin's evil plans and plays it during Penguin's election speech, turning the people against him. Penguin goes mad with rage and kidnaps all the first-born sons of Gotham City and Max too. Batman saves all the babies and pushes Penguin into toxic liquid. Catwoman tries to kill Max but Batman stops her. Max shoots Batman, knocking him out and Catwoman claims that she has six of her nine lives left although Max shoots her four times, leaving her with two lives. Catwoman kisses Max with an electrical taser between their lips and breaks an electric wire, creating an explosion which kills Max but Batman cannot find Selina's corpse. Penguin emerges from the water but the heat kills him and his emperor penguins drag his corpse into the toxic liquid.

Afterwards, Alfred (Michael Gough), Bruce's butler, drives Bruce home. Suddenly, Bruce spots Selina's shadow in an alley. He investigates the area, only finding her black cat, Miss Kitty, taking her with him before exchanging Christmas wishes with Alfred. Finally, the Batsignal lights up in the night sky and Catwoman rises up into the foreground and stares at it, confirming that she is alive.

==Cast==

* Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman
* Danny DeVito as Oswald Cobblepot / Penguin
* Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman / Selina Kyle
* Christopher Walken as Max Shreck
* Michael Murphy as Mayor of Gotham City
* Vincent Schiavelli as The Organ Grinder
* Anna Katarina as The Poodle Lady
* Andrew Bryniarski as Chip Shreck
* Cristi Conaway as The Ice Princess
* Pat Hingle as Commissioner James Gordon
* Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth
* John Strong as The Sword Swallower 
* Rick Zumwalt as The Tattooed Strongman
* Gregory Scott Cummins as The Acrobatic Thug

==Production==

===Development===
After the success of Batman, Warner Bros. was hoping for a sequel to start filming in May 1990 at Pinewood Studios. They spent $250,000 storing the sets from the first film. Tim Burton had mixed emotions about directing another film in the franchise after his experiences with the previous film. "I will return if the sequel offers something new and exciting", he said in 1989. "Otherwise it's a most-dumbfounded idea." Alan Jones (November 1989). "Batman in Production", Cinefantastique, pp. 7588. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Burton decided to direct Edward Scissorhands for 20th Century Fox. Meanwhile, Sam Hamm from the previous film delivered the first two drafts of the script, while Bob Kane was brought back as a creative consultant. Tim Burton, Sam Hamm, Denise Di Novi, Daniel Waters, Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark KnightThe Dark Side of the Knight, 2005, Warner Home Video Hamm's script had Penguin and Catwoman going after hidden treasure. 

Burton was impressed with Daniel Waters' work on Heathers; Burton originally brought Waters aboard on a sequel to Beetlejuice. Warner Bros. then granted Burton a large amount of creative control, demoting producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber to executive producers. Dissatisfied with the Hamm script, Burton commissioned a rewrite from Waters. Judy Sloane (August 1995). "Daniel Waters on Writing", Film Review, pp. 6769. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Waters "came up with a social satire that had an evil mogul backing a bid for the Mayor's office by the Penguin", Waters reported. "I wanted to show that the true villains of our world don't necessarily wear costumes." The plot device of Penguin running for Mayor came from the 1960s TV series episodes "Hizzoner the Penguin" and "Dizzoner the Penguin". Jeffrey Resner (August 1992). "Three Go Mad in Gotham", Empire, pp. 3946. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Waters wrote a total of five drafts. 

On the characterization of Catwoman, Waters explained "Sam Hamm went back to the way comic books in general treat women, like fetishy sexual fantasy. I wanted to start off just at the lowest point in society, a very beaten down secretary." Harvey Dent appeared in early drafts of the script, but was deleted. Waters quoted, "Sam Hamm definitely planned that. I flirted with it, having Harvey start to come back and have one scene of him where he flips a coin and it's the good side of the coin, deciding not to do anything, so you had to wait for the next movie." In early scripts Max Shreck was the "golden boy" of the Cobblepot family, whereas Penguin was the deformed outsider. It turned out that Shreck would be the Penguin's long-lost brother. Daniel Waters, Alex Ross, Batman Returns: Villains, 2005, Warner Home Video Max Shreck was also a reference to actor Max Schreck, known for his role as Count Orlok in Nosferatu. According to casting director Marion Dougherty, Burton was reportedly uncomfortable with casting Christopher Walken as Shreck, on the basis that the actor scared him. 

Burton hired Wesley Strick to do an uncredited rewrite. Strick recalled, "When I was hired to write Batman Returns (Batman II at the time), the big problem of the script was Penguin's lack of a 'master plan'." Warner Bros. presented Strick with warming or freezing Gotham City (a plot point later to be used in Batman & Robin). Strick gained inspiration from a Moses parallel that had Penguin killing the firstborn sons of Gotham. A similar notion was used when the Penguin's parents threw him into a river as a baby. Robin appeared in the script, but was deleted because Waters felt the film had too many characters. Waters called Robin "the most worthless character in the world, especially with as the loner of loners." Robin started out as a juvenile gang leader, who becomes an ally to Batman. Robin was later changed to a black teenaged garage mechanic. Waters explained, "He's wearing this old-fashioned garage mechanic uniform and it has an 'R' on it. He drives the Batmobile, which I notice they used in the third film!" Marlon Wayans was cast, and signed for a sequel. The actor had attended a wardrobe fitting, but it was decided to save the character for a third installment. 

Michael Keaton returned after a significant increase in his salary at $10 million. Annette Bening was cast as Catwoman after Burton saw her performance in The Grifters, but she dropped out due to pregnancy. Raquel Welch, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Madonna, Ellen Barkin, Cher, Bridget Fonda and Susan Sarandon were then in competition for the role. Sean Young, who was originally cast as Vicki Vale in the first film, believed the role should have gone to her. Young visited production offices dressed in a homemade Catwoman costume, demanding an audition. Burton was unfamiliar with Michelle Pfeiffer's work, but was convinced to cast her after one meeting. Pfeiffer received a $3 million salary ($2 million more than Bening) and a percentage of the box office. Pfeiffer took kickboxing lessons for the role. Kathy Long served as Pfeiffer's body double. On Danny DeVito's casting, Waters explained, "I kind of knew that DeVito was going to play The Penguin. We didn't really officially cast it, but for a short nasty little guy, it's a short list. I ended up writing the character for Danny DeVito." 

===Filming===
Gotham City Square set built inside Studio 16 on Warner Bros. Studios.
In early 1991, two of Hollywood's largest sound stages (Stage 16 at Warner Bros. and Stage 12 at Universal Studios) were being prepared for the filming of Batman Returns. Filming started in June 1991. Stage 16 held Gotham Plaza, based on Rockefeller Center. Universal's Stage 12 housed Penguin's underground lair. A half-a-million gallon tank filled with water was used. Burton wanted to make sure that the penguins felt comfortable. Eight other locations on the Warner Bros. lot were used, over 50% of their property was occupied by Gotham City sets. 

Animal rights groups started protesting the film after finding out that penguins would have rockets strapped on their backs. Richard Hill, the curator of the penguins, explained that Warner Bros. was very helpful in making sure the penguins were comfortable. "On the flight over the plane was refrigerated down to 45 degrees", recalls Hill. "In Hollywood, they were given a refrigerated trailer, their own swimming pool, half-a-ton of ice each day, and they had fresh fish delivered daily straight from the docks. Even though it was 100 degrees outside, the entire set was refrigerated down to 35 degrees." Owain Yolland (August 1992). "Two minutes, Mr Penguin", Empire, pp. 8990. Retrieved August 14, 2008. 

Warner Bros. devoted a large amount of secrecy for Batman Returns. The art department was required to keep their office blinds pulled down. Cast and crew had to have photo ID badges with the movie's fake working title Dictel to go anywhere near the sets. Kevin Costner was refused a chance to visit the set. An entertainment magazine leaked the first photos of Danny DeVito as the Penguin; in response Warner Bros. employed a private investigator to track down the accomplice. $65 million was spent during the production of Batman Returns, while $15 million was used for marketing, coming to a total cost of $80 million. The final shot of Catwoman looking at the Bat-Signal was completed during post-production and was not part of the shooting script. After Batman Returns was completed Warner Bros. felt it was best for Catwoman to survive, saving more characterizations in a future installment. Pfeiffer was unavailable and a body double was chosen. 

===Design and effects===
Bo Welch, Burton's collaborator on Beetlejuice and Edward Scissorhands, replaced Anton Furst as production designer, since Furst was unable to return for the sequel due to contractual obligations. When hell burst through the pavement and grew: Anton Furst conjured up Batman's Gotham City. In England he was a creator of dreams. But in Hollywood his dreams ended. Simon Garfield reports Welch blended "Fascist architecture with World's fair architecture" for Gotham City. Judy Sloane (August 1995). "Bo Welch Interview", Film Review, pp. 66. Retrieved August 14, 2008. He also studied Russian architecture and German Expressionism. An iron maiden was used for Bruce Wayne's entry into the Batcave. Bo Welch, Tim Burton, Gotham City Revisited: The Production Design of Batman Returns, 2005, Warner Home Video Stan Winston, who worked with Burton on Edward Scissorhands, designed Danny DeVito's prosthetic makeup, which took two hours to apply. Brian D. Johnson (June 22, 1992). "Batman's Return", Maclean's. Retrieved August 14, 2008. DeVito had to put a combination of mouthwash and red/green food coloring in his mouth "to create a grotesque texture of some weird ooze." Danny DeVito, Stan Winston, Making-Up the Penguin, 2005, Warner Home Video 

Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman
More than 60 Catsuits were designed in the six-month shoot at $1,000 each. Tim Fennell (August 1992). "The Catsuit", Empire, pp. 4749. Retrieved August 14, 2008. The Batsuit was updated, which was made out of a thinner, slightly more flexible foam rubber material than the suit from Batman. DeVito was uncomfortable with his costume, but this made it easy for him to get into character. J. P. Morgan's wardrobe was used for inspiration on Max Shreck's costume design. Bob Ringwood, Michelle Pfeiffer, Sleek, Sexy and Sinister: The Costumes of Batman Returns, 2005, Warner Home Video 

The bats were entirely composed of computer-generated imagery since it was decided directing real bats on set would be problematic. The Penguin's "bird army" was a combination of CGI, robotic creatures, men in suits and even real penguins. Robotic penguin puppets were commissioned by Stan Winston. In total 30 African penguins and 12 king penguins were used. Stan Winston, Assembling the Arctic Army, 2005, Warner Home Video A miniature effect was used for the exteriors of the Cobblepot Mansion in the opening scene and for Wayne Manor. The same method was used for the Bat Ski-boat and the exterior shots of the Gotham Zoo. Stan Winston, Mike Fink, Bats, Mattes and Dark Knights: The Visual Effects of Batman Returns, 2005, Warner Home Video 

===Music===

Danny Elfman had great enthusiasm for returning because "I didn't have to prove myself from the first film. I remember Jon Peters was very skeptical at first to hire me." Danny Elfman, Inside the Elfman Studios: The Music of Batman Returns, 2005, Warner Home Video Elfman's work schedule was 12 hours a day, 7 days a week. "When completing this movie I realized it was something of a film score and an opera. It was 95 minutes long, twice the amount of the average of film score." Burton allowed Elfman to be more artistic with the sequel score, such as the "scraping" on violins for the cat themes. The musician co-orchestrated "Face to Face", which was written and performed by Siouxsie and the Banshees. The song can be heard in one scene during the film and during the end credits. 

==Release==
Batman Returns was released in America on June 19, 1992, earning $45.69 million in 2,644 theaters on its opening weekend. This was the highest opening weekend in 1992 and the highest opening weekend of any film up to that point. The film went on to gross $162.83 million in North America, and $104 million in foreign countries, coming to a worldwide total of $266.83 million. Batman Returns was the third highest grossing film in America of 1992, and sixth highest in worldwide totals. The film was declared a financial success, but Warner Bros. felt the film should have been more successful. A "parental backlash" criticized Batman Returns with violence and sexual references that were unsuitable for children. McDonald's shut down their Happy Meal tie-in for the film. Olly Richards (September 1992). "Trouble in Gotham", Empire, pp. 2123. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Burton responded, "I like Batman Returns better than the first one. There was this big backlash that it was too dark, but I found this movie much less dark." 

===Critical reception===
Batman Returns received an very positive reception from critics. Based on 66 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, 81% of reviewers enjoyed the film, and the consensus: "Director Tim Burton's dark, brooding atmosphere, Michael Keaton's work as the tormented hero, and the flawless casting of Danny DeVito as The Penguin and Christopher Walken as, well, Christopher Walken, make the sequel better than the first." 

Janet Maslin in The New York Times thought that "Mr. Burton creates a wicked world of misfits, all of them rendered with the mixture of horror, sympathy and playfulness that has become this director's hallmark." She described Michael Keaton as showing "appropriate earnestness", Danny DeVito as "conveying verve", Christopher Walken as "wonderfully debonair", Michelle Pfeiffer as "captivating... fierce, seductive", Bo Welch's production design as "dazzling", Stefan Czapsky's cinematography as "crisp", and Daniel Waters's screenplay as "sharp." 

Peter Travers in Rolling Stone wrote: "Burton uses the summer's most explosively entertaining movie to lead us back into the liberating darkness of dreams." He praised the performances: "Pfeiffer gives this feminist avenger a tough core of intelligence and wit; she's a classic dazzler... Michael Keaton's manic-depressive hero remains a remarkably rich creation. And Danny DeVito's mutant Penguina balloon-bellied Richard III with a kingdom of sewer freaksis as hilariously warped as Jack Nicholson's Joker and even quicker with the quips." 

Desson Howe in The Washington Post wrote: "Director Burton not only re-creates his one-of-a-kind atmosphere, he one-ups it, even two-ups it. He's best at evoking the psycho-murky worlds in which his characters reside. The Penguin holds court in a penguin-crowded, Phantom of the Opera-like sewer home. Keaton hides in a castlelike mansion, which perfectly mirrors its owner's inner remoteness. Comic strip purists will probably never be happy with a Batman movie. But Returns comes closer than ever to Bob Kane's dark, original strip, which began in 1939." He described Walken as "engaging", DeVito as "exquisite" and Pfeiffer as "deliciously purry." 

Todd McCarthy in Variety wrote that "the real accomplishment of the film lies in the amazing physical realization of an imaginative universe. Where Burton's ideas end and those of his collaborators begin is impossible to know, but the result is a seamless, utterly consistent universe full of nasty notions about societal deterioration, greed and other base impulses." He praised the contributions of Stan Winston, Danny Elfman, Bo Welch and cinematographer Stefan Czapsky, and in terms of performances, opined that "the deck is stacked entirely in favor of the villains", calling DeVito "fascinating" and Pfeiffer "very tasty." 

Conversely, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film two stars, writing: "I give the movie a negative review, and yet I don't think it's a bad movie; it's more misguided, made with great creativity, but denying us what we more or less deserve from a Batman story. No matter how hard you try, superheroes and film noir don't go together; the very essence of noir is that there are no more heroes." He compared the Penguin negatively with the Joker of the first film, writing that "the Penguin is a curiously meager and depressing creature; I pitied him, but did not fear him or find him funny. The genius of Danny DeVito is all but swallowed up in the paraphernalia of the role." 

Jonathan Rosenbaum called DeVito "a pale substitute for Jack Nicholson from the first film" and felt that "there's no suspense in Batman Returns whatsoever". Batman comic book writer/artist Matt Wagner was quoted as saying: "I hated how Batman Returns made Batman little more than just another costumed creep, little better than the villains he's pursuing. Additionally, Burton is so blatantly not an action director. That aspect of both his films just sucked." 

Ty Burr in Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B-; he wrote that "Burton still hasn't figured out how to tell a coherent story: He's more interested in fashioning pretty beads than in putting them on a string.... Yet for all the wintry weirdness, there's more going on under the surface of this movie than in the original. No wonder some people felt burned by Batman Returns: Tim Burton just may have created the first blockbuster art film." 

Batman Returns was also criticized for propagating anti-Semitic overtones, more particularly the Penguin's character as a stereotypical Jew who is out for revenge and murdering every first-born. 

===Awards and nominations===

 Awarding Body Award Nominee Result 
 Academy Awards Best Visual Effects Michael L. Fink, Craig Barron, John Bruno, Dennis Skotak nomination 
 Best Makeup Ve Neill, Ronnie Specter, Stan Winston nomination 
 British Academy Film Awards (BAFTAs) Best Makeup Artist Ve Neill, Stan Winston nomination 
 Best Special Effects Michael L. Fink, Craig Barron, John Bruno, Dennis Skotak nomination 
 BMI Film & TV Awards BMI Film Music Award Danny Elfman 
 Golden Raspberry Awards (Razzies) Worst Supporting Actor Danny DeVito nomination 
 Hugo Awards Best Dramatic Presentation nomination 
 MTV Movie Awards Best Kiss Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer nomination 
 Best Villain Danny DeVito nomination 
 Most Desirable Female Michelle Pfeiffer nomination 
 Saturn Awards Best Fantasy Film nomination 
 Best Director Tim Burton nomination 
 Best Supporting Actor Danny DeVito nomination 
 Best Make-Up Stan Winston, Ve Neill 
 Best Costumes Bob Ringwood, Mary E. Vogt, Vin Burnham nomination 

American Film Institute recognition:
*AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
** Catwoman (Selina Kyle)Nominated Villain 
** The Penguin (Oswald Cobblepot)Nominated Villain 

===Legacy===

Batman Returns was the last film in the Batman film series that featured Tim Burton and Michael Keaton as director and leading actor, respectively. With the following film, Batman Forever, Warner Bros. decided to go in a "lighter" direction to be more mainstream in the process of a family film. Burton was asked to restrict himself to the role of producer and approved of Joel Schumacher as director. With Warner Bros. moving on development for Batman Forever in June 1993, a Catwoman spin-off was announced. Michelle Pfeiffer was to reprise her role, with the character not to appear in Forever because of "her own little movie". 

Burton became attached as director, while producer Denise Di Novi and writer Daniel Waters also returned to the Catwoman spin-off with Burton. In January 1994, Burton was unsure of his plans to direct Catwoman or an adaptation of The Fall of the House of Usher. On June 6, 1995, Waters turned in his Catwoman script to Warner Bros., the same day Batman Forever was released. Burton was still being courted to direct. Waters joked, "turning it in the day Batman Forever opened may not have been my best logistical move, in that it's the celebration of the fun-for-the-whole-family Batman. Catwoman is definitely not a fun-for-the-whole-family script." The film labored in development hell for years, with Pfeiffer getting replaced by Ashley Judd. The film ended up becoming the critically panned Catwoman (2004) starring Halle Berry. 

Victoria Beckham from the Spice Girls appears in the music video for their 1997 single "Too Much" in a missile silo next to a smoking rocket, clad in a black catsuit and with a long ponytail; she is portraying Catwoman from the film.

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Film analysis===
* From Comic To Pfeiffer's Cat Batman-Online.com's in-depth analysis on Tim Burton's Catwoman's comic origins
* Possible Comic Influences On Batman Returns Batman-Online.com's in-depth analysis on possible comic book influences of Batman Returns plotline



[[Batman & Robin (film)]]

Batman & Robin is a 1997 American superhero film based on the DC Comics character Batman. It is the fourth and final film of Warner Bros.' initial Batman film series. The film was directed by Joel Schumacher and written by Akiva Goldsman. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Uma Thurman, and Alicia Silverstone. Batman & Robin tells the story of the Dynamic Duo as they attempt to prevent Mr. Freeze and Poison Ivy from freezing all mankind to death and repopulating the earth with mutant plants, while at the same time struggling to keep their partnership together. This is also the only film appearance of Batgirl, who unexpectedly helps the title characters win in the end, including Bane.

Development for Batman & Robin began following the box office success of the previous film, Batman Forever. Warner Bros. commissioned the film for a June 1997 release. Schumacher and Goldsman conceived the film's plotline during pre-production on A Time to Kill. Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule.

Batman & Robin was released on June 20, 1997 to a number of negative reviews and is often regarded as one of the worst films ever made. Subsequently, Warner Bros. cancelled the unproduced Batman Triumphant and the film series was eventually rebooted with Batman Begins (2005) by director Christopher Nolan. The song made for the film, "The End Is the Beginning Is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins, won a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 40th Grammy Awards.

==Plot==

Batman and Robin attempt to stop Mr. Freeze from stealing a cache of diamonds. The supercriminal freezes Robin and flees, notifiying Batman that he has 11 minutes to thaw his partner. They learn that Freeze was once scientist Victor Fries, who became dependent on a diamond-powered subzero suit following an accident in a cryogenics lab he was occupying to find a cure for his wife, Nora, who was suffering from a terminal illness called MacGregor's Syndrome.
 
Meanwhile, botanist Dr. Pamela Isley is experimenting with the strength serum "Venom" to create mutant plants capable of fighting back against mankind's destruction of flora. She is furious to learn that her senior colleague Dr. Jason Woodrue used her Venom samples to transform a diminutive prisoner into the "super soldier" Bane. When she refuses to become the mad scientist's partner, Woodrue kills her with animal-plant toxins and chemicals. She transforms into the beautiful Poison Ivy and kills Woodrue with a venomous kiss before vowing to use her new powers to establish botanical supremacy over the world.

Alfred Pennyworth's niece Barbara Wilson makes a surprise visit from England and is invited to stay at Wayne Manor until she returns to university. Alfred is revealed to be suffering from MacGregor's Syndrome.

Ivy arrives in Gotham City with Bane as her henchman. She interrupts a Wayne Enterprises press conference at the Gotham Observatory where a giant new telescope is being unveiled, exhorting Bruce Wayne to implement a proposal that would safeguard the natural environment at the expense of millions of human lives, which Bruce summarily declines. She later appears at the Gotham Botanical Gardens fundraiser, seduccing everyone present with her pheromone dust, including the Dynamic Duo, who are there to protect a diamond on auction from Mr. Freeze. When Freeze crashes the event as expected, Ivy is instantly captivated by his "ruthless charm". Despite being captured by Batman and detained at the Arkham Asylum, Mr. Freeze is released by Ivy.

Ivy then proceeds to turn off Nora Fries' life support and makes Mr. Freeze believe Batman did it, thereby persuading him that they should kill Batman as well as the society that created him. They plan to turn the observatory's new telescope into a giant freezing gun to freeze the whole world's population to death and replace them with Ivy's mutant plants.

Meanwhile, Robin has become infatuated with Ivy and rebels against Batman, just as the villainess planned. He eventually goes to meet her at her garden hide-out. Ivy's venomous kiss fails to kill Robin because Batman had prevailed on him to coat his lips with rubber. She tries to drown Robin in her lily pond and entangles Batman in her crushing vines, although they are able to free themselves when Batgirl arrives and traps Ivy in her own floral throne. Having discovered the Batcave and decided to create her own crime-fighting persona with Alfred's help, Batgirl reveals herself as Barbara.

When the Trio arrive at the Observatory to stop Freeze, the criminal has already frozen Gotham. Bane attacks Robin and Batgirl, but they incapacitate him and restore him to his original human state. The two younger heroes save Gotham by repositioning the observatory's satellites, using their mirrors to reflect sunlight from outer space to thaw the city.

Batman shows Freeze video footage of Ivy's confession about pulling the plug on Nora, but reveals that he himself restored Nora. He vows that Freeze will be allowed to continue his research at Arkham Asylum to heal Nora. Batman asks Freeze for the cure he created for the first stage of MacGregor's Syndrome for Alfred and Freeze atones for his misdeeds by giving him two vials of the medicine he had developed.

At Arkham, Ivy is joined in her cell by Freeze, who promises to make her life a living hell for attempting to kill his wife. Back at Wayne Manor, Alfred is cured and Bruce invites Barbara to live with them and continue helping him and Dick fight crime as Batgirl.

==Cast==
* George Clooney as Bruce Wayne/Batman A billionaire industrialist who witnessed his parents' murder as a young boy. At night, Bruce becomes Batman, Gotham City's vigilante protector. Eric Lloyd portrays him as a child in a flashback.

* Chris O'Donnell as Dick Grayson/Robin The crime-fighting partner to Batman and ward of Bruce Wayne. He has begun to chafe against Batman's authority.

* Arnold Schwarzenegger as Dr. Victor Fries/Mr. Freeze A Nobel Prize-winning molecular biologist and two-time Olympic decathlete who suffers a terrible accident while trying to cryogenically preserve his terminally ill wife. As a result, he is transformed into a criminal forced to live in a special sub-zero suit powered by diamonds.

* Uma Thurman as Dr. Pamela Isley/Poison Ivy A botanist who becomes a crazed eco-terrorist after being pushed into vials of chemicals, poisons and toxins.

* Alicia Silverstone as Barbara Wilson/Batgirl Her parents had previously died in a car accident. Alfred, her uncle, was very close to her mother, Margaret. As she is Alfred's niece and is an orphan, Barbara is not Commissioner Gordon's daughter like in the comics, hence why her surname is Wilson instead of Gordon.

* Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth The trusted butler for Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson. Alfred is dying of a rare disease from which Mr. Freeze's wife also suffers.

* Pat Hingle as Commissioner James Gordon The police commissioner of Gotham City. He is close to Batman and informs him of numerous crimes.

* John Glover as Dr. Jason Woodrue A deranged scientist who aims to create Venom-powered "supersoldiers" to sell to dictators and warlords in order to make millions. He is responsible for the creation of both Bane and Poison Ivy, the latter of whom kills him with a kiss from her toxic lips.

* Elle Macpherson as Julie Madison Bruce Wayne's girlfriend. She proposes to Bruce, but he does not respond, fearing for her safety.

* Vivica A. Fox as Ms. B. Haven Mr. Freeze's sexy assistant who flirts with him constantly. He is unresponsive, as he is still in love with his wife.

* Vendela Kirsebom as Nora Fries Mr. Freeze's cryogenically-frozen wife.

* Elizabeth Sanders as Gossip Gerty Gotham's top gossip columnist.

* Robert "Jeep" Swenson as Bane Poison Ivy's bodyguard and muscle, who was originally a diminutive serial murderer named Antonio Diego (portrayed by Michael Reid MacKay). Transformed into a hugely powerful "Super-soldier" by the strength-enhancing drug "Venom", he was seen getting Mr. Freeze's suit back from Arkham Asylum, as well as fighting against the main heroes several times. Despite proving more than a match for Batman and Robin earlier on, he is eventually defeated by Robin and Batgirl after they find a way to stop the venom flow to his brain.

* Jesse Ventura as Arkham Asylum Guard

==Production==

===Development===
With the box office success of Batman Forever in June 1995, Warner Bros. instantly commissioned a sequel. They hired director Joel Schumacher and writer Akiva Goldsman to reprise their duties the following August, and decided it was best to fast track production for a June 1997 target release date, which is a break from the usual 3-year gap between films. Schumacher wanted to homage both the broad camp style of the 1960s television series and the work of Dick Sprang. The storyline of Batman & Robin was conceived by Schumacher and Goldsman during pre-production on A Time to Kill. Portions of Mr. Freeze's back-story were based on the episode "of Ice (Batman: The Animated Series episode)|Heart of Ice]", written by Paul Dini. Paul Dini, Batman & Robin: The Heroes, 2005, Warner Home Video 

While Chris O'Donnell reprises the role of Robin, Val Kilmer decided not to reprise the role of Batman from Batman Forever. Schumacher admitted he had difficulty working with Kilmer on Forever. "He sort of quit," Schumacher said, "and we sort of fired him." Kilmer said he was not aware of the fast track production and was already committed to The Saint (1997). Schumacher cast George Clooney in the role because he felt the actor could provide a lighter interpretation of the character than Michael Keaton (in Batman and Batman Returns) and Kilmer. The shooting schedule allowed Clooney to simultaneously work on ER without any scheduling conflicts. 

Patrick Stewart was considered for the role of Mr. Freeze, before the script was rewritten to accommodate Arnold Schwarzenegger's casting. Schumacher decided that Mr. Freeze must be "big and strong like he was chiseled out of a glacier". Schwarzenegger was paid a $25 million salary for the role. His prosthetic makeup and wardrobe took six hours to apply each day. Before Uma Thurman's casting, Demi Moore was considered for the role of Poison Ivy. Thurman took the role because she liked the femme fatale characterization of the character. Alicia Silverstone was the only choice for the role of Batgirl. 

===Filming===
The original start date was August 1996, but principal photography did not begin until September 12, 1996. Batman & Robin finished filming in late January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule. The film was mostly shot at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. 

When comparing work on Batman Forever, Chris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, explained, "It just felt like everything got a little soft the second time. On Batman Forever, I felt like I was making a movie. The second time, I felt like I was making a kid's toy commercial." He also complained of the Robin costume, saying it was more involved and uncomfortable than the one he wore in Batman Forever, with a glued-on mask which caused sweat to pool on his face. According to John Glover, who played Dr. Jason Woodrue, "Joel would sit on a crane with a megaphone and yell before each take, 'Remember, everyone, this is a cartoon'. It was hard to act because that kind of set the tone for the film." Production designer Barbara Ling admitted her influences for the Gotham City design came from "neon-ridden Tokyo and the Machine Age. Gotham is like a World's Fair on ecstasy." Barbara Ling, Bigger, Bolder, Brighter: The Production Design of Batman & Robin, 2005, Warner Home Video Rhythm and Hues and Pacific Data Images created the visual effects sequences, with John Dykstra and Andrew Adamson credited as the visual effects supervisors. John Dykstra, Andrew Adamson, Freeze Frame: The Visual Effects of Batman & Robin, 2005, Warner Home Video 

Stunt coordinator Alex Field taught Alicia Silverstone to ride a motorcycle so that she could play Batgirl. 

===Music===

Like Batman Forever, the original score for the film was written by Elliot Goldenthal. The soundtrack featured a variety of genres by various bands and performers, showcasing alternative rock on the lead single "The End Is the Beginning Is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins, on the Goo Goo Dolls' contribution, "Lazy Eye" and with R.E.M.'s song "Revolution". R&B singer R. Kelly also wrote "Gotham City" for the soundtrack, which became the other song featured in the end credits, as well as one of the singles, reaching the top 10 in the United States and in the UK. Eric Bent and Meshell Ndegeocello also contributed R&B songs. Also included was the top 5 second single, "Look into My Eyes" by the hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony. Other songs featured included electronic dance elements, including those by Moloko and Arkana. The soundtrack was released on May 27, 1997, a month before the film. 

==Marketing==
The Batman & Robin film trailer debuted on the February 19, 1997 episode of Entertainment Tonight. Warner Bros. spent $15 million to market and promote the film, in addition to its $125 million production budget. The studio also brought in toy companies to be involved with pre-production, including the design of concept art and character illustrations. Director Joel Schumacher criticized Warner Bros.' strategy for Batman & Robin as being overtly toyetic. Various Six Flags parks (Six Flags Great Adventure, Six Flags Over Texas, as well as Six Flags St. Louis) all debuted coasters themed to the film (all of which have been either closed, or re-themed to resemble ). 

==Reception==

===Box office===
Batman & Robin was released on June 20, 1997 in North America, earning $42,872,605 in its opening weekend, making it the third-highest opening weekend of 1997. However, the film rapidly declined with a 63% second-week plunge. Many observers based the second week drop on negative word of mouth. In addition, Batman & Robin faced early competition with Face/Off and Hercules. Schumacher blamed it on yellow journalism started by Harry Knowles of Ain't It Cool News and other film websites such as Dark Horizons. The film went on to gross $107.3 million in North America and $130.9 million internationally, coming to a worldwide total of $238.2 million. Warner Bros. acknowledged Batman & Robins shortcomings in the domestic market but pointed out success overseas. 

===Critical reaction===

Batman & Robin received negative reviews from film critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 12% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 66 reviews, certifying it "Rotten", with an average rating of 3.4/10, the consensus: "Joel Schumacher's tongue-in-cheek attitude hits an unbearable limit in Batman & Robin, resulting in a frantic and mindless movie that's too jokey to care much for." Metacritic collected an average score of 28, based on 21 reviews which is regarded as "generally unfavorable". 

Schumacher and producer Peter MacGregor-Scott blamed the negative reception of Batman & Robin on Warner Bros.' decision to fast track production. "There was a lot of pressure from Warner Bros. to make Batman & Robin more family-friendly," Schumacher explained. "We decided to do a less depressing Batman movie and less torture and more heroic. I know I have been criticized a lot for this, but I didn't see the harm in that approach at all." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times criticized the toyetic approach and Mr. Freeze's one-liner jokes in his two-star review of the film. Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times believed the film "killed" the Batman film series, and felt Batman & Robin depended too much on visual effects. Desson Thomson of The Washington Post largely disapproved of Schumacher's direction and Akiva Goldsman's script. Mick LaSalle, writing in the San Francisco Chronicle, said, "George Clooney is the big zero of the film, and should go down in history as the George Lazenby of the series." However, Janet Maslin of The New York Times gave a positive review. She praised Uma Thurman's acting, as well as the production and costume design. 

Batman & Robin was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film, as well as categories for Best Make-up and Best Costume. Alicia Silverstone won the Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress. Other nominations at the Razzie Awards included Schumacher (Worst Director), George Clooney and Chris O'Donnell (Worst Screen Couple), Akiva Goldsman (Worst Screenplay), both Chris O'Donnell and Arnold Schwarzenegger (Worst Supporting Actor), Uma Thurman (Worst Supporting Actress), as well as Billy Corgan (Worst Song for "The End Is the Beginning Is the End"). Batman & Robin also received nominations for Worst Picture, Worst Remake or Sequel and Worst Reckless Disregard for Human Life and Public Property. Ultimately, out of 11 nominations, Batman & Robin garnered only one Razzie Award.

Many observers thought Schumacher added possible homoerotic innuendo in the storyline. James Berardinelli questioned the "random amount of rubber nipples and camera angle close-ups of the Dynamic Duo's butts and Bat-crotches." Similar to Batman Forever, this primarily included the decision to add nipples and enlarged codpieces to Batman and Robin suits. Schumacher stated, "I had no idea that putting nipples on the Batsuit and Robin suit were going to spark international headlines. The bodies of the suits come from ancient Greek statues, which display perfect bodies. They are anatomically correct." Chris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, felt "it wasn't so much the nipples that bothered me. It was the codpiece. The press obviously played it up and made it a big deal, especially with Joel directing. I didn't think twice about the controversy, but going back and looking and seeing some of the pictures, it was very unusual." George Clooney joked, "Joel Schumacher told me we never made another Batman film because Batman was gay". Clooney himself has spoken critically of the film, saying, "I think we might have killed the franchise", and called it "a waste of money". 

===Cancelled sequel and legacy===

During the filming of Batman & Robin, Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies, prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to return as director for a sequel. However, writer Akiva Goldsman turned down an offer to write the script. In late 1996, Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth Batman film. A projected mid-1999 release date was announced. Titled Batman Triumphant, Protosevich's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain. Through the use of his fear toxin, he resurrects the Joker as a hallucination in Batman's mind. Harley Quinn appeared as a supporting character, written as the Joker's daughter. George Clooney and Chris O'Donnell were set to reprise the roles of Batman and Robin, and Jack Nicholson was in negotiations to return as the Joker. However, following the failure of Batman & Robin, Clooney vowed never to reprise his role. 

Warner Bros. decided to consider a live-action Batman Beyond film and an adaptation of Frank Miller's . Warner would then produce whichever idea suited them the most. Schumacher felt he "owe the Batman culture a real Batman movie. I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight." He approached Warner Bros. about doing Batman: Year One in mid-1998, but they were more interested in hiring Darren Aronofsky. Aronofsky and Frank Miller developed a Year One script with Aronofsky to direct, but it was ultimately canceled. Christopher Nolan was eventually hired to helm the next Batman film in January 2003, resulting in the rebooted Batman Begins (2005). 

In "Legends of the Dark Knight", an episode of The New Batman Adventures, three teenagers discuss their ideas about what Batman is really like. They briefly meet a youth called Joel whose idea of Batman reflects characterizations and costumes portrayed within Schumacher's "Batman and Robin". The teens treat Joel's ideas with utter disdain. "Legends of the Dark Knight". Dan Riba (director), Bruce Timm; Robert Goodman (writers). . October 10, 1998. No. 19, season 2. In Watchmen, director Zack Snyder and comic book artist Dave Gibbons choose to parody the molded muscle and nipple Batsuit design from Batman & Robin for the Ozymandias costume. The film is referenced in the episode "Legends of the Dark Mite!", when Bat-Mite briefly uses his powers to transform Batman's costume into the same suit shown in the Joel Schumacher Batman films, before declaring it "Too icky". "Legends of the Dark Mite!". Ben Jones (director), Paul Dini (writer). . May 29, 2009. No. 19, season 1. The Batman from Batman & Robin later appeared as part of an army of Batmen gathered from across the Multiverse in "Night of the Batmen!", complete with the rubber blue Batsuit. Additionally, while there where worries within Warner Bros., surrounding the negative critical reaction to Batman & Robin and how that may come to harm the success of their subsequent direct-to-video animated feature film, , that was originally planned for release at around the same time as Batman & Robin but was subsequently delayed. SubZero, nevertheless, still managed to go on to receive a far stronger positive response from critics, faring much better than Batman & Robin, with Mr. Freeze's role within it being seen in a much more positive rather than negative light, returning his status as a Batman opponent to one which was at least a lot closer to the level of popularity that was reached by him within the two Emmy-winning episodes that featured him in . 

==See also==

*List of films featuring powered exoskeletons
*List of films considered the worst

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Batman & Robin at RiffTrax



[[Batman Forever]]

Batman Forever is a 1995 American superhero film directed by Joel Schumacher and produced by Tim Burton, based on the DC Comics character Batman. It is the third installment of Warner Bros.' initial Batman film series, with Val Kilmer replacing Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne/Batman. Also stars Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey, Nicole Kidman and Chris O'Donnell. The plot focuses on Batman trying to stop Two-Face and the Riddler in their villainous scheme to extract confidential information from all the minds in Gotham City and use it to learn Batman's identity and bring the city under their control. He gains allegiance from a love interestpsychiatrist Dr. Chase Meridianand a young, orphaned circus acrobat named Dick Grayson, who becomes his sidekick Robin.

The film's tone was different from the previous installments, becoming more family-friendly since Warner Bros. considered that the previous film, Batman Returns (1992), underperformed at the box office due to its violence and dark overtones. Schumacher eschewed the dark, dystopian atmosphere of Burton's films, and drew inspiration directly from the Batman comic book seen in the 1940s/early 1950s, and the 1960s television series. The budget of the film was an estimated $100m. Production was troubled, with many actors considered for the main roles. Filming locations include Alcatraz Island, San Francisco, CA and the Manhattan Bridge in New York City, NY.

The film was released on June 16, 1995. Batman Forever received mixed reviews, but was a financial success. It grossed over $336 million worldwide and becoming the sixth-highest grossing film worldwide of 1995. It made $52,784,433 in the United States for its opening weekend (June 22, 1995) on 2842 screens.

==Plot==

In Gotham City, Batman stops a hostage situation in a bank caused by Two-Face, the alter ego of the disfigured former district attorney, Harvey Dent. However, Two-Face escapes. Edward Nygma, a researcher at Wayne Enterprises, develops a device to beam television directly to a person's brain; Bruce Wayne (with whom Nygma is obsessed) rejects the invention, noting that it "raises too many questions", and Nygma angrily resigns from his position after killing his supervisor and forging his suicide note. After meeting Batman-obessesed psychiatrist Dr. Chase Meridian, Bruce invites her to a charity circus event. There, Two-Face and his henchmen storm the event in an attempt to discover Batman's secret identity, and in the process murder The Flying Graysons, a family of acrobats who attempt to stop him. The youngest member, Dick, survives and throws Two-Face's bomb into the river.

Bruce assumes responsibility for Dick and allows him to stay at Wayne Manor. Dick then declares his intention to kill Two-Face and avenge his family's murder, and when he discovers Bruce's secret identity as Batman, he insists on becoming his partner, "Robin". Meanwhile, Nygma becomes a criminal known as the "Riddler", the master of puzzles and quizzes and forms an alliance with Two-Face. The two work together to steal capital for the mass production and promotion of Nygma's television device. Using his device, Nygma can read and control people's minds, and steal their intelligence quotient. At a business party, Nygma discovers Bruce's secret identity. Two-Face then attacks the party and nearly kills Batman, but Robin arrives just in time to save his life. Meanwhile, Chase realizes her love for Bruce surpasses her obsession with Batman, but soon discovers that they are one and the same. However, Two-Face and the Riddler later converge into Wayne Manor. The Riddler enters the Batcave and destroys most of the equipment, and he and Two-Face kidnap Chase, who the Riddler is romantic to, while leaving Bruce another riddle.

After solving the last riddle, Batman and Robin locate the Riddler's lair, Claw Island, where both are separated upon reaching the island. Robin then encounters Two-Face and manages to beat him to the ground; realizing that he does not have it in him to commit murder, Robin helps the villain back up. Two-Face gets the upper hand and captures Robin. Meanwhile, Batman manages to make his way into the Riddler's lair, where Robin and Chase are revealed as hostages, bound, gagged with duct tape and held over a watery chasm, giving Batman a choice of saving just one hostage. Batman finds a way to save both hostages, and manages to destroy the brainwave-collecting device, driving the Riddler into a mental breakdown in the process. During the battle, Two-Face falls to his death. The Riddler is finally sent to Arkham Asylum, and Chase is asked to consult on his case. Nygma offers to reveal the identity of Batman to her, but he believes that he himself is Batman, due to his damaged memories. Chase then meets Bruce Wayne outside and tells him his secret is safe. Batman and Robin then continue to protect Gotham City from crime.

==Cast==
* Val Kilmer as Bruce Wayne/Batman After coming across the journal of his father, he starts questioning his act of vengeance. Bruce struggles with his dual identity as a crime fighter, becoming romantically involved with Dr. Chase Meridian.

* Tommy Lee Jones as Harvey Dent/Two-Face Formerly the good district attorney of Gotham City, half of Harvey's face is scarred with acid during the conviction of a crime boss. Driven insane, he becomes the criminal Harvey Two-Face. He flips a coin to determine if he kills (tails) or not (heads).

* Jim Carrey as Edward Nygma/The Riddler A former Wayne Enterprises employee, Edward resigns after his newest invention is personally rejected by Bruce Wayne, with whom he is obsessed. He becomes the villainous Riddler, leaving riddles and puzzles at crime scenes.

* Nicole Kidman as Dr. Chase Meridian A beautiful psychologist and love interest of Bruce Wayne. Chase is fascinated by the dual nature of Batman and is sexually attracted to him. She is held as a damsel in distress in the climax.

* Chris O'Donnell as Dick Grayson/Robin Once a circus acrobat, Dick is taken in by Bruce after Two-Face murders his parents and brother at a circus event. Bruce is reminded of when his parents were murdered when he sees the same vengeance in Dick, and decides to take him in as his ward. He eventually discovers the Batcave and learns Bruce's secret identity. In his wake, he becomes the crime fighting partner, Robin.

* Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth The Wayne family's faithful butler and Bruce's confidant. Alfred also befriends the young Dick Grayson.

* Pat Hingle as James Gordon The police commissioner of Gotham City.

* Drew Barrymore as Sugar Two-Face's "good" assistant.

* Debi Mazar as Spice Two-Face's "bad" assistant.

* Elizabeth Sanders as Gossip Gerty Gotham's top gossip columnist.

* Ren Auberjonois as Dr. Burton The head Doctor of Arkham Asylum.

* Joe Grifasi as Hawkins, the Bank Guard Two-Face's hostage during the opening scene.

* Ofer Samra as Two-Face's thug

* Ed Begley, Jr. as Fred Stickley Edward Nygma's ill-tempered supervisor at Wayne Enterprises. After Stickley discovers the side effect of Edward's invention, Edward kills him and makes it look like suicide. Begley was uncredited for this role.

==Production==

===Development===
Even though Batman Returns was a financial success, Warner Bros. felt the film should have made more money and decided to make the film series more mainstream. Tim Burton, who had directed the two previous installments, was asked to restrict himself to the role of producer and signed Joel Schumacher as director. After approving Schumacher as director, Burton met with Lee and Janet Scott-Batchler, who agreed with him that "the key element to Batman is his duality. And it's not just that Batman is Bruce Wayne". Burton along with Schumacher hired the Batchers to write the script which introduced a psychotic Riddler with a pet rat accompanying him. The story elements and much of the dialogue still remained in the finished film, though Schumacher felt it could be "lighted down". Schumacher claims he originally had in mind an adaptation of Frank Miller's . The studio rejected the idea as they wanted a sequel, not a prequel, though Schumacher was able to include very brief events in Bruce Wayne's past. He hired Akiva Goldsman - with whom he previously had worked with on The Client - to write the second draft of script. 

Production went on fast track with Rene Russo cast as Dr. Chase Meridian. Michael Keaton decided not to reprise Batman because he did not like the new direction the film series was heading in. Keaton also wanted to pursue "more interesting roles", turning down $15 million to appear in Batman Forever. Val Kilmer was cast days later, and the filmmakers decided that Russo was too old for Kilmer, replacing her with a different actress. Schumacher got interested in Kilmer for Batman after seeing him in Tombstone, and the actor accepted the role without even reading the script or knowing who the new director was. Before Val Kilmer was cast, Daniel Day-Lewis, Ralph Fiennes, William Baldwin and Johnny Depp were all under consideration to replace Michael Keaton. Ethan Hawke turned down the role over fear of typecasting, but later regretted the decision. 

Robin Wright, Jeanne Tripplehorn and Linda Hamilton were in competition for Dr. Chase Meridian, with Wright appearing as the favorable choice. Nicole Kidman was eventually cast. Kidman had been previously considered for the role of Catwoman in Batman Returns but turned it down and the role eventually went to Michelle Pfeiffer. Even though Billy Dee Williams took the role of Harvey Dent in Batman because he was looking forward to portraying Two-Face in a sequel, Schumacher cast Tommy Lee Jones in the role. Jones was always Schumacher's first choice for the role after working with him on The Client. Jones claims he was sent the script and was very cautious to accept, but accepted the part because Two-Face was his son's favorite character. Robin Williams expressed interest in the role of The Riddler, while Micky Dolenz was considered early in pre-production by Tim Burton. Michael Jackson was attached to the role, but was turned down. Jim Carrey was eventually cast. Robin appeared in the shooting script of Batman Returns but was deleted due to too many characters. Marlon Wayans was cast in the role, and signed for Batman Forever. It was decided to replace Wayans with a white actor, Leonardo DiCaprio and Chris O'Donnell became the top two choices, with O'Donnell winning the part. Mitchell Gaylord served as O'Donnell's stunt double. 

===Filming===
Filming started in September 1994. Schumacher hired Barbara Ling for production design, claiming that the film needed a "force" and felt Ling could "advance on it". Schumacher wanted a design that was not to be in any way connected to the previous films, and instead was to be inspired by the images from the Batman comic books seen in the 1940s/early 1950s and taken from that of New York City architecture in the 1930s, with a combination of modern Tokyo. He also wanted a "city with personality", with more statues, as well as various amounts of neon.

Schumacher had problems filming with Kilmer, whom he described as "childish and impossible", reporting that he fought with various crewmen, and refused to speak to Schumacher during two weeks after the director told him to stop behaving in a rude way. Schumacher also mentioned Tommy Lee Jones as a source of trouble: "Jim Carrey was a gentleman, and Tommy Lee was threatened by him. I'm tired of defending overpaid, overprivileged actors. I pray I don't work with them again." 

===Design and effects===

Rick Baker designed the prosthetic makeup. John Dykstra, Andrew Adamson and Jim Rygiel served as visual effects supervisors, with Pacific Data Images also contributing to visual effects work. PDI provided a computer-generated Batman for complicated stunts. For the costume design, producer Peter MacGregor-Scott claimed that 146 workers were at one point working together. Batman's costume was redesigned along the lines of a more "MTV organic, and edgier feel" to the suit. Sound editing and mixing was co-supervised by Bruce Stambler and John Levesque, which included trips to caves to record bat sounds. A new Batmobile was designed for Batman Forever, with two cars being constructed, one for stunt purposes and one for close-ups with both showcasing a V8 engine. 

===Music===

Elliot Goldenthal was hired by Schumacher to compose the film score before the screenplay was written, whereas most composers are hired during production. In discussions with Schumacher, the director wanted Goldenthal to avoid taking inspiration from Danny Elfman, and requested an original composition. 

The soundtrack was commercially successful, selling almost as many copies as Prince's soundtrack to the 1989 Batman film. Only five of the songs on the soundtrack are actually featured in the movie, the rest are allegedly 'inspired by' Batman Forever  a curious claim, since most, if not all, of the tracks were recorded before the film was even released. Hit singles from the soundtrack include "Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me" by U2 and "Kiss from a Rose" by Seal, both of which were nominated for MTV Movie Awards. "Kiss from a Rose" (whose video was also directed by Joel Schumacher) reached No. 1 in the U.S. charts as well. The soundtrack itself, featuring additional songs by The Flaming Lips, Brandy (both songs also included in the film), Method Man, Nick Cave, Michael Hutchence (of INXS), PJ Harvey, and Massive Attack, was an attempt to (in producer Peter MacGregor-Scott's words) make the film more "pop".

==Deleted scenes==
Batman Forever went through a few major edits before its release. Originally darker than the final product, the movie's original length was closer to two hours and 40 minutes according to director Joel Schumacher. There was talk of an extended cut being released to DVD for the film's 10th anniversary in 2005. While all four previous Batman films were given special edition DVD releases on the same day as the Batman Begins DVD release, none of them were given extended cuts, although some of the following scenes were in a deleted scenes section in the special features. 

Many scenes were filmed but deleted from the film, others scenes had footage removed. These included:

* The escape of Two-Face from Arkham Asylum. Ren Auberjonois had another scene filmed here in the role of Doctor Burton, but his role was reduced to a cameo in the final film. He discovers Two-Face's escape, encountering his psychologist hanged in Two-Face's cell with "The Bat Must Die" written in blood on the wall. This was supposed to be the film's opening scene, but producers decided this was far too dark for a family audience. This caused a massive re-edit of the movie. Originally the opening in the final film was meant to be after the scene of Bruce Wayne at Wayne Enterprises. Then after the helicopter scene, would come the death of Stickley. The scene of batman going to the bat signal, only to find Chase, was supposed to be right before the chase sequence of Two-face trying to kill Batman. Chases line, "last night at the bank" was meant to be "last night at the circus". This scene appears in a rough edit on the special edition DVD. 
* When Two-Face addresses the crowd from the helicopter in the opening action scene, the speech was truncated and several lines that appeared in the Theatrical Trailer were removed, including the line "If the Bat wants to play, we'll play!".
* There was a sequence that contained an extended fight scene between Two-Face and Batman, where they both struggle for control of the helicopter. In this scene, Two-Face accuses Batman of being "a killer too", a direct continuity reference to the first two Batman films in which Batman killed the Joker, the Penguin and several of their respective goons. Two-face then manages to escape by the parachute, after Batman realizes he has locked the steering wheel into position. This sequence is included in rough form on the special edition DVD. 
* A scene right before Edward Nygma arrived at Wayne Manor. It featured Bruce Wayne watching a local Gotham talk show with Chase Meridian as a guest, talking about Batman.
* One scene right before Riddler and Two-face team up featured a little conversation with Dick and Bruce in the gym of the manor. This would explain why Dick suddenly has martial art training. This scene appears in a rough edit on the Special Edition DVD.
* The scene where the Riddler fails to punch a security guard out. The guard is then brutally beaten, presumably to death.
* One sequence came directly after the casino robbery, where Batman follows a robbery signal on a tracking device in the Batmobile. He shows up at the crime scene and finds he is at the wrong place (a beauty salon), in which a room full of girls laugh at him. The Riddler had been throwing Batman off the track by messing with the Batmobile's tracking device. This would explain why in the theatrical version Batman seems to give Riddler and Two-Face moments of free rein over the city. This scene appears in a rough edit on the Special Edition DVD.
* The construction of NygmaTech was after Batman solves the third riddle and was more in-depth. There were scenes shot that appear in publicity stills of Edward Nygma with a hard hat helping with the construction of his headquarters on Claw Island.
* Sugar and Spice, played by Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazar, try out the Riddler's device during the montage when it goes on sale. They are seated with the Riddler and Two-Face on the couch where Chase is handcuffed later in the film. This scene appears in the comic adaptation but not in the final film.
* There was originally a scene after the montage of Alfred and Bruce examining the NygmaTech "Box".
* An extended scene established Bruce in the Batcave shortly after having discussed with Dick then that this would have saved his life after the battle with Two-Face in the subway system under construction. In this scene he is appreciated as the GNN news (Bruce watching in the Batcomputer) attacking Batman and Two-Face after the battle in the Subway and after that Bruce talking to Alfred turns into the dilemma of continuing to be Batman and try a normal life with Chase. Like the deleted Helicopter fight sequence, this scene also makes reference to Batman himself being "a killer", and in the original production screenplay, this scene was to contain footage from Batman Returns, specifically taken from the rooftop fight scene with Catwoman. This would explain why in the theatrical version Bruce turns off all the systems and else in the Batcave telling Dick he's gives up being Batman. This scene appears in a rough form on the Special Edition DVD. 
* Another scene in the Wayne Manor raid sequence was longer, featuring Bruce and Chase fighting Two-Face and his thugs.
* The scene involving Chase Meridian on the couch originally included a longer ending where the Riddler injects her with a green sleeping agent so he can easily place her in the small tube with the trap door.
* The most well-known deleted scene involved further backstory to the film. It involved Bruce waking up after being shot in the head by Two-Face, temporarily wiping a part of his memory; he has forgotten his origin and life as the Dark Knight. Alfred takes him to the Batcave, which has been destroyed by the Riddler. They stand on the platform where the Batmobile was, and Alfred says, "Funny they did not know about the cave beneath the cave." The platform then rotates downward to another level where the sonar-modification equipment is kept, from the special Batsuit to the hi-tech weaponry. Bruce then discovers the cavern where he first saw the image that inspired him to become Batman  a giant bat. Inside he finds his father's Red Diary. It reminds him of the injustices committed against his family, and of how, in his small way, he felt responsible and helpless. The giant bat then appears and Bruce raises his arms and the shot shows that they are one. Bruce now remembers who he is and goes with Alfred to solve the riddles left throughout the film. Screenwriter Akiva Goldsman admitted the scene was very theatrical on the special edition DVD and felt it would have made a difference to the final cut. The bat was designed and created by Rick Baker, who was in charge of the make-up of Two-Face. This scene appears in a rough form on the special edition DVD and is briefly mentioned in the comic adaptation.
* The fight scene between Two-Face and Robin on Claw Island was originally longer.
* The original ending was similar in style to the previous Batman films, which had involved a scene with Alfred in the limousine, the camera tracking upward through the Gotham cityscape, followed by a rooftop shot involving a silhouetted hero (Batman in the original, Catwoman in Batman Returns) facing the Bat Signal. When Alfred drives Doctor Chase Meridian back to Gotham she asks him "Does it ever end, Alfred?. "Alfred replies, "No, Doctor Meridian, not in this lifetime..." The Bat-Signal shines on the night sky and Batman is standing on a pillar looking ahead. Robin then comes into shot and joins his new partner. They both leap off the pillar, towards the camera. A rough edit of the first half of the scene appears on the special edition DVD, but not in its entirety. The sequence with Batman and Robin at the end of this scene is not to be confused with a commercial for the video game, whose appears in a teaser trailer for the video game, which is on the VHS release of this film, released in the UK on December 3, 1995.

==Release==

===Box office===
Batman Forever opened in 2,842 theaters in the United States on June 16, 1995, making $52.78 million in its opening weekend. This was the highest opening weekend of all time up to that point. The film went on to gross $184.03 million in North America, and $152.5 million in international countries, totaling $336.53 million. Batman Forever was declared a huge financial success. The film earned more money than its predecessor Batman Returns, and was the second-highest (behind Toy Story) grossing film of 1995, in the U.S. 

===Critical reaction ===
Batman Forever was released to mixed reviews from film critics. Based on 58 reviews collected by the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 41% of reviewers giving the film a positive review and the consensus: "Loud, excessively busy, and often boring, Batman Forever nonetheless has the charisma of Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones to offer mild relief." Metacritic collected an average score of 51, based on 23 reviews. 

Peter Travers said "Batman Forever still gets in its licks. There's no fun machine this summer that packs more surprises." However, he criticized the film's excessive commercialism and felt that "the script misses the pain Tim Burton caught in a man tormented by the long-ago murder of his parents." Brian Lowry of Variety believed "One does have to question the logic behind adding nipples to the hard-rubber batsuit. Whose idea was that supposed to be anyway, Alfred's? Some of the computer-generated Gotham cityscapes appear too obviously fake. Elliot Goldenthal's score, while serviceable, also isn't as stirring as Danny Elfman's work in the first two films." 

James Berardinelli enjoyed the film. "It's lighter, brighter, funnier, faster-paced, and a whole lot more colorful than before." Scott Beatty felt "Tommy Lee Jones played Harvey Dent as a Joker knock-off rather than a multi-layered rogue." Lee Bermejo called Batman Forever "unbearable". Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert both gave the film mixed reviews, but with the former giving it a thumbs up and the latter a thumbs down. At the Movies. In his written review, Ebert wrote: "Is the movie better entertainment? Well, it's great bubblegum for the eyes. Younger children will be able to process it more easily; some kids were led bawling from Batman Returns where the PG-13 rating was a joke." Mick LaSalle had a mixed reaction, concluding "a shot of Kilmer's rubber buns at one point is guaranteed to bring squeals from the audience." 

UK video game magazine Amiga Power sabotaged an in-house advert for sister magazine SFX by inserting an assertion that Batman Forever was "the worst" (Batman movie) in response to the advert's own suggestive question, pithily pre-empting that magazine's own coverage.

===Accolades===
At the 68th Academy Awards, Batman Forever was nominated for Cinematography (lost to Braveheart), Sound (Donald O. Mitchell, Frank A. Montao, Michael Herbick and Petur Hliddal; lost to Apollo 13) and Sound Editing (John Leveque and Bruce Stambler) (also lost to Braveheart). "Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me" by U2 was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song (lost to "Colors of the Wind" from Pocahontas), but was also nominated for the Worst Original Song Golden Raspberry Award (lost to "Walk Into the Wind" from Showgirls). At the Saturn Awards, the film was nominated for Best Fantasy Film (lost to Babe), Make-up (lost to Seven), Special Effects (lost to Jumanji) and Costume Design (lost to 12 Monkeys). Composer Elliot Goldenthal was given a Grammy Award nomination. Batman Forever received six nominations at the 1996 MTV Movie Awards, four of which were divided between two categories (Carrey and Lee Jones for Best Villain; and Seal's "Kiss from a Rose" and U2's "Hold Me" in Best Song from a Movie). However, it won in just one category  Best Song from a Movie for Seal's "Kiss from a Rose".

===Merchandising===
In addition to a large line of toys and action figures from Kenner, the McDonald's food chain released several collectibles and mugs to coincide with the release of the film. Peter David and Alan Grant wrote separate novelizations of the film. Dennis O'Neil authored a comic book adaptation, with art by Michal Dutkiewicz. 

Six Flags Great Adventure theme park re-themed their "Axis Chemical" arena, home of the Batman stunt show, to resemble "Batman Forever", and the new show featured props from the film. Because of the mostly negative critical reaction however, the stunt arena was changed back to its original version after the season. Six Flags Over Texas featured a one-time firework show to promote the movie, and replica busts of Batman, Robin, Two-Face, and the Riddler can still be found in the Justice League store in the Looney Tunes U.S.A. section.

==Sequel==
In 1997, a sequel titled Batman & Robin was released. It starred George Clooney replacing Val Kilmer as Batman, Chris O'Donnell reprising his role as Robin and Arnold Schwarzenegger as Mr. Freeze. Batman Triumphant, a fifth film in the Batman film series, was planned, but after the critical failure of Batman & Robin, it was dismissed.

==See also==

* Batman Forever (video game)
* 
* Batman Forever (soundtrack)

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Batman: Year One]]

"Year One", later referred to as "Batman: Year One", is an American comic book story arc written by Frank Miller, illustrated by David Mazzucchelli, colored by Richmond Lewis, and lettered by Todd Klein. It originally appeared in issues #404 to #407 of DC Comics' Batman comic title in 1987.

There have been several reprints of the story: a hardcover, multiple trade paperback editions (one in standard comics paper with simpler coloring and one deluxe version with rich detailing in the colors &mdash; both colored by Richmond Lewis) and it has been included in The Complete Frank Miller Batman hardcover. There is also an animated film adaptation of the same name.

== Plot ==
The story recounts the beginning of Bruce Wayne's career as Batman and Jim Gordon's with the Gotham City Police Department. Bruce Wayne returns home to Gotham City at the age of twenty-five from training abroad in martial arts, manhunting, and science for the past 12 years, and James Gordon moves to Gotham with his wife, Barbara, after a transfer from Chicago. Both are swiftly acquainted with the corruption and violence of Gotham City, with Gordon witnessing his partner Detective Arnold John Flass assaulting a teen for fun.

On a surveillance mission to the seedy East End, a disguised Bruce is propositioned by teenaged prostitute Holly Robinson. He is reluctantly drawn into a brawl with her violent pimp and is attacked by several prostitutes, including dominatrix Selina Kyle. Two police officers shoot and take him in their squad car, but a dazed and bleeding Bruce breaks his handcuffs and causes a crash, dragging the police to a safe distance before fleeing. He reaches Wayne Manor barely alive and sits before his fathers bust, requesting guidance in his war on crime. A bat crashes through a window and settles on the bust, giving him the inspiration to become a bat.

Gordon soon works to rid corruption from the force, but, on orders from Commissioner Gillian Loeb, several officers attack him, including Flass, who personally threatens Gordons pregnant wife. In revenge, the recovering Gordon tracks Flass down, beats and humiliates him, leaving him naked and handcuffed in the snow.

As Gordon becomes a minor celebrity for several brave acts, Batman strikes for the first time, attacking a group of thieves. Batman soon works up the ladder, even attacking Flass while he was accepting a drug dealers bribe. After Batman interrupts a dinner party attended by many of Gothams corrupt politicians and crime bosses to announce his intention to bring them to justice, including Carmine "The Roman" Falcone, Loeb orders Gordon to bring him in by any means necessary.

As Gordon tries in vain to catch him, Batman attacks Falcone, stripping him naked and tying him up in his bed after dumping his car in the river, further infuriating the mob boss. Assistant district attorney Harvey Dent becomes Batmans first ally, while Detective Sarah Essen and Gordon, after Essen suggested Bruce Wayne as a Batman suspect, witness Batman save an old woman from a runaway truck. Essen holds Batman at gunpoint while Gordon is momentarily dazed, but Batman disarms her and flees to an abandoned building.

Claiming the building has been scheduled for demolition, Loeb orders a bomb dropped on it, forcing Batman into the fortified basement, abandoning his belt as the explosives inside catch fire. A trigger-happy SWAT team led by Branden is sent in, whom Batman attempts to trap in the basement. They soon escape and, after tranquilizing Branden, Batman dodges as the rest open fire, barely managing to survive after two bullet wounds. Enraged as the teams carelessly fired bullets injure several people outside, Batman beats the team into submission and, after using a device to attract the bats of his cave to him, he flees amid the chaos. Selina Kyle, after witnessing him in action, dons a costume of her own to begin a life of crime.

Gordon has a brief affair with Essen, while Batman intimidates a mob drug dealer for information. The dealer comes to Gordon to testify against Flass, who is brought up on charges. Upset with Gordon's exploits, Loeb blackmails Gordon against pressing charges with proof of his affair. After bringing Barbara with him to interview Bruce Wayne, investigating his connection to Batman, Gordon confesses the affair to her.

Batman sneaks into Falcones manor, overhearing a plan against Gordon, but is interrupted when Selina Kyle, hoping to build a reputation after her robberies were pinned on Batman, attacks Falcone and his bodyguards, aided from afar by Batman. Identifying Falcones plan as the morning comes, the uncostumed Bruce leaves to help.

While leaving home, Gordon spots a motorcyclist enter his garage. Suspicious, Gordon enters to see Johnny Vitti, Falcones nephew, and his thugs holding his family hostage. Gordon decisively shoots the thugs and chases Vitti, who has fled with the baby. The mysterious motorcyclist, now revealed to the reader as Bruce Wayne, rushes out to chase Vitti. Gordon blows out Vitti's car tire on a bridge and the two fight hand-to-hand, with Gordon losing his glasses, before Vitti and James Gordon Junior fall over the side. Bruce leaps over the railing and saves the baby. Gordon realizes that he is standing before an unmasked Batman, but says that he is "practically blind without glasses," and lets Bruce go.

In the final scenes of the comic, Flass turns on Loeb, supplying Dent with evidence and testimony, and Loeb resigns. Gordon is promoted to captain and stands on the rooftop waiting to meet Batman to discuss somebody called The Joker, who is plotting to poison the reservoir.

==Critical reaction==
David Mazzucchelli autographing a copy of the collected story at a June 28, 2012 signing at Midtown Comics in Manhattan.
IGN Comics ranked Batman: Year One number 1 on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels, saying that "no other book before or since has quite captured the realism, the grit and the humanity of Gordon and Batman so perfectly." The 25 Greatest Batman Graphic Novels, Hilary Goldstein, IGN, June 13, 2005 The website added, "It's not only one of the most important comics ever written, it's also among the best." Batman: Year One Review, IGN, June 17, 2005 

Writer Matthew K. Manning in the "1980s" chapter of DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle (2010) praises the story for both Miller's "realistic characterization" and Mazzucchelli's "brilliant iconic" artwork. 

==Continuity==
Batman: Year One exists not only in the mainstream DC continuity, but also in the same continuity as the other storylines in Miller's "Dark Knight Universe", consisting of The Dark Knight Returns, its sequel The Dark Knight Strikes Again, Spawn/Batman, and All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder. 

Following Crisis on Infinite Earths, DC rebooted many of its titles. Year One was followed by , but the 1994 crossover erased Year Two from continuity. In another continuity re-arrangement, Catwoman: Year One (Catwoman Annual #2, 1995) posited that Selina Kyle had not actually been a prostitute, but, rather, a thief posing as one in order to commit crimes.

Launched in 1989, following the success of the film Batman, the title examines crime-fighting exploits primarily, not exclusively, from the first four to five years of Batman's career. This title rotated in creative teams and time placement, but several stories directly relate to the events of Year One, especially the first arc "Batman: Shaman". In 1998, Jeph Loeb and Tim Sale created and , two 13-issue maxiseries that recounted Batman's early years as a crime-fighter following the events of Miller's original story and retold the origins of Two-Face and Dick Grayson. The Year One story was continued in the 2005 graphic novel , following up on Gordon informing Batman about the Joker, and thus recounting their first official encounter. Two other stories, Batman and the Monster Men and Batman and the Mad Monk tie into the same time period of Batman's career, filling in the gap between Year One and the Man Who Laughs. Following the 2007 cancellation of Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight, Batman Confidential began publication, depicting Batman's early years, although some of these stories take place several years after Miller's Year One story because Batman is depicted wearing his "yellow oval" costume.

== Other releases ==
"Batman: Year One" was released in 1995 by Battleaxe Press comics in South Africa under the serial numbers of Batman 1 to 4 as an introduction to the character.

==Adaptations==

===Live-action film===

In 2000, Warner Bros. hired Darren Aronofsky to write and direct a reboot of the Batman film franchise. This reboot was to be based on Batman: Year One. Accordingly, Aronofsky collaborated with Frank Miller who finished an early draft of the script. The script, however, was a loose adaptation, as it kept most of the themes and elements from the graphic novel but shunned other conventions that were otherwise integral to the character. It was eventually shelved by the studio then both Aronofsky and Miller moved on to other projects. 

In 2005, Christopher Nolan began his series, with the reboot film Batman Begins, which draws inspiration from Batman: Year One and other stories (see below).

===Animated film===
In 2011, a film adaptation was released by DC Universe Animated Original Movies based upon Frank Miller's original story arc. It is produced by Bruce Timm, co-directed by Lauren Montgomery and Sam Liu. It features the voices of Benjamin McKenzie as Bruce Wayne/Batman, Bryan Cranston as James Gordon, Eliza Dushku as Selina Kyle/Catwoman, Katee Sackhoff as Sarah Essen, Grey DeLisle as Barbara Gordon, Jon Polito as Commissioner Loeb, Alex Rocco as Carmine 'The Roman' Falcone. The movie premiered at Comic-Con, with OVA available in October. 

==Influence in other adaptations==

===Batman: Mask of the Phantasm===
In the acclaimed 1993 animated film (based on ), creators Bruce Timm, Paul Dini and Alan Burnett draw aspects from Batman: Year One during the flashback scenes, these include:

*A young and inexperienced Bruce Wayne fighting street thugs and realizing his shortcomings.
*The present-time scene where Batman/Bruce is cornered by Detective Bullock's SWAT Team adheres to a similar setting from the graphic novel as mentioned above (the abandoned tenement fire from issue #3).

===The Batman===
The first 2 seasons of The Batman animated series as well as its spin-off film The Batman vs Dracula take various inspiration from Batman: Year One, including:

*The Police hunting for the Batman and viewing him as Public Enemy #1.
* The role of Jim Gordon in Batman Year One being one of the few who doubts that Batman is a threat and is replaced at first by Ethan Bennett. After he becomes Clayface, he is then replaced by Ellen Yin (also based on The Dark Knight Returnss character Ellen Yindel). Later in the season finale of Season 2, Gordon came to the show as one of the few people who believes in Batman.
*There are also a few scenes in Seasons 1 and 2 as well as The Batman vs Dracula film where Batman/Bruce is being hunted down and then cornered by the GCPD's SWAT Team in an abandoned building. This adheres to a similar setting from the graphic novel as mentioned above (the abandoned tenement fire from issue #3).

=== Batman Forever ===
Joel Schumacher's Batman Forever, although set during another timespan, adopts some elements directly from the graphic novel. Schumacher claims he originally had in mind an adaptation of Frank Miller's Batman: Year One. The studio rejected the idea as they wanted a sequel, not a prequel, though Schumacher was able to include very brief events in Batman's past. Some of the more direct interpretations include:

*The close relationship between Bruce Wayne and Commissioner James Gordon.
*The scene where Bruce Wayne reaches Wayne Manor barely alive and sits before his fathers bust requesting guidance in his war on crime. A bat crashes through a window and settles on the bust giving him the inspiration to become a bat. This scene was used in a deleted footage involved further back story to the film. It involved Bruce waking up after being shot in the head by Two-Face, temporarily wiping a part of his memory; he has forgotten his origin and life as the Dark Knight. Alfred takes him to the Batcave, which has been destroyed by the Riddler. They stand on the platform where the Batmobile was,then rotates downward to another level where the sonar-modification equipment is kept, from the special Batsuit to the hi-tech weaponry. Bruce then discovers the cavern where he first saw the image that inspired him to become Batman  a giant bat. Inside he finds his father's Red Diary. It reminds him of the injustices committed against his family, and of how, in his small way, he felt responsible and helpless. The giant bat then appears and Bruce raises his arms and the shot shows that they are one. Bruce now remembers who he is and goes with Alfred to solve the riddles left throughout the film.
*The scene where Bruce being a child falls into the cave and see a bat as his inspiration and his fear (also used in Batman Begins).

===The Dark Knight trilogy===
Christopher Nolan's Batman Begins and its sequel The Dark Knight are set during the same timespan and adopt several elements directly from the graphic novel. Some of the more direct interpretations include:

*Major characters like Commissioner Loeb, Detective Flass and Carmine 'The Roman' Falcone who are featured prominently in Batman Begins.
*The scene with Bruce Wayne returning from years of training abroad on board a plane reminisces the first page of the graphic novel.
*Christian Bale's 'street attire' in Batman Begins mimics the clothes in the first issue of Batman: Year One when Bruce is walking down the Lower East End.
*Tying Falcone up: In the graphic novel Batman ties The Roman in his own house; in the film, he ties The Roman to a searchlight.
*In the final act of Batman Begins, while being cornered by the GCPD at Arkham Asylum Batman uses a high-frequency device to attract his bats from the cave. This is taken from the final act of the graphic novel when Batman does the same thing at the abandoned tenement fire.
*The concluding scene where Batman and Gordon are on top of the police headquarters continues, to an extent, the final page of the graphic novel where newly promoted Jim Gordon waits for Batman to arrive. In both the book and the film, Gordon announces the coming of a new threat: The Joker.
*During the famous viral marketing for The Dark Knight, an audio clip was available that depicted Harvey Dent walking up to a hostage situation and subduing the threat. While this may not be a direct adaptation, it does resemble the scene with the hostage situation in Batman: Year One, only replacing James Gordon with Harvey Dent (Aaron Eckhart). Although the entire incident and Dent's role occurs out of earshot and thus did not require Aaron Eckhart to play out the clip.
*The concluding scene in The Dark Knight, where Two-Face holds Gordon's family at gunpoint, is reminiscent of the Year One scene where Gordon's family is at danger from The Roman and Loeb's men. Batman saves Gordon's son from a fall in the film just as he does in the book.
* In The Dark Knight Rises, Batman is briefly seen using bat-shaped tranquilser darts to subdue Bane's men, in order to rescue Gordon and a few other captives. These tranquilser darts may be inspired by the ones Batman uses in Batman: Year One to escape the GCPD in the abandoned building.

===Video games===
The video game , a prequel to and , takes some inspirations from the comic. It mentions the corruption of the GCPD and features characters such as a younger Captain James Gordon, Commissioner Loeb and GCPD SWAT Team Leader Branden. A costume from that game was also available as DLC for Arkham City, and returns for use only in multiplayer in Arkham Origins.

==References==

==External links==
*Batman: Year One Movie Official Site
*Batman: Year One Movie Official Fan Page
*Batman: Year One @ The World's Finest
*Current edition at DC Comics ISBN 0-930289-33-1
*Deluxe Hardcover edition at DC Comics ISBN 1-4012-0690-5



[[Bi-directional text]]

Bi-directional text is text containing text in both text directionalities, both right-to-left (RTL or dextrosinistral) and left-to-right (LTR or sinistrodextral). It generally involves text containing different types of alphabets, but may also refer to boustrophedon, which is changing text directionality in each row.

Some writing systems of the world, notably the Arabic and Hebrew scripts, and derived systems such as the Urdu, Persian, Kurdish and Yiddish scripts, are written in a form known as right-to-left (RTL), in which writing begins at the right-hand side of a page and concludes at the left-hand side. This is different from the left-to-right (LTR) direction used by most languages in the world. When LTR text is mixed with RTL in the same paragraph, each type of text is written in its own direction, which is known as bi-directional text. This can get rather complex when multiple levels of quotation are used.

Many computer programs fail to display bi-directional text correctly.
For example, the Hebrew name Sarah () is spelled sin () resh () heh () from right to left. 
Note: Some web browsers may display the Hebrew text in this article in the opposite direction.

== Unicode support ==
Bidirectional script support is the capability of a computer system to correctly display bi-directional text. The term is often shortened to BiDi or bidi.

Early computer installations were designed only to support a single writing system, typically for left-to-right scripts based on the Latin alphabet only. Adding new character sets and character encodings enabled a number of other left-to-right scripts to be supported, but did not easily support right-to-left scripts such as Arabic or Hebrew, and mixing the two was not practical. Right-to-left scripts were introduced through encodings like ISO/IEC 8859-6 and ISO/IEC 8859-8, storing the letters (usually) in writing and reading order. It is possible to simply flip the left-to-right display order to a right-to-left display order, but doing this sacrifices the ability to correctly display left-to-right scripts. With bidirectional script support, it is possible to mix scripts from different scripts on the same page, regardless of writing direction.

In particular, the Unicode standard provides foundations for complete BiDi support, with detailed rules as to how mixtures of left-to-right and right-to-left scripts are to be encoded and displayed.

In Unicode encoding, all non-punctuation characters are stored in writing order. This means that the writing direction of characters is stored within the characters. If this is the case, the character is called "strong". Punctuation characters however, can appear in both LTR and RTL scripts. They are called "weak" characters because they do not contain any directional information. So it is up to the software to decide in which direction these "weak" characters will be placed. Sometimes (in mixed-directions text) this leads to display errors caused by the BiDi algorithm, which examines the text, identifies LTR and RTL strong characters and assigns a direction to weak characters, according to certain rules.

In the algorithm, each sequence of concatenated strong characters is called a "run". A weak character that is located between two strong characters with the same orientation will inherit their orientation. A weak character that is located between two strong characters with a different writing direction, will inherit the main context's writing direction (in an LTR document the character will become LTR, in an RTL document, it will become RTL). If a "weak" character is followed by another "weak" character, the algorithm will look at the first neighbouring "strong" character. Sometimes this leads to unintentional display errors. These errors are corrected or prevented with "pseudo-strong" characters. Such Unicode control characters are called marks. The mark ( or ) is to be inserted into a location to make an enclosed weak character inherit its writing direction.

For example, to correctly display the for an English name brand (LTR) in an Arabic (RTL) passage, an LRM mark is inserted after the trademark symbol if the symbol is not followed by LTR text. If the LRM mark is not added, the weak character will be neighbored by a strong LTR character and a strong RTL character. Hence, in an RTL context, it will be considered to be RTL, and displayed in an incorrect order.

Possible BiDi-types of a character, to be used by the BiDi algorithm, are:

== Scripts using bi-directional text ==
Egyptian hieroglyphs can be written bi-directionally, where the signs had a distinct "head" that faced the beginning of a line and "tail" that faced the end.

Chinese characters can also be written in either direction as well as vertically (top to bottom then right to left), especially in signs (such as plaques), but the orientation of the individual characters is never changed. This can often be seen on tour buses in China, where the company name customarily runs from the front of the vehicle to its rear  that is, from right to left on the right side of the bus, and from left to right on the left side of the bus. English texts on the right side of the vehicle are also quite commonly written in reverse order.

Image:Yangzhou-tour-bus--right-side-3182.jpg|The right side (text runs from right to left)
Image:Yangzhou-tour-bus--leftt-side-3184.jpg|The left side (text runs from left to right)
Image:Hainan Airlines - Boeing 737-86N.jpg| On the right side of this Hainan Airlines aircraft, the text runs from right to left (     ).
Image:Hainan Airlines.JPG|The left side, however, shows the text running from left to right (     ).
File:VM 5485 China Post Office car at Zhengzhou Train Station.jpg|A photo that shows text on both sides of a China Post vehicle

Another variety of writing style, called boustrophedon, was used in some scripts, such as ancient Greek inscriptions and Hungarian runes. This method of writing alternates direction, and usually reverses the individual characters, on each successive line.

== See also ==
* Internationalization and localization
* Horizontal and vertical writing in East Asian scripts
* Writing system#Directionality (section on directionality)
* Combining Cyrillic Millions
* Transformation of text
* Boustrophedon

== References ==

== External links ==
* Unicode Standards Annex #9 The Bidirectional Algorithm
* W3C guidelines on authoring techniques for bi-directional text - includes examples and good explanations
* GNU FriBidi A free implementation of the Unicode bidirectional algorithm
* ICU International Components for Unicode contains an implementation of the bidirectional algorithm  along with other internationalization services
* UCData: "Pretty Good Bidi Algorithm Library" A small and fast bidirectional reordering algorithm that works pretty good, but not necessarily compliant to the Unicode algorithm
* Bidirectional Scripts in Desktop Software Working group for supporting BiDi in Free Software. Contains several links to readings and implementation regarding BiDi in computer systems.
* Another Wiki about BiDi
* Bidirectional text - Examples and practical advice
* .Net BiDi Implementation
* A freely available rather final version of Israeli standard 5194 - bidirectional text editing
* Work in progress on new version of Bidi editing standard + reference implementation
* Series of articles about pitfalls of BiDi programming



[[Bernoulli's inequality]]

An illustration of Bernoulli's inequality, with the graphs of and shown in red and blue respectively. Here, 
In real analysis, Bernoulli's inequality (named after Jacob Bernoulli) is an inequality that approximates exponentiations of 1 + x.

The inequality states that

:

for every integer r  0 and every real number x  1. If the exponent r is even, then the inequality is valid for all real numbers x. The strict version of the inequality reads

:

for every integer r  2 and every real number x  1 with x  0.

Bernoulli's inequality is often used as the crucial step in the proof of other inequalities. It can itself be proved using mathematical induction, as shown below.

==Proof of the inequality==

For r = 0,

:

is equivalent to 1  1 which is true as required.

Now suppose the statement is true for r = k:

:

Then it follows that

:

However, as 1 + (k + 1)x + kx2  1 + (k + 1)x (since kx2  0), it follows that (1 + x)k + 1  1 + (k + 1)x, which means the statement is true for r = k + 1 as required.

By induction we conclude the statement is true for all r  0.

==Generalization==

The exponent r can be generalized to an arbitrary real number as follows: if x > 1, then

:

for r  0 or r  1, and

:

for 0  r  1.

This generalization can be proved by comparing derivatives.
Again, the strict versions of these inequalities require x  0 and r  0, 1.

== Related inequalities ==
The following inequality estimates the r-th power of 1 + x from the other side. For any real numbers x, r > 0, one has

:

where e = 2.718.... This may be proved using the inequality (1 + 1/k)k < e.

==Alternative form==
An alternative form of Bernoulli's inequality for and is:

:

This can be proved (for integer t) by using the formula for geometric series: (using y=1-x)

:
or equivalently 

==Proof for rational case==

An "elementary" proof can be given using the fact that geometric mean of positive numbers is less than arithmetic mean 

First assume 

By comparing Arithmetic and Geometric mean of numbers
( occurs times):

we get

or equivalently

This proves inequality for case.

For case,
let As 
we get with ,

This proves inequality for case.

As these inequalities are true for all rational numbers and ,
they are also true for all real numbers, which follows from a density argument of the rationals in the reals, and the fact that the functions involved are continuous.

==References==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Bernoulli Inequality by Chris Boucher, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* 



[[Benjamin Franklin-class submarine]]

 

The Benjamin Franklin-class submarine was an evolutionary development from the of fleet ballistic missile submarine. Having quieter machinery and other improvements, they are considered a separate class. A subset of this class is the re-engineered 640 class starting with . The Benjamin Franklin class, together with the , , , and classes, comprise the "41 for Freedom."

The Benjamin Franklin-class submarines were built with the Polaris A-3 ballistic missile, and later converted to carry the Poseidon C-3. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, selected units were further modified to carry Trident-I (C-4) ballistic missiles.

Two submarines of this class were converted for delivery of special warfare units ashore. In the early 1990s, to make room for the ballistic missile submarines within the limits set by the SALT II strategic arms limitation treaty, the ballistic missile tubes of and were disabled. Those boats were redesignated special operations attack submarines and given attack submarine (SSN) hull numbers.

USS Kamehameha was decommissioned on 2 April 2002, the last ship of the Benjamin Franklin class to be decommissioned.

== Boats ==
Submarines of the Benjamin Franklin class: http://www.submarinehistory.com/FleetBallisticMissileSubmarines.html California Center for Military History 
(Submarines marked with * indicate Trident C-4 ballistic missile conversions.)
* *
* *
* 
* *
* 
* 
* 
* *
* 
* *
* *
* 

== See also ==

* 41 for Freedom Fleet Ballistic Missile submarines
* Fleet Ballistic Missile

==References==
 

 
 Benjamin Franklin class



[[Bastard Operator From Hell]]

The Bastard Operator From Hell (BOFH) is a fictional character, a rogue system administrator who takes out his anger on users (often referred to as lusers), colleagues, bosses, and anyone else who pesters him with their pitiful user created "problems". Several people have written stories about BOFHs, but the canonical one is created by Simon Travaglia. The BOFH stories were originally posted in 1992 to Usenet by Travaglia, with some being reprinted in Datamation. They were published weekly from 1995 to 1999 in Network Week and since 2000 they have been published regularly in The Register. Simon Travaglia, The Register, accessed 18 January 2013 Several books of the stories have also been released.

By extension, the term is also used to refer to any system administrator who displays (or wishes he could get away with) the qualities of the original. The term has become common Internet slang.

Early BOFH editions took place in a university, moving on to an office workplace over time. BOFH 2k began with the BOFH and his pimply-faced youth (PFY) assistant moving to a new company.

==Characters==
The following characters appear regularly:

* The BOFH (real name of Simon). Loves 'his' system, and hates the users, who he believes are intent on breaking it. Faked his death in order to take an extended holiday, twice, with great success.
* The PFY (Pimply-Faced Youth) (real name of Stephen ) (BOFH's assistant, 1996) Possesses a similar temperament to the BOFH, and is often found either teaming up with and/or plotting against him.
* The Boss (often portrayed as having no IT knowledge whatsoever yet believes otherwise, changes throughout the stories as successive bosses are sacked, leave, are committed, or have nasty "accidents")
* "Beancounters" aka accountants (disposable, interchangeable, faceless, used on occasion as balls in a game of "blackout fire-alarm beancounter pinball")
* The CEO  The PFY's uncle Brian from 1996 until 2000, when the BOFH and PFY moved on to a new company. 
* The Head of IT, almost as disposable as the Boss, slightly more intelligent.
* "Helldesk Operators" (disposable, interchangeable, faceless)
* The Boss's Secretary, Sharon.
* Security (who will tape Emmerdale over CCTV video tapes; useless with computers)
* George, the cleaner (invaluable source of information, often referred to as the "Alfred" to the BOFH and PFY)
* Sam, the janitor (scapegoat)
* Ron, the electrician (Mad Ron the Sparky, often electrocuted, possibly deceased)
* Engineers, from various suppliers (often shown as having no idea what they are doing, often used as scapegoats)
* The 'Coloured Crayon' Department  the users of Apple Macs for graphic design
* Code Hacks  Programmers

==BOFH books==
* The Bastard Operator From Hell (Plan Nine, ISBN 1-929462-17-4)
* Bastard Operator From Hell II: Son of the Bastard (Plan Nine, ISBN 1-929462-40-9)
* Bride of the Bastard Operator From Hell (Plan Nine, ISBN 1-929462-48-4)
* Dummy Mode Is Forever (Plan Nine, ISBN 1-929462-63-8)
* Dial "B" For Bastard (Plan Nine, ISBN 1-929462-94-8)

==References==

==External links==
* BOFH stories, 1988-1999
* BOFH stories, 2000-present from The Register
* The Original BOFH #1 Usenet Post, June 10th, 1992



[[Brownie McGhee]]

Walter Brown ("Brownie") McGhee (November 30, 1915  February 16, 1996) was a Piedmont blues singer and guitarist, best known for his collaborations with the harmonica player Sonny Terry. 

==Life and career==
Brownie McGhee was born in Knoxville, Tennessee and grew up in Kingsport, Tennessee. [ Allmusic biography] As a child he had polio, which incapacitated his leg. His brother Granville "Sticks" or "Stick" McGhee was nicknamed for pushing young Brownie around in a cart. His father, George McGhee, was a factory worker known around University Avenue for playing guitar and singing. Brownie's uncle made him a guitar from a tin marshmallow box and a piece of board. Neely, Jack. Knoxville's Secret History. Scruffy City Publishing, 1995. McGhee spent much of his youth immersed in music, singing with local harmony group the Golden Voices Gospel Quartet and teaching himself to play guitar. A March of Dimes-funded leg operation enabled McGhee to walk. 

At age 22, Brownie McGhee became a traveling musician, working in the Rabbit Foot Minstrels and befriending Blind Boy Fuller, whose guitar playing influenced him greatly. After Fuller's death in 1941, J. B. Long of Columbia Records had McGhee adopt his mentor's name, branding him "Blind Boy Fuller No. 2." By that time, McGhee was recording for Columbia's subsidiary Okeh Records in Chicago, but his real success came after he moved to New York in 1942, when he teamed up with Sonny Terry, whom he had known since 1939 when Sonny was Blind Boy Fuller's harmonica player. The pairing was an overnight success; as well as recording, they toured together until around 1980. As a duo, Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee did most of their work from 1958 until 1980, spending 11 months of each year touring, and recording dozens of albums.

Despite their later fame as "pure" folk artists playing for white audiences, in the 1940s Terry and McGhee also attempted to be successful black recording performers, fronting a jump blues combo with honking saxophone and rolling piano, variously calling themselves "Brownie McGhee and his Jook House Rockers" or "Sonny Terry and his Buckshot Five," often with Champion Jack Dupree and Big Chief Ellis. They also appeared in the original Broadway productions of Finian's Rainbow and Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.

During the blues revival of the 1960s, Terry and McGhee were very popular on the concert and music festival circuits, occasionally adding new material but usually remaining faithful to their roots and their audience. 

Late in his life, McGhee began appearing in small film or TV roles. With Sonny Terry, he appeared in the 1979 Steve Martin comedy The Jerk. In 1987, McGhee gave a small but memorable performance as ill-fated blues singer Toots Sweet in the supernatural thriller movie, Angel Heart. In his review of Angel Heart, critic Roger Ebert singled out McGhee for praise, declaring that his "performance that proves Dexter Gordon isn't the only old musician who can act." McGhee appeared in a 1988 episode of "Family Ties" titled "The Blues, Brother" in which he played fictional blues musician Eddie Dupre, as well as a 1989 episode of Matlock entitled "The Blues Singer."

Happy Traum, a former guitar student of Brownie's, edited a blues guitar instruction guide and songbook for him. Using a tape recorder, Traum had McGhee instruct and, between lessons, talk about his life and the blues. Guitar Styles of Brownie McGhee was published in New York in 1971. The autobiographical section features Brownie talking about growing up, his musical beginnings, and a history of the early blues period (1930s onward).

One of McGhee's final concert appearances was at the 1995 Chicago Blues Festival. 

McGhee died from stomach cancer in February 1996 in Oakland, California at age 80; he missed his planned return trip to Australia. 

==Discography==
===Solo albums===
* Traditional Blues - Vol. 1 (Folkways Records, 1951)
* Brownie McGhee Blues (Folkways, 1955)
* Brownie McGhee Sings the Blues (Folkways, 1959)
* Traditional Blues - Vol. 2 (Folkways, 1960)
* Brownie's Blues (Original Blues Classics, 1962)
* Blues Is Truth (Blues Alliance, 1976)
* Facts Of Life (Blues Rock'It, 1985)

===Compilation===
* The Folkways Years, 1945-1959 (Smithsonian Folkways, 1991)

===With Sonny Terry===
* Brownie McGhee Blues (Folkways, 1955)
* Washboard Band - Country Dance Music (Folkways, 1956)
* Folk Songs of Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee (Roulette, 1958)
* Blues with Big Bill Broonzy, Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee (Folkways, 1959)
* Sonny & Brownie (A&M Records, 1973)
* Brownie McGhee and Sonny Terry Sing (Smithsonian Folkways, 1990)

==See also==
*American folk music
*Woody Guthrie
*American Blues
*List of blues musicians
*List of people from Tennessee
*List of folk musicians

==References==

==External links==
*Center for Southern African American Music - Brownie McGhee &mdash; McGhee bio and audio samples



[[International Bureau of Weights and Measures]]

The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (), is an international standards organisation, one of three such organisations established to maintain the International System of Units (SI) under the terms of the Metre Convention (Convention du Mtre). The organisation is usually referred to by its French initialism, BIPM.

The other organisations that maintain the SI system, also known by their French initialisms are the General Conference on Weights and Measures () (CGPM) and the International Committee for Weights and Measures () (CIPM).

==History==
The BIPM was created on 20 May 1875, following the signing of the Metre Convention, a treaty among 51 nations (). It is based at the Pavillon de Breteuil in Svres, France, a 4.35 ha site (originally 2.52 ha) granted to the Bureau by the French Government in 1876, where it enjoys extraterritorial status, a status that was clarified by the French decree No 70-820 of 9 September 1970. 

==Function==
Under the authority of the Metric Convention, the BIPM helps to ensure uniformity of SI weights and measures around the world. It does so through a series of consultative committees, whose members are the national metrology laboratories of the Convention's member states, and through its own laboratory work.

The BIPM carries out measurement-related research. It takes part in and organises international comparisons of national measurement standards and performs calibrations for member states.

The BIPM has an important role in maintaining accurate worldwide time of day. It combines, analyses, and averages the official atomic time standards of member nations around the world to create a single, official Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). 

The BIPM is also the keeper of the international prototype of the kilogram. 

== Directors of the BIPM ==
The bureau.
Since its establishment, the directors of the BIPM have been: 
*18751877 Gilbert Govi (Italy) 
*18771879 J. Pernet (Switzerland) 
*18791889 Ole Jacob Broch (Norway) 
*18891915 J.-Ren Benot (France) 
*19151936 Charles douard Guillaume (Switzerland) 
*19361951 Albert Prard (France) 
*19511961 Charles Volet (Switzerland) 
*19621977 Jean Terrien (France) 
*19781988 Pierre Giacomo (France) 
*19882003 Terry J. Quinn, CBE FRS (United Kingdom)
*20042010 Andrew J. Wallard (United Kingdom) 
*20112012 Michael Khne (Germany)
*2013 Martin J.T. Milton (United Kingdom). 

==See also==

* Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements
* International Organization for Standardization
* National Institute of Standards and Technology

==References==

 

==External links==

*



[[Bayonne]]

Bayonne (; Gascon Baiona ; ; ) is a city and commune in southwestern France at the confluence of the Nive and Adour rivers, in the Pyrnes-Atlantiques department, of which it is a sub-prefecture. It belongs to both vernacular cultural regions of Basque Country and Gascony.

Together with nearby Anglet, Biarritz, Saint-Jean-de-Luz, and several smaller communes, Bayonne forms an urban area with 178,965 inhabitants at the 1999 census, 40,078 of whom lived in the city of Bayonne proper (44,300 as of 2004 estimates).

The communes of Bayonne, Biarritz, and Anglet have joined into an intercommunal entity called the Agglomration Cte Basque-Adour (formerly Communaut d'agglomration de Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) prior to 2010). Prefectural order of 28/12/2010, extending the boundaries, modifying the bylaws, and changing the designation of CABAB 

==History==
In the 3rd century AD, the area was the site of a Roman castrum called Lapurdum, which was a military site, but not a port. In 840 the Vikings appeared before Lapurdum; in 842, Viking chieftain Bjrn Ironside and his troops launched a large-scale inland offensive and settled outside the city on the river bank. Lapurdum was an oppidum and they needed a port. Bayonne (from Basque ibai, "river") became a key place on the route between the Adour and Ebro rivers, which served as a kind of link between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. This commercial route was the main goal of Danish invaders in France. By this route, they could easily reach Muslim-controlled Tortosa, which was the main marketplace in Europe dealing with slaves.

By the 13th century, the city was an important port, with a Gascon and Basque population. As part of Aquitaine, it was ruled by England between 1151 to 1452 and was a key commercial center at the southern end of the English kingdom.

Its importance waned somewhat when the French king, Charles VII, took the city at the end of the Hundred Years' War and the Adour changed course shortly afterwards, leaving Bayonne without its access to the sea. The French, however, realised Bayonne's strategic site near the Spanish border and in 1578 dug a canal to again redirect the river through the city.

Bayonne endured numerous sieges from Plantagenet times until the end of the First French Empire in 1814. In the 17th century, Vauban built large fortifications and the Citadelle in and around the city. These proved crucial in 1813 and 1814, when Wellington's army besieged the city in the Napoleonic Wars, only taking it when they used a bridge of ships across the Adour to position artillery around the city.

Bayonne's location close to the border, but also within the Basque Country straddling both France and Spain, gave it an often privileged position in commerce. Basque sailors travelled the world, bringing back products such as cinnamon and riches from piracy and the whaling and cod trades. An armaments industry developed, giving the world the "bayonet". Jewish refugees from the Spanish Inquisition from 1560 brought new trades, most notably chocolate-making, which is still important in Bayonne. Spanish Basques also sought refuge in Bayonne in the 20th century during Francisco Franco's repression, with Petit Bayonne still a centre of Basque nationalism.
Petit Bayonne, a view across the Nive River
By the mid-19th century, Bayonne had declined somewhat with the centralisation of power to Paris and to the new dpartement capital, non-Basque Pau, after the 1789 French Revolution, and with Wellington's bombardment. However, rail links with Paris from 1854 and the growing importance of nearby Biarritz as a tourist centre brought industrialisation and development. Bayonne is now part of 'BAB' (Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz), a metropolitan area of almost 200,000 people.

Bayonne was part of the Zone occupe in the German occupation of France during World War II.

==Population==

==Main sights==
The Nive divides Bayonne into Grand Bayonne and Petit Bayonne, with five bridges between the two, both quarters still backed by Vauban's walls. The houses lining the Nive are examples of Basque architecture, with half-timbering and shutters in the national colours of red and green. The much wider Adour is to the north. The Pont Saint-Esprit connects Petit Bayonne with the Quartier Saint-Esprit across the Adour, where the massive Citadelle and the railway station are located. Grand Bayonne is the commercial and civic hub, with small pedestrianised streets packed with shops, plus the cathedral and Htel de Ville.

The Cathdrale Sainte-Marie is an imposing, elegant Gothic building, rising over the houses, glimpsed along the narrow streets. It was constructed in the 12th and 13th centuries. The south tower was completed in the 16th century but the cathedral was only completed in the 19th century with the north tower. The cathedral is noted for its charming cloisters. There are other details and sculptures of note, although much was destroyed in the Revolution.

Nearby is the Chteau Vieux, some of which dates back to the 12th century, where the governors of the city were based, including the English Black Prince.
Sainte-Marie Cathedral

The Muse Basque is the finest ethnographic museum of the entire Basque Country. It opened in 1922 but has been closed for a decade recently for refurbishment. It now has special exhibitions on Basque agriculture, seafaring and pelota, handicrafts and Basque history and way of life.

The Muse Bonnat began with a large collection bequeathed by the local-born painter Lon Bonnat. The museum is one of the best galleries in south west France and has paintings by Edgar Degas, El Greco, Sandro Botticelli, and Francisco Goya, among others.

At the back of Petit Bayonne is the Chteau Neuf, among the ramparts. Now an exhibition space, it was started by the newly arrived French in 1460 to control the city. The walls nearby have been opened to visitors. They are important for plant life now and Bayonne's botanic gardens adjoin the walls on both sides of the Nive.

The area across the Adour is largely residential and industrial, with much demolished to make way for the railway. The Saint-Esprit church was part of a bigger complex built by Louis XI to care for pilgrims to Santiago de Compostela. It is home to a wooden Flight into Egypt sculpture.

Overlooking the quarter is Vauban's 1680 Citadelle. The soldiers of Wellington's army who died besieging the citadelle in 1813 are buried in the nearby English Cemetery, visited by Queen Victoria and other British dignitaries when staying in Biarritz.

The distillery of the famous local liqueur Izarra is located on the northern bank of the Adour and is open to visitors.

Citadel

==Culture and sport==
Bayonne has the longest tradition of bull-fighting in France and there is a ring beyond the walls of Grand Bayonne. The season runs between July and September.
Bull-fighting is part of the five-day Ftes de Bayonne which starts on the first Wednesday of August and attracts people from across the Basque Country and beyond. Parades, music, dance, fireworks, food, and drink all feature in the celebrations. Soon after the Assumption festival of 15 August heralds a few more days of bull-fights.

There are also important festivals of Jazz (July), Bayonne ham (Holy Week), theatre and pelota (the Basque sport).

Aviron Bayonnais is the city's rugby union club, founded in 1904 and French champions three times, in 1913, 1934, and 1943. The local football team is Aviron Bayonnais FC.

Basque is the main language spoken in this city, together with French.

==Economy and products==
Bayonne is known for its fine chocolates, produced in the town for 500 years, and Bayonne ham, a cured ham seasoned with peppers from nearby Espelette. Izarra, the liqueur made in bright green or yellow colours, is distilled locally. It is said by some that Bayonne is the birthplace of mayonnaise, supposedly a corruption of Bayonnaise, the French adjective describing the city's people and produce. Now bayonnaise can refer to a particular mayonnaise flavoured with the Espelette chillis.

Bayonne is now the centre of certain craft industries that were once widespread, including the manufacture of makilas, traditional Basque walking-sticks. The Fabrique Alza just outside the city is known for its palas, bats used in pelota, the traditional Basque sport.

As of 1935, its chief industries were shipbuilding, tanning and pottery.
In the late 20th century, the processing of by-products from the Lacq natural gas field near Pau became important, although Bayonne has had higher-than-average unemployment. Metallurgy also provides local jobs.

The Port of Bayonne situated near the mouth of the Adour River, is the ninth largest in France, serving traffic of over 4.3 million tonnes per year. Cargo products include hydrocarbons, steel products, chemical products, fertiliser, sulphur, wood, maize and cattle feed.

==Transport==
The Gare de Bayonne is on the high-speed TGV line between Paris and Hendaye for connections with Spain. In practice, the line slows considerably beyond Bordeaux although there are plans to improve the service. There are regional rail services along the Basque coast, to Pau and through the Landes to Dax and Bordeaux. There is a line along the Nive valley through Labourd and Lower Navarre to Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, used principally by tourists and hikers.

There are extensive bus connections with Biarritz, Anglet and surrounding villages. The city is near the intersection between the A63 autoroute between Bordeaux and the Spanish border and the A64 from Bayonne to Toulouse.

Bayonne's airport is Aroport de Biarritz-Anglet-Bayonne 6 km away from the city towards Anglet and is shared with Biarritz and Anglet.

The city bus system is called STAB, Transports Urbains de l'agglomration de Bayonne.

Bayonne harbour is a stop over for yachts and boats crossing the Gulf of Biscay on their way from the UK to the Iberian Peninsula, the Atlantic, or the Mediterranean. The direct route from the UK across the Bay of Biscay and down to Atlantic Spain and Portugal

==Notable people==
* Jean du Vergier de Hauranne, (15811643), theologian, who introduced Jansenism into France
* Guillaume du Tillot (17111774), politician
* Dominique Joseph Garat (17491833), writer and politician
* Franois Cabarrus (17521810), French adventurer and Spanish financier
* Armand Joseph Dubernad (17411799), financial trader, consul general of the Holy Roman Empire
* Jacques Laffitte (17671844), banker and politician
* Frdric Bastiat (18011850), classical-liberal author and political economist
* Lon Bonnat (18331922), painter
* Ren Cassin (18871976), lawyer and judge; recipient of the 1968 Nobel Peace Prize
* Michel Camdessus (born 1933), managing director of the International Monetary Fund from 1997 to 2000
* Didier Deschamps (born 1968), World-Cup-winning footballer
* Imanol Harinordoquy (born 1980), French international rugby union player 
* Anthony Dupuis (born 1973), professional tennis player
* Sylvain Luc (born 1965), jazz guitarist
* Xavier de le Rue (born 1979), a snowboarder
* Joe Duplantier, vocalist and guitarist of technical death metal band, Gojira (band)
* Mario Duplantier, drummer of Gojira, brother of Joe Duplantier
* Eva Bisseni, judoka
* Achille Zo (18261901), painter
* Stphane Ruffier (born 1986) a French national football team goalkeeper.
David Narey (born 1956), master builder

==City government==
The Mayor of Bayonne from 1995 to 2007 was Jean Grenet, from the centre-right UMP. The 39-person town council is also dominated by the UMP, who hold 31 of the seats. The centre-left group has five seats, the Basque nationalist Baiona Berria have two, and the communist LCR one.

==International relations==

===Twin towns  Sister cities===
Bayonne is twinned with: 

 * Pamplona, Spain * L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain * Daytona Beach, Florida, United States * Bayonne, New Jersey, United States * Kajaani, Finland * Hydra, Greece * Nyregyhza, Hungary * Ascoli Piceno, Italy * Faro, Portugal * Veliko Turnovo, Bulgaria 

===Friendships and Cooperations===
* Kutaisi, Georgia

==In popular culture==
* In Wyndham Lewis's The Wild Body (1927) the protagonist, Ker-Orr, in the first story, "A Soldier of Humour", takes the train from Paris and stays in Bayonne before going to Spain.
* In Ernest Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises, three of the characters visit Bayonne en route to Pamplona, Spain.
* In Kim Stanley Robinson's The Years of Rice and Salt (2002), Bayonne is the first city recolonized by the Muslims after the total depopulation of Europe by the Black Death. Named "Baraka", its earliest colonizers were later driven out by rivals from Al-Andalus and flee to the Loire Valley, where they found the city of Nsara.
* The seventh track of Joe Bonamassa's album Dust Bowl is entitled The Last Matador of Bayonne.
* In Henry Miller's semi-autobiographic novel Tropic of Capricorn, the narrator describes a period of time selling the Encyclopdia Britannica door by door in Bayonne.
* In the summer of 2008, Manu Chao's live album Baionarena was recorded in the Arena of Bayonne.
* The album Life is Elsewhere, by English band Little Comets, features a song titled Bayonne.

==References==

*http://www.chateaudevayres.com/home.html In French and English, with views of the Castle by Louis de Foix, the 16th-century French Engineer who deviated the River Adour near Bayonne.
*Leon H. Histoire des Juifs de Bayonne, Paris, Armand Durlacher, 1893. in-4 : xvj, 436 pp. ; illustr de 4 planches hors-texte.

==External links==

* City council website 
* Official website of the "Office de commerce de Bayonne"
* Webpage about the citadel and fortifications of the town
* BAIONA in the Bernardo Estorns Lasa  Auamendi Encyclopedia (Euskomedia Fundazioa) (in Spanish)
* Fiestas Songs 
* INSEE commune file
* 
* 

 



[[Bubblegum Crisis]]

 is a Japanese cyberpunk OVA series. It displays strong influences from Blade Runner, also making occasional references to it.

== Setting ==
The series begins in the late 2032, seven years after the Second Great Kanto Earthquake has split Tokyo geographically and culturally in two. During the first episode, disparities in wealth are shown to be more pronounced than in previous periods in post-war Japan.

The main antagonist is Genom, a megacorporation with immense power and global influence. Its main product are boomers - cyberdroids used for manual labor and military purposes. While Boomers are intended to serve mankind, they become deadly instruments in the hands of ruthless individuals. The AD Police are tasked to deal with Boomer-related crimes. One of the series' themes is the inability of the department to deal with threats due to political infighting, red tape, and an insufficient budget.

The Knight Sabers are an all-female mercenary team and have considerable combat abilities using highly advanced suits of powered armor. They battle against long odds to overcome grave threats throughout the OVA series and preserve the overall safety of Mega Tokyo.

== Characters ==

== Production ==

The OVA series is eight episodes long. It was originally slated to run for 13 episodes, but due to legal problems between the two studios who jointly held the rights to the series, Artmic and Youmex, the series was discontinued. The problems may have been brought on by the series' lackluster sales in Japan. In North America, however, the series did comparatively well and remains a cult classic. 

In Japan, a number of comic books were produced that featured characters and storylines based in the BGC (a common abbreviation for the series name) universe. Some were very much thematically linked to the OVA series, while others were "one-shots" or comedy features. A number of artists participated in the creation of these comics, including Kenichi Sonoda, who had produced the original Knight Saber character designs. A North American comic based in the Bubblegum Crisis Universe was published in English by Dark Horse Comics.

The series involves the adventures of the Knight Sabers, an all-women group of mercenaries who don powered armor and fight various problems, most frequently rogue boomers. Boomers are humanoid robots designed to perform a variety of tasks, from construction and firefighting to combat; a particular model of Boomer, the BU-33S "Sexaroid", is designed for sexual purposes, and also in need of human blood, as revealed in episode 5.

One of the central themes of the series, showing strong influence from Blade Runner, is the exploration of what "human" really means. As in Blade Runner, this is often accomplished through a focus on the characters of certain androids, particularly BU-33S.

Bubblegum Crisis is notable also in that it was one of the few early anime series that were brought over from Japan unedited and subtitled with English captions that still have a great deal of popularity today. While anime has become much more popular in the intervening years, in 1991 it was still mostly unknown as a storytelling medium in North America. 

In 1997, a new series was created, titled Bubblegum Crisis 2040, but was not a sequel to the original OVA series. Headed by Chiaki J. Konaka, it was a standalone television series, and while it used similar themes to the original, it employed new designs for the characters and the mechanical devices. This series ran for twenty six episodes. Some discussion has taken place between the production companies for a second season, tentatively titled Bubblegum Crisis 2041.

Despite the age of the original series, a non-Japanese fandom still exists for it. The community of fans have produced large quantities of Fan fiction and Fan art based on both the OVA and television series with the current estimated count of fanfiction in English language alone well exceeding four hundred texts, Last version of the guide names 350 texts The BGC fanfiction repository on eyrie.org archive has over 400 texts. These do not fully overlap with ones named in the Fanfiction guide. The Bubblegum Crisis category on fanfiction.net lists further 292 texts, although it is unknown how many of them overlap with previously mentioned sources. though there is a preponderance of works and discussion based on the original series.

Bubblegum Crisis has many features that have proven attractive to many viewers of anime. The mecha designs, cyberpunk characters, and post-apocalyptic city of Megatokyo are well-realized and leave a lasting impression. The storylines are varied and complex, with some elements left deliberately unexplained and open to interpretation. 

The music throughout the original OVA series is one of the most recognizable in anime fandom and generates a strong feeling of 1980s nostalgia. The opening song and sequence for the first OVA, as well as many of the other songs throughout the series, clearly draw inspiration from the 1984 movie Streets of Fire. Nearly all of the music is available, as there are 8 soundtrack releases (one per OVA), as well as numerous "vocal" albums which feature songs "inspired by" the series as well as many drawn directly from it. As a consequence Bubblegum Crisis, with its better than 1:1 soundtrack album to episode ratio (when one considers the "vocal" albums), may arguably have among the highest number of album-length music collections (percentage-wise) which may be attributed to any single title in contemporary anime.

A roleplaying game based on the series was published by R. Talsorian in 1997 under the Fuzion system. It contains many original sketches of the characters, mecha and settings, as well as detailed background information about them. A supplement detailing the 1997 series was planned, but could not be completed before RTG's license expired in 2002.

A digitally-remastered compilation of the original series' episodes, featuring bi-lingual tracks and production extras, was released on DVD in 2004 by AnimEigo Inc. Animeigo successfully crowd-funded the show for Blu-ray on Kickstarter in November of 2013. http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/madoverlord/bubblegum-crisis-ultimate-edition-blu-ray-set 

== Media ==

=== Episodes ===

 # Title Release date 
 

=== Related media ===
*AD Police Files (1990): A prequel OVA set five years earlier and focusing on the A.D. Police and the start of the Crisis.
*Bubblegum Crash (1991): A three-episode OVA sequel. Reputedly an attempt to resolve the final five planned, but unproduced episodes.
*Bubblegum Crisis Tokyo 2040 (1998-99): A 26 episode TV series remake of the original OVA series.
* (1999): A 12 episode TV series prequel to Bubblegum Crisis and to A.D. Police Files, as the last episode reveals the setting is the year 2020.
*Parasite Dolls (2003): A three-episode OVA about Branch, a secret division of the A.D. Police.
*Scramble Wars released with Ten Little Gall Force. A massive crossover event between Bubblegum Crisis, Gall Force, Genesis Survivor Gaiarth, AD Police and Riding Bean
*Holiday in Bali special (live action)
*Hurricane Live 2032
*Hurricane Live 2033

=== Video games ===
* Crime Wave: game for PC-88, set in Megatokyo and featuring Knight Sabers as the main characters. 
* Bubblegum Crash: game for TurboGrafx-16. 

=== Comic book ===
* Bubblegum Crisis: Grand Mal produced by Adam Warren via Dark Horse Comics. 

===Live-action movie===
In May 2009 it was announced that a live-action movie of "Bubblegum Crisis" was in the early stages of production. A production agreement was signed at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival. The film was expected to be released in late 2012, and the production staff was said to have consulted with the original anime's staff members, Shinji Aramaki and Kenichi Sonoda, to help maintain consistency with the world of the original. However, no further developments have been announced.

=== Other ===
* Bubblegum Crisis role-playing game produced by R. Talsorian Games. It introduces an alternate setting named "Bubblegum Crossfire", basing on a premise that data units with hardsuit blueprints have been sent to more individuals than just Sylia Stingray, resulting in that by 2033 there are numerous Knight Saber-like groups spread all over the globe. RTG's license to produce this game has expired and at present all copies of back stock have been sold.
::* "Bubblegum Crisis: Before and After" (covering material from A.D. Police Files and Bubblegum Crash)
::*"Bubblegum Crisis EX" which includes completely new materials (also incorporating early design concepts for BGC mecha and hardsuits as new variants)
* Ground Zero Games produces four sets of 28 mm scale miniatures based on Bubblegum Crisis: Product Listing - BGC 
::* Knight Sabers
::* Boomers (actually BU-55 combat boomers)
::* A.D. Police officers
::* "GENOM bosses" (pack contains Quincy, Mason and GENOM battlesuit)
* "Soldier Blue" novel by Toshimichi Suzuki. Translated into English language in 1997 by R.Talsorian Games. A copy of the translation can be found here.
* Some images from BGC also were used in the CCG Ani-Mayhem.

== References ==

==External links==

===Official websites===
* AnimEigo's Bubblegum Crisis website
* Bubblegum Crisis  AIC's official Bubblegum Crisis page.

===Articles and information===
* 
* 
* 
* Anime in Retrospect: Bubblegum Crisis
*Animerica article
** http://web.archive.org/web/20040407164515/www.animerica-mag.com/features/bgc.html
* Website listing all the soundtracks

 



[[Black people]]

The term black people is an everyday English-language phrase, often used in socially-based systems of racial classification or of ethnicity to describe persons who are defined as belonging to a "black" ethnicity in their particular country, typically having a degree of Sub-Saharan African ancestry, or who are perceived to be dark-skinned relative to other "racial groups".

Different societies, such as Australia, Brazil, the United Kingdom, the United States and South Africa apply differing criteria regarding who is classified as "black", and these criteria have also varied over time. In some countries, social variables affect classification as much as skin-color, and the social criteria for "blackness" vary. In South Africa, mixed-race people are not considered to be "black", and in other regions, such as Australia and Melanesia, the term "black" has been applied to, and used by, populations with a very different history.

==Africa==
===South Africa===
Nelson Mandela led the ANC in the battle against South African Apartheid.
In South Africa during the apartheid era, beginning in the first half of the twentieth century, the population was classified into four main racial groups: Black, White, Asian (mostly Indian), and Coloured. The Coloured group included people of mixed Bantu, Khoisan, and European descent (with some Malay ancestry, especially in the Western Cape). The Coloured definition occupied an intermediary political position between the Black and White definitions in South Africa.

The apartheid bureaucracy devised complex (and often arbitrary) criteria in the Population Registration Act of 1945 to determine who belonged in which group. Minor officials administered tests to enforce the classifications. When it was unclear from a person's physical appearance whether a person was to be considered Colored or Black, the "pencil test" was employed. This involved inserting a pencil in a person's hair to determine if the hair was kinky enough for the pencil to get stuck. If so, the person was classified as Black. 

During the apartheid era, those classed as "Coloured" were oppressed and discriminated against. But, they had limited rights and overall had slightly better socioeconomic conditions than those classed as "Black".

In the post-apartheid era, the Constitution of South Africa has declared the country to be a 'Non-racial democracy". However, the ANC government has introduced laws in support of their affirmative action policies that define "Black" people to include "Africans", "Coloureds" and "Asians". Their affirmative action policies have also favored "Africans" over "Coloureds". Some South Africans categorized as "African Black" openly state that "Coloureds" did not suffer as much as they did during apartheid. The popular saying by "Coloured" South Africans to illustrate their dilemma is:

In 2008, the High Court in South Africa ruled that Chinese South Africans who were residents during the apartheid era (and their descendents) are to be reclassified as "Black people" solely for the purposes of accessing affirmative action benefits, because they were also "disadvantaged" by racial discrimination. Chinese people who arrived in the country after the end of apartheid do not qualify. "We agree that you are black, South African court tells Chinese", The Times 

Other than by appearance, "Coloureds" can usually be distinguished from "Blacks" by language. Most speak Afrikaans or English as a first language, as opposed to Bantu languages such as Zulu or Xhosa. They also tend to have more European-sounding names than Bantu names. 

===Mahgreb===
Algerian footballer Yacine Brahimi
There are a number of black communities in North Africa, some dating from prehistoric communities, others as descendants from the historical Trans-Saharan trade and after the Arab invasions of North Africa in the 7th century, descendants of slaves from the Arab Slave Trade in North Africa. Frigi et al. 2010, Ancient Local Evolution of African mtDNA Haplogroups in Tunisian Berber Populations, Human Biology, Volume 82, Number 4, August 2010 Harich et .al 2010, The trans-Saharan slave trade  clues from interpolation analyses and high-resolution characterization of mitochondrial DNA lineages 
Moroccan Gnawa musician Hassan Hakmoun

In the 18th century, the Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail "the Bloodthirsty" (16721727) raised a corps of 150,000 black slaves, called his Black Guard, who coerced the country into submission. Lewis. Race and Slavery in the Middle East, Oxford University Press, 1994 Abd al-Bukhr (Moroccan military organization). Encyclopdia Britannica. 

According to Dr. Carlos Moore, resident scholar at Brazil's University of the State of Bahia, Afro-multiracials in the Arab world, including Arabs in North Africa, self-identify in ways that resemble Latin America. He claims that black-looking Arabs, much like black-looking Latin Americans, consider themselves white because they have some distant white ancestry. 

Sadat's mother was a dark-skinned Sudanese woman and his father was a light-skinned Egyptian. In response to an advertisement for an acting position, he said, "I am not white but I am not exactly black either. My blackness is tending to reddish". Joseph Finklestone, Anwar Sadat: Visionary Who Dared, pp. 57, 31. ISBN 0-7146-3487-5 

Fathia Nkrumah was another Egyptian Arab with ties to West Africa. She was the late wife of Ghanaian revolutionary Kwame Nkrumah, whose marriage was seen as helping plant the seeds of cooperation between Egypt and other African countries as they struggled for independence from European colonization. This helped advance the formation of the African Union. African Union Summit 
Soldiers of the Free Arabian Legion in Greece, September 1943
Because of the patriarchal nature of Arab society, Arab men, including during the slave trade in North Africa, enslaved more black women than men, and used more black female slaves than males. The men interpreted the Qur'an to permit sexual relations between a male master and his female slave outside of marriage (see Ma malakat aymanukum and sex), See Tahfeem ul Qur'an by Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi, Vol. 2, pp. 112113, footnote 44. See also commentary on verses : Vol. 3, notes 71, p. 241; 2000, Islamic Publications. Tafsir ibn Kathir 4:24 leading to many mixed-race children. When an enslaved woman became pregnant with her Arab master's child, she became umm walad or mother of a child, a status that granted her privileged rights. As the child was given rights of inheritance, mixed-race children could share in any wealth of the father. Because the society was patrilineal, the children took their fathers' social status at birth and were born free. Some succeeded their fathers as rulers, as was the case with Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur, who ruled Morocco from 1578 to 1608, though technically not mixed-race. His mother was a Fulani concubine of his father. Such tolerance for black persons, even when technically "free", was not so common in Morocco. The term abd (,) (meaning "slave"), is still used as a common term for black people in the Arabic-speaking world. 

==Asia==

===China===

In August 2008, The Migration Information Source article noted that "A Nigerian Embassy spokesman estimated that Nigerians possibly make up the largest group of Black Africans in China, with about 2,000 to 3,000 Nigerians in Guangdong in 2006. Most businessmen only stay temporarily." Malia Politzer, "China and Africa: Stronger Economic Ties Mean More Migration". Migration Information Source, August 2008. "Guangzhou 'Chocolate City': Africans Seek Their Dreams in China". 18 December 2008. 

===India and Pakistan===

Siddi folk dancers performing at Devaliya Naka, Sasan Gir, Gujarat
The Siddi are an ethnic group inhabiting India and Pakistan whose members are descended from Bantu peoples from Southeast Africa that were brought to the Indian subcontinent as slaves by Arab and Portuguese merchants. Although it is commonly believed locally that "Siddi" derives from a word meaning "black", the term is actually derived from "Sayyid", the title borne by the captains of the Arab vessels that first brought Siddi settlers to the area. In the Makran strip of the Sindh and Balochistan provinces in southwestern Pakistan, these Bantu descendants are known as the Makrani. John B. Edlefsen, Khalida Shah, Mohsin Farooq, "Makranis, the Negroes of West Pakistan", Phylon (1960), Vol. 21, No. 2 (2nd Qtr., 1960), pp. 124130, Published by: Clark Atlanta University There was a brief "Black Power" movement in Sindh in the 1960s and many Siddi are proud of and celebrate their Black African ancestry. 

===Southeast Asia===

Ati woman, Philippinesthe Negritos are the indigenous people of Southeast Asia.
The Negritos are believed to be the earliest inhabitants of Southeast Asia, remnants of the earliest populations from the Out of Africa migration. Negrito means little black people in Spanish (negrito is the Spanish diminutive of negro, i.e., "little black person"); it is what the Spaniards called the short black people they encountered in the Philippines. 

==Australia==
Unknown Aboriginal woman in 1911
Indigenous Australians have been referred to as "black people" in Australia since the early days of European settlement. http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/4219798 While originally related to skin colour, the term is used to today to indicate Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander ancestry in general and can refer to people of any skin pigmentation. 

Being identified as either "black" or "white" in Australia during the 19th and early 20th centuries was critical in one's employment and social prospects. Various state-based Aboriginal Protection Boards were established which had virtually complete control over the lives of Indigenous Australians  where they lived, their employment, marriage, education and included the power to separate children from their parents. Aboriginal Protection Board at the State Records Office of Western Australia, accessed 20 December 2012 Aborigines were not allowed to vote and were often confined to reserves and forced into low paid or effectively slave labour. The social position of mixed-race or "half-caste" individuals varied over time. A 1913 report by Sir Baldwin Spencer states that:

After the First World War, however, it became apparent that the number of mixed-race people was growing at a faster rate than the white population, and by 1930 fear of the "half-caste menace" undermining the White Australia ideal from within was being taken as a serious concern. Dr. Cecil Cook, the Northern Territory Protector of Natives, noted that:

The official policy became one of biological and cultural assimilation: "Eliminate the full-blood and permit the white admixture to half-castes and eventually the race will become white". This led to different treatment for "black" and "half-caste" individuals, with lighter-skinned individuals targeted for removal from their families to be raised as "white" people, restricted from speaking their native language and practising traditional customs, a process now known as the Stolen Generation. 

Aboriginal activist Sam Watson addressing Invasion Day Rally 2007 in a "White Australia has a Black History" T-shirt
The second half of the 20th century to the present has seen a gradual shift towards improved human rights for Aboriginal people. Aborigines were given the right to vote in 1962, and in the 1967 referendum over 90% of the Australian population voted to end constitutional discrimination and to include Aborigines in the national census. During this period many Aboriginal activists began to embrace the term "black" and use their ancestry as a source of pride. Activist Bob Maza said:

In 1978 Aboriginal writer Kevin Gilbert received the National Book Council award for his book Living Black: Blacks Talk to Kevin Gilbert, a collection of Aboriginal people's stories, and in 1998 was awarded (but refused to accept) the Human Rights Award for Literature for Inside Black Australia, a poetry anthology and exhibition of Aboriginal photography. In contrast to previous definitions based solely on the degree of Aboriginal ancestry, in 1990 the Government changed the legal definition of Aboriginal to include any:

Nigerian attendants at the 2012 National Multicultural Festival in Canberra

This nationwide acceptance and recognition of Aboriginal people led to a significant increase in the number of people self-identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. The reappropriation of the term "black" with a positive and more inclusive meaning has resulted in its widespread use in mainstream Australian culture, including public media outlets, government agencies, and private companies. In 2012, a number of high-profile cases highlighted the legal and community attitude that identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander is not dependent on skin colour, with a well-known boxer Anthony Mundine being widely criticised for questioning the "blackness" of another boxer and journalist Andrew Bolt being successfully sued for publishing discriminatory comments about Aboriginals with light skin. 

===African Australians===
John Caesar, nicknamed "Black Caesar", convict and bushranger of unknown African parentage, was one of the first people of recent Black African ancestry to arrive in Australia. 

At the 2006 Census, 248,605 residents declared that they were born in Africa. This figure includes white Africans.

==Europe==
Portrait of a black woman, Katherine, in Antwerp, 1521, by Albrecht Drer

===Balkans===
Due to the Ottoman slave trade that had flourished in the Balkans, the coastal town of Ulcinj in Montenegro had its own black community. Yugoslavia  Montenegro and Kosovo  The Next Conflict? As a consequence of the slave trade and privateer activity, it is told how until 1878 in Ulcinj 100 black people lived. ULCINJ  HISTORY The Ottoman Army also deployed an estimated 30,000 Black African troops and cavalrymen to its expedition in Hungary during the Austro-Turkish War of 171618. African Slave Trade in Russia, By Dieudonne Gnammankou in La Channe et le lien, Doudou Diene, (id.) Paris, Editions UNESCO, 1988 

===Eastern Europe===

As African states became independent in the 1960s, the Soviet Union offered many of their citizens the chance to study in Russia. Over a period of 40 years, about 400,000 African students from various countries moved to Russia to pursue higher studies, including many Black Africans. MediaRights: Film: Black Russians     .  " ": . Info on "Black Russians" film project in English This extended beyond the Soviet Union to many countries of the Eastern bloc.

===France===

While census collection of ethnic background is illegal in France, it is estimated that there are about 2.5  5 million black people residing there. Europe's Minority Politicians in Short Supply. The Washington Post. 24 April 2005. In officially colorblind France, blacks have a dream  and now a lobby. Csmonitor.com. 12 January 2007. 

===Turkey===

A Bashi-bazouk of the Ottoman Empire, painting by Jean-Lon Grme, 1869
Beginning several centuries ago, a number of Black Africans were brought by slave traders during the Ottoman Empire to plantations between Antalya and Istanbul in modern-day Turkey. Ayvalkn renkli dernei. Retrieved 28 August 2008 Some of their descendants remain, and many migrated to larger cities. Other slaves were transported to Crete, from where they later arrived in the zmir area through the population exchange between Greece and Turkey in 1923, or indirectly from Ayvalk in pursuit of work. "Turks with African ancestors want their existence to be felt", Today's Zaman, 11 May 2008, Sunday. Retrieved 28 August 2008 

===United Kingdom===

According to the Office for National Statistics, at the 2001 census there were over a million black people in the United Kingdom; 1% of the total population described themselves as "Black Caribbean", 0.8% as "Black African", and 0.2% as "Black other". National Statistics Online Britain encouraged the immigration of workers from the Caribbean after World War II; the first symbolic movement was those who came on the ship the Empire Windrush. The preferred official umbrella term is "black and minority ethnic" (BME), but sometimes the term "black" is used on its own, to express unified opposition to racism, as in the Southall Black Sisters, which started with a mainly British Asian constituency, and the National Black Police Association, which has a membership of "African, African-Caribbean and Asian origin". NBPA Website The emphasis is on the common experience and determination of the people of African, African-Caribbean and Asian origin. 

==Middle East==

===Israel===

An African Hebrew Israelite of Jerusalem child in Dimona
About 150,000 East African and black people live in Israel, amounting to just over 2% of the nation's population. The vast majority of these, some 120,000, are Beta Israel, "The Ethiopian Population In Israel", Reuters. 16 July 2009. most of whom came during the 1980s and 1990s from Ethiopia "Why Jews see racism in Israel", Christian Science Monitor, 1 September 2009. In addition, Israel is home to over 5,000 members of the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem movement, who reside mainly in a distinct neighborhood in the Negev town of Dimona. Unknown numbers of black converts to Judaism reside in Israel, most of them converts from the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.

Additionally, there are around 60,000 non-Jewish African immigrants in Israel. Most of the migrants are from communities in Sudan and Eritrea, particularly the Niger-Congo-speaking Nuba groups of the southern Nuba Mountains. Israel deports Sudanese asylum seekers as S. Sudanese nationals "Israel PM: illegal African immigrants threaten identity of Jewish state". The Guardian. May 20, 2012. 

===Arabian Peninsula===
 Saudi Arabian footballer Majed Abdullah, nicknamed the "Saudi Arabian Pel"
Historians estimate that between the advent of Islam in 650 and the abolition of slavery in the Arabian Peninsula in the mid-20th century, A. Klein (2002), Historical Dictionary of Slavery and Abolition, Page xxii, books.google.com/books?isbn=0810841029: Saudi Arabia and Yemenabolished slavery in 1962, Oman in 1970. 10 to 18 million Black Africans were enslaved by Arab slave traders and taken to the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries. Encyclopdia Britannica's Guide to Black History "Focus on the slave trade", BBC Due to the sex-biased flow of female slaves to serve as concubines in harems in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries, the castration of male slaves to serve as harem guards, the death toll of Black African slaves from forced labor, and the assimilation of the children of female slaves and Arab owners into the Arab owners' families, there are very few remaining distinctive black communities in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries today. Dr Susan 

Genetic studies have found significant African female-mediated gene flow in Arab communities in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries, with an average of 38% of African maternal lineages in Yemen, J. Ridl, Mitochrondial DNA structure of Yemeni population,xa.yimg.com/kq/groups/20670320/.../name/Cp%2B5_J%2BmtDNA.pdf:"Substantial proportions of the Yemeni mtDNA gene pool can be assigned to sub-Saharan haplogroups (L-type) on one hand, and West Eurasian haplogroups (derivatives of M and
N) on the other hand (Kivisild et al., 2004; ern et al., 2008). The overall composite nature of Yemeni gene pool also supports its probable role as a recipient of gene flows from different parts of Africa and Eurasia. However, the major haplogroups exhibit different distributions among regional samples (Fig. 2) with lineages specific to sub-Saharan Africa being significantly more frequent in Hadramawt (60.0%) than in the western Yemeni populations where the frequency gradually decreases from Hajja in the north (34.3%) through Tihama (28.4%) to Taizz in the south (16.3%); the opposite is true for West Eurasian lineages (ern et al., 2008)." 16% in Oman-Qatar, KK Abu-Amero, Mitochondrial DNA structure in the Arabian Peninsula (2008), www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/8/45:"Sub-Saharan Africa L lineages in Saudi Arabia account for 10% of the total. 2 analyses showed that there is not significant regional differentiation in this Country. However, there is significant heterogeneity (p < 0.001) when all the Arabian Peninsula countries are compared. This is mainly due to the comparatively high frequency of sub-Saharan lineages in Yemen (38%) compared to Oman-Qatar (16%) and to Saudi Arabia-UAE (10%)." and 10% in Saudi Arabia-United Arab Emirates. Although distinctive and self-identified black communities have been reported in countries such as Iraq with a reported 1.2 million black people, Timothy Williams, In Iraq's African Enclave, Color is Plainly Seen, the New York Times, December 2, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/03/world/middleeast/03basra.html?_r=0:"But on the packed dirt streets of Zubayr, Iraqs scaled-down version of Harlem, African-Iraqis talk of discrimination so steeped in Iraqi culture that they are commonly referred to as abd  slave in Arabic  prohibited from interracial marriage and denied even menial jobs...Historians say that most African-Iraqis arrived as slaves from East Africa as part of the Arab slave trade starting about 1,400 years ago. They worked in southern Iraqs salt marshes and sugar cane fields.Though slavery  which in Iraq included Arabs as well as Africans  was banned in the 1920s, it continued until the 1950s, African-Iraqis say. Recently, they have begun to campaign for recognition as a minority population, which would grant them the same benefits as Christians, including reserved seats in Parliament...Black people here are living in fear, said Jalal Dhiyab Thijeel, an advocate for the countrys estimated 1.2 million African-Iraqis. We want to end that." in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries, most of those of identifiable African descent are classified and identify as Arab, not black. Alamin M. Mazrui et al., Debating the African Condition (2004), books.google.com/books?isbn=1592211453, p.324:"But many Arabs were themselves Black. To the present day there are Arab princes in Saudi Arabia who, in the Western world, would be regarded as 'Black'. One of the main reasons why the African Diaspora in the Arab world is so small is that people with African blood are much more readily accepted as Arabs than they would be accepted as 'Whites' in the Americas." 

==South America and the Caribbean==
Approximately 12 million Africans were shipped to the Americas during the Atlantic slave trade from 1492 to 1888, with 11.5 million of those shipped to South America and the Caribbean. United Nations Slavery Memorial, http://www.unslaverymemorial.org/history.html: "Accurate figures are still not available but at a conservative estimate, using the figures that have been generated by the latest Slave Trade Database, of the estimated millions transported, Portugal dominated the trade with 5.8 million or 46%, while Great Britain transported 3.25 million or 26%, France accounted for 1.38 million or 11%, and Spain 1.06 million or 8%. So it is unmistakable, that the 4 leading colonial powers accounted for a combined total of 11.5 million Africans or 92 % of the overall trade. The remainder was transported by the US 305,326, the Netherlands 554,336, and Denmark/Baltic 111,041. There were several stages to the trade. During the first phase between 1501 and1600, an estimated 277,509 Africans or just 2 % of the overall trade, were sent to the Americas and Europe. During the 17th century, some 15 % or 1,875,631 Africans embarked for the Americas. The period from 1701 to the passage of the British Abolition Act in 1807 was the peak of the trade. Here an estimated 7,163,241 or 57% of the trafficking in Africans transpired, with the remaining 26 % or 3,204,935 occurring between 1808 and 1866." Brazil was the largest importer in the Americas, with 5.5 million African slaves imported, followed by the British Caribbean with 2.76 million, the Spanish Caribbean and Spanish Mainland with 1.59 million Africans, and the French Caribbean with 1.32 million. United Nations Slavery Memorial, http://www.unslaverymemorial.org/history.html:"In the Americas, Brazil was the largest importer of Africans, accounting for 5.5 million or 44%, the British Caribbean with 2.76 million or 22%, the French Caribbean 1.32 million, and the Spanish Caribbean and Spanish Mainland accounting for 1.59 million. The relatively high numbers for Brazil and the British Caribbean is largely a reflection of the dominance and continued expansion of the plantation system in those regions. Even more so, the inability of the enslaved population in these regions to reproduce meant that the replacement demand for laborers was significantly high. In other words, Africans were imported to make up the demographic deficit on the plantations." Today their descendants number approximately 150 million in South America and the Caribbean. "Community Outreach" Seminar on Planning Process for SANTIAGO +5, Global Afro-Latino and Caribbean Initiative, 4 February 2006 In addition to skin color, other physical characteristics such as facial features and hair texture are often variously used in classifying peoples as black in South America and the Caribbean. In South America and the Caribbean, classification as black is also closely tied to social status and socioeconomic variables, especially in light of social conceptions of "blanqueamiento" (racial whitening) and related concepts. 

===Brazil===

Jongo, a Brazilian dance of African origin, c. 1822
The topic of race in Brazil is complex. A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both parents, nor were there only two categories to choose from. Between a pure black and a very light mulatto, more than a dozen racial categories were acknowledged, based on combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color. These types grade into each other like the colors of the spectrum, and no one category stands significantly isolated from the rest. That is, race has referred to appearance, not heredity. 

Scholars disagree over the effects of social status on racial classifications in Brazil. It is generally believed that upward mobility and education results in reclassification of individuals into lighter-skinned categories. The popular claim is that in Brazil, poor whites are considered black and wealthy blacks are considered white. Some scholars disagree, arguing that whitening of one's social status may be open to people of mixed race, but a typically black person will consistently be identified as black regardless of wealth or social status. 

====Statistics====

Brazilian Population, by Race, from 1872 to 1991 (Census Data) http://www.ibge.gov.br/ibgeteen/povoamento/ 
 Ethnic group White Black Brown Yellow (Asian) Undeclared Total 
 1872 3,787,289 1,954,452 4,188,737   9,930,478 
 1940 26,171,778 6,035,869 8,744,365 242,320 41,983 41,236,315 
 1991 75,704,927 7,335,136 62,316,064 630,656 534,878 146,521,661 
 

+Demographics of Brazil 
 Year White Pardo Black 
 1835 24.4% 18.2% 51.4% 
 2000 53.7% 38.5% 6.2% 
 2010 48.4% 42.4% 6.7% 

From the year 1500 to 1850, an estimated 3.5 million Africans were forcibly shipped to Brazil. It is estimated that more than half of the Brazilian population is at least in part descendants of these Africans. Brazil has the largest population of Afro-descendants outside of Africa. In contrast to the US, there were no segregation or anti-miscegenation laws in Brazil. Intermarriage has been popular for centuries. Much of the white/Asian population also has either African or Amerindian blood. According to the last census of the twentieth century, 54% identified themselves as white, 6.2% identified themselves as black, and 39.5% identified themselves as Pardo (brown)  a broad multi-racial category. 

A philosophy of whitening emerged in Brazil in the nineteenth century. Until recently the government did not keep data on race. However, statisticians estimate that in 1835 half the population was black, one fifth was Pardo (brown) and one fourth white. By 2000, the black population had fallen to 6.2%, the Pardo had increased to 40%, and white to 55%. Essentially most of the black population was absorbed into the multi-racial category by intermixing. A 2007 study found that at least 29% of the middle-class, white Brazilian population had some recent (since the colonial period) African ancestry. "Sex-biased gene flow in African Americans but not in American Caucasians", GMR, 2007, Vol. 12 No. 6 

====Race relations in Brazil====
Brazilian Candombl ceremony
Because of the ideology of miscegenation, Brazil has avoided the polarization of society into black and white. The bitter and sometimes violent racial tensions that divide the US are notably absent in Brazil. According to the 2010 census, 6.7% of Brazilians said they were black, compared with 6.2% in 2000, and 43.1% said they were mixed race, up from 38.5%. In 2010, Elio Ferreira de Araujo, Brazil's minister for racial equality, attributed the change to growing pride among his country's black and indigenous communities. "Brazil's census offers recognition at last to descendants of runaway slaves", Guardian 

The philosophy of the racial democracy in Brazil has drawn criticism from some quarters. Brazil has one of the largest gaps in income distribution in the world. The richest 10% of the population earn 28 times the average income of the bottom 40%. The richest 10 percent is almost exclusively white. One-third of the population lives under the poverty line, with blacks and other non-whites accounting for 70 percent of the poor. 
Fruit sellers in Rio de Janeiro c. 1820
In the US, black people earn 75% of what white people earn. Tom Phillips, "Brazil census shows African-Brazilians in the majority for the first time", The Guardian, 17 November 2011 In Brazil, non-whites earn less than 50% of what whites earn. Some have posited that Brazil practices the one-drop rule when analysts consider the facts of social and economic divisions. The gap in income between blacks and other non-whites is relatively small compared to the large gap between whites and non-whites. Other factors, such as illiteracy and education levels, show the same patterns. 
Unlike in the US, where African Americans were united in the civil-rights struggle, in Brazil the philosophy of whitening has helped divide blacks from other non-whites and prevented a more active civil rights movement.

Though Brazilians of African heritage make up a large percentage of the population there are very few black politicians. The city of Salvador, Bahia, for instance, is 80% Afro-Brazilian but has never had a black mayor. Critics indicate that US cities that have a black majority, such as Detroit and New Orleans, have never had white mayors since first electing black mayors in the 1970s. Charles Whitaker, "Blacks in Brazil: The Myth and the Reality", Ebony, February 1991. 
Black people in Brazil c. 1821
Non-white people also have limited media visibility. The Latin American media, in particular the Brazilian media, has been accused of hiding its Black, Indigenous, Multiracial and East Asian population. For example the telenovelas or soaps are said to be a hotbed of largely blond and light-eyed white (they resemble Scandinavians and other northern Europeans more than they look like white Brazilians of typical Southern European features) and light-skinned mulatto and mestizo (often deemed as white persons in Brazil if achieving the middle class or higher social status) actors. Most rare empowered persons of color represented in Latin American media possess typically Caucasian features due to a mix of racist standards of beauty, colourism and lookism. Nevertheless, in the last years, the number of empowered afrodescendants (either economically or by other ways) increased in Brazilian media coverage. Despite Brazil also possessing criminal black man stereotypes, it is considered a huge prejudice and mostly not used in a disordered way by the media, in spite of sometimes common "humouristic" sexist jokes and LGBT stereotyping Vexing stereotypes in humouristic shows is homophobia, lawyer Maria Berenice says. Maria Berenice Dias "homoaffective" (LGBT) rights, Family Law and Succession lawyer blog, 2011. and as such lack of politically correctness in native race issues is not a major problem (there are more stereotypes of Asian people, Europeans or U.S. Americans, for example).

These patterns of discrimination against non-whites have led some to advocate for the use of the Portuguese term 'negro' to encompass non-whites so as to renew a black consciousness and identity, in effect an African descent rule. "Brazil Separates Into a World of Black and White", Los Angeles Times, 3 September 2006. It generates criticism since Pardo, or Brown people, is intended to include caboclos (mestizos), assimilated Amerindians and tri-racials, not only afrodescendants  thus Brazilian of some or no recent African descent, as most White Brazilians, become 6070% of the population, breaking the argument of possible Brazilian one-drop rule since real noticeable mulattoes, cafuzos (zambos) and black persons are a minority and the Brazilian poor represents larger percents in Brazil. As one would expect from an underdeveloped country, there are pockets of poverty in White-majority and Japanese Brazilian-majority areas, rarer in urban developments but common in rural areas. They are even more common among Mestizo-majority areas, and Amerindian communities.

==United States==

Harriet Tubman, an African-American fugitive slave, abolitionist, and conductor of the Underground Railroad

In the first 200 years that black people were in the United States, they commonly referred to themselves as Africans. In Africa, people primarily identified themselves by ethnic group (closely allied to language) and not by skin color. Individuals identified themselves, for example, as Ashanti, Igbo, Bakongo, or Wolof, and others. But when Africans were brought to the Americas, they were often combined with other groups from Africa, and individual ethnic affiliations were not generally acknowledged by English colonists. In areas of the Upper South, different ethnic groups were brought together. This is significant as Africans came from a vast geographic region: the West African coastline stretching from Senegal to Angola and in some cases from the south-east coast such as Mozambique. A new identity and culture was born that incorporated elements of the various ethnic groups and of European cultural heritage, resulting in fusions such as the Black church and Black English. This new identity was based on African ancestry and slave status rather than membership in any one ethnic group. By contrast, slave records from Louisiana show that the French and Spanish colonists recorded more complete identities of Africans, including ethnicities and given tribal names. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The Development of Afro-Creole Culture in the Eighteenth Century, Louisiana State University Press, 1992/1995 

The US racial or ethnic classification "black" refers to people with all possible kinds of skin pigmentation, from the darkest through to the very lightest skin colors, including albinos, if they are believed by others to have African ancestry (in any discernible percentage), or to exhibit cultural traits associated with being "African American". As a result, in the United States the term "black people" is not an indicator of skin color but of socially based racial classification. Relatively dark-skinned people can be classified as white if they fulfill other social criteria of "whiteness", and relatively light-skinned people can be classified as black if they fulfill the social criteria for "blackness" in a particular setting. 

In March 1807, Great Britain, which largely controlled the Atlantic, declared the transatlantic slave trade illegal, as did the United States. (The latter prohibition took effect 1 January 1808, the earliest date on which Congress had the power to do so after protecting the slave trade under Article I, Section 9 of the United States Constitution.)

By that time, the majority of black people in the United States were native-born, so the use of the term "African" became problematic. Though initially a source of pride, many blacks feared the use of African as an identity would be a hindrance to their fight for full citizenship in the US. They also felt that it would give ammunition to those who were advocating repatriating black people back to Africa. In 1835, black leaders called upon black Americans to remove the title of "African" from their institutions and replace it with "Negro" or "Colored American". A few institutions chose to keep their historic names, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church. African Americans popularly used the terms "Negro" or "colored" for themselves until the late 1960s. African American Journeys to Africa, pp. 6364 

The term black was used throughout but not frequently since it carried a certain stigma.
In his 1963 "I Have a Dream" speech, Martin Luther King, Jr. uses the terms negro fifteen times and black four times. Each time he uses black it is in parallel construction with white, for example, "black men and white men". 

With the successes of the civil rights movement, a new term was needed to break from the past and help shed the reminders of legalized discrimination. In place of Negro, activists promoted the use of black as standing for racial pride, militancy, and power. Some of the turning points included the use of the term "Black Power" by Kwame Toure (Stokely Carmichael) and the popular singer James Brown's song "Say It Loud - I'm Black and I'm Proud".
Michael Jordan, an African American considered by many to be the greatest basketball player in history.
In 1988, the civil rights leader Jesse Jackson urged Americans to use the term "African American" because it had a historical cultural base and was a construction similar to terms used by European descendants, such as German American, Italian American, etc. Since then, African American and black have had essentially coequal status. Controversy continues over which term is more appropriate. Maulana Karenga and Owen Alik Shahadah argue African-American is more appropriate because it accurately articulates geographical and historical origin. Others have argued that "black" is a better term because "African" suggests foreignness, although black people have been in the US since the earliest colonial years. Still others believe the term black is inaccurate because African Americans have a variety of skin tones. Surveys show that the majority of black Americans have no preference for "African American" or "Black", although they have a slight preference for "black" in personal settings and "African American" in more formal settings. 

Increases in the number of black immigrants to the United States from Africa, the Caribbean, and Latin America since the late twentieth century have raised questions about who uses the term African American. The more recent African immigrants may sometimes view themselves, and be viewed, as culturally distinct from native-born Americans who descend from African slaves. 

The U.S. census race definitions says a "black" is a person having origins in any of the black (sub-Saharan) racial groups of Africa. It includes people who indicate their race as "Black, African Am., or Negro" or who provide written entries such as African American, Afro-American, Kenyan, Nigerian, or Haitian. The Census Bureau notes that these classifications are socio-political constructs and should not be interpreted as scientific or anthropological. 2000 US Census basics 
A black Gl and a Chinese soldier place the flag of their ally on the front of their jeep, truck convoy on the Stilwell Road, Burma, 1945
A considerable portion of the U.S. population identified as black also has European ancestry in varying amounts; a lesser proportion have some Native American ancestry. For instance, genetic studies of African-American people show an ancestry that is on average 1718% European. Steve Sailer, "How White Are Blacks? How Black Are Whites?", iSteve, 2002. 

===One-drop rule===
Since the late nineteenth century, the South used a colloquial term, the one-drop rule, to classify as black a person of any known African ancestry. This practice of hypodescent was not put into law until the early twentieth century. Legally the definition varied from state to state. Racial definition was more flexible in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries before the American Civil War. For instance, President Thomas Jefferson held persons who were legally white (less than 25% black) according to Virginia law at the time, but, because they were born to slave mothers, they were born into slavery, according to the principle of partus sequitur ventrem, which Virginia adopted into law in 1662.

Outside of the US, some other countries have adopted the one-drop rule, but the definition of who is black and the extent to which the one-drop "rule" applies varies greatly from country to country.

The one-drop rule may have originated as a means of increasing the number of black slaves Clarence Page, A Credit to His Races, The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, 1 May 1997. and was maintained as an attempt to keep the white race pure. One of the results of the one-drop rule was the uniting of the African-American community. Some of the most prominent abolitionists and civil-rights activists of the nineteenth century were multiracial, such as Frederick Douglass, Robert Purvis, and James Mercer Langston. They advocated equality for all.

===Blackness===
portrait of Barack Obama.jpg|thumb|upright|right|Barack Obama, the first President of the United States with black ancestry, was throughout his campaign criticized as being either "too black" or "not black enough". See also: [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pWe7wTVbLUU video ]]

The concept of blackness in the United States has been described as the degree to which one associates themselves with mainstream African American culture, politics, Chielozona Eze, Postcolonial Imaginations and Moral Representations (2011), p. 25, books.google.com/books?isbn=0739145088:"For Du Bois, blackness is political, it is existential, but above all, it is moral, for in it values abound; these values spring from the fact of being an oppressed." Barbara Olson, The Final Days (2003), p. 58, books.google.com/books?isbn=0895261251:"In fact, Bill Clinton had promoted an even worse variation, that authentic blackness is political..." and values. To a certain extent, this concept is not so much about race but more about political orientation, culture and behavior. Blackness can be contrasted with "acting white", where black Americans are said to behave with assumed characteristics of stereotypical white Americans with regard to fashion, dialect, taste in music, and possibly, from the perspective of a significant number of black youth, academic achievement. Ogbu, J. "Black American students in an affluent suburb: a study of academic disengagement". Erlbaum Associates Press. Mahwah, NJ. 2003. 

Due to the often political and cultural contours of blackness in the United States, the notion of blackness can also be extended to non-black people. Toni Morrison once described Bill Clinton as the first black President of the United States, because of his warm relations with African Americans and his poor upbringing. Christopher Hitchens was offended by the notion of Clinton as the first black president, noting, "Mr Clinton, according to Toni Morrison, the Nobel Prize-winning novelist, is our first black President, the first to come from the broken home, the alcoholic mother, the under-the-bridge shadows of our ranking systems. Thus, we may have lost the mystical power to divine diabolism, but we can still divine blackness by the following symptoms: broken homes, alcoholic mothers, under-the-bridge habits and (presumable from the rest of Miller's senescent musings) the tendency to sexual predation and to shameless perjury about same." Some black activists were also offended, claiming Clinton used his knowledge of black culture to exploit black people for political gain as no other president had before, while not serving black interests. They note his lack of action during the Rwanda genocide and his welfare reform, which Larry Roberts said had led to the worst child poverty since the 1960s. Others noted that the number of black people in jail increased during his administration. 

The question of blackness also arose in the Democrat Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. Commentators have questioned whether Obama, who was elected the first President with black ancestry, is "black enough", contending that his background is not typical because his mother was white American, and his father was a black Kenyan immigrant. Obama chose to identify as black and African-American. 

In July 2012, Ancestry.com reported on historic and DNA research by its staff that discovered that Obama is likely a descendant through his mother of John Punch, considered by some historians to be the first African slave in the Virginia colony. An indentured servant, he was "bound for life" in 1640 after trying to escape. The story of him and his descendants is that of multi-racial America since it appeared he and his sons married or had unions with white women, likely indentured servants and working class like them. Their multi-racial children were free because they were born to free English women. Over time, Obama's line of the Bunch family (as they became known) were property owners and continued to "marry white"; they became part of white society, likely by the early to mid-eighteenth century. Anastasia Harman, Natalie D. Cottrill, Paul C. Reed, and Joseph Shumway, "Documenting President Barack Obamas Maternal African-American Ancestry: Tracing His Mothers Bunch Ancestry to the First Slave in America", Ancestry.com, 16 July 2012, p. 19. 

==See also==
* African diaspora
* Enslaved Women in Colonial North America and the U.S.
* Black British
* Black Canadians
* Black Hispanic and Latino Americans
* Black Indians
* Black Jews
* Lists of black people
* Mulatto
* Racism
* Sub-Saharan Africa
* Zambo

==Footnotes==

 



[[Plague (disease)]]

Plague is a deadly infectious disease that is caused by the enterobacteria Yersinia pestis, named after the French-Swiss bacteriologist Alexandre Yersin. Until June 2007, plague was one of the three epidemic diseases specifically reportable to the World Health Organization (the other two being cholera and yellow fever). WHO IHR Brief No. 2. Notification and other reporting requirements under the IHR (2005) 

Depending on lung infection, or sanitary conditions, plague can be spread in the air, by direct contact, or by contaminated undercooked food or materials. The symptoms of plague depend on the concentrated areas of infection in each person: bubonic plague in lymph nodes, septicemic plague in blood vessels, pneumonic plague in lungs, and so on. It is treatable if detected early. Plague is still endemic in some parts of the world.

==Name==
The epidemiological use of the term "plague" is currently applied to bacterial infections that cause buboes, although historically the medical use of the term "plague" has been applied to pandemic infections in general. Plague is often synonymous with "bubonic plague", but this describes just one of its manifestations. Other names have been used to describe this disease, such as "The Black Plague" and "The Black Death"; the latter is now used primarily by scholars to describe the second, and most devastating, pandemic of the disease.

The etymology of the word "plague" is believed to come from the Latin word plga ("blow, wound") and plangere (to strike, or to strike down), cf. German Plage (infestation).

==Epidemiology and distribution==

===Infection and transmission===
The Oriental rat flea (Xenopsylla cheopsis) engorged with blood after a blood meal. This species of flea is the primary vector for the transmission of Yersinia pestis the organism responsible for bubonic plague in most plague epidemics in Asia, Africa, and South America. Both male and female fleas feed on blood and can transmit the infection.
A child bitten by a flea infected with the Yersinia pestis bacteria. Y. pestis, a member of the Enterobacteriaceae family, has caused the bite to become ulcerated.
Transmission of Y. pestis to an uninfected individual is possible by any of the following means. Plague Manual: Epidemiology, Distribution, Surveillance and Control, pp. 9 and 11. WHO/CDS/CSR/EDC/99.2 
* droplet contact  coughing or sneezing on another person
* direct physical contact  touching an infected person, including sexual contact
* indirect contact  usually by touching soil contamination or a contaminated surface
* airborne transmission  if the microorganism can remain in the air for long periods
* fecal-oral transmission  usually from contaminated food or water sources
* vector borne transmission  carried by insects or other animals.
Yersinia pestis circulates in animal reservoirs, particularly in rodents, in the natural foci of infection found on all continents except Australia. The natural foci of plague are situated in a broad belt in the tropical and subtropical latitudes and the warmer parts of the temperate latitudes around the globe, between the parallels 55 degrees North and 40 degrees South. 
Contrary to popular belief, rats did not directly start the spread of the bubonic plague. It is mainly a disease in the fleas (Xenopsylla cheopis) that infested the rats, making the rats themselves the first victims of the plague. Infection in a human occurs when a person is bitten by a flea that has been infected by biting a rodent that itself has been infected by the bite of a flea carrying the disease. The bacteria multiply inside the flea, sticking together to form a plug that blocks its stomach and causes it to starve. The flea then bites a host and continues to feed, even though it cannot quell its hunger, and consequently the flea vomits blood tainted with the bacteria back into the bite wound. The bubonic plague bacterium then infects a new victim, and the flea eventually dies from starvation. Serious outbreaks of plague are usually started by other disease outbreaks in rodents, or a rise in the rodent population.
In 1894, two bacteriologists, Alexandre Yersin of France and Kitasato Shibasabur of Japan, independently isolated the bacterium in Hong Kong responsible for the Third Pandemic. Though both investigators reported their findings, a series of confusing and contradictory statements by Kitasato eventually led to the acceptance of Yersin as the primary discoverer of the organism. Yersin named it Pasteurella pestis in honor of the Pasteur Institute, where he worked, but in 1967 it was moved to a new genus, renamed Yersinia pestis in honor of Yersin. Yersin also noted that rats were affected by plague not only during plague epidemics but also often preceding such epidemics in humans, and that plague was regarded by many locals as a disease of rats: villagers in China and India asserted that, when large numbers of rats were found dead, plague outbreaks soon followed.

In 1898, the French scientist Paul-Louis Simond (who had also come to China to battle the Third Pandemic) established the rat-flea vector that drives the disease. He had noted that persons who became ill did not have to be in close contact with each other to acquire the disease. In Yunnan, China, inhabitants would flee from their homes as soon as they saw dead rats, and on the island of Formosa (Taiwan), residents considered the handling of dead rats heightened the risks of developing plague. These observations led him to suspect that the flea might be an intermediary factor in the transmission of plague, since people acquired plague only if they were in contact with recently dead rats, who had died less than 24 hours before. In a now classic experiment, Simond demonstrated how a healthy rat died of plague, after infected fleas had jumped to it, from a rat which had recently died of the plague. http://www.asnom.org/en/423_peste.html 

==Plague immunization==

Since human plague is rare in most parts of the world, routine vaccination is not needed other than for those at particularly high risk of exposure, nor for people living in areas with enzootic plague, such as the western United States. It is not even indicated for most travellers to countries with known recent reported cases, particularly if their travel is limited to urban areas with modern hotels. The CDC thus only recommends vaccination for: (1) all laboratory and field personnel who are working with Y. pestis organisms resistant to antimicrobials; (2) people engaged in aerosol experiments with Y. pestis; and (3) people engaged in field operations in areas with enzootic plague where preventing exposure is not possible (such as some disaster areas).

A systematic review by the Cochrane Collaboration found no studies of sufficient quality to make any statement on the efficacy of the vaccine. 

==Pathology==

===Bubonic plague===

Swollen inguinal lymph glands on a person infected with the bubonic plague. The swollen lymph glands are termed buboes from the Greek word for groin, swollen gland: bubo.

When a flea bites a human and contaminates the wound with regurgitated blood, the plague carrying bacteria are passed into the tissue. Y. pestis can reproduce inside cells, so even if phagocytosed, they can still survive. Once in the body, the bacteria can enter the lymphatic system, which drains interstitial fluid. Plague bacteria secrete several toxins, one of which is known to cause dangerous beta-adrenergic blockade.

Y. pestis spreads through the lymphatics of the infected human until it reaches a lymph node, where it stimulates severe haemorrhagic inflammation that causes the lymph nodes to expand. The expansion of lymph nodes is the cause of the characteristic "bubo" associated with the disease.

===Septicemic plague===

Lymphatics ultimately drain into the bloodstream, so the plague bacteria may enter the blood and travel to almost any part of the body. In septicemic plague, bacterial endotoxins cause disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), causing tiny clots throughout the body and possibly ischaemic necrosis (tissue death due to lack of circulation/perfusion to that tissue) from the clots. DIC results in depletion of the body's clotting resources, so that it can no longer control bleeding. Consequently, there is bleeding into the skin and other organs, which can cause red and/or black patchy rash and hemoptysis/hematemesis (coughing up/ vomiting of blood). There are bumps on the skin that look somewhat like insect bites; these are usually red, and sometimes white in the center. Untreated, septicemic plague is usually fatal. Early treatment with antibiotics reduces the mortality rate to between 4 and 15 percent. People who die from this form of plague often die on the same day symptoms first appear.

===Pneumonic plague===

The pneumonic form of plague arises from infection of the lungs. It causes coughing and sneezing and thereby produces airborne droplets that contain bacterial cells and are likely to infect anyone inhaling them. The incubation period for pneumonic plague is short, usually two to four days, but sometimes just a few hours. The initial signs are indistinguishable from several other respiratory illnesses; they include headache, weakness, and hemoptysis or hematemesis (spitting or vomiting of blood). The course of the disease is rapid; unless diagnosed and treated soon enough, typically within a few hours, death may follow in one to six days; in untreated cases mortality is nearly 100%. 

===Pharyngeal plague===
This is an uncommon form of plague that resembles tonsillitis found in cases of close contact of patients with other forms of plague. 

 

===Meningeal plague===
This form of plague occurs when bacteria cross the blood-brain barrier, leading to infectious meningitis.

===Other clinical forms===
There are a few other rare manifestations of plague, including asymptomatic plague and abortive plague. Cellulocutaneous plague sometimes results in infection of the skin and soft tissue, often around the bite site of a flea.

==Treatments==
Waldemar Haffkine, a doctor who worked in Bombay, India, was the first to invent and test a plague vaccine against bubonic plague in 1897. Haffkine, W. M. 1897. Remarks on the plague prophylactic fluid. Br. Med. J. 1:1461 

If diagnosed in time the various forms of plague are usually highly responsive to antibiotic therapy. The antibiotics often used are streptomycin, chloramphenicol and tetracycline. Amongst the newer generation of antibiotics, gentamicin and doxycycline have proven effective in monotherapeutic treatment of plague. 

==History==

===Antiquity===
Amulet (800 BC  612 BC) to ward off plague inscribed with a quotation from the Akkadian Erra Epic
Nicolas Poussin (15941665), French. The Plague of Ashdod, 1630. Oil on canvas, 148 x 198 cm. Muse du Louvre, Paris, France, Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library.

The earliest account describing a possible plague epidemic is found in I Samuel 5:6 of the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh). In this account, the Philistines of Ashdod were stricken with a plague for the crime of stealing the Ark of the Covenant from the Children of Israel. The word "tumors" is used in most English translations to describe the sores that came upon the Philistines. The account indicates that the Philistine city and its political territory were stricken with a "ravaging of mice" and a plague, bringing death to a large segment of the population.

In the second year of the Peloponnesian War (430 BC), Thucydides described an epidemic disease which was said to have begun in Ethiopia, passed through Egypt and Libya, then come to the Greek world. In the Plague of Athens, the city lost possibly one third of its population, including Pericles. Modern historians disagree on whether the plague was a critical factor in the loss of the war. Although this epidemic has long been considered an outbreak of plague, many modern scholars believe that typhus, Plague of Athens smallpox, or measles may better fit the surviving descriptions. A recent study of DNA found in the dental pulp of plague victims suggests that typhoid was actually responsible. 

In the first century AD, Rufus of Ephesus, a Greek anatomist, refers to an outbreak of plague in Libya, Egypt, and Syria. He records that Alexandrian doctors named Dioscorides and Posidonius described symptoms including acute fever, pain, agitation, and delirium. Buboeslarge, hard, and non-suppuratingdeveloped behind the knees, around the elbows, and "in the usual places." The death toll of those infected was very high. Rufus also wrote that similar buboes were reported by a Dionysius Curtus, who may have practiced medicine in Alexandria in the third century BC. If this is correct, the eastern Mediterranean world may have been familiar with bubonic plague at that early date. Simpson, W.J. Patrick, A. 

In the second century, the Antonine Plague, named after Marcus Aurelius family name of Antoninus and also known as the Plague of Galen, who had first hand knowledge of the disease, may in fact have been smallpox. Galen was in Rome when it struck in 166 AD, and was also present in the winter of 16869 during an outbreak among troops stationed at Aquileia; he had experience with the epidemic, referring to it as very long lasting, and describes its symptoms and his treatment of it. Unfortunately, his references are scattered and brief. According to Barthold Georg Niebuhr Niebuhr, 1873. Lectures on the history of Rome, p 733. "this pestilence must have raged with incredible fury; it carried off innumerable victims. The ancient world never recovered from the blow inflected upon it by the plague which visited it in the reign of M. Aurelius." The mortality rate of the plague was 710 percent; the outbreak in 1656168 would have caused approximately 3.5 to 5 million deaths. Otto Seek believes that over half the population of the empire perished. J. F. Gilliam believes that the Antonine plague probably caused more deaths than any other epidemic during the empire before the mid-3rd century.

===Medieval and post-medieval pandemics===
Local outbreaks of the plague are grouped into three plague pandemics, whereby the respective start and end dates and the assignment of some outbreaks to either pandemic are still subject to discussion. According to Joseph P. Byrne from Belmont University, the pandemics were:
* the first plague pandemic from 541 to ~750, spreading from Egypt to the Mediterranean (starting with the Plague of Justinian) and northwestern Europe 
* the second plague pandemic from ~1345 to ~1840, spreading from Central Asia to the Mediterranean and Europe (starting with the Black Death), and probably also to China 
* the third plague pandemic from 1866 to the 1960s, spreading from China to various places around the world, notably India and the West Coast of the United States. 
However, the late medieval Black Death is sometimes seen not as the start of the second, but as the end of the first pandemic  in that case, the second pandemic's start would be 1361; also vary the end dates of the second pandemic given in literature, e.g. ~1890 instead of ~1840. 

===First Pandemic: Early Middle Ages (Plague of Justinian)===

The Plague of Justinian in AD 541542 is the first known attack on record, and marks the first firmly recorded pattern of bubonic plague. This disease is thought to have originated in China. It then spread to Africa from where the huge city of Constantinople imported massive amounts of grain, mostly from Egypt, to feed its citizens. The grain ships were the source of contagion for the city, with massive public granaries nurturing the rat and flea population. At its peak the plague was killing 10,000 people in Constantinople every day and ultimately destroyed perhaps 40% of the city's inhabitants. It went on to destroy up to a quarter of the human population of the eastern Mediterranean.

In AD 588 a second major wave of plague spread through the Mediterranean into what is now France. It is estimated that the Plague of Justinian killed as many as 100 million people across the world. The History of the Bubonic Plague Scientists Identify Genes Critical to Transmission of Bubonic Plague It caused Europe's population to drop by around 50% between 541 and 700. An Empire's Epidemic It also may have contributed to the success of the Arab conquests. Justinian's Flea The Great Arab Conquests An outbreak of it in the AD 560s was described in AD 790 as causing "swellings in the glands ... in the manner of a nut or date" in the groin "and in other rather delicate places followed by an unbearable fever". While the swellings in this description have been identified by some as buboes, there is some contention as to whether the pandemic should be attributed to the bubonic plague, Yersinia pestis, known in modern times. 

===Second Pandemic: from 14th century (Black Death) to 19th century===

From 1347 to 1351, the Black Death, a massive and deadly pandemic originating in China, spread along the Silk Road and swept through Asia, Europe and Africa. It may have reduced the world's population from 450 million to between 350 and 375 million. Historical Estimates of World Population, U.S. Census Bureau China lost around half of its population, from around 123 million to around 65 million; Europe around 1/3 of its population, from about 75 million to about 50 million; and Africa approximately 1/8 of its population, from around 80 million to 70 million (mortality rates tended to be correlated with population density so Africa, being less dense overall, had the lowest death rate). This makes the Black Death the largest death toll from any known non-viral epidemic. Although accurate statistical data does not exist, it is thought that 1.4 million died in England (1/3 of England's 4.2 million people), while an even higher percentage of Italy's population was likely wiped out. On the other hand, Northeastern Germany, Bohemia, Poland and Hungary are believed to have suffered less, and there are no estimates available for Russia or the Balkans. It is conceivable that Russia may not have been as affected due to its very cold climate and large size, hence often less close contact with the contagion.

The plague repeatedly returned to haunt Europe and the Mediterranean throughout the 14th to 17th centuries. According to Biraben, plague was present somewhere in Europe in every year between 1346 and 1671. The (disease)#Second Pandemic: Black Death|Second Pandemic] was particularly widespread in the following years: 13601363; 1374; 1400; 14381439; 14561457; 14641466; 14811485; 15001503; 15181531; 15441548; 15631566; 15731588; 15961599; 16021611; 16231640; 16441654; and 16641667; subsequent outbreaks, though severe, marked the retreat from most of Europe (18th century) and northern Africa (19th century). According to Geoffrey Parker, "France alone lost almost a million people to plague in the epidemic of 162831." 

In England, in the absence of census figures, historians propose a range of pre-incident population figures from as high as 7 million to as low as 4 million in 1300, The Black Death in Egypt and England: A Comparative Study, Stuart J. Borsch, Austin: University of Texas and a postincident population figure as low as 2 million. Secondary sources such as the Cambridge History of Medieval England often contain discussions of methodology in reaching these figures that are necessary reading for anyone wishing to understand this controversial episode in more detail. By the end of 1350, the Black Death subsided, but it never really died out in England. Over the next few hundred years, further outbreaks occurred in 136162, 1369, 137983, 138993, and throughout the first half of the 15th century. An outbreak in 1471 took as much as 1015% of the population, while the death rate of the plague of 147980 could have been as high as 20%. The most general outbreaks in Tudor and Stuart England seem to have begun in 1498, 1535, 1543, 1563, 1589, 1603, 1625, and 1636, and ended with the Great Plague of London in 1665. 
Plague Riot in Moscow in 1771: During the course of the city's plague, between 50,000 and 100,000 died (1/6 to 1/3 of its population).

In 1466, perhaps 40,000 people died of plague in Paris. Plague, 1911 Edition of the Encyclopdia Britannica During the 16th and 17th centuries, plague visited Paris for almost one year out of three. The Black Death ravaged Europe for three years before it continued on into Russia, where the disease hit somewhere once every five or six years from 1350 to 1490. Plague epidemics ravaged London in 1563, 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636, and 1665, reducing its population by 10 to 30% during those years. "Plague in London: spatial and temporal aspects of mortality", J. A. I. Champion, Epidemic Disease in London, Centre for Metropolitan History Working Papers Series, No. 1 (1993). Over 10% of Amsterdam's population died in 16231625, and again in 16351636, 1655, and 1664. Geography, climate, population, economy, society. J.P.Sommerville. There were 22 outbreaks of plague in Venice between 1361 and 1528. The plague of 15761577 killed 50,000 in Venice, almost a third of the population. Late outbreaks in central Europe included the Italian Plague of 16291631, which is associated with troop movements during the Thirty Years' War, and the Great Plague of Vienna in 1679. Over 60% of Norway's population died from 1348 to 1350. The last plague outbreak ravaged Oslo in 1654. 

In the first half of the 17th century, a plague claimed some 1.7 million victims in Italy, or about 14% of the population. Karl Julius Beloch, Bevlkerungsgeschichte Italiens, volume 3, pp. 359360. In 1656, the plague killed about half of Naples' 300,000 inhabitants. More than 1.25 million deaths resulted from the extreme incidence of plague in 17th-century Spain. The Seventeenth-Century Decline, S. G. Payne, A History of Spain and Portugal The plague of 1649 probably reduced the population of Seville by half. In 17091713, a plague epidemic that followed the Great Northern War (17001721, Sweden v. Russia and allies) killed about 100,000 in Sweden, and 300,000 in Prussia. The plague killed two-thirds of the inhabitants of Helsinki, and claimed a third of Stockholm's population. Western Europe's last major epidemic occurred in 1720 in Marseilles, in Central Europe the last major outbreaks happened during the plague during the Great Northern War, and in Eastern Europe during the Russian plague of 1770-1772
Worldwide distribution of plague-infected animals 1998
The Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world. Plague was present in at least one location in the Islamic world virtually every year between 1500 and 1850. 
 Plague repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa. Algiers lost 30,00050,000 to it in 162021, and again in 165457, 1665, 1691, and 174042. Plague remained a major event in Ottoman society until the second quarter of the 19th century. Between 1701 and 1750, 37 larger and smaller epidemics were recorded in Constantinople, and 31 between 1751 and 1800. Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague, and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out. 

====Nature of the Black Death====

gangrene due to plague.jpg|thumb|right|250 px|A hand showing [http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/acral acral gangrene of the digits due to plague, the black appearance of the necrotized tissue which occurs in gangrene, one of the symptoms of plague]]
The roof rat (Rattus rattus) is a reservoir host of bubonic plague with the oriental rat fleas that infest them being a prime vector of the disease.

In the early 20th century, following the identification by Yersin and Kitasato of the plague bacterium that caused the late 19th and early 20th century Asian bubonic plague (the Third Pandemic), most scientists and historians came to believe that the Black Death was an incidence of this plague, with a strong presence of the more contagious pneumonic and septicemic varieties increasing the pace of infection, spreading the disease deep into inland areas of the continents. It was claimed that the disease was spread mainly by black rats in Asia and that therefore there must have been black rats in north-west Europe at the time of the Black Death to spread it, although black rats are currently rare except near the Mediterranean. This led to the development of a theory that brown rats had invaded Europe, largely wiping out black rats, bringing the plagues to an end, although there is no evidence for the theory in historical records. Some historians suggest that marmots, rather than rats, were the primary carriers of the disease. The Shifting Explanations for the Black Death, the Most Devastating Plague in Human History 

The view that the Black Death was caused by Yersinia pestis has been incorporated into medical textbooks throughout the 20th century and has become part of popular culture, as illustrated by recent books, such as John Kelly's The Great Mortality. Many modern researchers have argued that the disease was more likely to have been viral (that is, not bubonic plague), pointing to the absence of rats from some parts of Europe that were badly affected and to the conviction of people at the time that the disease was spread by direct human contact. According to the accounts of the time the Black Death was extremely virulent, unlike the 19th and early 20th century bubonic plague. Samuel K. Cohn has made a comprehensive attempt to rebut the bubonic plague theory. In the Encyclopedia of Population, he points to five major weaknesses in this theory:
* very different transmission speeds  the Black Death was reported to have spread 385 km in 91 days (4.23 km/day) in 664, compared to 1215 km a year for the modern bubonic plague, with the assistance of trains and cars
* difficulties with the attempt to explain the rapid spread of the Black Death by arguing that it was spread by the rare pneumonic form of the disease  in fact this form killed less than 0.3% of the infected population in its worst outbreak (Manchuria in 1911)
* different seasonality  the modern plague can only be sustained at temperatures between 10 and 26C and requires high humidity, while the Black Death occurred even in Norway in the middle of the winter and in the Mediterranean in the middle of hot dry summers
* very different death rates  in several places (including Florence in 1348) over 75% of the population appears to have died; in contrast the highest mortality for the modern bubonic plague was 3% in Bombay in 1903
* the cycles and trends of infection were very different between the diseases  humans did not develop resistance to the modern disease, but resistance to the Black Death rose sharply, so that eventually it became mainly a childhood disease
Cohn also points out that while the identification of the disease as having buboes relies on accounts of Boccaccio and others, they described buboes, abscesses, rashes and carbuncles occurring all over the body, the neck or behind the ears. In contrast, the modern disease rarely has more than one bubo, most commonly in the groin, and is not characterised by abscesses, rashes and carbuncles. 

Researchers have offered a mathematical model based on the changing demography of Europe from AD 1000 to 1800 demonstrating how plague epidemics, 1347 to 1670, could have provided the selection pressure that raised the frequency of a mutation to the level seen today that prevent HIV from entering macrophages and CD4+ T cells that carry the mutation (the average frequency of this allele is 10% in European populations). It is suggested that the original single mutation appeared over 2,500 years ago and that persistent epidemics of a haemorrhagic fever struck at the early classical civilizations.

However recent research published in the open-access scientific journal PloS Pathogens in October 2010 presented conclusive evidence that two previously unknown clades (variant strains) of Y. pestis were responsible for the Black Death. A multinational team conducted new surveys that used both ancient DNA analyses and protein-specific detection to find DNA and protein signatures specific for Y. pestis in human skeletons from widely distributed mass graves in northern, central and southern Europe that were associated archaeologically with the Black Death and subsequent resurgences. The authors concluded that this research, together with prior analyses from the south of France and Germany,

:"... ends the debate about the etiology of the Black Death, and unambiguously demonstrates that Y. pestis was the causative agent of the epidemic plague that devastated Europe during the Middle Ages."

The study also identified two previously unknown but related strains of Y. pestis that were associated with distinct medieval mass graves. These were found to be ancestral to modern isolates of the present-day Y. pestis strains 'Orientalis' and 'Medievalis', suggesting that these variant strains (which are now presumed to be extinct) may have entered Europe in two waves. Surveys of plague pit remains in France and England indicate that the first variant entered Europe through the port of Marseille around November 1347 and spread through France over the next two years, eventually reaching England in the spring of 1349, where it spread through the country in three successive epidemics.

However, surveys of plague pit remains from the Netherlands town of Bergen op Zoom showed evidence of a second Y. pestis genotype which differed from that found in Britain and France and this second strain is now thought to have been responsible for the pandemic that spread through the Low Countries from 1350. This discovery implies that Bergen op Zoom (and possibly other parts of the southern Netherlands) was not directly infected from England or France c. AD 1349, and the researchers have suggested that a second wave of plague infection, distinct from that which occurred in Britain and France, may have been carried to the Low Countries from Norway, the Hanseatic cities, or another site. 

===Third Pandemic: 19th and 20th centuries===

Houses being burned in China in the 1890s during the bubonic plague pandemic
The Third Pandemic began in China's Yunnan province in 1855, spreading plague to all inhabited continents and ultimately killing more than 12 million people in India and China alone. Casualty patterns indicate that waves of this pandemic may have come from two different sources. The first was primarily bubonic and was carried around the world through ocean-going trade, transporting infected persons, rats, and cargoes harboring fleas. The second, more virulent strain was primarily pneumonic in character, with a strong person-to-person contagion. This strain was largely confined to Manchuria and Mongolia. Researchers during the "Third Pandemic" identified plague vectors and the plague bacterium (see above), leading in time to modern treatment methods.

Plague occurred in Russia in 18771889 in rural areas near the Ural Mountains and the Caspian Sea. Efforts in hygiene and patient isolation reduced the spread of the disease, with approximately 420 deaths in the region. Significantly, the region of Vetlianka in this area is near a population of the bobak marmot, a small rodent considered a very dangerous plague reservoir. The last significant Russian outbreak of Plague was in Siberia in 1910 after sudden demand for marmot skins (a substitute for sable) increased the price by 400 percent. The traditional hunters would not hunt a sick Marmot and it was taboo to eat the fat from under the arm (the axillary lymphatic gland that often harboured the plague) so outbreaks tended to be confined to single individuals. The price increase, however, attracted thousands of Chinese hunters from Manchuria who not only caught the sick animals but also ate the fat, which was considered a delicacy. The plague spread from the hunting grounds to the terminus of the Chinese Eastern Railway and then followed the track for 2,700 km. The plague lasted 7 months and killed 60,000 people.

Paul-Louis Simond injecting a plague vaccine in Karachi, 1898
The bubonic plague continued to circulate through different ports globally for the next fifty years; however, it was primarily found in Southeast Asia. An epidemic in Hong Kong in 1894 had particularly high death rates, 90%. As late as 1897, medical authorities in the European powers organized a conference in Venice, seeking ways to keep the plague out of Europe. Mumbai plague epidemic struck the city of Bombay (Mumbai) in 1896. The disease reached the Territory of Hawaii in December 1899, and the Board of Health's decision to initiate controlled burns of select buildings in Honolulu's Chinatown turned into an uncontrolled fire which led to the inadvertent burning of most of Chinatown on January 20, 1900. Star Bulletin "Great Chinatown Fire" Shortly thereafter, plague reached the continental US, initiating the San Francisco plague of 19001904. Plague persisted in Hawaii on the outer islands of Maui and Hawaii (The Big Island) until it was finally eradicated in 1959. Uoregon.edu 

Although the outbreak that began in China in 1855 is conventionally known as the Third Pandemic (see above), it is unclear whether there have been fewer, or more, than three major outbreaks of bubonic plague. Most modern outbreaks of bubonic plague amongst humans have been preceded by a striking, high mortality amongst rats, yet this phenomenon is absent from descriptions of some earlier plagues, especially the Black Death. The buboes, or swellings in the groin, that are especially characteristic of bubonic plague, are a feature of other diseases as well.

Research done by a team of biologists from the Institute of Pasteur in Paris and Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz in Germany by analyzing the DNA and proteins from plague pits was published in October 2010, reported beyond doubt that all 'the three major plagues' were due to at least two previously unknown strains of Yersinia pestis and originated from China. A team of medical geneticists led by Mark Achtman of University College Cork in Ireland reconstructed a family tree of the bacterium and concluded in an online issue of Nature Genetics published on 31 October 2010 that all three of the great waves of plague originated from China. Europes Plagues Came From China, Study Finds 

==Plague as a biological weapon==

Worldwide distribution of plague infected animals 1998
Plague has a long history as a biological weapon. Historical accounts from ancient China and medieval Europe detail the use of infected animal carcasses, such as cows or horses, and human carcasses, by the Xiongnu/Huns, Mongols, Turks, and other groups, to contaminate enemy water supplies. Han Dynasty General Huo Qubing is recorded to have died of such a contamination while engaging in warfare against the Xiongnu. Plague victims were also reported to have been tossed by catapult into cities under siege.

In 1347, the Genoese possession of Caffa, a great trade emporium on the Crimean peninsula, came under siege by an army of Mongol warriors of the Golden Horde under the command of Janibeg. After a protracted siege during which the Mongol army was reportedly withering from the disease, they decided to use the infected corpses as a biological weapon. The corpses were catapulted over the city walls, infecting the inhabitants. The Genoese traders fled, transferring the plague (Black Death) via their ships into the south of Europe, whence it rapidly spread. 

During World War II, the Japanese Army developed weaponised plague, based on the breeding and release of large numbers of fleas. During the Japanese occupation of Manchuria, Unit 731 deliberately infected Chinese, Korean, and Manchurian civilians and prisoners of war with the plague bacterium. These subjects, termed "maruta", or "logs", were then studied by dissection, others by vivisection while still conscious. Members of the unit such as Shiro Ishii were exonerated from the Tokyo tribunal by Douglas MacArthur but 12 of them were prosecuted in the Khabarovsk War Crime Trials in 1949 during which some admitted having spread bubonic plague within a 36-km radius around the city of Changde. Daniel Barenblatt, A plague upon Humanity, HarperCollns, 2004, pp.220-221 

Ishii innovated bombs containing live mice and fleas, with very small explosive loads, to deliver the weaponized microbes, overcoming the problem of the explosive killing the infected animal and insect by the use of a ceramic, rather than metal, casing for the warhead. While no records survive of the actual usage of the ceramic shells, prototypes exist and are believed to have been used in experiments during WWII.

After World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union developed means of weaponising pneumonic plague. Experiments included various delivery methods, vacuum drying, sizing the bacterium, developing strains resistant to antibiotics, combining the bacterium with other diseases (such as diphtheria), and genetic engineering. Scientists who worked in USSR bio-weapons programs have stated that the Soviet effort was formidable and that large stocks of weaponised plague bacteria were produced. Information on many of the Soviet projects is largely unavailable. Aerosolized pneumonic plague remains the most significant threat. The plague can be easily treated with antibiotics, thus a widespread epidemic is highly unlikely in developed countries. 

==1994 epidemic in Surat, India==

In 1994, there was a pneumonic plague epidemic in Surat, India that resulted in 52 deaths and in a large internal migration of about 300,000 residents, who fled fearing quarantine. 

A combination of heavy monsoon rain and clogged sewers led to massive flooding which resulted in unhygienic conditions and a number of uncleared animal carcasses. It is believed that this situation precipitated the epidemic. There was widespread fear that the sudden rush of people from this area might spread the epidemic to other parts of India and the world, but that scenario was averted, probably as a result of effective public health response mounted by the Indian health authorities. Some countries, especially those in the nearby Gulf region, took the step of cancelling some flights and putting a pause on shipments from India.

Much like the Black Death that spread through medieval Europe, some questions still remain unanswered about the 1994 epidemic in Surat. 

Initial questions about whether it was an epidemic of plague arose because the Indian health authorities were unable to culture Yersinia pestis, but this could have been due to poor laboratory procedures. Yet, there are several lines of evidence strongly suggesting that it was a plague epidemic: blood tests for Yersinia were positive, a number of individuals showed antibodies against Yersinia and the clinical symptoms displayed by the affected were all consistent with the disease being plague. 

==Other contemporary cases==

* On August 31, 1984, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported a case of pneumonic plague in Claremont, California. The CDC believes that the patient, a veterinarian, contracted plague from a stray cat. As the cat wasn't available for necropsy, this could not be ultimately confirmed. 
* From 1995 to 1998, annual outbreaks of plague were witnessed in Mahajanga, Madagascar. 
* In the U.S., about half of all fatal cases of plague since 1970 have occurred in New Mexico. There were 2 plague deaths in the state in 2006, the first fatalities in 12 years. 
* In February 2002, a small outbreak of pneumonic plague took place in the Shimla District of Himachal Pradesh state in northern India. 2002  Plague in India. WHO 
* In the fall of 2002, a New Mexico couple contracted the disease, just prior to a visit to New York City. They both were treated by antibiotics, but the male required amputation of both feet to fully recover, due to the lack of blood flow to his feet, cut off by the bacteria.
* On April 19, 2006, CNN News and others reported a case of plague in Los Angeles, California, lab technician Nirvana Kowlessar, the first reported case in that city since 1984. 
* In May 2006, KSL Newsradio reported a case of plague found in dead field mice and chipmunks at Natural Bridges National Monument about 40 mi west of Blanding in San Juan County, Utah. 
* In May 2006, Arizona media reported a case of plague found in a cat. 
* One hundred deaths resulting from pneumonic plague were reported in Ituri district of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in June 2006. Control of the plague was proving difficult due to the ongoing conflict. 
* It was reported in September 2006 that three mice infected with Yersinia pestis apparently disappeared from a laboratory belonging to the Public Health Research Institute, located on the campus of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, which conducts anti-bioterrorism research for the United States government. 
* On May 16, 2007, an 8-year-old hooded capuchin monkey in the Denver Zoo died of the bubonic plague. Five squirrels and a rabbit were also found dead on zoo grounds and tested positive for the disease. 
* On June 5, 2007 in Torrance County, New Mexico a 58-year-old woman developed bubonic plague, which progressed to pneumonic plague. 
* On November 2, 2007, Eric York, a 37 year old wildlife biologist for the National Park Service's and The Felidae Conservation Fund, was found dead in his home at Grand Canyon National Park. On October 27, York performed a necropsy on a mountain lion that had likely perished from the disease and three days afterward York complained of flu-like symptoms and called in sick from work. He was treated at a local clinic but was not diagnosed with any serious ailment. The discovery of his death sparked a minor health scare, with officials stating he likely died of either plague or hantavirus, and 49 people who had come into contact with York were given aggressive antibiotic treatments. None of them fell ill. Autopsy results released on November 9, confirmed the presence of Y. pestis in his body, confirming plague as a likely cause of death. 
 
* In January 2008, at least 18 people died of bubonic plague in Madagascar. Madagascar: eighteen dead from Bubonic Plague, five in hospital since 1 January 2008 
* On June 16, 2009, Libyan authorities reported an outbreak of bubonic plague in Tobruk, Libya. 16-18 cases were reported, including one death. 
 
* On August 2, 2009, Chinese authorities quarantined the town of Ziketan, Xinghai County in Hainan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Qinghai Province (Northwestern China) after an outbreak of pneumonic plague. As of this writing, three have died and ten more are ill, being treated in hospital. 
* On September 13, 2009, Dr. Malcolm Casadaban died following an accidental laboratory exposure to an attenuated strain of the plague bacterium. This has happened due to his undiagnosed hereditary hemochromatosis (iron overload). He was an Associate Professor of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology and of Microbiology at the University of Chicago. 
* On 1 July 2010, eight cases of Bubonic plague were reported in humans in the District of Chicama, Peru. One 32 year old man was affected, as well as three boys and four girls ranging in age from 8 to 14 years old. 425 houses were fumigated and 1210 guinea pigs, 232 dogs, 128 cats and 73 rabbits were given anti flea treatment in an effort to stop the epidemic. http://www.correoperu.com.pe/correo/nota.php?txtEdi_id=21&txtSecci_parent=0&txtSecci_id=63&txtNota_id=383412, Peru Correo Newspaper 
* On May 3, 2012, a ground squirrel trapped during routine testing at a popular campground on Palomar Mountain in San Diego County, California, tested positive for the plague bacteria. 
* On June 2, 2012, a man in Crook County, Oregon, attempting to rescue a cat choking on a mouse, was bitten and became infected with septicemic plague. 
* On July 16, 2013, A squirrel trapped in the Table Mountain Campgrounds of Angeles National Forest, tested positive for the plague, prompting a health advisory and the closing of the campground while investigators tested other squirrels and dusted the area for plague-infected fleas. 
* On August 26, 2013 Temir Isakunov, a teenage boy, died of bubonic plague in northern Kyrgyzstan. 
* December 2013 reports of Pneumonic Plague epidemic in 5 of 112 districts of Madagascar, believed to be caused by large brush fires forcing rats into towns. Australian AFP news sources 

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===
* Weatherford 2004: 242-250
* 
* Biraben, Jean-Noel. Les Hommes et la Peste The Hague 1975.
* Buckler, John and Bennet D. Hill and John P. McKay. "A History of Western Society, 5th Edition." New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1995.
* 
* . this manuscript reports a census of potential plague vectors (rodents and fleas) in a Brazilian focus region (i.e. region associated with cases of disease); free PDF download Retrieved 2005-03-02
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Patrick, Adam. "Disease in Antiquity: Ancient Greece and Rome," in Diseases in Antiquity, editors: Don Brothwell and A. T. Sandison. Springfield, Illinois; Charles C. Thomas, 1967.
* Platt, Colin. King Death: The Black Death and its Aftermath in Late-Medieval England Toronto University Press, 1997.
* 
* Simpson, W. J. A Treatise on Plague. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1905.
* 

==External links==
* World Health Organization
** Health topic
** Communicable Disease Surveillance & Response  Impact of plague & Information resources
* Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
** CDC Plague map world distribution, publications, information on bioterrorism preparedness and response regarding plague
** Infectious Disease Information more links including travelers' health
* Agent Fact Sheet: Plague, Center for Biosecurity
* Symptoms, causes, pictures of bubonic plague
* Secrets of the Dead. Mystery of the Black Death PBS
* 
* Researchers sound the alarm: the multidrug resistance of the plague bacillus could spread
* Plague - LoveToKnow 1911
* Genome information is available from the NIAID PathoSystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC)

 



[[Baudot code]]

The Baudot code, invented by mile Baudot, is a character set predating EBCDIC and ASCII. It was the predecessor to the International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2), the teleprinter code in use until the advent of ASCII. Each character in the alphabet is represented by a series of bits, sent over a communication channel such as a telegraph wire or a radio signal. The symbol rate measurement is known as baud, and is derived from the same name.

==History==

===Baudot code===
Technically, five bit codes began in the 16th century, when Francis Bacon developed the cipher now called Bacon's cipher. However, this cipher is not a machine cipher and as such is not readily suitable for telecommunications. 

Baudot invented his original code in 1870 and patented it in 1874. It was a 5-bit code, with equal on and off intervals, which allowed telegraph transmission of the Roman alphabet and punctuation and control signals. It was based on an earlier code developed by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber in 1834. 

Baudot's original code was adapted to be sent from a manual keyboard, and no teleprinter equipment was ever constructed that used it in its original form. The code was entered on a keyboard which had just five piano type keys, operated with two fingers of the left hand and three fingers of the right hand. Once the keys had been pressed they were locked down until mechanical contacts in a distributor unit passed over the sector connected to that particular keyboard, when the keyboard was unlocked ready for the next character to be entered, with an audible click (known as the "cadence signal") to warn the operator. Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute. 

 Continental Code V IV I II III V IV I II III A 1    P %     B 8    Q /    C 9     R    D 0     S ;  E 2   T !   E' &   U 4    F    V '     G 7   W ?    H    X ,  I   Y 3   J 6   Z :     K (   .    L =     * * Erasure   M )   Figure Blank   N N    Letter Blank O 5    Inland Code Let. Fig. V IV I II III Let. Fig. V IV I II III A 1   .   E 2  X 9/   Y 3  S 7/   / 1/   Z :    I 3/   W ?    U 4   T     O 5    V      Let. Bl.  J 6   K (    G 7   M )    B 8   R     H     L =     F 5/    N      C 9    Q /     D 0     P +      Fig. Bl.  * *   

The table above "shows the allocation of the Baudot code which was employed in the British Post Office for continental and inland services. It will be observed that a number of characters in the continental code are replaced by fractionals in the inland code. Code elements 1, 2 and 3 are transmitted by keys 1, 2 and 3, and these are operated by the first three fingers of the right hand. Code elements 4 and 5 are transmitted by keys 4 and 5, and these are operated by the first two fingers of the left hand."
 
 Alan G. Hobbs, 5 Unit Codes, section Baudot Multiplex System 
 

Baudot's code became known as International Telegraph Alphabet No. 1, and is no longer used.

===Murray code===
Paper tape with holes representing the "Baudot Code"
In 1901 Baudot's code was modified by Donald Murray (18651945), prompted by his development of a typewriter-like keyboard. The Murray system employed an intermediate step, a keyboard perforator, which allowed an operator to punch a paper tape, and a tape transmitter for sending the message from the punched tape. At the receiving end of the line, a printing mechanism would print on a paper tape, and/or a reperforator could be used to make a perforated copy of the message. As there was no longer a direct correlation between the operator's hand movement and the bits transmitted, there was no concern about arranging the code to minimize operator fatigue, and instead Murray designed the code to minimize wear on the machinery, assigning the code combinations with the fewest punched holes to the most frequently used characters. 

The Murray code also introduced what became known as "format effectors" or "control characters"  the CR (Carriage Return) and LF (Line Feed) codes. A few of Baudot's codes moved to the positions where they have stayed ever since: the NULL or BLANK and the DEL code. NULL/BLANK was used as an idle code for when no messages were being sent.

Early British Creed machines used the Murray system.

===Western Union===
Keyboard of a teleprinter using the Baudot code, with FIGS and LTRS shift keys.
Murray's code was adopted by Western Union which used it until the 1950s, with a few changes that consisted of omitting some characters and adding more control codes. An explicit SPC (space) character was introduced, in place of the BLANK/NULL, and a new BEL code rang a bell or otherwise produced an audible signal at the receiver. Additionally, the WRU or "Who aRe yoU?" code was introduced, which caused a receiving machine to send an identification stream back to the sender.

===ITA2===
Around 1930, the CCITT introduced the International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2) code as an international standard, which was based on the Western Union code with some minor changes. The US standardized on a version of ITA2 called the American Teletypewriter code (USTTY) which was the basis for 5-bit teletypewriter codes until the debut of 7-bit ASCII in 1963. 

International Telegraph Alphabet 2

 International telegraphy alphabet No. 2 (Baudot-Murray code) 
 Pattern of impulses1=mark 0=space Letter shift Figure shift 
 msb on left msb on right 
 00000 00000 Null Null 
 00100 00100 Space Space 
 10111 11101 Q 1 
 10011 11001 W 2 
 00001 10000 E 3 
 01010 01010 R 4 
 10000 00001 T 5 
 10101 10101 Y 6 
 00111 11100 U 7 
 00110 01100 I 8 
 11000 00011 O 9 
 10110 01101 P 0 
 00011 11000 A  
 00101 10100 S Bell 
 01001 10010 D WRU? 
 01101 10110 F ! 
 11010 01011 G & 
 10100 00101 H # 
 01011 11010 J ' 
 01111 11110 K ( 
 10010 01001 L ) 
 10001 10001 Z \" 
 11101 10111 X / 
 01110 01110 C : 
 11110 01111 V ; 
 11001 10011 B ? 
 01100 00110 N , 
 11100 00111 M . 
 01000 00010 Carriage return Carriage return 
 00010 01000 Line feed Line feed 
 11011 11011 Shift to figures 
 11111 11111 Shift to letters 

ITA2 is still used in TDDs, telex, and some amateur radio applications, such as radioteletype ("RTTY"). ITA2 is also used in Enhanced Broadcast Solution (a recent financial protocol specified by Deutsche Brse) to reduce the character encoding footprint. 

==Nomenclature==
Nearly all 20th-century teleprinter equipment used Western Union's code, ITA2, or variants thereof. Radio amateurs casually call ITA2 and variants "Baudot" incorrectly, Enhanced Broadcast Solution  Interface Specification Final Version and even the American Radio Relay League's Amateur Radio Handbook does so, though in more recent editions the tables of codes correctly identifies it as ITA2.

==Details==
NOTE: This table presumes the space called "1" by Baudot and Murray is rightmost, and least significant. The way the transmitted bits were packed into larger codes varied by manufacturer; the most common solution allocates the bits from the least significant bit towards the most significant bit (leaving the three most significant bits of a byte unused).
Table of USTTY codes (expressed as hexadecimal numbers)
In ITA2, characters are expressed using five bits. ITA2 uses two code sub-sets, the "letter shift" (LTRS), and the "figure shift" (FIGS). The FIGS character (11011) signals that the following characters are to be interpreted as being in the FIGS set, until this is reset by the LTRS (11111) character. In use, the LTRS or FIGS shift key is pressed and released, transmitting the corresponding shift character to the other machine. The desired letters or figures characters are then typed. Unlike a typewriter or modern computer keyboard the shift key isn't kept depressed whilst the corresponding characters are typed. "ENQuiry" will trigger the other machine's answerback. It means "Who are you?"

CR is carriage return, LF is line feed, BEL is the bell character which rang a small bell (often used to alert operators to an incoming message), SP is space, and NUL is the null character (blank tape).

Note: the binary conversions of the codepoints are often shown in reverse order, depending on (presumably) from which side one views the paper tape. Note further that the "control" characters were chosen so that they were either symmetric or in useful pairs so that inserting a tape "upside down" did not result in problems for the equipment and the resulting printout could be deciphered. Thus FIGS (11011), LTRS (11111) and space (00100) are invariant, while CR (00010) and LF (01000), generally used as a pair, are treated the same regardless of order by page printers. LTRS could also be used to overpunch characters to be deleted on a paper tape (much like DEL in 7-bit ASCII).

The sequence RYRYRY... is often used in test messages, and at the start of every transmission. Since R is 01010 and Y is 10101, the sequence exercises much of a teleprinter's mechanical components at maximum stress. Also, at one time, fine-tuning of the receiver was done using two coloured lights (one for each tone). 'RYRYRY...' produced 0101010101..., which made the lights glow with equal brightness when the tuning was correct. This tuning sequence is only useful when ITA2 is used with two-tone FSK modulation, such as is commonly seen in Radioteletype (RTTY) usage.

US implementations of Baudot code may differ in the addition of a few characters, such as #, & on the FIGS layer. The above table represents the US TTY code.

The Russian version of Baudot code (MTK-2) used three shift modes; the Cyrillic letter mode was activated by the character (00000). Because of the larger number of characters in the Cyrillic alphabet, the characters !, &,  were omitted and replaced by Cyrillics, and BEL has the same code as Cyrillic letter .

== See also ==
*Serial communication
*Asynchronous communication
*Morse code
*RY (test signal)
*Punched tape

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
*MTK-2 code table
*Baudot, Murray, ITA2, ITA5, etc.
* 
* Online Text-ITA2-Converter (includes paper tape view)
* A breakdown of the patent for Baudot's first device



[[Blu-Tack]]

Blu-Tack
Blu-Tack looked at with a Scanning Electron Microscope

Blu-tack is a reusable putty-like pressure-sensitive adhesive produced by Bostik, commonly used to attach lightweight objects (such as posters or sheets of paper) to walls or other dry surfaces. Traditionally blue (blu), it is also available in other colours. 

The composition of Blu-Tack is a manufacturing secret but is described as a synthetic rubber compound without hazardous properties under normal conditions. It can be swallowed without harm and is noncarcinogenic. It is non-soluble and is denser than water. The material has a flash point of 93 C / 200 F, at which it releases carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, water vapour, oxides of nitrogen, and toxic fumes. 

== History ==
In 1970, laboratory researcher Alan Holloway was working for sealant manufacturer Ralli Bondite of Waterlooville, England. Ralli Bondite was a wholly owned subsidiary of G & L Ralli Investment & Trustee Co. Ltd. Holloway inadvertently produced a product that was useless as a sealant, but pliable and semi-elastic. This novelty product was demonstrated by Ralli Bondite management to visiting executives from another sealant and adhesive manufacturer, as a means of wall mounting notices. There was no need for secrecy about the formula, as it was of no use for a gun-grade mastic, the main product of Ralli Bondite. Initially the potential of this material was not fully recognised, but later Bostik commenced research into the development of what they were eventually to launch as Blu-Tack. In its conceptual stage Blu-Tack was white, but was coloured blue in response to concerns received from marketing research regarding the possibility of children mistaking it for edible confectionery. 

In the United Kingdom in March 2008, 20,000 numbered packs of pink Blu-Tack were made available, to help raise money for Breast Cancer Campaign, with 10 pence from each pack going to the charity. The formulation was slightly altered to retain complete consistency with its blue counterpart. Since then, many coloured variations have been made, including red and white, yellow and a green Halloween pack.

== Similar products ==

Similar products of various colours are made by many manufacturers, including: 
* "Tack-it" by Faber-Castell
* "Poster Putty", "Tac 'N Stick", "Ticky Tack", "Sticky Tack", "Patafix" and "White Tack" by German company UHU
* "Sticky Stuff" and "Fun-Tak" by Henkel brands Pritt, Loctite and LePage
* "Poster Tack" and "Elmer's Tack" by Elmer's. 

They are also sold under the generic names "adhesive putty" and "mounting putty".

The generic trademark or common name for mounting putty varies by region:
* "Overtictack" in many parts of the US and Canada. 
* Prestik in South Africa 
* "Patafix" in France and Italy (phonetic abbreviation for "pte  fixer", "fastening dough" in French) . 
* "Kennaratyggj" (teacher's chewing gum) in Iceland 
* "Elefantsnot" (elephant's snot) in Denmark
* "Hftmassa" (attachment mass) or "kludd" in Sweden

== Uses ==

Like all poster putties, Blu-Tack provides an alternative to the artist's traditional kneaded eraser, having a superior grip and plasticity. Blu-Tack can be finely shaped and worked into even very small areas. Like kneaded erasers, it can be stretched and kneaded to freshen its working surfaces.

Blu-Tack is also used for sculpture. In 2007 artist Elizabeth Thompson created a 200-kilogram sculpture of a house spider using Blu-Tack over a wire frame. It took around 4000 packs and was exhibited at London Zoo. Other artists have created works from the material including stop-motion animation.

Blu-Tack acts as an excellent damping agent for sound and vibration applications, due to its low amplitude response properties. http://www.stereophile.com/content/sound-surprise-loudspeakerstand-interface-page-1 

==References==

==External links==
* Official Blu-Tack site, UK
* Official Blu Tack site, Australia



[[Bacillus]]

Gram stain of a Bacillus species.
Bacillus is a genus of Gram-positive, rod-shaped (bacillus), bacteria and a member of the phylum Firmicutes. Bacillus species can be obligate aerobes (oxygen reliant), or facultative anaerobes (having the ability to be aerobic or anaerobic). They will test positive for the enzyme catalase when there has been oxygen used or present. Ubiquitous in nature, Bacillus includes both free-living (non-parasitic) and parasitic pathogenic species. Under stressful environmental conditions, the bacteria can produce oval endospores that are not true spores but which the bacteria can reduce themselves to and remain in a dormant state for very long periods. These characteristics originally defined the genus, but not all such species are closely related, and many have been moved to other genera of Firmicutes. 

Many species of Bacillus can produce copious amounts of enzymes which are made use of in different industries. Some Bacillus species can form intracellular inclusions of polyhydroxyalkanoates under certain adverse environmental conditions, as in a lack of elements such as phosphorus, nitrogen, or oxygen combined with an excessive supply of carbon sources.

B.subtilis has proved a valuable model for research. Other species of Bacillus are important pathogens, causing anthrax and food poisoning.

==Industrial significance==
Many Bacillus species are able to secrete large quantities of enzymes. Bacillus amyloliquefaciens is the source of a natural antibiotic protein barnase (a ribonuclease), alpha amylase used in starch hydrolysis, the protease subtilisin used with detergents, and the BamH1 restriction enzyme used in DNA research.

A portion of the Bacillus thuringiensis genome was incorporated into corn (and cotton) crops. The resulting GMOs are therefore resistant to some insect pests.

==Use as model organism==
Bacillus subtilis is one of the best understood prokaryotes, in terms of molecular biology and cell biology. Its superb genetic amenability and relatively large size have provided the powerful tools required to investigate a bacterium from all possible aspects. Recent improvements in fluorescence microscopy techniques have provided novel and amazing insight into the dynamic structure of a single cell organism. Research on Bacillus subtilis has been at the forefront of bacterial molecular biology and cytology, and the organism is a model for differentiation, gene/protein regulation, and cell cycle events in bacteria. 

==Clinical significance==
Two Bacillus species are considered medically significant: B. anthracis, which causes anthrax, and B. cereus, which causes food poisoning similar to that caused by Staphylococcus. A third species, B. thuringiensis, is an important insect pathogen, and is sometimes used to control insect pests. The type species is B. subtilis, an important model organism. It is also a notable food spoiler, causing ropiness in bread and related food. Some environmental and commercial strains B. coagulans may play a role in food spoilage of highly acidic, tomato based products.

An easy way to isolate Bacillus is by placing nonsterile soil in a test tube with water, shaking, placing in melted mannitol salt agar, and incubating at room temperature for at least a day. Colonies are usually large, spreading and irregularly shaped. Under the microscope, the Bacillus cells appear as rods, and a substantial portion usually contain an oval endospore at one end, making it bulge.

== Cell wall ==
The cell wall of Bacillus is a structure on the outside of the cell that forms the second barrier between the bacterium and the environment, and at the same time maintains the rod shape and withstands the pressure generated by the cell's turgor. The cell wall is composed of teichoic and teichuronic acids. B. subtilis is the first bacterium for which the role of an actin-like cytoskeleton in cell shape determination and peptidoglycan synthesis was identified, and for which the entire set of peptidoglycan-synthesizing enzymes was localised. The role of the cytoskeleton in shape generation and maintenance is important. 

==Phylogeny==
The genus Bacillus was named in 1835 by Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg, to contain rod-shaped (bacillus) bacteria. He had seven years earlier named the genus Bacterium. Bacillus was later amended by Ferdinand Cohn to further describe them as spore-forming, Gram-positive, aerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria. COHN (F.): Untersuchungen ber Bakterien. Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen Heft 2, 1872, 1, 127-224. Like other genera associated with the early history of microbiology, such as Pseudomonas and Vibrio, the 266 species of Bacillus are ubiquitous. The genus has a very large ribosomal 16S diversity and is environmentally diverse.
 
Several studies have tried to reconstruct the phylogeny of the genus. The Bacillus-specific study with the most diversity covered is by Xu and Cote using 16S and the ITS region, where they divide the genus into 10 groups, which includes the nested genera Paenibacillus, Brevibacillus, Geobacillus, Marinibacillus and Virgibacillus. However, the tree constructed by the living tree project, a collaboration between ARB-Silva and LPSN where a 16S (and 23S if available) tree of all validated species was constructed, the genus Bacillus contains a very large number of nested taxa and majorly in both 16S and 23S it is paraphyletic to Lactobacillales (Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Listeria, etc.), due to Bacillus coahuilensis and others. A gene concatenation study found similar results to Xu and Cote, but with a much more limited number of species in terms of groups, but used Listeria as an outgroup, so in light of the ARB tree, it may be "inside-out".

One clade, formed by B. anthracis, B. cereus, B. mycoides, B. pseudomycoides, B. thuringiensis and B. weihenstephanensis under current classification standards, should be a single species (within 97% 16S identity), but due to medical reasons, they are considered separate species, Ole Andreas kstad and Anne-Brit Kolst Chapter 2: Genomics of Bacillus Species in M. Wiedmann, W. Zhang (eds.), Genomics of Foodborne Bacterial Pathogens, 29 Food Microbiology and Food Safety. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011 DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7686-4_2 an issue also present for four species of Shigella and Escherichia coli. BRENNER (D.J.): Family I. Enterobacteriaceae Rahn 1937, Nom. fam. cons. Opin. 15, Jud. Com. 1958, 73; Ewing, Farmer, and Brenner 1980, 674; Judicial Commission 1981, 104. In: N.R. KRIEG and J.G. HOLT (eds), Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, first edition, vol. 1, The Williams & Wilkins Co, Baltimore, 1984, pp. 408-420 

==See also==
* Paenibacillus and Virgibacillus are genera of bacteria that were formerly included in Bacillus

==References==

==External links==
* Bacillus genomes and related information at PATRIC, a Bioinformatics Resource Center funded by NIAID

 



[[Braslia]]

Braslia () is the federal capital of Brazil and the capital of the Federal District. The city is located along the Brazilian Highlands in the country's Central-West region. It was founded on April 21, 1960, to serve as the new national capital. Braslia had an estimated population of 2,789,761 in 2013, making it the 4th most populous city in Brazil. IBGE: Braslia IBGE. Retrieved on 2013-10-07. . 

Among major Latin American cities, Braslia has the highest GDP per capita at R$61,915 (US$36,175). http://www.urosario.edu.co/urosario_files/9d/9d96f884-d433-45a8-947b-4e9877596f63.pdf 

Braslia was planned and developed by Lcio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer in 1956 in order to move the capital from Rio de Janeiro to a more central location. The landscape architect was Roberto Burle Marx. The city's design divides it into numbered blocks as well as sectors for specified activities, such as the Hotel Sector, the Banking Sector and the Embassy Sector. Braslia was chosen as a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to its modernist architecture. 

The city has a unique status in Brazil, as it is an administrative division rather than a legal municipality like other cities in Brazil. Nationally, the term is almost always used synonymously with the Federal District, which constitutes an indivisible Federative Unit, analogous to a state. Several "satellite cities" (suburbs) are also part of the Federal District.

The centers of all three branches of the federal government of Brazil are in Braslia, including the Congress, President, and Supreme Court. The city also hosts 124 foreign embassies. Braslia International Airport connects the capital to all major Brazilian cities and many international destinations, and is the third busiest airport in Brazil.

The city will be one of the main host cities of the 2014 FIFA World Cup and will be the host city of 2019 Summer Universiade. Additionally, Braslia hosted the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup.

==History==

From 1763 to 1960, Rio de Janeiro was the capital of Brazil. At this time, resources tended to be centered in Brazil's southeast region near Rio de Janeiro. Braslia's geographically central location fostered a more regionally neutral federal capital. An article of the country's first republican constitution dating back to 1891 stated that the capital should be moved from Rio de Janeiro to a place close to the center of the country. The plan was originally conceived in 1827 by Jos Bonifcio, an advisor to Emperor Pedro I. He presented a plan to the General Assembly of Brazil for a new city called Braslia, with the idea of moving the capital westward from the heavily populated southeastern corridor. The bill was not enacted because Pedro I dissolved the Assembly.

Juscelino Kubitschek, President of Brazil from 1956 to 1961, ordered the construction of Braslia, fulfilling the promise of the Constitution and his own political campaign promise. Building Braslia was part of Juscelino's "fifty years of prosperity in five" plan. Lcio Costa won a contest and was the main urban planner in 1957, with 5550 people competing. Oscar Niemeyer, a close friend, was the chief architect of most public buildings and Roberto Burle Marx was the landscape designer. Braslia was built in 41 months, from 1956 to April 21, 1960, when it was officially inaugurated.

Until the 1980s, the governor of the Federal District was appointed by the Federal Government, and the laws of Braslia were issued by the Brazilian Federal Senate. With the Constitution of 1988 Braslia gained the right to elect its Governor, and a District Assembly (Cmara Legislativa) was elected to exercise legislative power. History of Braslia The Federal District does not have a Judicial Power of its own. The Judicial Power which serves the Federal District also serves federal territories. Currently, Brazil does not have any territories, therefore, for now the courts serve only cases from the Federal District.

According to legend, Italian saint Don Bosco in 1883 had a dream in which he described a futuristic city that roughly fitted Braslia's location. In Braslia today, many references of Bosco, who founded the Salesian order, are found throughout the city and one church parish in the city bears his name. About Brasilia Brazil 

==Geography==

===Climate===

Braslia has a tropical savanna climate (Aw) according to the Kppen system. The individual seasons are defined according to the degree of humidity of the air: one season is dry, while the other one is comparatively humid. The average temperature is 20.5 C. 
September, at the end of the dry season, has the highest average maximum temperature, 28 C, and July has the lowest average maximum temperature, 26 C. The lowest average minimum temperature is in June and July 11 C. Average temperatures from September through April are a consistent 22 C. The record low temperature was 0 C, and the record high was 37 C.

The dry season lasts from late March-early April to late September-early October, though late May may see rainfall. Humidity averages about 50% during the dry season which often falls below 30% by midday.

==Demographics==

Cultural Complex of Braslia.
Braslia at night from ISS.
According to the 2010 IBGE Census, there were 2,469,489 people residing in the city of Braslia. 2010 IGBE Census The census revealed the following numbers: 1,239,882 Pardo (Multiracial) people (48.2%), 1,084,418 White people (42.2%), 198,072 Black people (7.7%), 41,522 Asian people (1.6%), 6,128 Amerindian people (0.2%). 2010 IGBE Census 

In 2010, Braslia was ranked as the fourth most populous city in Brazil after So Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Salvador. The largest Brazilian cities - 2010 IBGE Census } 

In 2010, the city had 474,871 opposite-sex couples and 1,241 same-sex couples (see more at LGBT rights in Brazil). The population of Braslia was 52.2% female and 47.8% male. 

In the 1960 census there were almost 140,000 residents in the new Federal District. By 1970 this figure had grown to more than 537,000. In 2000 the population of the Federal District was over 2,000,000. Planned for only 500,000 inhabitants, Braslia has seen its population grow much more than expected. Several satellite cities have been created over the years to house the extra inhabitants. 

From the beginning, the growth of Braslia was greater than original estimates. According to the original plans, Braslia would be a city for government authorities and staff. However, during the construction period, Brazilians from all over the country migrated to Braslia, seeking public and private jobs. 

This makes it the largest city (by population) in the world at the close of the 20th century that did not exist at the beginning of the century (a distinction held by Chicago in the 19th century). Braslia has one of the highest growth rates in Brazil, with its population increasing by 2.82% each year, mostly because of internal migration.

Braslia's inhabitants include a foreign population of mostly embassy workers as well as large numbers of Brazilian migrants. Today, the city has important communities of immigrants and refugees. The Human Development Index in the city is at 0.936 in the year 2000, (developed nation level), and the illiteracy rate is around 4.35%.

===Religion===
View of the Cathedral of Braslia.

 Religion Percentage Number 
 Catholic 56.62% 1,455,134 
 Protestant 26.88% 690,982 
 No religion 9.20% 236,528 
 Spiritist 3.50% 89,836 
 Jewish 0.04% 1103 
 Muslim 0.04% 972 

Source: IBGE 2010. 

==Cityscape==
Brazilian National Flag and Congress.

At the northwestern end of the Monumental Axis are federal district and municipal buildings, while at the southeastern end, near the middle shore of Lake Parano, stand the executive, judicial, and legislative buildings around the Square of Three Powers, the conceptual heart of the city. Braslia 

These and other major structures were designed by Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer. In the Square of Three Powers, he created as a focal point the dramatic Congressional Palace, which is composed of five parts: twin administrative towers flanked by a large, white concrete dome (the meeting place of the Senate) and by an equally massive concrete bowl (the Chamber of Deputies), which is joined to the dome by an underlying, flat-roofed building. Braslia, Brazil (UNESCO site) 

A series of low-lying annexes (largely hidden) flank both ends. Also in the square are the glass-faced Planalto Palace housing the presidential offices, and the Palace of the Supreme Court. Farther east, on a triangle of land jutting into the lake, is the Palace of the Dawn (Palcio da Alvorada; the presidential residence). Between the federal and civic buildings on the Monumental Axis is the city's cathedral, considered by many to be Niemeyer's finest achievement (see photographs of the interior). The parabolically shaped structure is characterized by its 16 gracefully curving supports, which join in a circle 115 feet (35 meters) above the floor of the nave; stretched between the supports are translucent walls of tinted glass. The nave is entered via a subterranean passage rather than conventional doorways. Other notable buildings are Buriti Palace, Itamaraty Palace, the National Theater, and several foreign embassies that creatively embody features of their national architecture. The Brazilian landscape architect Roberto Burle Marx designed landmark modernist gardens for some of the principal buildings. Braslia 

Both low-cost and luxury housing were built by the government in the central city. The residential zones of the inner city are arranged into superquadras ("superblocks"): groups of apartment buildings along with a prescribed number and type of schools, retail stores, and open spaces. At the northern end of Lake Parano, separated from the inner city, is a peninsula with many fashionable homes, and a similar neighbourhood exists on the southern lakeshore. Originally the city planners envisioned extensive public areas along the shores of the artificial lake, but during early development private clubs, hotels, and upscale residences and restaurants gained footholds around the water. Set well apart from the city are suburban satellite cities, including Gama, Ceilndia, Taguatinga, Ncleo Bandeirante, Sobradinho, and Planaltina. These towns, with the exception of Gama and Sobradinho were not planned. Braslia 

===Monumental civic scale===
Aerial view of the Asa Sul (South Wing) district.
The city has been both acclaimed and criticized for its use of modernist architecture on a grand scale and for its somewhat utopian city plan.

After a visit to Braslia, the French writer Simone de Beauvoir complained that all of its superquadras exuded "the same air of elegant monotony," and other observers have equated the city's large open lawns, plazas, and fields to wastelands. As the city has matured, some of these have gained adornments, and many have been improved by landscaping, giving some observers a sense of "humanized" spaciousness. Although not fully accomplished, the "Braslia utopia" has produced a city of relatively high quality of life, in which the citizens live in forested areas with sporting and leisure structure (the superquadras) flanked by small commercial areas, bookstores and cafes; the city is famous for its cuisine and efficiency of transit.

Even these positive features have sparked controversy, expressed in the nickname "ilha da fantasia" ("fantasy island"), indicating the sharp contrast between the city and surrounding regions, marked by poverty and disorganization in the cities of the state of Gois, around Braslia.

Critics of Braslia's grand scale have characterized it as a modernist platonic fantasy about the future:

==Economy==

Shopping center in the city.

The major roles of construction and of services (government, communications, banking and finance, food production, entertainment, and legal services) in Braslia's economy reflect the city's status as a governmental rather than an industrial center. Industries connected with construction, food processing, and furnishings are important, as are those associated with publishing, printing, and computer software. GDP is divided in Public Administration 54.8%, Services 28.7%, Industry 10.2%, Commerce 6.1%, Agribusiness 0.2%. 

Besides being the political center, Braslia is an important economic center. Braslia has the highest city gross domestic product (GDP) of 99.5 billion reais representing 3.76% of the total Brazilian GDP.
The main economic activity of the federal capital results from its administrative function. Its industrial planning is studied carefully by the Government of the Federal District. Being a city registered by UNESCO, the government in Braslia has opted to encourage the development of non-polluting industries such as software, film, video, and gemology among others, with emphasis on environmental preservation and maintaining ecological balance, preserving the city property.

According to Mercer's city rankings of cost of living for expatriate employees, Braslia ranks 45th among the most expensive cities in the world in 2012, up from the 70th position in 2010, ranking behind So Paulo (12th) and Rio de Janeiro (13th).

===Services===
Central Bank of Brazil.
(91% of local GDP, according to the IBGE):
* Government  the public sector is by far the largest employer, accounting for around 40% of the city jobs. Government jobs include all levels, from the federal police to diplomacy, from the transportation bureau to the armed forces;
* Communications  the telephony used to be a state monopoly, and Braslia held the HQ of Telebrs, the central state company; one of the enterprises that resulted from the privatization of the system in the 90's, Brasil Telecom, keeps it HQ in the city; the official Postal Service (Correios) HQ is located in the city as well; as it is the main place of Federal Government news, it is also notable the activities of TV stations, including the main offices of four public networks (TV Brasil/Agncia Brasil, TV Cmara, TV Senado and TV Justia), the regional offices of four major private television networks (Globo, SBT, Rede Bandeirantes and Rede Record) and a main affiliate of RedeTV!;
* Banking and finance  headquarters of the Banco do Brasil and the Caixa Econmica Federal, both controlled by the Federal Government, and the Banco de Braslia, controlled by the city local government; it is also the site of the headquarters of the Central Bank, the main government regulatory agency of the financial sector;
* Entertainment  the shopping malls Conjunto Nacional, ParkShopping, Ptio Brasil Shopping, Braslia Shopping, Boulevard Shopping, Taguatinga Shopping, Terrao Shopping, Gilberto Salomo and Iguatemi Braslia.
* Information technology (Politec, Poliedro, CTIS, among others), and legal services.

===Industries===
South hotel sector in Braslia.
South hotel sector at night.
In the city include:
* Construction (Paulo Octavio, Via Construes, and Irmos Gravia among others);
* Food processing (Perdigo, Sadia);
* Furniture Making;
* Recycling (Novo Rio, Rexam, Latasa and others);
* Pharmaceuticals (Unio Qumica);
* Graphic industries.

The main agricultural products produced in the city are coffee, guavas, strawberries, oranges, lemons, papayas, soy beans, and mangoes. It has over 110,000 cows and it exports wood products worldwide.

The Federal District, where Braslia is located, has a GDP of R$ 133,4 billion (about US$ 64.1 billion), about the same as Belarus according to The Economist. Its share of the total Brazilian GDP is about 3.8%. 

The Federal District has the largest GDP per capita income of Brazil US$ 25,062, slightly higher than Portugal. 

===Accommodation===
The city's planned design included specific areas for almost everything, including accommodation, Hotels Sectors North and South. New hotel facilities are being developed elsewhere, such as the hotels and tourism Sector North, located on the shores of Lake Parano. Braslia has a range of tourist accommodation from inns, pensions and hostels to larger international chain hotels.

The city's restaurants cater to a wide range of foods from local and regional Brazilian dishes to international cuisine.

==Education==

Institute of Biological Sciences (IB) of the University of Braslia.

The Portuguese language is the official national language and the primary language taught in schools. English and Spanish are also part of the official curriculum. The city has six international schools: American School of Braslia, Braslia International School (BIS), Escola das Naes, Swiss International School (SIS), Lyce franais Franois-Mitterrand (LfFM) and Maple Bear Canadian School. International schools in Braslia 

Braslia has two universities, three university centers, and many private colleges.

===Main tertiary educational institutions===
* Universidade de Braslia  University of Braslia (UnB) (public);
* Universidade Catlica de Braslia  Catholic University of Braslia (UCB);
* Centro Universitrio de Braslia (UniCEUB);
* Centro Universitrio do Distrito Federal (UDF);
* Universidade Paulista (UNIP);
* Instituto de Educao Superior de Braslia (IESB).

==Culture==
The "Piet" statue in the National Cathedral of Braslia.

As a venue for political events, music performances and movie festivals, Braslia is a cosmopolitan city, with around 124 embassies, a wide range of restaurants and complete infrastructure ready to host any kind of event. Not surprisingly, the city stands out as an important business tourism destination, which is an important part of the local economy, with dozens of hotels spread around the national capital. Traditional parties take place throughout the year. In June, large festivals known as "festas juninas" are held celebrating Catholic saints such as Saint Anthony of Padua, Saint John the Baptist, and Saint Peter. On September 7, the traditional Independence Day parade is held on the Ministries Esplanade. Throughout the year, local, national, and international events are held throughout the city. Christmas is widely celebrated, and New Year's Eve usually hosts major events. Braslia 

The city also hosts a varied assortment of art works from artists like Bruno Giorgi, Alfredo Ceschiatti, Athos Bulco, Marianne Peretti, Alfredo Volpi, Di Cavalcanti, Dyllan Taxman, Victor Brecheret and Burle Marx, whose works have been integrated into the city's architecture, making it a unique landscape. The cuisine in the city is very diverse. Many of the best restaurants in the city can be found in the Asa Sul district. 

Ministries Esplanade on the Monumental Axis.

===Historic sites and museums===

====Eixo Monumental====
At the end of the Eixo Monumental ("Monumental Axis") lies the Esplanada dos Ministrios ("Ministries Esplanade"), an open area in downtown Braslia. The rectangular lawn is surrounded by two eight-lane avenues where many government buildings, monuments and memorials are located.

====National Congress====
The National Congress Building.
The Palcio da Alvorada.

Brazil's bicameral National Congress consists of the Senate (the upper house) and the Chamber of Deputies of Brazil (the lower house). Since the 1960s, the National Congress has been located in Braslia. As with most official buildings throughout the city, it was designed by Oscar Niemeyer in the style of modern Brazilian architecture. The hemisphere to the left is the seat of the Senate and the hemisphere to the right is the seat of the Chamber of Deputies. The Congress also occupies various other surrounding buildings, some connected by tunnels.

The National Congress building is located in the middle of the Eixo Monumental, the city's main avenue. In front lies a large lawn and reflecting pool. The building faces the Praa dos Trs Poderes where the Palcio do Planalto and the Supremo Tribunal Federal are located.

====Palcio da Alvorada====
The Palcio da Alvorada is the official residence of the President of Brazil. The palace was designed, along with the rest of the city of Braslia, by Oscar Niemeyer and inaugurated in 1958.

One of the first structures built in the republic's new capital city, the "Alvorada" lies on a peninsula at the margins of Lake Parano. The principles of simplicity and modernity, that in the past characterized the great works of architecture, motivated Niemeyer. The viewer has an impression of looking at a glass box, softly landed on the ground with the support of thin external columns.

The building has an area of 7,000 m2 with three floors consisting of the basement, landing, and second floor. The auditorium, kitchen, laundry, medical center, and administration offices are at basement level. The rooms used by the presidency for official receptions are on the landing. The second floor has four suites, two apartments, and various private rooms which make up the residential part of the palace.

The building also has a library, a heated Olympic-sized swimming pool, a music room, two dining rooms and various meeting rooms. A chapel and heliport are in adjacent buildings.

====Palcio do Planalto====
The Palcio do Planalto.

The Palcio do Planalto is the official workplace of the President of Brazil. It is located at the Praa dos Trs Poderes in Braslia. As the seat of government, the term "O Planalto" is often used as a metonym for the executive branch of government.

The main working office of the President of the Republic is in the Palcio do Planalto. The President and his family do not live in it, rather in the official residence, the Palcio da Alvorada. Besides the President, senior advisors also have offices in the "Planalto," including the Vice-President of Brazil and the Chief of Staff. The other Ministries are along the Esplanada dos Ministrios.

The architect of the Palcio do Planalto was Oscar Niemeyer, creator of most of the important buildings in Braslia. The idea was to project an image of simplicity and modernity using fine lines and waves to compose the columns and exterior structures.

The Palace is four stories high, and has an area of 36,000 m2. Four other adjacent buildings are also part of the complex.
Itamaraty Palace, headquarters of the Ministry of External Relations.

====Complexo Cultural da Repblica====
The Complexo Cultural da Repblica (Portuguese for Cultural Complex of the Republic) is formed by the National Library of Braslia and the National Museum of the Republic. It is situated in the Eixo Monumental, next to the Cathedral of Braslia.

The National Library of Braslia (Biblioteca Nacional de Braslia in Portuguese) occupies an area of 14,000 m2, consisting of reading and study rooms, auditorium and a collection of over 300,000 items.

The National Museum of the Republic (Museu Nacional da Repblica in Portuguese) consists of a 14,500 m2 exhibit area, two 780-seat auditoriums, and a laboratory. The space is mainly used to display temporary art exhibits.

===Parano Lake===
Parano Lake is a large artificial lake built to increase the amount of water available to the region. It has the second largest marina in Brazil, and hosts wakeboarders and windsurfers.

===Juscelino Kubitschek bridge===
The Juscelino Kubitschek Bridge.
The Juscelino Kubitschek bridge, also known as the 'President JK Bridge' or the 'JK Bridge', crosses Lake Parano in Braslia. It is named after Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira, former president of Brazil. It was designed by architect Alexandre Chan and structural engineer Mrio Vila Verde. Chan won the Gustav Lindenthal Medal for this project at the 2003 International Bridge Conference in Pittsburgh due to "...outstanding achievement demonstrating harmony with the environment, aesthetic merit and successful community participation".

It consists of three 60 m tall asymmetrical steel arches that crisscross diagonally. With a length of 1,200 m (0.75 miles), it was completed in 2002 at a cost of US$ 56.8 million. The bridge has a pedestrian walkway and is accessible to bicyclists and skaters.

===Praa dos Trs Poderes===
Supreme Court of Brazil.
Praa dos Trs Poderes (Portuguese for Square of the Three Powers) is a plaza in Braslia. The name is derived from the encounter of the three federal branches around the plaza: the Executive, represented by the Palcio do Planalto (presidential office); the Legislative, represented by the National Congress (Congresso Nacional); and the Judicial branch, represented by the Supreme Federal Court (Supremo Tribunal Federal).

It is a tourist attraction in Braslia, designed by Lcio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer as a place where the three branches would meet harmoniously.

===Cathedral of Braslia===
The Cathedral of Braslia in the capital of the Federative Republic of Brazil, is an expression of the architect Oscar Niemeyer. This concrete-framed hyperboloid structure, seems with its glass roof reaching up, open, to the heavens. On 31 May 1970, the Cathedrals structure was finished, and only the 70 m diameter of the circular area were visible. Niemeyer's project of Cathedral of Braslia is based in the hyperboloid of revolution which sections are asymmetric. The hyperboloid structure itself is a result of 16 identical assembled concrete columns. These columns, having hyperbolic section and weighing 90 t, represent two hands moving upwards to heaven. The Cathedral was dedicated on 31 May 1970.

===Popular culture===
Dom Bosco Sanctuary in Braslia.
Braslia has also been the focus of modern day literature. Published in 2008, The World In Grey: Dom Bosco's Prophecy, by author Ryan J. Lucero, tells an apocalyptic story based on the famous prophecy from the late 19th century by the Italian saint Don Bosco. 

According to Don Bosco's prophecy: 

Braslia lies between the parallels 15 S and 20 S, where an artificial lake (Parano Lake) was formed. Don Bosco is Braslia's patron saint.

American Flagg!, the First Comics comic book series created by Howard Chaykin, portrays Braslia as a cosmopolitan world capital of culture and exotic romance. In the series, it is a top vacation and party destination.

==Transportation==

===International airport===
Braslia International Airport (BSB).
Braslia International Airport (BSB).
BrasliaPresidente Juscelino Kubitschek International Airport serves the metropolitan area with major domestic and international flights. It is the third busiest Brazilian airport based on passengers and aircraft movements. Because of its strategic location it is a civil aviation hub for the rest of the country.

This makes for a large number of takeoffs and landings and it is not unusual for flights to be delayed in the holding pattern before landing. Following the airport's master plan, Infraero built a second runway, which was finished in 2006. In 2007, the airport handled 11,119,872 passengers. Airport Statistics for 2007 http://www.infraero.gov.br/upload/arquivos/movi/mov.operac.1207.pdf The main building's third floor, with 12 thousand square meters, has a panoramic deck, a food court, shops, four movie theatres with total capacity of 500 people, and space for exhibitions. Braslia Airport has 136 vendor spaces.

The airport is located about 11 km from the central area of Braslia, outside the metro system. The area outside the airport's main gate is lined with taxis as well as several bus line services which connect the airport to Braslia's central district. The parking lot accommodates 1,200 cars. The airport is serviced by domestic and regional airlines (TAM, GOL, Azul, WebJET, Trip and Avianca), in addition to a number of international carriers.

In 2012, Braslia's International Airport was won by the InfrAmerica consortium, formed by the Brazilian engineering company ENGEVIX and the Argentine Corporacion America holding company, with a 50% stake each. Brazilian Airport Privatization  Second Round Concessions 

During the 25-year concession, the airport may be expanded to up to 40 million passengers a year. Brazil Opens First Expansion at a Privately Operated Airport 

In 2014, the airport received 15 new boarding bridges, totalling 28 in all. This was the main requirement made by the federal government, which transferred the operation of the terminal to the Inframerica Group after an auction. The group invested R$ 750 million in the project. In the same year, the number of parking spaces doubled, reaching three thousand. The airport's entrance have a new rooftop cover and a new access road. Furthermore, a VIP room was created on Terminal 1's third floor. The investments resulted an increase the capacity of Braslia's airport from approximately 15 million passengers per year to 21 million by 2014. Inframerica Group will invest R$ 750 million in Brasilias Airport 

Braslia has direct flights to all states of Brazil and direct international flights to Atlanta, Buenos Aires, Lisbon, Miami, Panama City, and Paris. International flights - Braslia International Airport 

===Metro===

102 Sul Metro Station.
Braslia's new tram to be built on W3 Avenue.
Metr de Braslia is Braslia's underground metro system. The subway system has 24 stations on two lines, the Orange and Green lines, distributed along a total network of 42 km, covering some of the metropolitan area. Both lines begin at the Central Station and run parallel until the guas Claras Station. The Braslia metro is not comprehensive, so buses may provide better access to the city centre.

The metro leaves the Rodoviria (bus station) and goes south, avoiding most of the political and tourist areas. The main purpose of the metro is to serve suburban neighborhoods, such as Samambaia, Taguatinga and Ceilndia, as well as Guar and guas Claras. The satellite cities served are more populated in total than the Plano Piloto itself (the census of 2000 indicated that Ceilndia had 344,039 inhabitants, Taguatinga had 243,575, whereas the Plano Piloto had approximately 400,000 inhabitants), and most residents of the satellite cities depend on public transportation. 

===High-speed rail===
A high-speed railway was planned between Braslia and Goinia, the capital of the state of Goias, although it will probably be turned into a regional service linking these capital cities and cities in between, like Anpolis and Alexnia. 

===Buses===

The main bus hub in Braslia is the Central Bus Station, located in the crossing of the Eixo Monumental and the Eixo, about 2 km from the Three Powers Plaza. The original plan was to have a bus station as near as possible to every corner of Braslia. Today, the bus station is the hub of urban buses only, some running within Braslia and others connecting Braslia to the satellite cities.

In the original city plan, the interstate buses should also stop at the Central Station. Because of the growth of Braslia (and corresponding growth in the bus fleet), today the interstate buses leave from the older interstate station (called Rodoferroviria), located at the western end of the Eixo Monumental. The Central Bus Station also contains a main metro station.

A new bus station was opened in July 2010. It is on Sada Sul (South Exit) near Parkshopping Mall and with its metro station, and it's also an inter-state bus station, used only to leave the Federal District.

==Tourist sites nearby==
Waterfalls in the Chapada dos Veadeiros National Park.
Nearby attractions include:
* Chapada dos Veadeiros  A National Park with plenty of cerrado wildlife and surrounded by several waterfalls.
* Itiquira Falls  this 168 m-high waterfall is just over 100 km from Braslia, in the municipality of Formosa, Gois
* Caldas Novas  The largest natural hot springs resort in the world. Located about 360 km southeast of the city in the state of Gois.
* Pirenpolis  The city, located 150 km from Braslia, is well known for its waterfalls and Portuguese colonial architecture, and a popular festival involving mounted horses called Festa do Divino Esprito Santo which takes place 45 days after Easter. Its nightlife is very popular, and a Jazz Festival takes place in May.
* Gois Velho  Former capital of the State of Gois, filled with Portuguese colonial architecture, also known by its popular parties and ceremonies, like the Fogaru, in which masked men honor Christ's death and resurrection on Easter Sunday.

==Sports==
Estadio Nacional de Brasilia in its inaugural game.
Nilson Nelson Gymnasium.
Brazilian delegation in Braslia.

===Football===

The three most well known teams of Braslia are:
* Brasiliense FC from Taguatinga (Commonly called Jacar, the "Alligator")
* SE Gama (Commonly called Verdo, the "Big Green")
* Braslia Futebol Clube (Commonly called Colorado, The Reds)
Both teams won the Srie B of the Brazilian Football Championship once (Gama in 1998 and Brasiliense in 2004), but they failed to be successful in the Srie A. As of 2014, Brasiliense will play the Srie D, while Gama only plays the Metropolitan league and doesn't even participate in the Srie D.

The main stadiums are the Brasilia National Stadium Man Garrincha (which was reinaugurated on May 18, 2013), the Serejo Stadium (home for Brasiliense) and the Bezerro Stadium (home for Gama).

Braslia is one of the host cities of the 2014 FIFA World Cup and 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, for which Brazil is the host nation. Braslia hosted the opening of the Confederations Cup and will host 7 World Cup games. 

Braslia will also host football tournaments during the 2016 Summer Olympics to be held in Rio de Janeiro.

===Hang gliding===
Braslia is known as a departing point for the practice of unpowered air sports, sports that may be practiced with hang gliding or paragliding wings. Practitioners of such sports reveal that, because of the city's dry weather, the city offers strong thermal winds and great "cloud-streets", which is also the name for a manoeuvre quite appreciated by practitioners.

In 2003, Braslia hosted the 14th Hang Gliding World Championship, one of the categories of free flying. In August 2005, the city hosted the 2nd stage of the Brazilian Hang Gliding Championship.

===Motor sports===
Braslia is the site of the Autdromo Internacional Nelson Piquet which hosted a non-championship round of the 1974 Formula One Grand Prix season.

===Basketball===
The city is home to Uniceub BRB, one of Brazil's best basketball clubs. Currently, NBB champion (2010, 2011 and 2012). The club hosts some of its games at the 16,000 all-seat Nilson Nelson Gymnasium.

==Notable people of Braslia==

*Kak, footballer born in the satellite city of Gama and playing for AC Milan, having previously played for Real Madrid and So Paulo.

*Legio Urbana (Portuguese for Urban Legion) were a Brazilian rock band formed in 1982 in Braslia, consisting of Renato Russo (vocals), Dado Villa-Lobos (guitar) and Marcelo Bonf (drums).

== International relations ==

=== Twin towns and sister cities ===
Braslia is twinned with: 

 * Abuja, Nigeria * Amsterdam, Netherlands * Asuncin, Paraguay * Brussels, Belgium (since 2013) * Buenos Aires, Argentina (since 2002) * Canberra, Australia * Doha, Qatar * Gaza, Palestinian National Authority * Guadalajara, Mexico * Havana, Cuba * Khartoum, Sudan * Kiev, Ukraine * Lima, Peru * Lisbon, Portugal * Luxor, Egypt * Montevideo, Uruguay * New York City, United States (since 2004) * Pretoria, South Africa * Rome, Italy * Santiago, Chile * Tehran, Iran * Vienna, Austria (since 2013) * Washington D.C., United States (since 2013) * Xi'an, China (since 1997) 

===Partner cities===
Braslia has the following partner cities:

 * Berlin, Germany * Bogot, Colombia * Caracas, Venezuela * Madrid, Spain * Mexico City, Mexico * Singapore, Singapore 

==See also==

* Flag of the Federal District
* Coat of arms of the Federal District
* List of administrative regions in Federal District
;Planned capital cities
* The Brazilian state capitals of Palmas, Goinia, Belo Horizonte, Aracaju, Teresina and Boa Vista
* Australia's capital Canberra, also a purpose-built city
* India's capital New Delhi
* The capital of Burma, Naypyidaw
* The capital of Kazakhstan, Astana
* Malaysia's Putrajaya, the federal administrative center of the country, also a purpose-built city
* Pakistan's capital Islamabad, also a purpose-built in the 1960s
* The United States's capital Washington, D.C.
* The capital of Nigeria, Abuja

==References==

==External links==

* Page of the Regional Administration of Braslia
* Page of the Government of the Federal District
* Download Free Braslia App Guide
* Braslia's Official Guide
* Official Braslia site
* Photos 360 of Brasilia  GUIABSB
* About Brasilia
* About Brasilia
* AboutBrasil/Brasilia - Capital of the New Millenium

 



[[Blue Streak (missile)]]

Blue Streak was a British medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM), and later the first stage of the Europa satellite launch vehicle. Blue Streak was cancelled without entering full production.

The project was intended to maintain an independent British nuclear deterrent, replacing the V bomber fleet which would become obsolete by 1965. The operational requirement for the missile was issued in 1955 and the design was complete by 1957. However, during development it became clear that the missile system was too expensive and too vulnerable to a pre-emptive strike. The missile project was cancelled in 1960, with US-led Skybolt the preferred replacement.

Partly to avoid political embarrassment from the cancellation, the UK Government proposed that the rocket be used as the first stage of a civilian satellite launcher called Black Prince. However, the cost was thought to be too great for the UK alone, and international collaboration was sought. This led to the formation of the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO), with Blue Streak used as the first stage of a carrier rocket named Europa.

Europa was tested at Woomera Test Range, Australia, and later at Kourou in French Guiana. Following launch failures, the ELDO project was cancelled in 1972 and development of Blue Streak was halted.

==Background==
Post-war Britain's nuclear weapons armament was initially based on free-fall bombs delivered by the V bomber force. It soon became clear that if Britain wanted to have a credible threat, a ballistic missile was essential. There was a political need for an independent deterrent, so that Britain could remain a major world power. Britain was unable to purchase American weapons wholesale due to the restrictions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946.

In April 1954 the Americans proposed a joint development programme for ballistic missiles. The United States would develop an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) of 5,000 nmi range, while the United Kingdom with United States support would develop a medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM) of 2,000 nmi range. The proposal was accepted as part of the Wilson-Sandys Agreement of August 1954, which provided for collaboration, exchange of information, and mutual planning of development programmes. The decision to develop was influenced by what could be learnt about missile design and development in the US. Initial requirements for the booster were made by the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough with input on the rocket engine design from the Rocket Propulsion Establishment at Westcott. British Operational Requirement 1139 demanded a rocket of at least 1500 n.m. and the initially proposed rocket would have just reached that threshold.

==Development==
De Havilland won the contract to build the missile, which was to be powered by an uprated liquid-fuelled Rocketdyne S3D engine, developed by Rolls-Royce, called RZ2. Two variants of this engine were developed: the first provided a static thrust of 137000 lbf and the second (intended for the three stage satellite launch vehicle) 150000 lbf. The engines were unique at that time in that they could be vectored by seven degrees in flight and could therefore be used to guide the vehicle. This configuration, however, put considerable pressure on the autopilot which had to cope with the problem of a vehicle whose weight was diminishing rapidly and that was steered by large engines whose thrust remained more or less constant. The vibration was also a problem, particularly at engine cut-off, and the later development of the autopilot for the satellite launcher was, in itself, a considerable achievement.

Subcontractors included the Sperry Gyroscope Company who produced the guidance system whilst the nuclear warhead was designed by the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermaston.

The missiles used liquid oxygen and kerosene propellants. Whilst the vehicle could be left fully laden with over 20 tonnes of kerosene, the 60 tonnes of liquid oxygen had to be loaded immediately before launch or icing became a problem. Due to this, fuelling the rocket took 4.5 minutes, which would have made it useless as a rapid response to an attack. The missile was vulnerable to a pre-emptive strike, launched without warning or in the absence of any heightening of tension sufficient to warrant readying the missile. To negate this problem DeHavilland created a stand-by feature. A missile could be held at 30 seconds' notice to launch for ten hours. As the missiles were to be deployed in pairs and it took ten hours for one missile to be prepared for stand-by, one of the two missiles could always be ready for rapid launch.

To protect the missiles against a pre-emptive strike while being fuelled, the idea of siting the missiles in underground launchers was developed. These would have been designed to withstand a one megaton blast at a distance of half a mile (800 m) and were a British innovation, subsequently exported to the United States. However, finding sites for these silos proved extremely difficult and RAF Spadeadam in Cumberland (now Cumbria) was the only site where construction was undertaken although test borings were undertaken at a number of other locations. This was also the site where the RZ2 rocket engines and also the complete Blue Streak missile were tested. The best sites for silo construction were the more stable rock strata in parts of southern and north east England and eastern Scotland, but the construction of many underground silos in the countryside carried enormous economic, social, and political cost. Development of the underground launchers presented a major technical challenge. 1/60th and 1/6th scale models base on a U shaped design were constructed and tested at RPE Westcott. Three alternative designs were drawn up with one chosen as the prototype, designated K11. RAF Upavon would appear to have been the preferred location for the prototype operational launcher with the former RNAS at Crail as the likely first operational site.

As no site in Britain provided enough space for test flights, a test site was established at Woomera, South Australia.

==Cancellation as a military project==
Doubts arose as the cost escalated from the first tentative figure of 50m submitted to the Treasury in early 1955, to 300m in late 1959. Its detractors in the civil service claimed that the programme was crawling along when compared with the speed of development in the US and the Soviet Union. 

Estimates within the Civil Service for completion of the project ranged from a total spend of 550 million to 1.3 billion, as different ministers were set on either abandoning or continuing the project.

Whitehall opposition to the project grew, and it was eventually cancelled in 1960 on the ostensible grounds that it would be too vulnerable to a first-strike attack. Admiral of the Fleet Lord Mountbatten had spent considerable effort arguing that the project should be cancelled at once in favour of his Navy being armed with nuclear weapons, capable of pre-emptive strike.

Some considered the cancellation of Blue Streak to be not only a blow to British military-industrial efforts, but also to Commonwealth ally Australia, which had its own vested interest in the project.

The British military transferred its hopes for a strategic nuclear delivery system to the Anglo-American Skybolt missile, before the project's cancellation by the USA as its ICBM program reached maturity. The British instead purchased the Polaris system from the Americans, carried in British-built submarines.

==Civilian programmes - Black Prince and ELDO==
After the cancellation as a military project, there was reluctance to cancel the project because of the huge cost incurred. Blue Streak would have become the first stage of a projected all British satellite launcher known as "Black Prince": the second stage was derived from the Black Knight test vehicle, and the orbital injection stage was a small hydrogen peroxide/kerosene motor.

Black Prince proved too expensive for the UK, and the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) was set up. This used Blue Streak as the first stage, with French and German second and third stages. The Blue Streak first stage was successfully tested three times at the Woomera test range in Australia as part of the ELDO programme.

=== Black Prince ===

In 1959, a year before the cancellation of the Blue Streak as a missile, the government requested that the RAE and Saunders-Roe design a carrier rocket based on Blue Streak and Black Knight. This design used Blue Streak as a first stage and a 54 inch (137 centimetre) second stage based on the Black Knight. Hill, p. 124 Several different third stages would be available, depending on the required payload and orbit.

The cost of developing Black Prince was estimated to be 35 million.

It was planned that Black Prince would be a Commonwealth project. However, since the government of John Diefenbaker in Canada was already spending more money than publicly acknowledged on Alouette and Australia was not interested in the project, these two countries were unwilling to contribute. South Africa was no longer a member of the Commonwealth. New Zealand was only likely to make "modest" contributions. Hill, p. 126 

===European Launcher Development Organisation===

Placard reads - Remains of the first Blue Streak rocket launched from Woomera 5th June 1964. Discovered 50km SE of Giles in 1980.
Britain instead proposed a collaboration with other European countries to build a three-stage launcher capable of placing a one-ton payload into low Earth orbit. 
Consisting of Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands, with Australia as an associate member.

Preliminary work began in 1962 and ELDO was formally signed into existence in 1964.

Britain with Blue Streak became the first stage of the European launch vehicle with France providing the Coralie second stage and Germany the third. Italy worked on the satellite project, the Netherlands and Belgium concentrated on tracking and telemetry systems and Australia supplied the launch site.

The combined launcher was named Europa.

After ten test launches, the Woomera launch site was not suitable for putting satellites into geosynchronous orbit, and in 1966 it was decided to move to the French site of Kourou in South America. F11 was fired from here in November 1971, but the failure of the autopilot caused the vehicle to break up. The launch of F12 was postponed whilst a project review was carried out, which led to the decision to abandon the Europa design.

ELDO was merged with the European Space Research Organisation to form the European Space Agency.

====List of Blue Streak launches as part of ELDO====
(Taken from the "Europa SLV Historiograph", produced by HSD Ltd)

 Flight No. Second stage (Corali) Third stage (Astris) Payload Launch date Mission notes 
 F1 n/a n/a n/a 5 June 1964 uncontrollable oscillations during final phase of burn due to fuel sloshing in tanks 
 F2 n/a n/a n/a 21 October 1964 Successful flight 
 F3 n/a n/a n/a 23 March 1965 Successful flight 
 F4 untested untested untested 24 May 1966 Successful flight 
 F5 untested untested untested 15 November 1966 Successful flight 
 F6.1 failed untested untested 4 June 1967 2nd stage failed to ignite 
 F6.2 failed failed failed 6 December 1967 2nd stage failed to separate 
 F7 successful failed failed 29 November 1968 3rd stage failure after separation 
 F8 successful failed failed 3 July 1969 3rd stage failure after separation 
 F9 successful successful failed 24 June 1970 Fairing failed to separate 
 F11 successful successful failed 5 November 1971 Guidance system failed 
 F12 untested untested untested n/a Delivered to French Guiana 
 F13 untested untested untested n/a Delivered to National Museum of Flight, near Edinburgh 
 F14 untested untested untested n/a Delivered to Deutsches Museum, Munich 
 F15 untested untested untested n/a Delivered to Euro Space Center, Redu, Belgium 
 F16 untested untested untested n/a On display at NSC Leicester, on loan from Liverpool Museums 
 F17 n/a n/a n/a n/a Parts only completed 
 F18 n/a n/a n/a n/a Parts only completed 

==Related projects==
Aside from Black Prince, a range of other proposals was made between 1959 and 1972 for a carrier rocket based on Blue Streak, Hill, p. 117 however, none of these were ever built in full and today only exist in design.

===De Havilland/British Interplanetary Society proposal===
In 1959 de Havilland suggested solving the problem of the Blue Streak/Black Knight geometry by compressing the 10 by 1 metre (30 by 3 foot) Black Knight into a 10 ft sphere. Although this seemed logical, the development costs proved to be too high for the limited budget of the programme. Hill, p. 119 

===Westland Helicopters Black Arrow===

Following its merger with Saunders Roe, Westland Helicopters developed the three-stage Black Arrow satellite carrier rocket, derived from the Black Knight test vehicle. The first stage of Black Arrow was given the same diameter as the French Coralie (the second stage of Europa) in order to make it compatible with Blue Streak. Using Blue Streak as an additional stage would have increased Black Arrow's payload capacity. To maintain this compatibility, the first stage diameter was given in metres, although the rest of the rocket was defined in imperial units.

Black Arrow carried out four test launches (without an additional Blue Streak stage) from Woomera between 1969 and 1971, with the final launch carrying the satellite Prospero X-3 into orbit. The United Kingdom remains the only country to have successfully developed and then abandoned a satellite launch capability.

===Hawker Siddeley Dynamics proposal===
In 1972, Hawker Siddeley Dynamics (HSD) produced a brochure for a design using Blue Streak as the first stage of a two-stage to orbit rocket, with an American Centaur upper stage. The Centaur second stage would have either been built in the UK under licence or imported directly from the USA. Both the Centaur and Blue Streak had proved to be very reliable up to this point, and since they were both already designed development costs would have been low. Furthermore, it had a payload of 870920 kg to a geosynchronous orbit with, and 650700 kg without the use of additional booster rockets. 

==Blue Streak today==
Following the cancellation of the Blue Streak project some of the remaining rockets were preserved at:

* The National Space Centre in Leicester, England.
* The Deutsches Museum at Oberschleiheim near Munich
* The National Museum of Flight in East Fortune, Scotland.
* The Euro Space Center in Redu, Belgium.

A section of the propulsion bay, engines and equipment can be found at the Solway Aviation Museum, Carlisle Lake District Airport. Only a few miles from the Spadeadam testing site, the museum carries many exhibits, photographs and models of the Blue Streak programme, having inherited the original Spadeadam collection that used to be displayed on site.

RZ2 engines are on display at National Space Centre a pair on cradles alongside the Blue Streak rocket, and at the Armagh Planetarium, Northern Ireland and The Euro Space Center in Redu, Belgium.

Footage from the Blue Streak launch was briefly incorporated into The Prisoners final episode, "Fall Out". A part of the Blue Streak rocket launched on 5 June 1964 from Woomera, Australia, found 50 km SE of Giles in 1980 is on display at Giles Weather Station. Another piece was located in 2006, but its exact location has been kept secret by the finders. The titanium structure of a German third stage was, for some time, sited on the edge of a gravel pit in Gloucestershire. Images of the Blue Streak 1 are incorporated in the American film Contact.

==See also==
*List of missiles
*Rainbow Codes
* Black Arrow
* Black Knight
* Skylark
*Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom
*Martu

==Notes==

==References==
*
*Boyes, J. (2013). The Blue Streak Underground Launchers. Airfield Review No 140. Airfield Research Group.

==External links==
*http://www.spaceuk.org/bstreak/bstreak.htm
*http://www.skomer.u-net.com/projects/bluestreak.htm
*http://www.webcitation.org/query?url=http://www.geocities.com/CapeCanaveral/Launchpad/6133/bluestreak.html&date=2009-10-25+06:41:18
*Blue Streak including newsreel footage
*RAF Spadeadam
*National Museum of Scotland description of the Museum of Flight exhibit
*Free papermodel of a Blue Streak missile
*British Public information film on the Blue Streak at the National Archives (15 minutes QuickTime and Windows Media formats)
*BBC Radio 4  "The Archive Hour  Britain's Space Race". 11 August 2007.
* A cutaway drawing of the Blue Streak



[[Bakassi]]

The Nigeria-Cameroon border region on the coast from a 1963 map, with Bakassi peninsula in the middle
right
Bakassi is a peninsula on the African Atlantic Gulf of Guinea. It lies between the Cross River estuary, near the city of Calabar in the west, and the Rio del Ray estuary on the east. It is governed by Cameroon, following the transfer of sovereignty from neighbouring Nigeria as a result of a judgment by the International Court of Justice. The Land and Maritime Boundary Between Cameroon and Nigeria (Cameroon v. Nigeria: Equatorial Guinea intervening), Judgment, ICJ Reports 2002, p.303 On 22 November 2007, the Nigerian Senate rejected the transfer, since the Greentree Agreement ceding the area to Cameroon was contrary to Section 12(1) of the 1999 Constitution. Regardless, the territory was transferred to Cameroon on 14 August 2008. 

==Geography and economy==
The peninsula lies between latitudes 425' and 510'N and longitudes 820' and 908'E . It consists of a number of low-lying, largely mangrove covered islands covering an area of around 665 km (257 sq mi). The population of Bakassi is the subject of some dispute, but is generally put at between 150,000 and 300,000 people.

Bakassi is situated at the extreme eastern end of the Gulf of Guinea, where the warm east-flowing Guinea Current (called Aya Efiat in Efik) meets the cold north-flowing Benguela Current (called Aya Ubenekang in Efik). These two ocean currents interact creating huge foamy breakers which constantly advance towards the shore, and building submarine shoals rich in fish, shrimps, and a wide variety of other marine life forms. This makes the Bakassi area a very fertile fishing ground, comparable only to Newfoundland in North America and Scandinavia in Western Europe. Most of the population make their living through fishing.

The peninsula is commonly described as "oil-rich", though in fact no commercially viable deposits of oil have been discovered. However, the area has aroused considerable interest from oil companies in the light of the discovery of rich reserves of high grade crude oil in Nigeria. At least eight multinational oil companies have participated in the exploration of the peninsula and its offshore waters. In October 2012, China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation announced it had discovered new oil and gas resources in the Bakassi region. Addax Petroleum Discovers New Oil, Gas Resources in Cameroon, MenaFN.com, 10 October 2012 

==History==
During the European scramble for Africa, Queen Victoria signed a Treaty of Protection with the King and Chiefs of Akwa Akpa, known to Europeans as Old Calabar on 10 September 1884. This enabled the United Kingdom to exercise control over the entire territory around Calabar, including Bakassi. The territory subsequently became de facto part of Nigeria, although the border was never permanently delineated. However, documents released by the Cameroonians, in parity with that of the British and Germans, clearly places Bakassi under Cameroonian Territory as a consequence of colonial era Anglo-German agreements. After Southern Cameroons voted in 1961 to leave Nigeria and became a part of Cameroon, Bakassi remained under Calabar administration in Nigeria until ICJ judgement of 2002. Nowa Omoigui, The Bakassi Story, Omoigui.com 

==Population==
Bakassi inhabitants are mainly the Calabar people, the people of Cross River State and Akwa Ibom State of Nigeria, including the Efut, Efik, Ibibio, Annang, etc.

==Territorial dispute==
Nigeria and Cameroon have disputed the possession of Bakassi for some years, leading to considerable tension between the two countries. In 1981 the two countries went to the brink of war over Bakassi and another area around Lake Chad, at the other end of the two countries' common border. More armed clashes broke out in the early 1990s. In response, Cameroon took the matter to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on 29 March 1994. Bola A. Akinterinwa, Equatorial Guinea and the Bakassi Dispute, Nigerdeltacongress.com, April 2002 

The case was extremely complex, requiring the court to review diplomatic exchanges dating back over 100 years. Nigeria relied largely on Anglo-German correspondence dating from 1885 as well as treaties between the colonial powers and the indigenous rulers in the area, particularly the 1884 Treaty of Protection. Cameroon pointed to the Anglo-German treaty of 1913, which defined sphere of control in the region, as well as two agreements signed in the 1970s between Cameroon and Nigeria. These were the Yaound II Declaration of 4 April 1971 and the Maroua Declaration of 1 June 1975, which were devised to outline maritime boundaries between the two countries following their independence. The line was drawn through the Cross River estuary to the west of the peninsula, thereby implying Cameroonian ownership over Bakassi. However, Nigeria never ratified the agreement, while Cameroon regarded it as being in force.

===ICJ verdict===
The ICJ delivered its judgment on 10 October 2002, finding (based principally on the Anglo-German agreements) that sovereignty over Bakassi did indeed rest with Cameroon. It instructed Nigeria to transfer possession of the peninsula, but did not require the inhabitants to move or to change their nationality. Cameroon was thus given a substantial Nigerian population and was required to protect their rights, infrastructure and welfare. Mike Chinedu Anekwe, ICJ ruling on Bakassi: Matters arising, Nigeriaworld.com, 27 December 2002 

The verdict caused consternation in Nigeria. It aroused vitriolic comments from Nigerian officials and the Nigerian media alike. Chief Richard Akinjide, a former Nigerian Attorney-General and Minister of Justice who had been a leading member of Nigeria's legal team, described the decision as "50% international law and 50% international politics", "blatantly biased and unfair", "a total disaster", and a "complete fraud". The Nigerian newspaper The Guardian went further, declaring that the judgment was "a rape and unforeseen potential international conspiracy against Nigerian territorial integrity and sovereignty" and "part of a Western ploy to foment and perpetuate trouble in Africa". The outcome of the controversy was a de facto Nigerian refusal to withdraw its troops from Bakassi and transfer sovereignty. The Nigerian government did not, however, openly reject the judgment but instead called for an agreement that would provide "peace with honour, with the interest and welfare of our people." http://www.thisdayonline.com/archive/2002/10/30/20021030news03.html 

The ICJ judgment was backed up by the United Nations, whose charter potentially allowed sanctions or even the use of force to enforce the court's ruling. Secretary-General Kofi Annan stepped in as a mediator and chaired a tripartite summit with the two countries' presidents on 15 November 2002, which established a commission to facilitate the peaceful implementation of the ICJ's judgement. A further summit was held on 31 January 2004. This has made significant progress, but the process has been complicated by the opposition of Bakassi's inhabitants to being transferred to Cameroon. By Gilbert da Costa, , VOA, 8 August 2006 

Bakassian leaders threatened to seek independence if Nigeria renounced sovereignty. This secession was announced on 9 July 2006, as the "Democratic Republic of Bakassi". The decision was reportedly made at a meeting on 2 July 2006 and The Vanguard newspaper of Nigeria reported the decision to secede. The decision was reportedly made by groups of militants including Southern Cameroons under the aegis of Southern Cameroons Peoples Organisation (SCAPO), Bakassi Movement for Self-Determination (BAMOSD), and the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND). http://www.postnewsline.com/2008/07/rebels-declare.html 

===Resolution===
On 13 June 2006, President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria and President Paul Biya of Cameroon resolved the dispute in talks led by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in New York City. Obasanjo agreed to withdraw Nigerian troops within 60 days and to leave the territory completely in Cameroonian control within the next two years. Annan said, "With today's agreement on the Bakassi peninsula, a comprehensive resolution of the dispute is within our grasp. The momentum achieved must be sustained." Cameroon: Presidents Obasanjo And Biya Shake Hands On Disputed Bakassi Peninsula, Allafrica, 13 June 2006 

===Withdrawal===
Nigeria began to withdraw its forces, comprising some 3,000 troops, beginning 1 August 2006, and a ceremony on 14 August marked the formal handover of the northern part of the peninsula. The remainder stayed under Nigerian civil authority for two more years. 

On 22 November 2007, the Nigerian Senate passed a resolution declaring that the withdrawal from the Bakassi Peninsula was illegal. The government took no action, and handed the final parts of Bakassi over to Cameroon on 14 August 2008 as planned, but a Federal High Court had stated this should be delayed until all accommodations for resettled Bakassians had been settled; the government did not seem to plan to heed this court order, and set the necessary mechanisms into motion to override it. Fishermen displaced from Bakassi had been settled in a landlocked area called New Bakassi, which they claimed is already inhabited and not suitable for fishermen like them but only for farmers. Nigerian High Court stops government on Bakassi handover, People's Daily Online, 1 August 2008 

==References==

==External links==
*International Court of Justice, press release on decision
*Nigerian Government official statement in response to the ruling
*BBC News report on handover, 8 August 2006
*BBC News report on handover, 14 August 2008
* Archive of Articles on the Bakassi conundrum



[[Bestiary]]

"The Leopard" from the 13th-century bestiary known as the "Rochester Bestiary."
Detail from the 12th century Aberdeen Bestiary
Monoceros and Bear. Bodleian Library, MS. Ashmole 1511, The Ashmole Bestiary, Folio 21r, England (Peterborough?), Early 13th century.
The Perindens Tree.

A bestiary, or Bestiarum vocabulum is a compendium of beasts. Originating in the Ancient world, bestiaries were made popular in the Middle Ages in illustrated volumes that described various animals, birds and even rocks. The natural history and illustration of each beast was usually accompanied by a moral lesson. This reflected the belief that the world itself was the Word of God, and that every living thing had its own special meaning. For example, the pelican, which was believed to tear open its breast to bring its young to life with its own blood, was a living representation of Jesus. The bestiary, then, is also a reference to the symbolic language of animals in Western Christian art and literature.

==History==
The earliest bestiary in the form in which it was later popularized was an anonymous 2nd century Greek volume called the Physiologus, which itself summarized ancient knowledge and wisdom about animals in the writings of classical authors such as Aristotle's Historia Animalium and various works by Herodotus, Pliny the Elder, Solinus, Aelian and other naturalists.

Following the Physiologus, Saint Isidore of Seville (Book XII of the Etymologiae) and Saint Ambrose expanded the religious message with reference to passages from the Bible and the Septuagint. They and other authors freely expanded or modified pre-existing models, constantly refining the moral content without interest or access to much more detail regarding the factual content. Nevertheless, the often fanciful accounts of these beasts were widely read and generally believed to be true. A few observations found in bestiaries, such as the migration of birds, were discounted by the natural philosophers of later centuries, only to be rediscovered in the modern scientific era.

Mediaeval bestiaries are remarkably similar in sequence of the animals of which they treat. Bestiaries were particularly popular in England and France around the 12th century and were mainly compilations of earlier texts. The Aberdeen Bestiary is one of the best known of over 50 manuscript bestiaries surviving today.

Bestiaries influenced early heraldry in the Middle Ages, giving ideas for charges and also for the artistic form. Even if it is now known that many of the beasts in old bestiaries are unreal, they still give inspiration to coats of arms created in our time. 

Two illuminated Psalters, the Queen Mary Psalter (British Library Ms. Royal 2B, vii) and the Isabella Psalter (State Library, Munich), contain full Bestiary cycles. The bestiary in the Queen Mary Psalter is found in the "marginal" decorations that occupy about the bottom quarter of the page, and are unusually extensive and coherent in this work. In fact the bestiary has been expanded beyond the source in the Norman bestiary of Guillaume le Clerc to ninety animals. Some are placed in the text to make correspondences with the psalm they are illustrating. The Queen Mary psalter: a study of affect and audience By Anne Rudloff Stanton, p44ff, Diane Publishing 

The Italian artist Leonardo da Vinci also made his own bestiary. 

A volucrary is a similar collection of the symbols of birds that is sometimes found in conjunction with bestiaries. The most widely known volucrary in the Renaissance was Jean de Cuba's Jardin de Sant which describes 122 birds.

==Bestiary Content==
Medieval bestiaries often contained detailed descriptions and illustrations of species native to Western Europe, exotic animals and what in modern times are considered to be imaginary animals. Descriptions of the animals included the physical characteristics associated with the creature, although these were often physiologically incorrect, along with the Christian morals that the animal represented. The description was then normally followed with an artistic illustration of the animal as described in the bestiary.

Bestiaries were organized in different ways based upon the text. The descriptions could be organized by animal groupings, such as terrestrial and marine creatures, or presented in an alphabetical manner. However, the texts gave no distinction between existing and imaginary animals. Descriptions of creatures such as dragons, unicorns, basilisk, griffin and caladrius were common in such works and found intermingled amongst accounts of bears, boars, deer, lions, and elephants. 

This lack of separation has often been associated with the assumption that people during this time believed in what the modern period classifies as nonexistent or "imaginary creatures." However, this assumption is currently under debate, with various explanations being offered. 

Some scholars, such as Pamela Gravestock, have written on the theory that Medieval people didn't actually think such creatures existed but instead focused on the belief in the importance of the Christian morals these creatures represented and that the importance of the moral didn't change regardless if the animal existed or not. Other scholars, including have also suggested that the grouping of existing and nonexistent creatures was because of the importance of the word of the Church during this time and that, even if the bestiary accounts of certain animals was found to not exist, it was crucial to continue believing in the animal because of the claim the Church made to its existence. To state that the animal in question didn't exist was to defy the truth of the word of the Church.

The contents of Medieval bestiaries were often obtained and created from combining older textual sources and accounts of animals, such as the Physiologus, with newer observations and writings. In this way, the content of such written works was constantly added to and built upon.

==Modern bestiaries==
In modern times, artists such as Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec and Saul Steinberg have produced their own bestiaries. Jorge Luis Borges wrote a contemporary bestiary of sorts, the Book of Imaginary Beings, which collects imaginary beasts from bestiaries and fiction. Nicholas Christopher wrote a literary novel called "The Bestiary" (Dial, 2007) that describes a lonely young man's efforts to track down the world's most complete bestiary. John Henry Fleming's Fearsome Creatures of Florida Fearsomecreatures.com (Pocol Press, 2009) borrows from the medieval bestiary tradition to impart moral lessons about the environment. Caspar Henderson's The Book of Barely Imagined Beings Barelyimaginedbeings.com (Granta 2012, Chicago University Press 2013), subtitled "A 21st Century Bestiary," explores how humans imagine animals in a time of rapid environmental change.

Writers of Fantasy fiction draw heavily from the fanciful beasts described in mythology, fairy tales, and bestiaries. The "worlds" created in Fantasy fiction can be said to have their own bestiaries. Similarly, authors of fantasy role-playing games sometimes compile bestiaries as references, such as the Monster Manual for Dungeons & Dragons. It is not uncommon for video games with a large variety of enemies (especially role-playing video games) to include a bestiary of sorts. This usually takes the form of a list of enemies with short descriptions (e.g. the Metroid Prime and Castlevania games, as well as Dark Cloud and Final Fantasy) and may even be central to the plot (Pokmon series).

==See also==
*Allegory in the Middle Ages
*List of medieval bestiaries
*Marine counterparts of land creatures

==References==

* "The Medieval Bestiary", by James Grout, part of the Encyclopdia Romana.
* Payne, Ann. (1990) "Mediaeval Beasts.
* Hassig, Debra (1995) Medieval Bestiaries: Text, Image, Ideology.
* Hassig, Debra, ed. (1999) The Mark of the Beast: The Medieval Bestiary in Art, Life, and Literature.
* Benton, Janetta Rebold. (1992) The Medieval Menagerie: Animals in the Art of the Middle Ages.
* George, Wilma and Brunsdon Yapp. (1991) The Naming of the Beasts: Natural History in the Medieval Bestiary.
* Clark, Willene B. and Meradith T. McMunn. (1989) The Bestiary and its Legacy.
* Gravestock, Pamela. (1999) "Did Imaginary Animals Exist?"
* Flores, Nona C. (1993) "The Mirror of Nature Distorted: The Medieval Artist's Dilemma in Depicting Animals".

===Notes===

== External links ==
* The Bestiary: The Book of Beasts, T.H. White's translation of a medieval bestiary in the Cambridge University library; digitized by the University of WisconsinMadison libraries.
* The Medieval Bestiary online, edited by David Badke.
* The Bestiaire of Philippe de Thaon at the National Library of Denmark.
* The Bestiary of Anne Walshe at the National Library of Denmark.
* The Aberdeen Bestiary at the University of Aberdeen.
* Exhibition (in English, but French version is fuller) at the Bibliothque nationale de France
* Christian Symbolology Animals and their meanings in Christian texts.
* Bestiairy - Monsters & Fabulous Creatures of Greek Myth & Legend with pictures

*

[[Ballad of the Green Berets]]

"The Ballad of the Green Berets" is a patriotic song in the ballad style about the Green Berets, an elite special force in the U.S. Army. It is one of the very few songs of the 1960s to cast the military in a positive light and in 1966 it became a major hit, reaching No. 1 for five weeks on the Hot 100 and four weeks on Cashbox. It was also a crossover smash, reaching No. 1 on Billboard's Easy Listening chart and No. 2 on Billboard's Country survey.

The song was written by Robin Moore and Staff Sgt. Barry Sadler, while the latter was recuperating from a leg wound suffered as a medic in the Vietnam War. Moore also wrote a book, The Green Berets, about the force. The tune itself is borrowed from the traditional American folk song "The Butcher Boy".

Lyrics include:

The lyrics were written in honor of Green Beret James Gabriel, Jr., the first native Hawaiian who died in Vietnam, who was executed by the Viet Cong while on a training mission on April 8, 1962. One verse was written in honor of Gabriel, but it never made it into the final version. I'm a Lucky One by Staff Sgt. Barry Sadler (Macmillan 1967, pp. 8081) 

Sadler debuted the song on television on January 30, 1966 on The Ed Sullivan Show.

==Popularity==
The song was the No. 1 hit in the U.S. for the five weeks encompassing March 1966 and the No. 1 hit on the Billboard Hot 100's end of the year chart for 1966, despite the competing "California Dreaming", sharply dividing the popular music market, and the No. 21 song of the 1960s, even though the Vietnam War later became unpopular. The rivalry between "Green Berets" and "California Dreaming" was so fierce that the two records tied for the No. 1 record of 1966, according to Cashbox. "Green Berets" has sold over nine million singles and albums and was the top single of a year in which the British Invasion, led by the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, continued to dominate the U.S. charts. For comparison, according to Billboard, The Beatles' top hit in 1966 was "We Can Work It Out" (No. 16), while the Stones' top hit in 1966 was "Paint It, Black" (No. 21).

"Green Berets" is currently used as one of the four primary marching tunes of the Fightin' Texas Aggie Band.

==In film==
The song is heard in a choral rendition by Ken Darby in the 1968 John Wayne film, The Green Berets, based on Moore's book. The score of the movie was never released as an album until Film Score Monthly released it in 2005. A film tie-in featuring artwork from the film and a cover version by Ennio Morricone was released in Europe, though the other tracks on the album were soundtracks from A Fistful of Dollars and For a Few Dollars More.

The song appears in the films More American Graffiti and Canadian Bacon. It can be heard in the gun show scene from the 2002 film Showtime, and in the film Jesus' Son, in a scene that features a hitch-hiking Jack Black.

A vinyl copy of "The Ballad of the Green Berets" makes a brief appearance in "The Simpsons" episode "Homer's Phobia", from the show's eighth season. Guest star and filmmaker John Waters is seen, near the five minute mark, flipping through Homer and Marge's record collection; Sadler's hit is amongst them.

Bill Murray briefly sang "Green Berets" in "Caddyshack" during his nighttime attempt to kill the gopher.

==Covers and derivatives==
Many American cover versions of the song appeared recorded by artists ranging from Kate Smith and Duane Eddy to unknown artists singing on various drugstore records.

The punk band The F.U's performed a cover of the song, featured on the album This Is Boston, Not L.A.

Many cover versions are in different languages rewritten to reference local units; these include:
* A German version (Hundert Mann und ein Befehl), sung by Freddy Quinn and later again by Heidi Brhl had considerable success in Germany. The German version is a song against the war. It rejects any sacrifice, not only for the son, but for the father as well. Freddy Quinn sings the song from the point of view of the reluctant but forced soldier, Heidi Bruhl from the point of view of the crying girlfriend of the soldier. Freddy Quinn's version was later cover by and also by Cryptic Wintermoon.
* The Royal Netherlands Army's Korps Commandotroepen (KCT) use the original lyrics. The only difference is that in the chorus, instead of singing "These are men, America's best", they sing "These are men, The Netherlands' best". Also in the final chorus, referring to the son of a deceased Green Beret, they sing "Make him one of The Netherlands' best". This version of the original ballad is sung to recruits who have successfully completed the harsh Basic Commando Training (ECO), and who receive their Green Beret.
* Rhodesian singer-songwriter John Edmond recorded the "Ballad of the Green Berets" with reference to the soldiers of the Rhodesian Light Infantry (RLI), commando-style fireforce units of Rhodesian Security Forces who wore berets of green color. A "Ballad of the Red Beret" was sung by the Rhodesian Ministry of Internal Affairs at their battlecamp in Chikurubi. In South Africa, the "Ballad of the Green Berets" was recorded as the "Ballad of the Maroon Berets". The Maroon beret is a symbol of the South African Special Forces Brigade and the South African 44 Parachute Regiment. Also this song was re-recorded by South African opera singer Leonore Veenemans as "My Land Suid-Afrika".
* The Swedish version "Balladen om den bl baskern" is a salute to the Swedish soldiers serving in the United Nations' peace-keeping forces (the Blue Berets). It was sung by Anita Lindblom.
* The Croatian Bojna za specijalna djelovanja (BSD) use the lyrics, but instead of "These are men, America's best" they sing "These are men, Croatia's best" and in the final chorus, referring to the son of a killed Green Beret, they also sing "Make him one of Croatia's best". It is unclear when exactly is the song first sung by new recruits, but it is assumed to be sometime after completing training.
* The Italian version is called La Ballata del Soldato, sung by Quartetto Cetra.
* In the Swiss Armed Forces, the Infantry Officer's School uses a quadrlingual version (named The Infantry Ballad) of the song as their anthem, in salute to the bonds created by the very harsh training undertaken by the cadets as well as to the sense of duty (and their motto, Exemplo Ducemus) they vow to respect. It is sung everyday onwards to the morning role call, before the National Anthem.

==Parodies==
* In 1968, The Beach Bums, an ad hoc group featuring a young Bob Seger, recorded "The Ballad of the Yellow Beret". The song was a send-up of "The Ballad of the Green Berets", chronicling the adventures of a draft dodger. The record was withdrawn after a cease and desist letter from Sadler.
* The Residents parodied the song on their Third Reich & Roll album.
* Another parody was used on the episode of Saturday Night Live William Shatner hosted in 1986, called "Ollie North, The Mute Marine." Shatner participated in the sketch, outfitted in a USMC Class A uniform, which was a satire of Oliver North and his refusal at that point to speak up about his participation in the Iran-Contra Affair, and in which he had no lines.
* The song is used to humorous effect in Michael Moore's film Canadian Bacon as ill-informed Americans prepare for an invasion by Canada.
* In the movie Wag the Dog, the fictitious unit 303 Special Forces has a song created titled "The Men of the 303" that is played to a deliberately similar but original tune written by Huey Lewis for the film.
* In the film Caddyshack, Carl Spackler, played by Bill Murray, mumbles the song under his breath while he is connecting the wires to the plunger as he prepares for his final battle with his gopher nemesis.
* Comedian Paul Shanklin parodied the song with "Ballad of the Black Beret", referring to the Clinton sex scandal, on his 1999 album Simply Reprehensible.
* Though its usage here is not a parody, in an episode of Cheers, Cliff aborts his plans to emigrate to Canada with his love interest when Sam, Woody, and Frasier appeal to his patriotic side by singing this song.

==References==

==External links==
* [ Ballads of The Green Berets] at AllMusic
* Soon This Will Pass sung by Joan Gibbs at Barbara Joan Gushin



[[Baroque dance]]

Final plate from Kellom Tomlinson's dancing manual The Art of Dancing Explained (London, 1735).
Baroque dance is dance of the Baroque era (roughly 16001750), closely linked with Baroque music, theatre and opera.

== English country dance ==

The majority of surviving choreographies from the period are English country dances, such as those in the many editions of Playford's The Dancing Master. Playford only gives the floor patterns of the dances, with no indication of the steps. However other sources of the period, such as the writings of the French dancing-masters Feuillet and Lorin, indicate that steps more complicated than simple walking were used at least some of the time.

English country dance survived well beyond the Baroque era and eventually spread in various forms across Europe and its colonies, and to all levels of society. See the article on English country dance for more information.

== The French Noble style ==
A costume design for Louis XIV as The Rising Sun, from the final entre of Le Ballet de la Nuit (1653).
The great innovations in dance in the 17th century originated at the French court under Louis XIV, and it is here that we see the first clear stylistic ancestor of classical ballet. The same basic technique was used both at social events, and as theatrical dance in court ballets and at public theaters. The style of dance is commonly known to modern scholars as the French noble style or belle danse (French, literally "beautiful dance"), however it is often referred to casually as baroque dance in spite of the existence of other theatrical and social dance styles during the baroque era.

Primary sources include more than three hundred choreographies in Beauchamp-Feuillet notation, Little, Meredith Ellis and Marsh, Carol G. La Danse Noble, An Inventory of Dances and Sources, (Broude Brothers Ltd, 1992) ISBN 0-8450-0092-6 Lancelot, Francine, La Belle Dance: Catalogue Raisonn, (Van Dieren Editeur, 1996) ISBN 2-911087-02-X as well as manuals by Raoul Auger Feuillet and Pierre Rameau in France, Kellom Tomlinson and John Weaver in England, and Gottfried Taubert in Germany. This wealth of evidence has allowed modern scholars and dancers to recreate the style, although areas of controversy still exist. The standard modern introduction is Hilton. Hilton, Wendy, Dance and Music of Court and Theater: Selected Writings of Wendy Hilton (Pendragon Press, 1997) ISBN 0-945193-98-X 

French dance types include:
* Bourre
* Canarie (canary)
* Chaconne
* (French) courante
* Entre grave
* Forlane (forlana)
* Gavotte
* Gigue
* Loure (slow gigue)
* Menuet (minuet)
* Musette
* Passacaille (passacaglia)
* Passepied
* Rigaudon
* Sarabande
* Tambourin

The English, working in the French style, added their own hornpipe to this list.

Many of these dance types are familiar from baroque music, perhaps most spectacularly in the stylized suites of J. S. Bach. Little, Meredith and Jenne, Natalie. Dance and the Music of J.S. Bach (Indiana University Press, 1991, 2001) ISBN 0-253-21464-5 Note however, that the allemandes, that occur in these suites do not correspond to a French dance from the same period.

== Theatrical dance ==
The French noble style was danced both at social events and by professional dancers in theatrical productions such as opera-ballets and court entertainments. However, 18th century theatrical dance had at least two other styles: comic or grotesque, and semi-serious. Fairfax, Edmund. The Styles of Eighteenth-Century Ballet (Scarecrow Press, 2003) ISBN 0-8108-4698-5 Harris-Warrick, Rebecca and Brown, Bruce Alan, editors. The Grotesque Dancer on the Eighteenth Century Stage (The University of Wisconsin Press, 2005) ISBN 0-299-20354-9 

== Other social dance styles ==
Other dance styles, such as the Italian and Spanish dances of the period are much less well studied than either English country dance or the French style. The general picture seems to be that during most of the 17th century, a style of late Renaissance dance was widespread, but as time progressed, French ballroom dances such as the minuet were widely adopted at fashionable courts. Beyond this, the evolution and cross-fertilisation of dance styles is an area of ongoing research.

== Modern reconstructions ==
The revival of baroque music in the 1960s and '70s sparked renewed interest in 17th and 18th century dance styles. While some 300 of these dances had been preserved in Beauchamp-Feuillet notation, it wasn't until the mid-20th century that serious scholarship commenced in deciphering the notation and reconstructing the dances.

Perhaps best known among these pioneers was Britain's Melusine Wood, who published several books on historical dancing in the 1950s. Wood, Melusine, More Historical Dances, (Imperial Soc. Dancing, 1956) ISBN 0-900484-12-8 Miss Wood passed her research on to her student Belinda Quirey, and also to Pavlova Company ballerina & choreographer Mary Skeaping (19021984). The latter became well known for her reconstructions of baroque ballets for London's "Ballet for All" company in the 1960s.

The leading figures of the second generation of historical dance research include Shirley Wynne and her Baroque Dance Ensemble which was founded at Ohio State University in the early 1970s and Wendy Hilton (19312002), a student of Belinda Quirey who supplemented the work of Melusine Wood with her own research into original sources. Hilton, Wendy, Dance of Court and Theater: The French Noble Style 1690-1725 (Princeton Book Company, 1981) ISBN 0-916622-09-6 
A native of Britain, Hilton arrived in the U.S. in 1969 joining the faculty of the Juilliard School in 1972 and establishing her own baroque dance workshop at Stanford University in 1974 which endured for more than 25 years.

Catherine Turocy (b. circa 1950) began her studies in Baroque dance in 1971 as a student of dance historian Shirley Wynne. She founded The New York Baroque Dance Company (http://www.nybaroquedance.org/) in 1976 with Ann Jacoby, and the company has since toured internationally. In 1982/83 as part of the French national celebration of Jean Philippe Rameau's 300th birthday, Turocy choreographed the first production of Jean-Philippe Rameau's Les Borades - it was never performed during the composer's lifetime. This French supported production with John Eliot Gardiner, conductor, and his Orchestra was directed by Jean Louis Martinoty. Ms. Turocy has been decorated as Chevalier in the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French government. 

In 1973, French dance historian Francine Lancelot (19292003) began her formal studies in ethnomusicology which later lead her to researching French traditional dance forms and eventually Renaissance and Baroque dances. In 1980, at the invitation of the French Minister of Culture, she founded the baroque dance company "Ris et Danceries". Her work in choreographing the landmark 1986 production of Lully's 1676 tragedie-lyrique Atys was part of the national celebration of the 300th anniversary of Lully's death. This production propelled the career of William Christie and his ensemble Les Arts Florissants. Since the Ris et Danseries company was disbanded circa 1993, choreographers from the company have continued with their own work. Batrice Massin with her "Compagnie Fetes Galantes", along with Marie Genevieve Mass and her company "L'Eventail" are among the most prominent. In 1995 Francine Lancelot's catalogue raisonn of baroque dance, entitled "La Belle Dance" was published.

==References==
 

==External links==
*BaroqueDance.info background information, period dancing manuals, and a large collection of links.
*The Calendar of Early Dance information about upcoming baroque events, choreographies and photos galleries

Dance



[[Borzoi]]

The borzoi (, literally "fast"), also called the Russian wolfhound (), is a breed of domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris). Descended from dogs brought to Russia from central Asian countries, it is similar in shape to a greyhound, and is also a member of the sighthound family.

The system by which Russians over the ages named their sighthounds was a series of descriptive terms, not actual names. "Borzi" is the masculine singular form of an archaic Russian adjective that means "fast". "Borzya sobka" ("fast dog") is the basic term used by Russians, though "sobka" is usually dropped. The name "Psovaya" derived from the word Psovina, which means "wavy, silky coat", just as "Hortaya" (as in Hortaya Borzaya) means shorthaired. In Russia today the breed we know as the borzoi is officially known as "Russkaya Psovaya Borzaya". Other Russian sighthound breeds are "Stepnaya Borzaya" (from the steppe), called "Stepnoi"; and "Krimskaya Borzaya" (from the Crimea), called "Krimskoi".

The standard plural, "borzois", is given in most dictionaries and must therefore be considered correct. The Borzoi Club of America and the Borzoi Club UK both prefer "borzoi" as the form for both singular and plural forms (this is not the case in Russian, as the Russian plural is "borze").

== Description ==
Borzoi, red coat
=== Appearance ===

Borzois are large Russian sighthounds that resemble some central Asian breeds such as the Afghan hound, Saluki, and the Kyrgyz Taigan. Borzois can generally be described as "long-haired greyhounds", though they come in virtually any color. The borzoi coat is silky and flat, often wavy or slightly curly. The long top-coat is quite flat, with varying degrees of waviness or curling. The soft undercoat thickens during winter or in cold climates, but is shed in hot weather to prevent overheating. In its texture and distribution over the body, the borzoi coat is unique. There should be a frill on its neck, as well as feathering on its hindquarters and tail. 

Borzoi males frequently weigh more than 100 lb. Males stand at least 30 in at the shoulder, while the height of females is around 26 in. Despite their size, the overall impression is of streamlining and grace, with a curvy shapeliness and compact strength.

File:Borzoi black female.png|A black borzoi
File:Three Borzoi.jpg|White borzois
File:Rjaska v. Kaluga.jpg|Black and white Borzoi
File:Borzoi 600.jpg|White with brown coated Borzoi

=== Temperament ===

Borzoi, white - sandy coloured coat
Borzoi as race dog

The borzoi is a quiet, but athletic and independent dog. Most borzois are almost silent, barking only very rarely. They do not have strong territorial drives and cannot be relied on to raise the alarm upon sighting a human intruder. The borzoi is extremely smart and requires patient, experienced handling. They are gentle and highly sensitive dogs with a natural respect for humans, and as adults they are decorative couch potatoes with remarkably gracious house manners. Borzois do not generally display dominance or aggression towards people, but will turn aggressive if handled roughly. Typically however, they are rather reserved with strangers but affectionate with people they know well. Their sensitivity to invasion of their personal space can make them nervous around children unless they are brought up with them. Despite their size, borzois adapt very well to suburban life, provided they have a spacious yard and regular opportunities for free exercise.

A common misunderstanding about the intelligence of breeds in the Hound group stems from their independent nature, which conflicts with the frequent confusion between the concepts of "intelligence" and "obedience" in discussions of canine brainpower. Stanley Coren's survey of canine obedience trainers published in The Intelligence of Dogs reported that borzois obeyed the first command less than 25% of the time. Coren's test, however, was by his own admission heavily weighted towards the "obedience" interpretation of intelligence and based on a better understanding of "working" breeds than hounds. Unfortunately, the publicity given to this report has led to unfair denigration of breeds which are under-represented in obedience clubs and poorly understood by the average obedience trainer. At a Conformation Judges training session not long after Coren's book was released, I was greeted by the coordinator with the question, "I read something that said Borzois aren't very smart, is that true?" This to the owner of several borzois, one of which knows how to open the refrigerator, and all of which respond instantly to "commands" given in that special owner-dog private language that wouldn't even be noticed by an outsider. "Work" for hound breeds is done out of hearing and often out of sight of the human companion; it is an activity for which the dogs are "released", rather than an activity which is "commanded".

In terms of obedience, borzois are selective learners who quickly become bored with repetitive, apparently pointless, activity, and they can be very stubborn when they are not properly motivated. For example, food rewards, or "baiting", may work well for some individuals, but not all for others. Nevertheless, borzois are definitely capable of enjoying and performing well in competitive obedience and agility trials with the right kind of training. Scott pp.113 Like other sighthounds, they are very sensitive and do not cope well with harsh treatment or training based on punishment, and will be extremely unhappy if raised voices and threats are a part of their daily life. However, like any intelligent dog, borzois respond extremely well to the guidance, support, and clear communication of a benevolent human leadership.

Borzois were bred to pursue or "course" game and have a powerful instinct to chase things that run from them, including cats and small dogs. Built for speed and endurance, they can cover long distances in a very short time. A fully fenced yard is a necessity for maintaining any sighthound. They are highly independent and will range far and wide without containment, with little regard for road traffic. For off-lead exercise, a borzoi needs a very large field or park, either fully fenced or well away from any roads, to ensure its safety. 

Borzois are born with specialized coursing skills, but these are quite different from the dog-fighting instincts seen in some breeds. It is quite common for borzois at play to course (i.e., run down) another dog, seize it by the neck and hold it immobile. Young pups do this with their littermates, trading off as to who is the prey. It is a specific hunting behavior, not a fighting or territorial domination behavior.

Borzois can be raised very successfully to live with cats and other small animals provided they are introduced to them when they are puppies. Some, however, will possess the hunting instinct to such a degree that they find it impossible not to chase a cat that is moving quickly. The hunting instinct is triggered by movement and much depends on how the cat behaves.

== Health ==
Borzois vary widely in colour

Stated life expectancy is 10 to 12 years. Median lifespan based on a UK Kennel Club survey is 9 years 1 month. 1 in 5 died of old age, at an average of 10 to 11.5 years. The longest lived dog lived to 14 years 3 months. Dogs that are physically fit and vigorous in their youth through middle age are more vigorous and healthy as elderly dogs, all other factors being equal. In the UK, cancer and cardiac problems seem to be the most frequent causes of premature death. [http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk/cgi-bin/search.cgi?qt=mortality+borzoi&ss=0&search=Search ] 

Like its native relative the Hortaya Borzaya, the borzoi is basically a very sound breed. OCD, hip and elbow dysplasia have remained almost unknown, as were congenital eye and heart diseases before the 1970s. However, in some countries modern breeding practices have introduced a few problems.

As with other very deep-chested breeds, gastric torsion is the most common serious health problem in the borzoi. Also known as bloat, this life-threatening condition is believed to be anatomical rather than strictly genetic in origin. One common recommendation in the past has been to raise the food bowl of the dog when it eats. However, studies have shown that this may actually increase the risk of bloat. 

Less common are cardiac problems including cardiomyopathy and cardiac arrhythmia disorders. A controversy exists as to the presence of progressive retinal atrophy in the breed. A condition identified as borzoi retinopathy is seen in some individuals, usually active dogs, which differs from progressive retinal atrophy in several ways. First, it is unilateral, and rarely seen in animals less than three years of age; second, a clear-cut pattern of inheritance has not been demonstrated; and finally, most affected individuals do not go blind.

Borzoi puppies rapidly grow into strong and graceful sprinters.Correct nutrition during puppyhood is also debatable for borzois. These dogs naturally experience enormous growth surges in the first year or two of their lives. It is now widely accepted that forcing even faster growth by feeding a highly concentrated, high-energy diet is dangerous for skeletal development, causing unsoundness and increased tendency to joint problems and injury. Being built primarily for speed, borzois do not carry large amounts of body fat or muscle, and therefore have a rather different physiology to other dogs of similar size (such as the Newfoundland, St. Bernard, or Alaskan Malamute). Laboratory-formulated diets designed for a generic "large" or "giant" breed are unlikely to take the needs of the big sighthounds into account.

The issues involved in raw feeding may be particularly relevant to tall, streamlined breeds such as the borzoi. It is interesting to note that the Hortaya Borzaya, undoubtedly a very close relative, is traditionally raised on a meager diet of oats and table scraps. The Hortaya is also said to be intolerant of highly concentrated kibble feeds. Basically, a lean body weight in itself is nothing to be concerned about, and force-feeding of healthy young borzoi is definitely not recommended.

== History ==
 Borzoi 1879 
Wolf hunting with borzois (1904), Efim A. Tikhmenev.
The famous actress, Sarah Bernhardt, depicted with borzoi, by Clairin Henderson

It was long thought that Saluki type sighthounds were originally brought to Russia from Byzantium in the South about the 9th and 10th centuries and again later by the Mongol invaders from the East. However, now that the archeological archives and research results of the former USSR are open to scientists, it has become quite clear that the primal sighthound type evolved between the Kyrgyzstan, the lower Kazakhstan part of Altai and the Afghan plains, and that the earliest actual sighthound breeds were the plains Afghan hounds and the Kyrgyz Taigan.

These ancient breeds then migrated South (founding the Tazi/Saluki branch) and West (founding the Stepnaya, Krimskaya and Hortaya branches) to develop into breeds adapted to those regions. This was a slow process which happened naturally through normal spreading of trade, with the silk and spice trade via the Silk Road being the prime vector.

The more modern Psovaya Borzaya was founded on Stepnaya, Hortaya and the Ukrainian-Polish version of the old Hort. There were also imports of Western sighthound breeds to add to the height and weight. It was crossed as well with the Russian Laika specifically and singularly to add resistance against Northern cold and a longer and thicker coat than the Southern sighthounds were equipped with.

All of these foundation typesTazi, Hortaya, Stepnaya, Krimskaya, and Hortalready possessed the instincts and agility necessary for hunting and bringing down wolves.

The Psovoi was popular with the Tsars before the 1917 revolution. For centuries, Psovoi could not be purchased but only given as gifts from the Tsar. Grand Duke Nicholas Nicolaievich of Russia bred countless Psovoi at Perchino, his private estate. Scott pp.10 

The Russian concept of hunting trials was instituted during the era of the Tsars. As well as providing exciting sport, the tests were used for selecting borzoi breeding stock; only the quickest and most intelligent hunting dogs went on to produce progeny. For the aristocracy these trials were a well-organized ceremony, sometimes going on for days, with the borzois accompanied by mounted hunters and Foxhounds on the Russian steppe. Hares and other small game were by far the most numerous kills, but the hunters especially loved to test their dogs on wolf. If a wolf was sighted, the hunter would release a team of two or three borzois. The dogs would pursue the wolf, attack its neck from both sides, and hold it until the hunter arrived. The classic kill was by the human hunter with a knife. Wolf trials are still a regular part of the hunting diploma for all Russian sightdog breeds of the relevant type, either singly or in pairs or trios, in their native country.

After the 1917 Revolution, wolf hunting with sighthounds has soon gone out of fashion as an "aristocratic" and a means- and -time-taking way of hunting.
A necessity in a wolf-catching sighthound didn't exist, in addition to the old proved technique of batue with the use of baits, flags and other appeared new, way more effectivefrom airplanes, from propeller sleighs, with electronic lure whistles. For decades the generations of few remaining sighthounds were regarded as hunting-suited, when showing enough attacking initiative for fox hunting. The rumours about prosecution of sighthounds in post-revolutionary Russia is a legend of modern time, possibly based on similar incidents in Maoist China.

In the late 1940s, a Soviet soldier named Constantin Esmont made detailed records of the various types of borzoi he found in Cossack villages. Esmont's illustrations were recently published and can be viewed by clicking on the link below.

Esmont was concerned that the distinct types of borzaya were in danger of degenerating without a controlled system of breeding. He convinced the Soviet government that borzois were a valuable asset to the hunters who supported the fur industry and henceforth, their breeding was officially regulated. To this day short-haired Hortaya Borzaya are highly valued hunting dogs on the steppes, while the long-haired Psovaya Borzaya, is going through a hard period of restoration of its working qualities after decades of shadow, mainly show existence.

Exports of borzois to other countries were extremely rare during the Soviet era. However, enough had been taken to England, Scandinavia, Western Europe, and America in the late 19th century for the breed to establish itself outside its native country.

 

 

== Notable borzois ==
portrait|thumb| 120px|]
* The borzoi is the symbol of Alfred A. Knopf publishing house.
* Tasha, a female borzoi belonging to the noted vet Buster Lloyd-Jones (founder of Denes natural pet foods), was born in the UK during the Second World War and is the pedigree ancestor of most British borzoi bloodlines. Scott pp.14 
* Ben was the white male borzoi, beloved of Edward J. Smith, Captain of the Titanic. There exists a photo of the Captain and his dog outside his cabin on the ship. The dog was not, however, on the maiden voyage.
* Kolchak has been the mascot of the 27th Infantry Regiment since the Regiment participated in the Siberian Intervention. The 27th Infantry had been nicknamed "The Wolfhounds" in recognition of their endurance during battles in Siberia.

== In popular culture ==
A Borzoi in the field with flowers
A female Borzoi
* Leo Tolstoy's 1869 novel War and Peace contains an extensive wolf hunting scene with borzois in book 7, chapters 3 to 6. 
* F. Scott Fitzgerald's second novel, The Beautiful and Damned (1922), contains a scene in which Gloria compares Anthony to a Russian wolfhound. Anthony decides to take this as a compliment: "Anthony remembered that they were white and always looked unnaturally hungry. But then they were usually photographed with dukes and princesses, so he was properly flattered." 
* Ivan, one of the protagonists of the historical novel by the Cuban writer Leonardo Padura Fuentes, El hombre que amaba a los perros (The Man Who Loved Dogs), is the editor of a university journal of veterinary medicine, who manages to make a living during the Special Period in Cuba by helping people take care of their dogs. The novel alludes to Ivan's own dogs as well as to borzoi dogs owned by Leon Trotsky and his assassin, Ramn Mercader.
* In the book Dark Symphony (2003) by Christine Feehan, Byron gives Antonietta a black borzoi named "Celt".
* In the book The Romanov Prophecy (2004) by Steve Berry
* In the anime Kuroshitsuji (Japanese for Black Butler), Ciel Phantomhive as a child had a black borzoi named Sebastian. He named the demon with which he made a Faustian contract after this dog.
* The 1968 film version War and Peace contains a hunting scene with borzois from the kennel of Ekhaga, Sweden.
* Uncle Zeke starred as "Digger" in the 2000 Disney film, 102 Dalmatians
* The borzoi brothers, Rocket, Missile, and Jet in Ginga Densetsu Weed
* Boris in Walt Disney's 1955 film Lady and the Tramp
* D'or's Prince Igor owned by Barbara Todd (Zcerlov) and bred by Andre Legere appears in the 1969 film, Hello Dolly!
* When Katniss Everdeen and Peeta Mellark arrive at the Capitol in the 2012 film The Hunger Games, a pair of pink borzois are shown on screenan illustration of the Capitol residents' gaudy lifestyle. http://www.wordofthenerdonline.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/GuCu6.jpg 
* Borzois can also been seen in cameo roles in the films Love at First Bite, Legends of the Fall ("Notchee Boy"), http://www.picklehillhound.com/notche.htm Excalibur, All Dogs Go to Heaven (1989), Bride of Frankenstein, Easter Parade, Wolfen, Ziegfeld Follies, Onegin (1999), Gangs of New York (2002), Chaplin, The Avengers (TV series), JAG, Maverick (1994), Sleepy Hollow, Last Action Hero, and A Knights Tale (on the DVD deleted scenes).
* "Mademoiselle Nobs" from (song)|Pink Floyd: Live at Pompeii] (1971) who "sings" a song with the band. 
* Lyndell Ackerman's "Nessie" CH Windyglens Finesse in the TV show Wings.
* In an SCTV parody commercial for fictional Poochare dog food, a borzoi dog is seen being taken for a walk by Eugene Levy.
* In episode 2 of the first season of the anime Medaka Box, one of the requests for the student council is to find a missing puppy, which turns out to be a borzoi. It has grown quite large since it was lost. This also happens in the manga version.
* A borzoi is one of the dogs to appear in the film Cats & Dogs. It is seen during the council session scene.
==In Art==
In 2004, the UK Kennel Club held its fourth temporary exhibition, "The Borzoi in Art," which offered unique insights into the borzoi and how the breed has been depicted in art throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. The exhibition included paintings, bronzes, and porcelain which had previously not been available to the public. The exhibition ran from 27 September to 3 December. The borzoi is frequently found in art deco-period works.

===Gallery===

File:Borzo by a Chair-George Hare.jpg |A Borzoi by a Chair, by George Hare
File:Ernst Deutsch-Dryden - Die Suffragette.jpg |Die Suffragette

File:Louis Vorow Zborrowski by Julian Russell Story (1857-1919).jpg |Louis Vorow Zborrowski by Julian Russell Story (1857-1919)
File:George Barbier La Gazette1.jpg|George Barbier depicting a woman with a Borzoi in La Gazette
File:Affiche Steinlen 1.jpg 
File:Bartina.jpg|A Borzoi with a Borzoi picture behind. 
File:El venedor de tapissos.jpg|El venedor de tapissos, The carpet handler.
File:SerovElizabethDepartingOnAHunt.jpg| Painting by Valentin Alexandrovich Serov

 
 
 

== Notes ==

== References ==
* The Borzoi Handbook Winifred E. Chadwick. London: Nicholson & Watson 1952. Including a translation of The Perchino Hunt By His Excellency Dmitri Walzoff (1912).
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

*



[[Basenji]]

The Basenji is a breed of hunting dog that was bred from stock originating in central Africa. Most of the major kennel clubs in the English-speaking world place the breed in the Hound Group; more specifically, it may be classified as belonging to the sighthound type. The Fdration Cynologique Internationale places the breed in Group 5, Spitz and Primitive types, and the United Kennel Club (US) places the breed in the Sighthound & Pariah Group.

The Basenji produces an unusual yodel-like sound commonly called a "barroo", due to its unusually shaped larynx. Adapted from the book Why Pandas Do Handstands, 2006, by Augustus Brown. This trait also gives the Basenji the nickname "Barkless Dog". BCOA African Stock Project  1945 Letter from Africa 

Basenjis share many unique traits with Pariah dog types. Basenjis, like dingoes and some other breeds of dog, come into estrus only once annually, as compared to other dog breeds which may have two or more breeding seasons every year. Both dingoes and basenji lack a distinctive odor, http://akc.org/breeds/basenji/ AKC Meet the Breeds: Basenji. AKC. Retrieved 2009-09-14 Right Pet: Dingo and are prone to howls, yodels, and other undulated vocalizations over the characteristic bark of modern dog breeds. One theory holds that the latter trait is the result of the selective killing of 'barkier' dogs in the traditional Central African context because barking could lead enemies to humans' forest encampments. While dogs that resemble the basenji in some respects are commonplace over much of Africa, the breed's original foundation stock came from the old growth forest regions of the Congo Basin, where its structure and type were fixed by adaptation to its habitat, as well as use (primarily net hunting in extremely dense old-growth forest vegetation).

== Characteristics ==

=== Appearance ===
Red Basenji with white markings
Two Basenji
A Basenji puppy
 Basenji
A tricolour Basenji with white markings 

Basenjis are small, elegant-looking, short-haired dogs with erect ears, a tightly curled tail and a graceful neck. A basenji's forehead is wrinkled, even more so when they are young or extremely young. A basenji's eyes are typically almond-shaped, which often gives the dogs the appearance of squinting. Basenjis typically weigh about 24 lb and stand 16 in at the shoulder. They are a square breed, which means they are as long as they are tall.Basenjis are athletic dogs, and are actually deceptively powerful for their size. They have a graceful, confident gait like a trotting horse, and skim the ground in a double suspension gallop, with their characteristic curled tail straightened out for greater balance when running flat out at their top speed. Basenjis come in a few different colorations: red, black, tricolor, and brindle, and they all have white chests and stomachs. They can also come in trindle, which is a tricolor with brindle points, a rare combination.

=== Temperament ===

The Basenji is alert, energetic, curious and reserved with strangers. The Basenji is somewhat aloof with strangers, and tends to become emotionally attached to a single human. Basenjis may not get along with non-canine pets. Basenjis dislike wet weather, like to climb, can easily get over chain wire fences. Most Basenji problems involve a mismatch between owner and pet. 

Basenjis often stand on their hind legs, somewhat like a meerkat, by themselves or leaning on something; this behavior is often observed when the dog is curious about something. Basenjis have a strong prey drive. According to the book The Intelligence of Dogs, they are the second least trainable dog. However, Basenjis are extremely intelligent and respond to training that is consistent and positive with plenty of treats. Basenjis do not respond well to punishment, such as yelling and hitting, which can cause them to utter a warning growl.

== Health ==

There is apparently only one completed health survey of Basenjis, http://users.pullman.com/lostriver/breeddata.htm Dog Longevity Web Site, Breed Data page. Compiled by K. M. Cassidy. Retrieved 8 July 2007 a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey. http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk/item/570 Kennel Club/British Small Animal Veterinary Association Scientific Committee. 2004. Purebred Dog Health Survey. Retrieved 5 July 2007 

Basenjis can suffer from PRA (progressive retinal atrophy), which causes blindness; and Fanconi syndrome, which can cause kidney failure. Besides Fanconi Syndrome and PRA, Basenjis can also suffer from Hypothyroidism, IPSID (immunoproliferative systemic intestinal disease), and HA (Hemolytic Anemia). Basenjis are also sensitive to environmental and household chemicals which may cause liver problems.

===Longevity===

Basenjis in the 2004 UK Kennel Club survey had a median lifespan of 13.6 years (sample size of 46 deceased dogs), which is 12 years longer than the median lifespan of other breeds of similar size. http://users.pullman.com/lostriver/weight_and_lifespan.htm Dog Longevity Web Site, Weight and Longevity page. Compiled by K. M. Cassidy. Retrieved 5 July 2007 The oldest dog in the survey was 17.5 years. Most common causes of death were old age (30%), urologic (incontinence, Fanconi syndrome, chronic kidney failure 13%), behavior ("unspecified" and aggression 9%), and cancer. (9%). 

 

Among 78 live dogs in the 2004 UKC survey, the most common health issues noted by owners were dermatologic and urologic (urologic issues in Basenjis can be signs of Fanconi syndrome).

====Fanconi Syndrome====

Fanconi syndrome, an inheritable disorder in which the kidneys fail to reabsorb electrolytes and nutrients, is unusually common in Basenjis. Noonan,CHB, Kay JM 
1990. Prevalence and Geographic-distribution of Fanconi Syndrome in Basenjis in the United-States Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association197(3)345349 Symptoms include excessive drinking, excessive urination, and glucose in the urine, which may lead to a misdiagnosis of diabetes. Fanconi syndrome usually presents between 4 and 8 years of age, but sometimes as early as 3 years or as late as 10 years. Fanconi syndrome is treatable and organ damage is reduced if treatment begins early. Basenji owners are advised to test their dog's urine for glucose once a month beginning at the age of 3 years. Glucose testing strips designed for human diabetics are inexpensive and available at most pharmacies. Steve Gonto, M.M.Sc., Ph.D., has a 'Fanconi Disease Management Protocol for Veterinarians' that is commonly used by many veterinarians with Fanconi syndrome afflicted dogs. http://basenjicompanions.org/health/images. The current DNA test for Fanconi syndrome may be ordered from http://www.offa.org/dnatesting/fanconi.html /Protocol2003.html 

=====Fanconi DNA Linkage Test=====

In July 2007, Dr. Gary Johnson of the University of Missouri released the linked marker DNA test for Fanconi Syndrome in Basenjis. It is the first predictive test available for Fanconi Syndrome. With this test, it is possible to more accurately determine the probability of a dog carrying the gene for Fanconi Syndrome.

Dogs tested using this "Linkage Test" will return one of the following statuses:
:*Probably Clear/Normal
::Indicates the individual has most likely inherited normal DNA from both parents. It is unlikely that basenjis which test this way will produce affected puppies no matter which dog they are bred to.
:*Probably Carrier
::Indicates the individual has most likely inherited normal DNA from one parent and DNA with the Fanconi syndrome mutation from the other parent. Although this basenji is unlikely to develop Fanconi syndrome, it could produce puppies that will develop Fanconi syndrome. To minimize the chances of this happening it is recommended carriers be bred only to those that test as Probably Clear/Normal for Fanconi Syndrome.
:*Probably Equivocal/Indeterminate
::Indicates the individual's DNA contained features found in both "normal" and "carrier" basenjis. At present it cannot be predicted whether these basenjis are carriers or normal; however, it is unlikely that they will develop Fanconi syndrome. The safest strategy would be to treat them as carriers and only bred to those basenjis that test as Probably Clear/Normal for Fanconi Syndrome.
:*Probably Affected
::Indicates the individual is likely to develop clinical Fanconi syndrome and is likely to produce puppies with Fanconi Syndrome if bred to basenjis other than those that test as Probably Clear/Normal for Fanconi Syndrome.

This linkage test is being provided as a tool to assist breeders whilst research continues towards the development of the direct fanconi test.

The direct Fanconi DNA test has now been developed and may be ordered from the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals at http://www.offa.org/dnatesting/fanconi.html .

For more information about the linkage test visit: Basenji Health Endowment Fanconi Test FAQ.

====Other basenji health issues====

Basenjis sometimes carry a simple recessive gene which, when homozygous for the defect, causes genetic Hemolytic Anemia. Basenji Health Issues Most 21st-century basenjis are descended from ancestors that have tested clean. When lineage from a fully tested line (set of ancestors) cannot be completely verified, the dog should be tested before breeding. As this is a non-invasive DNA test, a basenji can be tested for HA at any time.

Basenjis sometimes suffer from hip dysplasia, resulting in loss of mobility and arthritis-like symptoms. All dogs should be tested by either OFA or PennHIP prior to breeding.

Malabsorption, or immunoproliferative enteropathy, is an autoimmune intestinal disease that leads to anorexia, chronic diarrhea, and even death. A special diet can improve the quality of life for afflicted dogs.

The breed can also fall victim to progressive retinal atrophy (a degeneration of the retina causing blindness) and several less serious hereditary eye problems such as coloboma (a hole in the eye structure), and persistent pupillary membrane (tiny threads across the pupil).

== History ==
A black and white Basenji portrait.

Among breeds recognized by the AKC, the Basenji is arguably the most ancient dog breed; that is to say that the common ancestor it shares with all other existing dogs lived longer ago than the common ancestor of any two other living dogs. www.nature.com However, this is not to say that most ancient common ancestor of all dogs was a Basenji, as the characteristics that define the breed may have evolved since then. Although the modern Basenji is from central Africa, at some point long ago its ancestor arrived there from eastern Asia, having evolved from either Chinese or southeast Asian wolves. http://www.dibubasenjis.com/papers/domestication.pdf 

Originating on the continent of Africa, Basenji Club Of America Introduction to Basenjis basenji-like dogs have lived with humans for thousands of years. Dogs resembling modern Basenjis can be seen on stelae in the tombs of Egyptian pharaohs, sitting at the feet of their masters, looking just as they do today, with pricked ears and tightly curled tails. Dogs of this type were originally kept for hunting small game by tracking and driving the game into nets. BCOA African Stock Project  1945 Letter from Africa Dollman, Guy., 1937 The Basenji Dog Journal of the Royal African Society Vol 36, No. 143 pp. 148149 

Europeans first described the type of dog from which the Basenji breed was derived in the Congo in 1895. These local dogs, which Europeans identified as a unique breed and called "basenji" were prized by locals for their intelligence, courage, speed, and silence. An article published called The Intelligence of Dogs by Stanley Coren, Ph.D. questions this. It ranks the breed at #78 out of 79 which is the second to lowest rank in intelligence. This is considered by some to be an unreliable list, as it only focuses on ability to listen to a first command. Independent dogs such as Basenjis and Afghan Hounds are considered by some to be more intelligent than obedient breeds because of their ability to recognize what benefits them, and what is simply to please another. Basenji Club Of America Understanding Basenjis 

Basenjis were assistants to the hunt, chasing wild game into nets for their masters. The Azande and Mangbetu people from the northeastern Congo region describe basenjis, in the local Lingala language, as mbw na basnzi. Translated, this means "dogs of the savages", or "dogs of the villagers". In the Congo, the basenji is also known as "dog of the bush." The dogs are also known to the Azande of southern Sudan as Ango Angari. BCOA African Stock Project  My Journey into the Home of the Basenji The word basnzi itself is the plural form of mosnzi. In Swahili, another Bantu language, from East Africa, mbwa shenzi translates to wild dog. Another local name is mbwa mkube mbwa wamwitu, or jumping up and down dog, a reference to their tendency to jump straight up to spot their quarry.

Several attempts were made to bring the breed to England, but the earliest imports succumbed to disease. In 1923, for example, Lady Helen Nutting brought six Basenjis with her from Sudan, but all six died from distemper shots they received in quarantine. BCOA African Stock Project  Lady Helen Nutting It was not until the 1930s that foundation stock was successfully established in England, and then to the United States by animal importer Henry Trefflich. So it is that nearly all the Basenjis in the Western world are descended from these few original imports. BCOA African Stock Project  History of the Breed Presented to the AKC The breed was officially accepted into the AKC in 1943. In 1990, the AKC stud book was reopened to 14 new imports at the request of the Basenji Club of America. The stud book was reopened again to selected imported dogs from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2013. An American-led expedition collected breeding stock in villages in the Basankusu area of the Democratic Republic of Congo, in 2010. Dibu Basenjis Expedition to Basankusu. Basenjis are also registered with the UKC. 

The popularity of the Basenji in the United States, according to the American Kennel Club, has declined over the past decade, with the breed ranked 71st in 1999, decreasing to 84th in 2006, and to 93rd in 2011. 

Further study is needed to determine whether they belong to the subspecies Canis lupus familiaris, as is the case with most dogs, or rather into the subspecies Canis lupus dingo, like the Australian Dingo. http://www.canids.org/species/Dingo.pdf p.223 

File:Dog - -6.JPG| Tri-Colored Basenji

File:Trindle_basenji.jpg|Trindle Basenji
Benny-Basenji.jpg|Basenji showing characteristic large, forward-pointing ears.

File:Basenjis Charly e Bravo a sette mesi.jpg|A pair of red Basenjis

== In popular culture ==
* The title character of the 1954 novel Good-bye, My Lady, by James H. Street, is a basenji. The book was made into a movie of the same name in 1956, with a cast that included Brandon deWilde, Walter Brennan, and Sidney Poitier. Good-bye, My Lady (1956) 

* Veronica Anne Starbuck's 2000 novel Heart of the Savannah features a basenji named Savannah. Savannah narrates this story about her adventures as an African-bred dog brought to America. Starbuck also wrote a sequel titled August Magic.

* Simon Cleveland wrote a novel titled The Basenji Revelation, published by Lulu Press in 2004, in which a government agent suffers amnesia and undergoes a change in personality after inheriting a basenji from his late mother.

* The true story of a basenji was featured in the episode The Cat Came Back http://www.thisamericanlife.org/pages/descriptions/06/316.html on the radio program This American Life.

* According to the webcomic Achewood, if Jesus Christ were a dog, he'd be a basenji. An Afternoon With Molly Sanders 

* Basenjis are featured in an episode of the animated television series The Wild Thornberrys In episode 3.04 "Tyler Tucker, I Presume?". Nigel Thornberry encounters a group of tribesmen along with their Congolese hunting dogs. The series' director, Mark Risley owns several basenjis, and his dogs provided the recorded "voices" for their animated counterparts.
* An episode of Pound Puppies, "The Pups Who Loved Me", revolves around a basenji secret agent character by the name of Bondo. The dog is drawn with an appropriate likeness, but appears to bark, which is uncharacteristic of the breed.

== See also ==
* Indian pariah dog
* Pariah dog

== References ==

== External links ==

* 
* Basenjis in Africa 
* Basenji Club of America
* 



[[Brit milah]]

The brit milah ( , Ashkenazi pronunciation , "covenant of circumcision"; Yiddish pronunciation, bris ) is a Jewish religious male circumcision ceremony performed on the eighth day of a male infant's life by a mohel. The brit milah is followed by a celebratory meal (seudat mitzvah).

==Biblical references==

"Isaac's Circumcision", Regensburg Pentateuch, c1300
According to the Hebrew Bible () God commanded the Biblical patriarch Abraham to be circumcised, an act to be followed by his descendants:

Also, provides: "And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised."

According to the Hebrew Bible, it was "a reproach" for an Israelite to be uncircumcised (Joshua 5:9.) The term arelim ("uncircumcised" ) is used opprobriously, denoting the Philistines and other non-Israelites (I Samuel 14:6, 31:4; II Samuel 1:20) and used in conjunction with tameh (unpure) for heathen (Isaiah 52:1). The word arel ("uncircumcised" ) is also employed for "impermeable" (Leviticus 26:41, "their uncircumcised hearts"; compare Jeremiah 9:25; Ezekiel 44:7,9); it is also applied to the first three years' fruit of a tree, which is forbidden (Leviticus 19:23).

However, the Israelites born in the wilderness after the Exodus from Egypt were not circumcised. Joshua 5:2-9, explains, "all the people that came out" of Egypt were circumcised, but those "born in the wilderness" were not. Therefore Joshua, before the celebration of the Passover, had them circumcised at Gilgal specifically before they entered Canaan. Abraham, too, was circumcised when he moved into Canaan.

The prophetic tradition emphasizes that God expects people to be good as well as pious, and that non-Jews will be judged based on their ethical behavior, see Noahide Law. Thus, Jeremiah 9:25-26 says that circumcised and uncircumcised will be punished alike by the Lord; for "all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart."

The penalty of non-observance is kareth (spiritual excision from the Jewish nation), as noted in . Conversion to Judaism for non-Israelites in Biblical times necessitated circumcision otherwise one could not partake in the Passover offering (). Today, as in the time of Abraham, it is required of converts in Orthodox, Conservative and Reform Judaism. ().

As found in Genesis 17:1-14, brit milah is considered to be so important that should the eighth day fall on the Sabbath, actions that would normally be forbidden because of the sanctity of the day are permitted in order to fulfill the requirement to circumcise. The Talmud, when discussing the importance of Milah, compares it to being equal to all other mitzvot (commandments) based on the gematria for brit of 612 (Tractate Nedarim 32a).

Covenants in ancient times were sometimes sealed by severing an animal, with the implication that the party who breaks the covenant will suffer a similar fate. In Hebrew, the verb meaning "to seal a covenant" translates literally as "to cut". It is presumed by Jewish scholars that the removal of the foreskin symbolically represents such a sealing of the covenant. "Circumcision." Mark Popovsky. Encyclopedia of Psychology and Religion. Ed. David A. Leeming, Kathryn Madden and Stanton Marlan. New York: Springer, 2010. pp.153-154. 

==Ceremony==
Family circumcision set and trunk, ca. eighteenth century Wooden box covered in cow hide with silver implements: silver trays, clip, pointer, silver flask, spice vessel.

===Time and place===
It is customary for the brit to be held in a synagogue, but it can also be held at home or any other suitable location. The brit is performed on the eighth day from the baby's birth, taking into consideration that according to the Jewish calendar, the day begins at the sunset of the day before. If the baby is born on Sunday before sunset, the Brit will be held the following Sunday. However, if the baby is born on Sunday night after sunset, the Brit is on the following Monday. The brit takes place on the eighth day following birth even if that day is Shabbat or a holiday. A brit is traditionally performed in the morning, but it may be performed any time during daylight hours.
 

====Postponement for health reasons====
The Talmud explicitly instructs that a boy must not be circumcised if he had two brothers who died due to complications arising from their circumcisions; this may be due to a concern about haemophilia. An Israeli study found a high rate of urinary tract infections if the bandage is left on too long. 

If the child is born prematurely or has other serious medical problems, the brit milah will be postponed until the doctors and mohel deem the child strong enough.

====Anesthetic====
Most prominent acharonim rule that the mitzvah of brit milah lies in the pain it causes, and anesthetic, sedation, or ointment should generally not be used. Rabbi Yaakov Montrose. Halachic World - Volume 3: Contemporary Halachic topics based on the Parshah. "Lech Lecha - No Pain, No Bris?" Feldham Publishers 2011, pp. 29-32 Eliezer Waldenberg, Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg, Shmuel Wosner, Moshe Feinstein and others agree that the child should not be sedated, although pain relieving ointment may be used under certain conditions; Shmuel Wosner particularly asserts that the act ought to be painful, as per Psalms 44:23. Regarding an adult circumcision, pain is ideal, but not mandatory. In a letter-to-the-editor published in the January 3, 1998, NY Times, Moshe David Tendler disagrees with the above and writes "It is a biblical prohibition to cause anyone unnecessary pain". He recommends the use of an analgesic cream such as Lidocaine, even though it has been implicated in several pediatric near death episodes. 
 
 
 

===Kvater===
The title of kvater (male) or kvaterin (female) among Ashkenazi Jews is for the person who carries the baby from the mother to the father, who in turn carries him to the mohel. This honor is usually given to a couple without children, as a merit or segula (efficacious remedy) that they should have children of their own. The origin of the term may simply be "Gevatter", an archaic German word for godfather, [http://beritmila.org/Glossary.html ] but it is also said to be a Yiddish erroneous combination of the words kavod ("honor" in Hebrew) and tor ("door" in Yiddish), meaning "The person honored by bringing the baby". Another source is a mix of Hebrew and Yiddish meaning 'like the father'.

===Seudat mitzvah===
"Chair of Elijah" used during the brit milah ceremony
After the ceremony, a celebratory meal takes place. At the birkat hamazon additional introductory lines, known as Nodeh Leshimcha, are added. These lines praise God and request the permission of God, the Torah, Kohanim and distinguished people present to proceed with the grace. When the four main blessings are concluded, special ha-Rachaman prayers are recited. They request various blessings by God that include:
#the parents of the baby, to help them raise him wisely;
#the sandek;
#the baby boy to have strength and grow up to trust in God and perceive Him three times a year;
#the mohel for unhesitatingly performing the ritual;
#to send the Jewish Messiah speedily in the merit of this mitzvah;
#to send Elijah the prophet, known as "The Righteous Kohen", so that God's covenant can be fulfilled with the re-establishment of the throne of King David.

==Ritual components==

===Uncovering, priah===
Infant after brit
At the neonatal stage, the inner preputial epithelium is still linked with the surface of the glans. 

 
The mitzvah is executed only when this epithelium is either removed, or permanently peeled back to uncover the glans. 
The Jerusalem Talmud there adds: "and is punished kareth!"
 
On medical circumcisions performed by surgeons, the epithelium is removed along with the foreskin, Circumcision Policy Statement of The American Academy of Pediatrics notes that "There are three methods of circumcision that are commonly used in the newborn male," and that all three include "bluntly freeing the inner preputial epithelium from the epithelium of the glans," to be later amputated with the foreskin. to prevent post operative penile adhesion and its complications. 

 
However, on ritual circumcisions performed by a mohel, the epithelium is most commonly peeled off only after the foreskin has been amputated. This procedure is called priah (), which means: 'uncovering'. The main goal of "priah" (also known as "bris periah"), is to remove as much inner layer of the foreskin as possible and prevent the movement of the shaft skin, what creates a final look of what is known as "low and tight" circumcision style. 

According to Rabbinic interpretation of traditional Jewish sources, the 'priah' has been performed as part of the Jewish circumcision since the Israelites first inhabited the Land of Israel. Talmud Bavli Tractate Yebamoth 71b: Rabbah b. Isaac stated in the name of Rab: The commandment of uncovering the corona at circumcision was not given to Abraham; for it is said, At that time the Lord said unto Joshua: 'Make thee knives of flint etc.' But is it not possible this applied to those who were not previously circumcised; for it is written, For all the people that came out were circumcised, but all the people that were born etc.?  If so, why the expression. 'Again!' Consequently it must apply to the uncovering of the corona. 
However, the Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion, argues that many Hellenistic Jews had an operation performed to conceal the fact of their circumcision, and that similar action was taken during the Hadrianic persecution, in which period a prohibition against circumcision was issued. Thus, hypothesize the editors, it was probably in order to prevent the possibility of obliterating the traces of circumcision that the rabbis added to the requirement of cutting the foreskin that of priah. Werblowsky, R.J. Zwi & Wigoder, Geoffrey (1997) The Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press The frenulum may also be cut away at the same time, in a procedure called frenectomy. 
 
According to Shaye J. D. Cohen, in Why Aren't Jewish Women Circumcised?: Gender and Covenant in Judaism, pg 25, the Torah only commands circumcision (milah.) David Gollaher has written that the rabbis added the procedure of priah to discourage men from trying to restore their foreskins: Once established, priah was deemed essential to circumcision; if the mohel failed to cut away enough tissue, the operation was deemed insufficient to comply with God's covenant and Depending on the strictness of individual rabbis, boys (or men thought to have been inadequately cut) were subjected to additional operations. 

======
Hemostat (center) is used to keep the two layers of the foreskin together so that they are cut and removed as one. The guard (top center) is slid over the foreskin as close to the glans as possible to allow for maximum removal of the former without any injury to the latter. The scalpel is used to detach the foreskin, and the underlying blue bag is a sterilization pouch for the metal tools. The tube (center left) was used for metzitzah
In addition to (the actual circumcision) and , mentioned above, the Talmud (Mishnah Shabbat 19:2) mentions a third step, , translated as suction, as one of the steps involved in the circumcision rite. The Talmud writes that a "Mohel (Circumciser) who does not suck, creates a danger and should be dismissed from practice". Tractate Shabbos 133b Rambam - Maimonides in his "book of laws" Laws of Milah Chapter 2, paragraph 2: "...and afterwards he sucks the circumcision until blood comes out from far places, in order not to come to danger, and anyone who does not suck, we remove him from practice." Rashi on that Talmudic passage explains that this step is in order to draw some blood from deep inside the wound to prevent danger to the baby, Rashi and others on Tractate Shabbos 173a and 173b and current medical knowledge confirms the benefits of the practice. 
 
There are other modern antiseptic and antibiotic techniquesall used as part of the brit milah todaywhich many say accomplish the intended purpose of metzitzah, however, since metzitzah is one of the four steps to fulfill Mitzvah, it continues to be practiced by many Orthodox and Hassidic Jews. 
 

========
The ancient method of performing metzitzahmetzitzah b'peh, or oral suction 
 
 has become controversial. The process has the mohel place his mouth directly on the circumcision wound to draw blood away from the cut. The vast majority of Jewish circumcision ceremonies do not use metzitzah b'peh, but some Hasidic Jews use it. 
 
 It has been suggested, but not documented, that the practice poses a serious risk of spreading herpes to the infant. 
 Staff (8 June 2012) Should extreme Orthodox Jewish circumcision be illegal? The Week, Retrieved 30 June 2012 Proponents maintain that there is no conclusive evidence that links herpes to Metzitza, http://www.matziv.com/pictures/drbermanarticlemetzitzah and that attempts to limit this practice infringe on religious freedom. 
 
 

The practice has become a controversy in both secular and Jewish medical ethics. The ritual of metzitzah is found in Mishnah Shabbat 19:2, which lists it as one of the four steps involved in the circumcision rite. Rabbi Moses Sofer (17621839) observed that the Talmud states that the rationale for this part of the ritual was hygienic  i.e., to protect the health of the child. The Chasam Sofer issued a conditional leniency (Heter) to perform metzitzah with a sponge to be used instead of oral suction in a letter to his student, Rabbi Lazar Horowitz of Vienna. This letter was never published among Rabbi Sofer's responsa but rather in the secular journal Kochvei Yitzchok. along with letters from Dr. Wertheimer, the Chief Dr of the Viennese General Hospital, attesting to the fact the mohel was checked several times and never found to have signs of the disease and the ban was requested because of the "possibility of future infections". Moshe Schick (18071879), a student of Moses Sofer, states in his book of Responsa, Sheeilos uteshuvos Maharam Schick (Orach Chaim 152,) that Moses Sofer gave the ruling in that specific instance only because the mohel refused to step down and had secular Government connections that prevented his removal in favor of another mohel and the Heter may not be applied elsewhere. He also states (Yoreh Deah 244) that the practice is possibly a Sinaitic tradition, i.e., Halacha l'Moshe m'Sinai.

Chaim Hezekiah Medini, after corresponding with the greatest Jewish sages of the generation concluded the practice to be Halacha l'Moshe m'Sinai and elaborates on what prompted Moses Sofer to give the above ruling. Sdei Chemed vol.8 page 238 He tells the story that a student of Moses Sofer, Lazar Horowitz, Chief Rabbi of Vienna at the time and author of the responsa Yad Elazer, needed the ruling because of a governmental attempt to ban circumcision completely if it included metztitzah b'peh. He therefore asked Sofer to give him permission to do brit milah without metzitzah bpeh. When he presented the defense in secular court, his testimony was erroneously recorded to mean that Sofer stated it as a general ruling. The Rabbinical Council of America, (RCA) which claims to be the largest American organization of Orthodox rabbis, published an article by mohel, Dr Yehudi Pesach Shields, in their summer 1972 issue of Tradition magazine, calling for the abandonment of Metzitzah b'peh. Since then the RCA, has issued an opinion that advocates methods that do not involve contact between the mohel's mouth and the open wound, such as the use of a sterile syringe, thereby eliminating the risk of infection. According to the Chief Rabbinate of Israel http://cbci16.b1.cdn.co.il/imagebank/orig/orig_041F747012AB47F9A57A42BD87D1E8C4.JPG and the Edah HaChareidis http://cbci16.b2.cdn.co.il/imagebank/orig/orig_C65A7314BA5E41F0B7EF10BFC75E4195.JPG metzitzah b'peh should still be performed.

The practice of metzitzah b'peh was alleged to pose a serious risk in the transfer of herpes from mohelim to eight Israeli infants, one of whom suffered brain damage. When three New York City infants contracted herpes after metzizah b'peh by one mohel and one of them died, New York authorities took out a restraining order against the mohel requiring use of a sterile glass tube, or pipette. The mohel's attorney argued that the New York Department of Health had not supplied conclusive medical evidence linking his client with the disease. 
 In September 2005, the city withdrew the restraining order and turned the matter over to a rabbinical court. 
 Dr. Thomas Frieden, the Health Commissioner of New York City, wrote, "There exists no reasonable doubt that metzitzah b'peh can and has caused neonatal herpes infection....The Health Department recommends that infants being circumcised not undergo metzitzah b'peh." 
 In May 2006, the Department of Health for New York State, issued a protocol for the performance of metzitzah b'peh. 
 Dr. Antonia C. Novello, Commissioner of Health for New York State, together with a board of rabbis and doctors, worked, she said, to "allow the practice of metzizah b'peh to continue while still meeting the Department of Health's responsibility to protect the public health." 
 

In three medical papers done in Israel, Canada, and the USA, oral suction following circumcision was suggested as a cause in 11 cases of neonatal herpes. Rubin LG, Lanzkowsky P. Cutaneous neonatal herpes simplex infection associated with ritual circumcision. Pediatric Infectious Diseases Journal. 2000. 19(3) 266-267. Distel R, Hofer V, Bogger-Goren S, Shalit I, Garty BZ. Primary genital herpes simplex infection associated with Jewish ritual circumcision. Israel Medical Association Journal. 2003 Dec;5(12):893-4 Researchers noted that prior to 1997, neonatal herpes reports in Israel were rare, and that the late incidences were correlated with the mothers not carrying the virus themselves. Rabbi Doctor Mordechai Halperin implicates the "better hygiene and living conditions that prevail among the younger generation", which lowered the rate of young Israeli Chareidi mothers that carry the virus, to 60%. He explains that an "absence of antibodies in the mothers blood means that their newborn sons received no such antibodies through the placenta, and therefore are vulnerable to infection by HSV-1." 

====Barriers====
Because of the risk of infection, some rabbinical authorities have ruled that the traditional practice of direct contact should be replaced by using a glass tube between the wound and the mohel's mouth, so there is no direct oral contact. The Rabbinical Council of America, the largest group of Modern Orthodox rabbis, endorses this method. The RCA paper states: "Rabbi Schachter even reports that Rav Yosef Dov Soloveitchik reports that his father, Rav Moshe Soloveitchik, would not permit a mohel to perform metzitza bepeh with direct oral contact, and that his grandfather, Rav Chaim Soloveitchik, instructed mohelim in Brisk not to do metzitza bepeh with direct oral contact. However, although Rav Yosef Dov Soloveitchik also generally prohibited metzitza bepeh with direct oral contact, he did not ban it by those who insisted upon it,...". The sefer Mitzvas Hametzitzah The book was originally published in German, Die Ausbung der Mezizo, Frankfurt a.M. 1906; It was subsequently translated into Hebrew, reprinted in Jerusalem in 1966 under the title "Mitzvas Hametzitzah" and appended to the back of Dvar Sinai, a book written by the author's grandson, Sinai Adler. by Rabbi Sinai Schiffer of Baden, Germany, states that he is in possession of letters from 36 major Russian (Lithuanian) rabbis that categorically prohibit Metzitzah with a sponge and require it to be done orally. Among them is Rabbi Chaim Halevi Soloveitchik of Brisk.

In September 2012, the New York Department of Health unanimously ruled that the practice of metztizah b'peh should require informed consent from the parent or guardian of the child undergoing the ritual. New York, NY - City Approves Metzitzah BPeh Consent Form (full video NYC DOH debate), Vosizneias.com, Published September 13, 2012 Prior to the ruling, several hundred rabbis, including Rabbi David Neiderman, the executive director of the United Jewish Organization of Williamsburg, signed a declaration stating that they would not inform parents of the potential dangers that came with metzitzah b'peh, even if informed consent became law. New York - Rabbis Say Theyll Defy Law On Metzitzah Bpeh, Vosizneias.com, Published September 2, 2012 

In a Motion for preliminary injunction with intend to sue, filed against New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene, affidavits by Doctors Awi Federgruen Professor at the Columbia University Graduate School of Business. http://protectmilah.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/MBP-Federgruen-Affidavit.pdf Brenda Breuer, Director of Epidemiologic Research at the Department of Pain Medicine and Palliative Care at the Beth Israel Medical Center, and an Associate Professor of Clinical Neurology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. http://protectmilah.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/MBP-Breuer-Affidavit2.pdf Daniel S. Berman, Chief of Infectious-Disease at New York Westchester Square Hospital, http://protectmilah.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/MBP-Berman-Affidavit.pdf argues that the study on which the department passed its conclusions is flawed.

===Hatafat dam brit===
A brit milah is more than circumcision, it is a sacred ritual in Judaism, as distinguished from its non-ritual requirement in Islam. One ramification is that the brit is not considered complete unless a drop of blood is actually drawn. The standard medical methods of circumcision through constriction do not meet the requirements of the halakhah for brit milah, because they cause hemostasis, i.e., they stop the flow of blood. Morever, circumcision alone, in the absence of the brit milah ceremony, does not fulfill the requirements of the mitzvah. Therefore, in cases where a Jew who was circumcised outside of a brit milah, an already-circumcised convert, or an aposthetic (born without a foreskin) individual, the mohel draws a symbolic drop of blood (, )from the penis at the point where the foreskin would have been or was attached. Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah, 263:4 

==Milah l'shem giur==
Set of brit milah implements, Gttingen city museum
A Milah L'shem giur is a "Circumcision for the purpose of conversion". In Orthodox Judaism, this procedure is usually done by adoptive parents for adopted boys who are being converted as part of the adoption or by families with young children converting together. The conversion of a minor is valid in both Orthodox and Conservative Judaism until a child reaches the age of majority (13 for a boy, 12 for a girl); at that time the child has the option of renouncing his conversion and Judaism, and the conversion will then be considered retroactively invalid. He must be informed of his right to renounce his conversion if he wishes. If he does not make such a statement it is accepted that the boy is halakhically Jewish. Orthodox rabbis will generally not convert a non-Jewish child raised by a mother who has not converted to Judaism. Rabbi Paysach J. Krohn, Bris Milah Mesorah Publications Ltd, 1985, pp.103-105 

The laws of conversion and conversion-related circumcision in Orthodox Judaism have numerous complications, and authorities recommend that a rabbi be consulted well in advance.

In Conservative Judaism, the Milah l'Shem giur procedure is also performed for a boy whose mother has not converted, but with the intention that the child be raised Jewish. This conversion of a child to Judaism without the conversion of the mother is allowed by Conservative interpretations of halakha. Conservative Rabbis will authorize it only under the condition that the child be raised as a Jew in a single-faith household. Should the mother convert, and if the boy has not yet reached his third birthday, the child may be immersed in the mikveh with the mother, after the mother has already immersed, to become Jewish. If the mother does not convert, the child may be immersed in a mikveh, or body of natural waters, to complete the child's conversion to Judaism. This can be done before the child is even one year old. If the child did not immerse in the mikveh, or the boy was too old, then the child may choose of their own accord to become Jewish at age 13 as a Bar Mitzvah, and complete the conversion then. Rabbi Avram Israel Reisner, On the conversion of adoptive and patrilineal children, Rabbinical Assembly Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, 1988 

*The ceremony, when performed l'Shem giur, does not have to be performed on a particular day, and does not override Shabbat and Jewish Holidays. 
*In Orthodox Judaism, there is a split of authorities on whether the child receives a Hebrew name at the Brit ceremony or upon immersion in the Mikvah. According to Zichron Brit LeRishonim, naming occurs at the Brit with a different formula than the standard Brit Milah. The more common practice among Ashkenazic Jews follows Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, with naming occurring at immersion.

Where the procedure was performed but not followed by immersion or other requirements of the conversion procedure (e.g., in Conservative Judaism, where the mother has not converted), if the boy chooses to complete the conversion at Bar Mitzvah, a Milah l'shem giur performed when the boy was an infant removes the obligation to undergo either a full brit milah or hatafat dam brit.

==Reasons for circumcision==

In Of the Special Laws, Book 1, the Jewish philosopher Philo (20 BC - AD 50) gives six reasons for the practice of circumcision. 
 
 He attributes four of the reasons to "men of divine spirit and wisdom". These include the idea that circumcision:
# protects against disease,
# secures cleanliness "in a way that is suited to the people consecrated to God", 
# causes the circumcised portion of the penis to resemble a heart, thereby representing a physical connection between the "breath contained within the heart is generative of thoughts, and the generative organ itself is productive of living beings", and 
# promotes prolificness by removing impediments to the flow of semen. To these, Philo added two of his own reasons, including the idea that circumcision 
# "signified figuratively the excision of all superfluous and excessive pleasure" and 
# "that it is a symbol of a man's knowing himself".

Rabbi Saadia Gaon considers something to be 'complete', if it lacks nothing, but also has nothing that is unneeded. He regards the foreskin an unneeded organ that God created in man, and so by amputating it, the man is completed. 
 
 

Maimonides (Moses ben Maimon "Rambam", CE 1135-1204), who apart from being a great Torah scholar was also a physician and philosopher, argued that circumcision serves as a common bodily sign to members of the same faith. He also asserted that the main purpose of the act is to repress sexual pleasure, with the strongest reason being that it is difficult for a woman to separate from an uncircumcised man with whom she has had sex. 
 

The author of Sefer ha-Chinuch 2nd commandment provides three reasons for the practice of circumcision:
#To complete the form of man, by removing what he claims to be a redundant organ;
#To mark the chosen people, so their body will be different as their soul is; The organ chosen for the mark is the one responsible for the sustenance of the species.
#Said completion isn't congenital, but left to the man. This implies, that as he completes the form of his body, so can he complete the form of his soul.

Talmud professor Daniel Boyarin offered two explanations for circumcision. One is that it is a literal inscription on the Jewish body of the name of God in the form of the letter "yud" (from "yesod"). The second is that the act of bleeding represents a feminization of Jewish men, significant in the sense that the covenant represents a marriage between Jews and (a symbolically male) God. Boyarin, Daniel. "`This We Know to Be the Carnal Israel': Circumcision and the Erotic Life of God and Israel," Critical Inquiry. (Spring, 1992), 474-506. 

==Reform Judaism==
The leaders of Reform Judaism in early nineteenth century Germany at first rejected circumcision, claiming it to be 'barbaric'. The Origins of Reform Judaism, The American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise, 2010 (retrieved November 11, 2010) Theodor Herzl, the founder of Zionism and associated with the Reform movement, notably refused to allow his son to be circumcised. Female Circumcision: Multicultural Perspectives,
 By Rogaia Mustafa Abusharaf, (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007), page 51 The Gender Of Desire: Essays On Male Sexuality, By Michael S. Kimmel, SUNY Press, 2005, page 181 By 1871, rabbinic leadership in the German Reform Movement reasserted "the supreme importance of circumcision in Judaism", though those who had not been circumcised would continue to be considered as Jews. Although the issue of circumcision of converts continues to be debated, the necessity of Brit Milah for Jewish infant boys has been stressed in every subsequent Reform rabbis manual or guide. 
 Since 1984 Reform Judaism has trained and certified over 300 of their own practicing mohalim in this ritual. 
 
 

==The anti-circumcision movement and brit shalom==

Some contemporary Jews choose not to circumcise their sons. 
 They are assisted by a small number of Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis, and have developed a welcoming ceremony that they call the brit shalom ("Covenant Peace") for such children, also accepted by Humanistic Judaism. 
 

This ceremony of brit shalom is not officially approved of by the Reform or Reconstructionist rabbinical organizations, who make the recommendation that male infants should be circumcised, though the issue of converts remains controversial and circumcision of converts is not mandatory in either movement. 

However, the connection of the Reform movement to an anti-circumcision, pro-symbolic stance is a historical one. From the early days of the movement in Germany, some classical Reformers hoped to replace ritual circumcision "with a symbolic act, as has been done for other bloody practices, such as the sacrifices." Katz, Jacob (1998) Divine Law in Human Hands: Case Studies in Halakhic Flexibility. Jerusalem: Hebrew University ISBN 978-965-223-980-8 As a result, many European Jewish fathers during the nineteenth century chose not to circumcise their sons, including Theodore Herzl. Stewart, Desmond (1974) Theodore Herzl. New York: Doubleday ISBN 978-0-385-08896-1 In the US, an official Reform resolution in 1893 abolished circumcision for converts, Meyer, Michael "Berit Mila within the History of the Reform Movement" in Barth, Lewis (1990) Berit Mila in the Reform Context. New York: Berit Milah Board of reform Judaism and this ambivalence towards the practice has carried over to classical-minded Reform Jews today. In Elyse Wechterman's essay A Plea for Inclusion, she argues that, even in the absence of circumcision, committed Jews should never be turned away, especially by a movement "where no other ritual observance is mandated". She goes on to advocate for an alternate covenant ceremony, brit atifah, for both boys and girls as a welcoming ritual into Judaism. Mark, Elizabeth Wyner (2003) The Covenant of Circumcision. Lebanon, NH: Brandeis ISBN 1-58465-307-8 With a continuing negativity towards circumcision still present within a minority of modern-day Reform, Judaic scholar Jon Levenson has warned that if they "continue to judge brit milah to be not only medically unnecessary but also brutalizing and mutilating...the abhorrence of it expressed by some early Reform leaders will return with a vengeance", proclaiming that circumcision will be "the latest front in the battle over the Jewish future in America." Levenson, Jon (March 2000) "The New Enemies of Circumcision", Commentary 

In Israel, a small number of families who have chosen not to have their sons circumcised formed a support group in the year 2000. Over two and a half years, 200 couples have enlisted. Hilary Leila Kreiger, A cut above the rest, Jerusalem Post, 21 November 2002 According to the Leadership Conference of Secular and Humanistic Jews, "circumcision is not required for Jewish identity." 

== See also ==
*Brit rechitzah

==References==

==External links==

*CircCentral, an online museum of circumcision tools
*Jewish Encyclopedia entry on circumcision
*Circumcision, Jewish Virtual Library 
* Rabbi Eliezer Melamed, The Laws of Brit Mila.



[[Business ethics]]

Business ethics (also corporate ethics) is a form of applied ethics or professional ethics that examines ethical principles and moral or ethical problems that arise in a business environment. It applies to all aspects of business conduct and is relevant to the conduct of individuals and entire organizations. 

Business ethics has both normative and descriptive dimensions. As a corporate practice and a career specialization, the field is primarily normative. Academics attempting to understand business behavior employ descriptive methods. The range and quantity of business ethical issues reflects the interaction of profit-maximizing behavior with non-economic concerns.
Interest in business ethics accelerated dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s, both within major corporations and within academia. For example, today most major corporations promote their commitment to non-economic values under headings such as ethics codes and social responsibility charters.
Adam Smith said, "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices." Smith, A (1776/ 1952) An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, p. 55 Governments use laws and regulations to point business behavior in what they perceive to be beneficial directions. Ethics implicitly regulates areas and details of behavior that lie beyond governmental control. The emergence of large corporations with limited relationships and sensitivity to the communities in which they operate accelerated the development of formal ethics regimes. 

==History==
Business ethical norms reflect the norms of each historical period. As time passes norms evolve, causing accepted behaviors to become objectionable. Business ethics and the resulting behavior evolved as well. Business was involved in slavery, Slavery and the Making of AmericaEpisode 1. Video.google.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Kingsolver, A. (2008). Capitalism. Encyclopedia of Race and Racism. J. H. Moore. Detroit, Macmillan reference ISBN 0-02-866021-8 pp. 268271. Williams, E. (1994 ). Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill, The University of North Carolina Press. "Slavery was not born of racism: rather, racism was the consequence of slavery. Unfree labor in the New World was brown, white, black, and yellow; Catholic, Protestant and pagan" colonialism, King Leopold II King of BelgiumKing of the Congo. Video.google.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Robotham, D. (2005). Political Economy. A Handbook of Economic Anthropology. J. G. Carrier. Northampton, MA, Edward Elgar ISBN 1-84376-175-0 pp. 4158 and the cold war. Berger D., Easterly W, et al. (2010) Commercial Imperialism? Political Influence and Trade During the Cold War. NBER Working Paper No. 15981. 

The term 'business ethics' came into common use in the United States in the early 1970s. By the mid-1980s at least 500 courses in business ethics reached 40,000 students, using some twenty textbooks and at least ten casebooks along supported by professional societies, centers and journals of business ethics. The Society for Business Ethics was started in 1980. European business schools adopted business ethics after 1987 commencing with the European Business Ethics Network (EBEN). Richard T. De George History of Business Ethics. Scu.edu (2005-02-19). Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Madsen, Essentials of Business Ethics In 1982 the first single-authored books in the field appeared. Richard De George, Business Ethics Manuel G. Velasquez, Business Ethics: Concepts and Cases. 

Firms started highlighting their ethical stature in the late 1980s and early 1990s, possibly trying to distance themselves from the business scandals of the day, such as the savings and loan crisis. The idea of business ethics caught the attention of academics, media and business firms by the end of the Cold War. Moon, Chris Et al.(2001) Business Ethics. London: The Economist:119132 MBA Institutes & Business school networks: IIMA, IIMB, IIMC, IIML, IIMK, IIMI, ISB, Great lakes, XLRI, JBIMS, FMS. Coolavenues.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. However, legitimate criticism of business practices was attacked for infringing the "freedom" of entrepreneurs and critics were accused of supporting communists. The entire book discusses unethical business practices and CIA collaborating with each other with appropriate documentary evidence. Confessions of An Economic Hit ManWhat Really Goes on Behind Global Affairs. Video.google.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. This scuttled the discourse of business ethics both in media and academia. Chomsky, N. (1989). Necessary Illusions: Thought Control in Democratic Societies London, Pluto Press ISBN 0-89608-366-7. 

==Overview==
Business ethics reflects the philosophy of business, one of whose aims is to determine the fundamental purposes of a company. If a company's purpose is to maximize shareholder returns, then sacrificing profits to other concerns is a violation of its fiduciary responsibility. Corporate entities are legally considered as persons in USA and in most nations. The 'corporate persons' are legally entitled to the rights and liabilities due to citizens as persons.

Economist Milton Friedman writes that corporate executives' "responsibility... generally will be to make as much money as possible while conforming to their basic rules of the society, both those embodied in law and those embodied in ethical custom". Friedman also said, "the only entities who can have responsibilities are individuals ... A business cannot have responsibilities. So the question is, do corporate executives, provided they stay within the law, have responsibilities in their business activities other than to make as much money for their stockholders as possible? And my answer to that is, no, they do not." Friedman, M. (1984). "Milton Friedman respondsan interview with Friedman." Business and Society 84(5) Bevan, D. (2008).Philosophy: A Grounded Theory Approach and the Emergence of Convenient and Inconvenient Ethics. Cutting Edge Issues in Business Ethics M. Painter-Morland and P. Werhane. Boston, Springer. 24: 131152. A multi-country 2011 survey found support for this view among the "informed public" ranging from 30 to 80%. Ronald Duska views Friedman's argument as consequentialist rather than pragmatic, implying that unrestrained corporate freedom would benefit the most in long term. Contemporary Reflections on Business Ethics. Activist Business Ethics Similarly author business consultant Peter Drucker observed, "There is neither a separate ethics of business nor is one needed", implying that standards of personal ethics cover all business situations. Drucker, P. (1981). " What is business ethics?" The Public Interest Spring(63): 1836. However, Peter Drucker in another instance observed that the ultimate responsibility of company directors is not to harmprimum non nocere. Activist Business Ethics 
Another view of business is that it must exhibit corporate social responsibility (CSR): an umbrella term indicating that an ethical business must act as a responsible citizen of the communities in which it operates even at the cost of profits or other goals. Pinnington, A. H. and Lafferty, G. (2002). Human Resource Management in Australia. Melbourne: Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-551477-7 Good Governance Program. (2004). Business Ethics: A manual for managing a responsible business enterprise in emerging market economies. (pp.93128) Washington DC: Good Governance Program, US Department of Commerce In the US and most other nations corporate entities are legally treated as persons in some respects. For example, they can hold title to property, sue and be sued and are subject to taxation, although their free speech rights are limited. This can be interpreted to imply that they have independent ethical responsibilities. Duska argues that stakeholders have the right to expect a business to be ethical; if business has no ethical obligations, other institutions could make the same claim which would be counterproductive to the corporation. 

Ethical issues include the rights and duties between a company and its employees, suppliers, customers and neighbors, its fiduciary responsibility to its shareholders. Issues concerning relations between different companies include hostile take-overs and industrial espionage. Related issues include corporate governance;corporate social entrepreneurship; political contributions; legal issues such as the ethical debate over introducing a crime of corporate manslaughter; and the marketing of corporations' ethics policies.
According to IBE/ Ipsos MORI research published in late 2012, the three major areas of public concern regarding business ethics in Britain are executive pay, corporate tax avoidance and bribery and corruption. For a summary of the study see http://www.ibe.org.uk/userfiles/attitudes_to_be2012.pdf 

==Functional business areas==

=== Finance ===
Fundamentally, finance is a social science discipline. The discipline borders behavioral economics, sociology, Cetina, K. K., & Preda, A. (Eds.). (2005). The sociology of financial markets. Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-929692-8 economics, accounting and management. It concerns technical issues such as the mix of debt and equity, dividend policy, the evaluation of alternative investment projects, options, futures, swaps, and other derivatives, portfolio diversification and many others. It is often mistaken to be a discipline free from ethical burdens. The 2008 financial crisis caused critics to challenge the ethics of the executives in charge of U.S. and European financial institutions and financial regulatory bodies. Huevel, K. et al., (2009). Meltdown: how greed and corruption shattered our financial system and how we can recover. New York: Nation Books ISBN 1-56858-433-4. Finance ethics is overlooked for another reasonissues in finance are often addressed as matters of law rather than ethics. Boatright, J. R. Finance ethics 

====Finance paradigm====

Aristotle said, "the end and purpose of the polis is the good life". Aristotle 1948 Politics E. Barker, trans. Oxford: Clarendon, p. 38. Adam Smith characterized the good life in terms of material goods and intellectual and moral excellences of character. Smith in his The Wealth of Nations commented, "All for ourselves, and nothing for other people, seems, in every age of the world, to have been the vile maxim of the masters of mankind." However, a section of economists influenced by the ideology of neoliberalism, interpreted the objective of economics to be maximization of economic growth through accelerated consumption and production of goods and services. Neoliberal ideology promoted finance from its position as a component of economics to its core. Proponents of the ideology hold that unrestricted financial flows, if redeemed from the shackles of "financial repressions", best help impoverished nations to grow. The theory holds that open financial systems accelerate economic growth by encouraging foreign capital inows, thereby enabling higher levels of savings, investment, employment, productivity and "welfare", welfare in terms of preference satisfaction Hayek F.A. 1976 Law, Legislation and Liberty: Volume 2 London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 1530. along with containing corruption. Neoliberals recommended that governments open their financial systems to the global market with minimal regulation over capital flows. Grabel, Ilene (2003), 'International private capital flows and developing countries', in Ha-Joon Chang (ed.), Rethinking Development Economics, London: Anthem Press, pp. 32545 Valdez, J. G. (1995). Pinochet's Economists: The Chicago School in Chili Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-45146-9 The recommendations however, met with criticisms from various schools of ethical philosophy. Some pragmatic ethicists, found these claims to unfalsifiable and a priori, although neither of these makes the recommendations false or unethical per se. Samuels, W., J (1977). Ideology in Economics In S. Weintraub (Ed.), Modern Economic Thought (pp. 467484). Oxford: Blackwell. Charles, W., & Wisman, J. ( 1993). The Chicago School: Positivism or Ideal Type In W. J. Samuels (Ed.), The Chicago School of Political Economy New Brunswick Transaction Publishers ISBN 1-56000-633-1 Raising economic growth to the highest value necessarily means that welfare is subordinate, although advocates dispute this saying that economic growth provides more welfare than known alternatives. Since history shows that neither regulated nor unregulated firms always behave ethically, neither regime offers an ethical panacea. Salinger, L. M., Ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of White Collar Corporate Crime. California, Sage Reference ISBN 0-7619-3004-3. Dembinski, P. H., Lager, C., Cornford, A., & Bonvin, J.-M. (Eds.). (2006). Enron and World Finance: A Case Study in Ethics. New York: Palgrave. Markham, J. W. (2006). A financial history of Modern US Corporate Scandals. New York: M.E. Sharpe ISBN 0-7656-1583-5 

Neoliberal recommendations to developing countries to unconditionally open up their economies to transnational finance corporations was fiercely contested by some ethicists. Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press ISBN 0-691-00102-2. Ferguson, J. (1997). Anthropology and its Evil Twin: Development in the Constitution of a Discipline. In F. Cooper & R. Packard (Eds.), International Development and the Social Sciences: Essays on the History and Politics of Knowledge (pp. 150175). Berkeley: University of California Press ISBN 0-520-20957-5. Frank, A. G. (1991). The Underdevelopment of Development. Scandinavian Journal of Development Alternatives(10), 572. Smith, D. A., Solinger, D. J., & Topik, S. C. (Eds.). (1999). States and Sovereignty in the Global Economy. London: Routledge ISBN 0-415-20119-5. The claim that deregulation and the opening up of economies would reduce corruption was also contested. Bribery committed by large companies and multinational corporationssocial problems and systematic, pervasive government corruptionPeter Eigengovernment, corruption, bribery, social, problems, large, companiessciencestage.com Political science. Sciencestage.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Fisman, R., & Miguel, E. (2008). Economic Gangsters: Corruption, Violence and the Poverty of Nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press ISBN 0-691-13454-5. Global Corruption Report 2009: Corruption and Private Sector. (A Report by Transparency International) (2009). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-13240-1. 

Dobson observes, "a rational agent is simply one who pursues personal material advantage ad infinitum. In essence, to be rational in finance is to be individualistic, materialistic, and competitive. Business is a game played by individuals, as with all games the object is to win, and winning is measured in terms solely of material wealth. Within the discipline this rationality concept is never questioned, and has indeed become the theory-of-the-firm's sine qua non". "Experts of finance tend to view business firm as, 'an abstract engine that uses money today to make money tomorrow' Financial ethics is in this view a mathematical function of shareholder wealth. Such simplifying assumptions were once necessary for the construction of mathematically robust models. However signalling theory and agency theory extended the paradigm to greater realism. 

===Other issues===
Fairness in trading practices, trading conditions, financial contracting, sales practices, consultancy services, tax payments, internal audit, external audit and executive compensation also fall under the umbrella of finance and accounting. Armstrong, M. B. (2002). Ethical Issues in Accounting. In N. E. Bowie (Ed.), The Blackwell guide to business ethics (pp. 145157). Oxford: Blackwell ISBN 0-631-22123-9 Particular corporate ethical/legal abuses include: creative accounting, earnings management, misleading financial analysis, insider trading, securities fraud, bribery/kickbacks and facilitation payments. Outside of corporations, bucket shops and forex scams are criminal manipulations of financial markets. Cases include accounting scandals, Enron, WorldCom and Satyam.

===Human resource management===
Human resource management occupies the sphere of activity of recruitment selection, orientation, performance appraisal, training and development, industrial relations and health and safety issues. Walsh, A. J. HRM and the ethics of commodied work in a market economy. Business Ethicists differ in their orientation towards labour ethics. Some assess human resource policies according to whether they support an egalitarian workplace and the dignity of labor. Kuchinke, K. P. (2005). The self at work: theories of persons, meaning of work and their implications for HRD Dirkx, J. M. (2005). To develop a firm persuasion: Workplace learning and the problem of meaning. 

Issues including employment itself, privacy, compensation in accord with comparable worth, collective bargaining (and/or its opposite) can be seen either as inalienable rights Introduction: ethical human resource management Duska, R. Employee Rights. or as negotiable. Koehn, D. (2002). Ethical Issues in Human Resources. In N. E. Bowie (Ed.), The Blackwell guide to business ethics (pp. 225243). Oxford: Blackwell ISBN 0-631-22123-9. Watson, I., Buchanan, J., Campbell, I., and Briggs, C. (2003). Fragmented Futures: New Challenges in Working Life. ACIRRT, University of Sydney, NSW: The Federation Press. Smith, N. H. (1997). Strong Hermeneutics: Contingency and Moral Identity. London: Routledge. 
Discrimination by age (preferring the young or the old), gender/sexual harassment, race, religion, disability, weight and attractiveness. A common approach to remedying discrimination is affirmative action.

Once hired, employees have the right to occasional cost of living increases, as well as raises based on merit. Promotions, however, are not a right, and there are often fewer openings than qualified applicants. It may seem unfair if an employee who has been with a company longer is passed over for a promotion, but it is not unethical. It is only unethical if the employer did not give the employee proper consideration or used improper criteria for the promotion. DeGeorge, Richard. "Business Ethics, Seventh Edition". Prentice Hall, 2010, p. 351-352. 

Potential employees have ethical obligations to employers, involving intellectual property protection and whistle-blowing.

Employers must consider workplace safety, which may involve modifying the workplace, or providing appropriate training or hazard disclosure.

Larger economic issues such as immigration, trade policy, globalization and trade unionism affect workplaces and have an ethical dimension, but are often beyond the purview of individual companies. Legge, K. The ethics of HRM in dealing with individual employees without collective representation. Morehead, A., Steele, M., Stephen, K., and Duffin, L. (1997). Changes at Work: The 1995 Australian Workplace Industrial Relations Survey. Melbourne: Longman 

====Trade unions====
Unions for example, may push employers to establish due process for workers, but may also cost jobs by demanding unsustainable compensation and work rules. Reinhold, R. (2000). 'Union Membership in 2000: Numbers Decline During Record Economic Expansion', Illinois Labor Market Review, 6. Akyeampong, E. (1997). 'A Statistical Portrait of the Trade Union Movement', Perspectives on Labour and Income, 9: 4554. Kuruvilla, S., Das, S., Kwon, H., and Kwon, S. (2002). 'Trade Union Growth and Decline in Asia', British Journal of Industrial Relations, 40(3): 43161. Watson T.J (2003). 'Ethical Choice in Managerial Work: The Scope for Managerial Choices in an Ethically Irrational World', Human Relations, 56(2): 16785. However, weakening of labour unions, what they call 'notorious,' is celebrated as a victory of 'free market' by moralists bent towards neoliberal ideology Desai, M. (1991). Issues concerning setting up of social work specializations in India. International Social Work, 34, 8395 Guest, D. E. HRM and performance: can partnership address the ethical dilemmas? 

Unionized workplaces may confront union busting and strike breaking and face the ethical implications of work rules that advantage some workers over others.

====Management strategy====
Among the many people management strategies that companies employ are a "soft" approach that regards employees as a source of creative energy and participants in workplace decision making, a "hard" version explicitly focused on control and Theory Z that emphasizes philosophy, culture and consensus. None ensure ethical behavior. Introduction: ethical human resource management Some studies claim that sustainable success requires a humanely treated and satisfied workforce. Schneider, B., Hanges, P., Smith, D., and Salvaggio, A. (2003). 'Which Comes First: Employee Attitudes or Organizational Financial and Market Performance?', Journal of Applied Psychology, 88: 83651. Guest, D. E., Michie, J., Conway, N., and Sheehan, M. (2003). 'Human Resource Management and Corporate Performance in the UK', British Journal of Industrial Relations, 41(2): 291314. Boxall, P., & Purcell, J. Strategic management and human resources: the pursuit of productivity, exibility, and legitimacy 

===Sales and marketing===

Marketing of age only as late as 1990s. Marketing ethics was approached from ethical perspectives of virtue or virtue ethics, deontology, consequentialism, pragmatism and relativism. 

Ethics in marketing deals with the principles, values and/or ideals by which marketers (and marketing institutions) ought to act. Brenkert, G. K. Marketing ethics. Marketing ethics is also contested terrain, beyond the previously described issue of potential conflicts between profitability and other concerns.
Ethical marketing issues include marketing redundant or dangerous products/services Marcoux, A. (2009). Business-Focused Business Ethics. in Normative Theory and Business Ethics. J. Smith. Plymouth Rowman & Littlefield: pp. 1734 ISBN 0-7425-4841-4 Fisher, B., 2003-05-27 "Ethics of Target Marketing: Process, Product or Target?" Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Marriott Hotel, San Diego, CA Groucutt, J., P. Leadley, et al. (2004). Marketing: essential principles, new realities. London, Kogan p. 75 ISBN 0-7494-4114-3 transparency about environmental risks, transparency about product ingredients such as genetically modified organisms Free as in Freedom: Table of Contents. Oreilly.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Labelling of GMO Products: Freedom of Choice for Consumers. Gmo-compass.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. EUROPAFood SafetyBiotechnologyGM Food & FeedLabelling. Ec.europa.eu (2003-09-22). Retrieved on 2010-09-02. possible health risks, financial risks, security risks, etc., respect for consumer privacy and autonomy, Brenkert, G. K. Marketing ethics advertising truthfulness and fairness in pricing & distribution. 

According to Borgerson, and Schroeder (2008), marketing can influence individuals' perceptions of and interactions with other people, implying an ethical responsibility to avoid distorting those perceptions and interactions. Borgerson, J. L. and J. E. Schroeder (2008). Building an Ethics of Visual Representation: Contesting Epistemic Closure in Marketing Communication. in Cutting Edge Issues in Business Ethics. M. P. Morland and P. Werhane. Boston, Springer pp. 87108 ISBN 1-4020-8400-5 

Marketing ethics involves pricing practices, including illegal actions such as price fixing and legal actions including price discrimination and price skimming. Certain promotional activities have drawn fire, including greenwashing, bait and switch, shilling, viral marketing, spam (electronic), pyramid schemes and multi-level marketing. Advertising has raised objections about attack ads, subliminal messages, sex in advertising and marketing in schools.

===Production===
This area of business ethics usually deals with the duties of a company to ensure that products and production processes do not needlessly cause harm. Since few goods and services can be produced and consumed with zero risk, determining the ethical course can be problematic. In some case consumers demand products that harm them, such as tobacco products. Production may have environmental impacts, including pollution, habitat destruction and urban sprawl. The downstream effects of technologies nuclear power, genetically modified food and mobile phones may not be well understood. While the precautionary principle may prohibit introducing new technology whose consequences are not fully understood, that principle would have prohibited most new technology introduced since the industrial revolution. Product testing protocols have been attacked for violating the rights of both humans and animals.

===Property===

The etymological root of property is the Latin 'proprius' Online Etymology Dictionary. Etymonline.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. which refers to 'nature', 'quality', 'one's own', 'special characteristic', 'proper', 'intrinsic', 'inherent', 'regular', 'normal', 'genuine', 'thorough, complete, perfect' etc. The word property is value loaded and associated with the personal qualities of propriety and respectability, also implies questions relating to ownership. A 'proper' person owns and is true to herself or himself, and is thus genuine, perfect and pure. 

====Modern history of property rights====
Modern discourse on property emerged by the turn of 17th century within theological discussions of that time. For instance, John Locke justified property rights saying that God had made "the earth, and all inferior creatures, common to all men". Harris, J.W. (1996), "Who owns My Body", Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 16: 5584. Harris finds this argument a 'spectacular non sequitur,' 'rom the fact that nobody owns me if I am not a slave, it simply does not follow that I must own myself'(p. 71) 

In 1802 Utilitarian Jeremy Bentham stated, "property and law are born together and die together". Bentham, J. (1931), Theory of Legislation, London: Kegan Paul, p. 113 ISBN 978-1-103-20150-1 

One argument for property ownership is that it enhances individual liberty by extending the line of non-interference by the state or others around the person. Seen from this perspective, property right is absolute and property has a special and distinctive character that precedes its legal protection. Blackstone conceptualized property as the "sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises over the external things of the world, in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe". Blackstone, W. (1766), Commentaries on the Laws of England, Volume II, Of the Rights of Things, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

=====Slaves as property=====
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, slavery spread to European colonies including America, where colonial legislatures defined the legal status of slaves as a form of property. During this time settlers began the centuries-long process of dispossessing the natives of America of millions of acres of land. Wishart, D. J. (1994). An Unspeakable Sadness The Dispossession of the Nebraska Indians. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press ISBN 0-8032-9795-5 Ironically, the natives lost about 200000 sqmi of land in the Louisiana Territory under the leadership of Thomas Jefferson, who championed property rights. "Jefferson's Instructions to Lewis, June 20, 1803" Letters of the Lewis and Clark Expedition with Related Documents, 17831854, ed. Donald Jackson (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1978) 1: 6166. Michael, J. (2008). Identity and the Failure of America. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Michael observes that Thomas Jefferson, in spite of all his freedom speeches, was himself a slave owner, owning slaves as his property, p.45 

Combined with theological justification, property was taken to be essentially natural ordained by God. Property, which later gained meaning as ownership and appeared natural to Locke, Jefferson and to many of the 18th and 19th century intellectuals as land, labour or idea and property right over slaves had the same theological and essentialized justification Gordon, D. (2009). Gender, Race and Limiting the Constitutional Privilege of Religion as a Haven for Bias: The Bridge Back to the Twentieth Century. Women's Rights Law Reporter, p. 30. Sandoval, Alonso De. (2008). Treatise on Slavery: Selections from De instauranda Aethiopum salute. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. pp. 17, 20 Bay, M. (2008). Polygenesis Versus Monogenesis In Black and White. In J. H. Moore (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Race and Racism (Vol. 1, pp. 9093). Detroit: Macmillan Reference:91 Baum, B. (2006). The Rise and Fall of the Caucasian Race: A Political History of Racial Identity. New York: New York University Press, ISBN 0-8147-9892-6 p. 35 It was even held that the property in slaves was a sacred right. Jensen, E. M. (1991). The Good Old Cause': The Ratification of the Constitution and Bill of Rights in South Carolina. In R. J. Haws (Ed.), The South's Role in the Creation of the Bill of Rights. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. Following a bitter debate over the importation of slaves from abroad, Congress was denied the authority to prohibit the slave trade until 1808. The rendition of escaped slaves was also a priority for southerners. Accordingly, the fugitive slave clause declared that persons held to service or labor under state law "shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may be due." (Ely, 2008:46) Wiecek noted, "slavery was more clearly and explicitly established under the Constitution as it had been under the Articles". Wiecek, W. M. (1977). The Sources of Antislavery Constitutionalism in America, 17601848. New York: Cornell University Press:63 Accordingly, US Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney in his 1857 judgment stated, "The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution".

====Natural right vs social construct====
Neoliberals hold that private property rights are a non-negotiable natural right. Tom Bethell "Private Property" Digital History. Digitalhistory.uh.edu. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Davies counters with "property is no different from other legal categories in that it is simply a consequence of the significance attached by law to the relationships between legal persons." Singer claims, "Property is a form of power, and the distribution of power is a political problem of the highest order". Cohen, M. R. (1927). Property and Sovereignty. Cornell Law Quarterly, 13, 830. Cohen commenting on the power dimension of property noted, "we must not overlook the actual fact that dominion over things is also imperium over our fellow human beings" p. 13 Rose finds, "'Property' is only an effect, a construction, of relationships between people, meaning that its objective character is contestable. Persons and things, are 'constituted' or 'fabricated' by legal and other normative techniques.". "'Property' has no essential character, but is rather a highly exible set of rights and responsibilities which congeal in different ways in different contexts" Singer observes, "A private property regime is not, after all, a Hobbesian state of nature; it requires a working legal system that can define, allocate, and enforce property rights." Davis claims that common law theory generally favors the view that "property is not essentially a 'right to a thing', but rather a separable bundle of rights subsisting between persons which may vary according to the context and the object which is at stake". 

In common parlance property rights involve a 'bundle of rights' Cooter, R. and T. Ulen (1988). Law and Economics. New York, Harper Collins. including occupancy, use and enjoyment, and the right to sell, devise, give, or lease all or part of these rights. Honor, A. M. (1961). Ownership. In A. G. Guest (Ed.), Oxford Essays in Jurisprudence. London: Oxford University Press.; Becker, L. (1980). The Moral Basis of Property Rights In J. Pennock & J. Chapman (Eds.), Property. New York: New York University Press.. However, some scholars often use the terms ownership, property and property rights interchangeably, while others define ownership (or property) as a set of specific rights each attached to the vast array of uses accessible by the owner. Ownership has thus been interpreted as a form of aggregation of such social relationsa bundle of rights over the use of scarce resources . Alchian, A. A. (1965). Some Economics of Property Rights. Il Politico, 30, 816829 Custodians of property have obligations as well as rights. Property has been conceptualized as absolute ownership with full control over the owned property without being accountable to anyone else . Michelman writes, "A property regime thus depends on a great deal of cooperation, trustworthiness, and self-restraint among the people who enjoy it." Property as the Keystone Right? Notre Dame Law Review 71 

Menon claims that the autonomous individual, responsible for his/her own existence is a cultural construct moulded by Western culture rather than the truth about the human condition. Penner views property as an "illusion"a "normative phantasm" without substance. 

In the neoliberal literature, property is part of the private side of a public/private dichotomy and acts a counterweight to state power. Davies counters that "any space may be subject to plural meanings or appropriations which do not necessarily come into conflict".

Private property has never been a universal doctrine, although since the end of the Cold War is it has become nearly so. Some societies, e.g., Native American bands, held land, if not all property, in common. When groups came into conflict, the victor often appropriated the loser's property. Fischbach, M. R. (2003). Records of Dispossession: Palestinian Refugee Property and the Arab-Israeli Conict. New York: Columbia University Press ISBN 0-231-12978-5. In this book Fischbach discusses on forceful dispossession of Palestinian property by Israel The rights paradigm tended to stabilize the distribution of property holdings on the presumption that title had been lawfully acquired.

Property does not exist in isolation, and so property rights too. Bryan claimed that property rights describe relations among people and not just relations between people and things Miunzer, S. R. (1990). A theory of property. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 17 Bryan, B. (2000). Property as Ontology: on Aboriginal and English Understandings of Property. Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence, 13, 331. In this article Bradley Bryan claimed that property is about much more than a set of legal relations: it is 'an expression of social relationships because it organizes people with respect to each other and their material environment' p. 4 Arendt, H. (1958). The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p. 7 Singer holds that the idea that owners have no legal obligations to others wrongly supposes that property rights hardly ever conflict with other legally protected interests. Singer continues implying that legal realists "did not take the character and structure of social relations as an important independent factor in choosing the rules that govern market life". Ethics of property rights begins with recognizing the vacuous nature of the notion of property.

===Intellectual property===

Intellectual property (IP) encompasses expressions of ideas, thoughts, codes and information. "Intellectual property rights" (IPR) treat IP as a kind of real property, subject to analogous protections, rather than as a reproducible good or service. Boldrin and Levine argue that "government does not ordinarily enforce monopolies for producers of other goods. This is because it is widely recognized that monopoly creates many social costs. Intellectual monopoly is no different in this respect. The question we address is whether it also creates social benefits commensurate with these social costs." 

International standards relating to Intellectual Property Rights are enforced through Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). In the US, IP other than copyrights is regulated by the United States Patent and Trademark Office.

The US Constitution included the power to protect intellectual property, empowering the Federal government "to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries". Steelman, A. Intellectual Property. Boldrin and Levine see no value in such state-enforced monopolies stating, "we ordinarily think of innovative monopoly as an oxymoron. Vlimki, M. (2005). The Rise of Open Source Licensing: A Challenge to the Use of Intellectual Property in the Software Industry. Helsinki: Turre Publishing ISBN 952-91-8769-6. Further they comment, 'intellectual property' "is not like ordinary property at all, but constitutes a government grant of a costly and dangerous private monopoly over ideas. We show through theory and example that intellectual monopoly is not necessary for innovation and as a practical matter is damaging to growth, prosperity, and liberty" . Steelman defends patent monopolies, writing, "Consider prescription drugs, for instance. Such drugs have benefited millions of people, improving or extending their lives. Patent protection enables drug companies to recoup their development costs because for a specific period of time they have the sole right to manufacture and distribute the products they have invented." The court cases by 39 pharmaceutical companies against South Africa's 1997 Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act, which intended to provide affordable HIV medicines has been cited as a harmful effect of patents. The South African Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Bill and TRIPS. Academic.udayton.edu. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Orsi, F., Camara, M., & Coriat, B. (2006). AIDS, TRIPS and 'TRIPS plus': the case for developing and less developed countries. 

One attack on IPR is moral rather than utilitarian, claiming that inventions are mostly a collective, cumulative, path dependent, social creation and therefore, no one person or rm should be able to monopolize them even for a limited period. The opposing argument is that the benefits of innovation arrive sooner when patents encourage innovators and their investors to increase their commitments. Roderick Long, a libertarian philosopher, observes, "Ethically, property rights of any kind have to be justified as extensions of the right of individuals to control their own lives. Thus any alleged property rights that conflict with this moral basislike the "right" to own slavesare invalidated. In my judgment, intellectual property rights also fail to pass this test. To enforce copyright laws and the like is to prevent people from making peaceful use of the information they possess. If you have acquired the information legitimately (say, by buying a book), then on what grounds can you be prevented from using it, reproducing it, trading it? Is this not a violation of the freedom of speech and press? It may be objected that the person who originated the information deserves ownership rights over it. But information is not a concrete thing an individual can control; it is a universal, existing in other people's minds and other people's property, and over these the originator has no legitimate sovereignty. You cannot own information without owning other people". Roderick Long in Machlup concluded that patents do not have the intended effect of enhancing innovation. Machlup, F. (1958). An Economic Review of the Patent System. Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office, p. 80. Expressing similar concern Fritz Machlup wrote, "It would be irresponsible, on the basis of our present knowledge of its economic consequences, to recommend instituting patent system." Self-declared anarchist Proudhon, in his 1847 seminal work noted, "Monopoly is the natural opposite of competition," and continued, "Competition is the vital force which animates the collective being: to destroy it, if such a supposition were possible, would be to kill society" Proudhon (1847), Chapter VI in The Philosophy of Poverty. The Sherman Act of 1890, was passed in America to stop rampant cartelization and monopolization in the American economy, followed by the Clayton Act of 1914, Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, and the Anti-Price Discrimination Act of 1936. In recent years, "antitrust" enforcement is alleged to have reduced competition. E.g., "antitrust is anticompetitive" writes Boudreaux Antitrust. 

Mindeli and Pipiya hold that the knowledge economy is an economy of abundance because it relies on the "infinite potential" of knowledge and ideas rather than on the limited resources of natural resources, labor and capital. Allison envisioned an egalitarian distribution of knowledge. Allison, R. (2005). The Birth of Spiritual Economics In L. Zsolnai (Ed.), Spirituality and ethics in management (Vol. 19, pp. 6174). New York: Springer:73 Kinsella claims that IPR create artificial scarcity and reduce equality. Kinsella, S. (2008). Against Intellectual Property. Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute. Kinsella writes, "Ideas are not naturally scarce. However, by recognizing a right in an ideal object, one creates scarcity where none existed before" p. 33 David, P. (2001, 2223 January). Will Building 'Good Fences' Really Make 'Good Neighbours'. Paper presented at the Science, report to European Commission (DG-Research) STRATA-ETAN workshop on IPR aspects of internal collaborations, Brussels. Bouckaert wrote, "Natural scarcity is that which follows from the relationship between man and nature. Scarcity is natural when it is possible to conceive of it before any human, institutional, contractual arrangement. Artificial scarcity, on the other hand, is the outcome of such arrangements. Artificial scarcity can hardly serve as a justification for the legal framework that causes that scarcity. Such an argument would be completely circular. On the contrary, artificial scarcity itself needs a justification" Bouckaert, B (1990). "What is Property?" In "Symposium: Intellectual Property." Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy 13(3) p. 793 Corporations fund much IP creation and can acquire IP they do not create, Macmillan, F. (2006). Public interest and the public domain in an era of corporate dominance. to which Menon and others object. Andersen claims that IPR has increasingly become an instrument in eroding public domain. 

Ethical and legal issues include: Patent infringement, copyright infringement, trademark infringement, patent and copyright misuse, submarine patents, biological patents, patent, copyright and trademark trolling, Employee raiding and monopolizing talent, Bioprospecting, biopiracy and industrial espionage, digital rights management.

Notable IP copyright cases include Napster, Eldred v. Ashcroft and Air Pirates.

==International issues==
While business ethics emerged as a field in the 1970s, international business ethics did not emerge until the late 1990s, looking back on the international developments of that decade. Many new practical issues arose out of the international context of business. Theoretical issues such as cultural relativity of ethical values receive more emphasis in this field. Other, older issues can be grouped here as well. Issues and subfields include:
* The search for universal values as a basis for international commercial behaviour.
* Comparison of business ethical traditions in different countries. Also on the basis of their respective GDP and rankings.
* Comparison of business ethical traditions from various religious perspectives.
* Ethical issues arising out of international business transactions; e.g., bioprospecting and biopiracy in the pharmaceutical industry; the fair trade movement; transfer pricing.
* Issues such as globalization and cultural imperialism.
* Varying global standardse.g., the use of child labor.
* The way in which multinationals take advantage of international differences, such as outsourcing production (e.g. clothes) and services (e.g. call centres) to low-wage countries.
* The permissibility of international commerce with pariah states.

The success of any business depends on its financial performance. Financial accounting helps the management to report and also control the business performance.

The information regarding the financial performance of the company plays an important role in enabling people to take right decision about the company. Therefore, it becomes necessary to understand how to record based on accounting conventions and concepts ensure unambling and accurate records.

Foreign countries often use dumping as a competitive threat, selling products at prices lower than their normal value. This can lead to problems in domestic markets. It becomes difficult for these markets to compete with the pricing set by foreign markets. In 2009, the International Trade Commission has been researching anti-dumping laws. Dumping is often seen as an ethical issue, as larger companies are taking advantage of other less economically advanced companies.

==Economic systems==
Political economy and political philosophy have ethical implications, particularly regarding the distribution of economic benefits. John Rawls and Robert Nozick are both notable contributors. For example, Rawls has been interpreted as offering a critique of offshore outsourcing on social contract grounds, whereas Nozick's libertarian philosophy rejects the notion of any positive corporate social obligation.

==Law and regulation==
Very often it is held that business is not bound by any ethics other than abiding by the law. Milton Friedman is the pioneer of the view. He held that corporations have the obligation to make a profit within the framework of the legal system, nothing more. . Friedman made it explicit that the duty of the business leaders is, "to make as much money as possible while conforming to the basic rules of the society, both those embodied in the law and those embodied in ethical custom". Friedman, M. (1970). "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Profit", The New York Times Magazine. Ethics for Friedman is nothing more than abiding by 'customs' and 'laws'. The reduction of ethics to abidance to laws and customs however have drawn serious criticisms.

Counter to Friedman's logic it is observed that legal procedures are technocratic, bureaucratic, rigid and obligatory where as ethical act is conscientious, voluntary choice beyond normativity. Agamben, G. (1993) The Coming Community, trans. Michael Hardt. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, p. 43 ISBN 0-8166-2235-3 Law is retroactive. Crime precedes law. Law against a crime, to be passed, the crime must have happened. Laws are blind to the crimes undefined in it. Further, as per law, "conduct is not criminal unless forbidden by law which gives advance warning that such conduct is criminal. United States of America, Plaintiff-appellee, v. Kristine D. Vasarajs, Defendant-appellant908 F.2d 443Justia US Court of Appeals Cases and Opinions. Cases.justia.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-02. Also, law presumes the accused is innocent until proven guilty and that the state must establish the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. As per liberal laws followed in most of the democracies, until the government prosecutor proves the firm guilty with the limited resources available to her, the accused is considered to be innocent. Though the liberal premises of law is necessary to protect individuals from being persecuted by Government, it is not a sufficient mechanism to make firms morally accountable. 

==Implementation==

===Corporate policies===

As part of more comprehensive compliance and ethics programs, many companies have formulated internal policies pertaining to the ethical conduct of employees. These policies can be simple exhortations in broad, highly generalized language (typically called a corporate ethics statement), or they can be more detailed policies, containing specific behavioural requirements (typically called corporate ethics codes). They are generally meant to identify the company's expectations of workers and to offer guidance on handling some of the more common ethical problems that might arise in the course of doing business. It is hoped that having such a policy will lead to greater ethical awareness, consistency in application, and the avoidance of ethical disasters.

An increasing number of companies also require employees to attend seminars regarding business conduct, which often include discussion of the company's policies, specific case studies, and legal requirements. Some companies even require their employees to sign agreements stating that they will abide by the company's rules of conduct.

Many companies are assessing the environmental factors that can lead employees to engage in unethical conduct. A competitive business environment may call for unethical behaviour. Lying has become expected in fields such as trading. An example of this are the issues surrounding the unethical actions of the Saloman Brothers.

Not everyone supports corporate policies that govern ethical conduct. Some claim that ethical problems are better dealt with by depending upon employees to use their own judgment.

Others believe that corporate ethics policies are primarily rooted in utilitarian concerns, and that they are mainly to limit the company's legal liability, or to curry public favour by giving the appearance of being a good corporate citizen. Ideally, the company will avoid a lawsuit because its employees will follow the rules. Should a lawsuit occur, the company can claim that the problem would not have arisen if the employee had only followed the code properly.

Sometimes there is disconnection between the company's code of ethics and the company's actual practices. Thus, whether or not such conduct is explicitly sanctioned by management, at worst, this makes the policy duplicitous, and, at best, it is merely a marketing tool.

Jones and Parker write, "Most of what we read under the name business ethics is either sentimental common sense, or a set of excuses for being unpleasant." Many manuals are procedural form filling exercises unconcerned about the real ethical dilemmas. For instance, US Department of Commerce ethics program treats business ethics as a set of instructions and procedures to be followed by 'ethics officers'., some others claim being ethical is just for the sake of being ethical. Business ethicists may trivialize the subject, offering standard answers that do not reflect the situation's complexity. 

Author of 'Business Ethics,' Richard DeGeorge writes in regard to the importance of maintaining a corporate code, "Corporate codes have a certain usefulness and there are several advantages to developing them. First, the very exercise of doing so in itself is worthwhile, especially if it forces a large number of people in the firm to think through, in a fresh way, their mission and the important obligations they as a group and as individuals have to the firm, to each other, to their clients and customers, and to society as a whole. Second, once adopted a code can be used to generate continuing discussion and possible modification to the code. Third, it could help to inculcate in new employees at all levels the perspective of responsibility, the need to think in moral terms about their actions, and the importance of developing the virtues appropriate to their position." 

===Ethics officers===

Ethics officers (sometimes called "compliance" or "business conduct officers") have been appointed formally by organizations since the mid-1980s. One of the catalysts for the creation of this new role was a series of fraud, corruption, and abuse scandals that afflicted the U.S. defense industry at that time. This led to the creation of the Defense Industry Initiative (DII), a pan-industry initiative to promote and ensure ethical business practices. The DII set an early benchmark for ethics management in corporations. In 1991, the Ethics & Compliance Officer Association (ECOA)originally the Ethics Officer Association (EOA)was founded at the Center for Business Ethics (at Bentley College, Waltham, MA) as a professional association for those responsible for managing organizations' efforts to achieve ethical best practices. The membership grew rapidly (the ECOA now has over 1,200 members) and was soon established as an independent organization.

Another critical factor in the decisions of companies to appoint ethics/compliance officers was the passing of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations in 1991, which set standards that organizations (large or small, commercial and non-commercial) had to follow to obtain a reduction in sentence if they should be convicted of a federal offense. Although intended to assist judges with sentencing, the influence in helping to establish best practices has been far-reaching.

In the wake of numerous corporate scandals between 2001 and 2004 (affecting large corporations like Enron, WorldCom and Tyco), even small and medium-sized companies have begun to appoint ethics officers. They often report to the Chief Executive Officer and are responsible for assessing the ethical implications of the company's activities, making recommendations regarding the company's ethical policies, and disseminating information to employees. They are particularly interested in uncovering or preventing unethical and illegal actions. This trend is partly due to the SarbanesOxley Act in the United States, which was enacted in reaction to the above scandals. A related trend is the introduction of risk assessment officers that monitor how shareholders' investments might be affected by the company's decisions.

The effectiveness of ethics officers is not clear. If the appointment is made primarily as a reaction to legislative requirements, one might expect little impact, at least over the short term. In part, this is because ethical business practices result from a corporate culture that consistently places value on ethical behaviour, a culture and climate that usually emanates from the top of the organization. The mere establishment of a position to oversee ethics will most likely be insufficient to inculcate ethical behaviour: a more systemic programme with consistent support from general management will be necessary.

The foundation for ethical behaviour goes well beyond corporate culture and the policies of any given company, for it also depends greatly upon an individual's early moral training, the other institutions that affect an individual, the competitive business environment the company is in and, indeed, society as a whole.

==Academic discipline==
As an academic discipline, business ethics emerged in the 1970s. Since no academic business ethics journals or conferences existed, researchers published in general management journals, and attended general conferences. Over time, specialized peer-reviewed journals appeared, and more researchers entered the field. Corporate scandals in the earlier 2000s increased the field's popularity. As of 2009, sixteen academic journals devoted to various business ethics issues existed, with Journal of Business Ethics and Business Ethics Quarterly considered the leaders. 

The International Business Development Institute is a global non-profit organization that represents 217 nations and all 50 United States. It offers a Charter in Business Development (CBD) that focuses on ethical business practices and standards. The Charter is directed by Harvard, MIT, and Fulbright Scholars, and it includes graduate-level coursework in economics, politics, marketing, management, technology, and legal aspects of business development as it pertains to business ethics. IBDI also oversees the International Business Development Institute of Asia http://www.ibdinstitute.asia which provides individuals living in 20 Asian nations the opportunity to earn the Charter.

==Religious views==
In Sharia law, followed by many Muslims, banking specifically prohibits charging interest on loans. Traditional Confucian thought discourages profit-seeking. Jonathan Chan Confucian Business Ethics and the Nature of Business Decisions Christianity offers the Golden Rule command, "Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets." 
according to the article "Theory of the real economy", there is a more narrow point of view from the Christianity faith towards the relationship between ethics and religious traditions. This article stresses about how capable is Christianity of establishing reliable boundaries for financial institutions. One criticism comes from Pope Benedict by describing the "damaging effects of the real economy of badly managed and largely speculative financial dealing." It is mentioned that Christianity has the potential to transform the nature of finance and investment but only if theologians and ethicist provide more evidence of what is real in the economic life. Business ethics receives an extensive treatment in Jewish thought and Rabbinic literature, both from an ethical (Mussar) and a legal (Halakha) perspective; see article Jewish business ethics for further discussion.

==Related disciplines==
Business ethics is part of the philosophy of business, the branch of philosophy that deals with the philosophical, political, and ethical underpinnings of business and economics. Christoph Luetge (ed.): Handbook of the Philosophical Foundations of Business Ethics. Heidelberg/New York: Springer 2013, ISBN 978-9400714953. Business ethics operates on the premise, for example, that the ethical operation of a private business is possiblethose who dispute that premise, such as libertarian socialists, (who contend that "business ethics" is an oxymoron) do so by definition outside of the domain of business ethics proper.

The philosophy of business also deals with questions such as what, if any, are the social responsibilities of a business; business management theory; theories of individualism vs. collectivism; free will among participants in the marketplace; the role of self interest; invisible hand theories; the requirements of social justice; and natural rights, especially property rights, in relation to the business enterprise.

Business ethics is also related to political economy, which is economic analysis from political and historical perspectives. Political economy deals with the distributive consequences of economic actions. It asks who gains and who loses from economic activity, and is the resultant distribution fair or just, which are central ethical issues.

== See also ==

* Bribery
* Business culture
* Business Ethics Quarterly
* Business and Professional Ethics Journal
* Business law
* Corporate behaviour
* Corporate crime
* Corporate social entrepreneurship
* Corporate social responsibility
* Corruption
* Ethicism
* Ethics
* Ethical implications in contracts
* Ethical consumerism
* Ethical code
* Ethical job
* Fiduciary
* Journal of Business Ethics
* Journal of Business Ethics Education
* Management
* Organizational ethics
* Optimism bias
* Penny stock scam
* Strategic misrepresentation
* Strategic planning

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

 


[[BBS]]

BBS may refer to:

==Technologies==
* Bulletin Board System, a computer that allows users to dial into the system over a phone line or telnet connection
* BIOS Boot Specification, a system firmware specification related initial program load (IPL; AKA booting)

* Blum Blum Shub, a pseudorandom number generator
* Building Back Safer, a shortening used for the rebuilding of areas after a disaster

==Organisations==
* Bahrain Bayan School, a private school in Bahrain
* Budapest Business School, the second oldest business school in the world
* BBS Kraftfahrzeugtechnik AG, a high-performance automobile wheel manufacturer
* Bankenes Betalingssentral, a Norwegian bank clearing company
* Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad
* Bodu Bala Sena, a Sri Lankan political organization
* British Blind Sport, a British sporting charity for people who are visually impaired
* British Bryological Society, a British society for the study of mosses and liverworts
* Badger Boys State, a youth government camp held in Wisconsin

==Science==
* Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a genetic disorder
* Besnier-Boeck-Schaumann disease, or sarcoidosis, a chronic inflammatory systemic disease
* Behavioral and Brain Sciences, a peer-reviewed journal
* Berg Balance Scale, a test of a person's static and dynamic balance abilities
* Bogart-Bacall Syndrome, a vocal misuse disorder named after Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall
* Breeding Bird Survey, which monitors the status and trends of bird populations
* Brittle Bone Society, a British medical research charity

==Culture==
* Baton Broadcast System, a system of Canadian television stations
* Bhutan Broadcasting Service, the national radio and television service in Bhutan
* BBS Productions, highly influential film production company of early 1970s New Hollywood
* Bender's Big Score, the first full-length Futurama movie
* Boom Boom Satellites, a Japanese electronic music duo
* Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep, a videogame for the PlayStation Portable
* Be back soon, an Internet slang acronym

==Other==
* Behavior-based safety, a process to reduce risks by focusing on the behaviors that lead to increased hazards.
* Bachelor of Business Studies, an academic degree
* Bachelor of Business Statistics, an academic degree
* BBs, another name for airsoft gun pellets
* BBS, collective term for the former South African High Commission Territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland Protectorate and Swaziland, administered by the British High Commissioner for Southern Africa
* Bronze Bauhinia Star, the lowest rank in Order of the Bauhinia Star, an honours system Hong Kong
* Blue Back Square, a shopping center in West Hartford, Connecticut
* Brigade and Battalion Simulation developed for US brigade and battalion commanders to train their battle staffs in combat and battlefield.


[[British Standards]]

BSI Kitemark certification symbol
British Standards are the standards produced by BSI Group which is incorporated under a Royal Charter (and which is formally designated as the National Standards Body (NSB) for the UK). The BSI Group produces British Standards under the authority of the Charter, which lays down as one of the BSI's objectives to: 

Formally, as per the 2002 Memorandum of Understanding between the BSI and the United Kingdom Government, British Standards are defined as:

Products and services which BSI certifies as having met the requirements of specific standards within designated schemes are awarded the Kitemark. 

== How British Standards are made ==
The BSI Group as a whole does not produce British Standards, as standards work within the BSI is decentralized. The governing Board of BSI establishes a Standards Board. The Standards Board does little apart from setting up Sector Boards (a Sector in BSI parlance being a field of standardization such as ICT, Quality, Agriculture, Manufacturing, or Fire). Each Sector Board in turn constitutes several Technical Committees. It is the Technical Committees that, formally, approve a British Standard, which is then presented to the Secretary of the supervisory Sector Board for endorsement of the fact that the Technical Committee has indeed completed a task for which it was constituted. 

== The standards ==
The standards produced are titled British Standard XXXX:YYYY where XXXX is the number of the standard, P is the number of the part of the standard (where the standard is split into multiple parts) and YYYY is the year in which the standard came into effect. BSI Group currently has over 27,000 active standards. Products are commonly specified as meeting a particular British Standard, and in general this can be done without any certification or independent testing. The standard simply provides a shorthand way of claiming that certain specifications are met, while encouraging manufacturers to adhere to a common method for such a specification.

The Kitemark can be used to indicate certification by BSI, but only where a Kitemark scheme has been set up around a particular standard. It is mainly applicable to safety and quality management standards. There is a common misunderstanding that Kitemarks are necessary to prove compliance with any BS standard, but in general it is neither desirable nor possible that every standard be 'policed' in this way.

Following the move on harmonisation of the standard in Europe, some British Standards are gradually superseded or replaced by the relevant European Standards (EN).

== Status of standards ==

Standards are continuously reviewed and developed and are periodically allocated one or more of the following status keywords. Guide to using the BSI shop (retrieved 26-Jan-2013) 

*Confirmed - the standard has been reviewed and confirmed as being current.
*Current - the document is the current, most recently published one available.
*Draft for public comment/DPC - a national stage in the development of a standard, where wider consultation is sought within the UK.
*Obsolescent - indicating by amendment that the standard is not recommended for use for new equipment, but needs to be retained to provide for the servicing of equipment that is expected to have a long working life, or due to legislative issues.
*Partially replaced - the standard has been partially replaced by one or more other standards.
*Proposed for confirmation - the standard is being reviewed and it has been proposed that it is confirmed as the current standard.
*Proposed for obsolescence - the standard is being reviewed and it has been proposed that it is made obsolescent.
*Proposed for withdrawal - the standard is being reviewed and it has been proposed that it is withdrawn.
*Revised - the standard has been revised.
*Superseded - the standard has been replaced by one or more other standards.
*Under review - the standard is under review.
*Withdrawn - the document is no longer current and has been withdrawn.
*Work in hand - there is work being undertaken on the standard and there may be a related draft for public comment available.

== History ==
BSI Group began in 1901 as the Engineering Standards Committee, led by James Mansergh, to standardise the number and type of steel sections, in order to make British manufacturers more efficient and competitive.

Over time the standards developed to cover many aspects of tangible engineering, and then engineering methodologies including quality systems, safety and security.

==Examples of British Standards==
BSI Group headquarters in Chiswick district in London.
*BS 0 A standard for standards specifies Development, Structure and Drafting of British Standards themselves.
*BS 1 Lists of Rolled Sections for Structural Purposes
*BS 2 Specification and Sections of Tramway Rails and Fishplates
*BS 3 Report on Influence of Gauge Length and Section of Test Bar on the Percentage of Elongation
*BS 4 Specification for Structural Steel Sections
*BS 5 Report on Locomotives for Indian Railways 
*BS 6 Properties of Rolled Sections for Structural Purposes
*BS 7 Dimensions of Copper Conductors Insulated Annealed, for Electric Power and Light
*BS 8 Specification for Tubular Tramway Poles
*BS 9 Specification and Sections of Bull Head Railway Rails
*BS 10 Tables of Pipe Flanges
*BS 11 Specifications and Sections of Flat Bottom Railway Rails
*BS 12 Specification for Portland Cement
*BS 13 Specification for Structural Steel for Shipbuilding
*BS 14 Specification for Structural Steel for Marine Boilers
*BS 15 Specification for Structural Steel for Bridges, etc., and General Building Construction
*BS 16 Specification for telegraph material (insulators, pole fittings, etc.)
*BS 17 Interim Report on Electrical Machinery
*BS 18 Forms of Tensile Test Pieces
*BS 19 Report on Temperature Experiments on Field Coils of Electrical Machines
*BS 20 Report on *BS Screw Threads
*BS 21 Report on Pipe Threads for Iron or Steel Pipes and Tubes
*BS 22 Report on Effect of Temperature on Insulating Materials
*BS 23 Standards for Trolley Groove and Wire, 
*BS 24 Specifications for Material used in the Construction of Standards for Railway Rolling Stock
*BS 25 Report on Errors in Workmanship Based on Measurements Carried Out for the Committee by the National Physical Laboratory
*BS 26 Second Report on Locomotives for Indian Railways (Superseding No 5) 
*BS 27 Report on Standard Systems of Limit Gauges for Running Fits
*BS 28 Report on Nuts, Bolt Heads and Spanners
*BS 29 Specification for Ingot Steel Forgings for Marine Purposes, 
*BS 30 Specification for Steel Castings for Marine Purposes, 
*BS 31 Specification for Steel Conduits for Electrical Wiring
*BS 32 Specification for Steel Bars for use in Automatic Machines
*BS 33 Carbon Filament Electric Lamps
*BS 34 Tables of BS Whitworth, BS Fine and BS Pipe Threads
*BS 35 Specification for Copper Alloy Bars for use in Automatic Machines 
*BS 36 Report on British Standards for Electrical Machinery
*BS 37 Specification for Electricity Meters 
*BS 38 Report on British Standards Systems for Limit Gauges for Screw Threads
*BS 39 Combined Report on BS Screw Threads
*BS 40 Specification for Spigot and Socket Cast Iron Low Pressure Heating Pipes
*BS 41 Specification for Spigot and Socket Cast Iron Flue or Smoke Pipes
*BS 42 Report on Reciprocating Steam Engines for Electrical Purposes
*BS 43 Specification for Charcoal Iron Lip-welded Boiler Tubes
*BS 44 Specification for Cast Iron Pipes for Hydraulic Power
*BS 45 Report on Dimensions for Sparking Plugs (for Internal Combustion Engines)
*BS 46 Specification for Keys and Keyways
*BS 47 Steel Fishplates for Bullhead and Flat Bottom Railway Rails, Specification and Sections of 
*BS 48 Specification for Wrought Iron of Smithing Quality for Shipbuilding (Grade D)
*BS 49 Specification for Ammeters and Voltmeters
*BS 50 Third Report on Locomotives for Indian Railways (Superseding Nos. 5 and 26) 
*BS 51 Specification for Wrought Iron for use in Railway Rolling Stock (Best Yorkshire and Grades A, B and C)
*BS 52 Specification for bayonet lamp-caps lampholders and B.C. adaptors (lampholder plugs)
*BS 53 Specification for Cold Drawn Weldless Steel Boiler Tubes for Locomotive Boilers
*BS 54 Report on Screw Threads, Nuts and Bolt Heads for use in Automobile Construction
*BS 55 Report on Hard Drawn Copper and Bronze Wire
*BS 56 Definitions of Yield Point and Elastic Limit
*BS 57 Report on heads for Small Screws
*BS 58 Specification for Spigot and socket Cast Iron Soil Pipes
*BS 59 Specification for Spigot and Socket Cast Iron Waste and Ventilating Pipes (for other than Soil Purposes)
*BS 60 Report of Experiments on Tungsten Filament Glow Lamps
*BS 61 Specification for Copper Tubes and their Screw Threads (primarily for domestic and similar work)
*BS 62 Screwing for Marine Boiler Stays, 
*BS 63 Specification for Sizes of Broken Stone and Chippings, 
*BS 64 Specification for Fishbolts and Nuts for Railway Rails
*BS 65 Specification for Salt-Glazed Ware Pipes, 
*BS 66 Specification for Copper-Alloy Three-Piece Unions (for Low and Medium Pressure Screwed Copper Tubes)
*BS 67 Specification for Two and Three-Plate Ceiling Roses
*BS 68 Method of Specifying the Resistance of Steel Conductor Rails, 
*BS 69 Report on Tungsten Filament Glow Lamps (Vacuum Type) for Automobiles
*BS 70 Report on Pneumatic Tyre Rims for Automobiles, Motor Cycles and Cycles
*BS 71 Report on Dimensions of Wheel Rims and Tyre Bands for Solid Rubber Tyres for Automobiles
*BS 72 British Standardisation Rules for Electrical Machinery, 
*BS 73 Specification for Two-Pin Wall Plugs and Sockets (Five-, Fifteen- and Thirty-Ampere) 
*BS 74 Charging Plug and Socket, for Vehicles Propelled by Electric Secondary Batteries, Specification for
*BS 75 Steels for Automobiles, Specification for Wrought 
*BS 76 Report of and Specifications for Tar and Pitch for Road Purposes 
*BS 77 Specification. Voltages for a.c. transmission and distribution systems
*BS 78 Specification for Cast Iron Pipes and Special Castings for Water, Gas and Sewage
*BS 79 Report on Dimensions of Special Trackwork for Tramways
*BS 80 Magnetos for Automobile Purposes
*BS 81 Specification for Instrument Transformers
*BS 82 Specification for Starters for Electric Motors
*BS 83 Standard of Reference for Dope and Protective Covering for Aircraft
*BS 84 Report on Screw Threads (British Standard Fine), and their Tolerances (Superseding parts of Reports Nos. 20 and 33) 
*BS 86 Report on Dimensions of Magnetos for Aircraft Purposes 
*BS 87 Report on Dimensions for Airscrew Hubs
*BS 88 Specification for cartridge fuses for voltages up to and including 1000 V a.c. and 1500 V d.c. Originally titled: Specification for Electric Cut-Outs (Low Pressure, Type O)
*BS 89 Specification for Indicating Ammeters, Voltmeters, Wattmeters, Frequency and Power-Factor Meters
*BS 90 Specification for Recording (Graphic) Ammeters, Voltmeters and Wattmeters
*BS 95 Tables of Corrections to Effective Diameter required to compensate Pitch and Angle Errors in Screw Threads of Whitworth Form
*BS 98 Specification for Goliath Lamp Caps and Lamp Holders
*BS 103 Specification for Falling Weight Testing Machines for Rails 
*BS 104 Sections of Light Flat Bottom Railway Rails and Fishplates
*BS 105 Sections of Light and Heavy Bridge Type Railway Rails
*BS 107 Standard for Rolled Sections for Magnet Steel
*BS 196 for protected-type non-reversible plugs, socket-outlets cable-couplers and appliance-couplers with earthing contacts for single phase a.c. circuits up to 250 volts
*BS 308 a now deleted standard for engineering drawing conventions, having been absorbed into BS 8888.
*BS 317 for Hand-Shield and Side Entry Pattern Three-Pin Wall Plugs and Sockets (Two Pin and Earth Type)
*BS 336 for fire hose couplings and ancillary equipment
*BS 372 for Side-entry wall plugs and sockets for domestic purposes (Part 1 superseded BS 73 and Part 2 superseded BS 317)
*BS 381 for colours used in identification, coding and other special purposes
*BS 476 for fire resistance of building materials / elements
*BS 499 Welding terms and symbols. 
*BS 546 for Two-pole and earthing-pin plugs, socket-outlets and socket-outlet adaptors for AC (50-60 Hz) circuits up to 250V
*BS 857 for safety glass for land transport
*BS 987C Camouflage Colours 
*BS 1088 for marine plywood
*BS 1192 for Construction Drawing Practice. Part 5 (BS1192-5:1998) concerns Guide for structuring and exchange of CAD data.
*BS 1361 for cartridge fuses for a.c. circuits in domestic and similar premises
*BS 1362 for cartridge fuses for BS 1363 power plugs
*BS 1363 for mains power plugs and sockets
*BS 1377 Methods of test for soils for civil engineering.
*BS 1572 Colours for Flat Finishes for Wall Decoration 
*BS 1881 Testing Concrete 
*BS 1852 Specification for marking codes for resistors and capacitors
*BS 2660 Colours for building and decorative paints
*BS 2979 Transliteration of Cyrillic and Greek Letters
*BS 3506 for unplasticized PVC pipe for industrial uses
*BS 3621 Thief resistant lock assembly. Key egress.
*BS 3943 Specification for plastics waste traps
*BS 4293 for residual current-operated circuit-breakers
*BS 4343 for industrial electrical power connectors
*BS 4573 Specification for 2-pin reversible plugs and shaver socket-outlets
*BS 4800 for paint colours used in building construction
*BS 4900 for vitreous enamel colours used in building construction
*BS 4901 for plastic colours used in building construction
*BS 4902 for sheet / tile floor covering colours used in building construction
*BS 4960 for weighing instruments for domestic cookery
*BS 4962 for plastics pipes and fittings for use as subsoil field drains
*BS 5252 for colour-coordination in building construction
*BS 5400 for steel, concrete and composite bridges.
*BS 5499 for graphical symbols and signs in building construction; including shape, colour and layout
*BS 5544 for anti-bandit glazing (glazing resistant to manual attack)
*BS 5750 for quality management, the ancestor of ISO 9000
*BS 5759 Specification for webbing load restraint assemblies for use in surface transport
*BS 5837 for protection of trees during construction work
*BS 5930 for site investigations
*BS 5950 for structural steel
*BS 5993 for Cricket balls
*BS 6008 for preparation of a liquor of tea for use in sensory tests
*BS 6312 for telephone plugs and sockets
*BS 6651 code of practice for protection of structures against lightning; replaced by BS EN 62305 (IEC 62305) series.
*BS 6701 installation, operation and maintenance of telecommunications equipment and telecommunications cabling
*BS 6879 for British geocodes, a superset of 
*BS 7430 code of practice for earthing
*BS 7671 Requirements for Electrical Installations, The IEE Wiring Regulations, produced by the IET.
*BS 7799 for information security, the ancestor of the ISO/IEC 27000 family of standards, including 27002 (formerly 17799)
*BS 7901 for recovery vehicles and vehicle recovery equipment
*BS 7925 Software testing
*BS 7971 Protective clothing and equipment for use in violent situations and in training
*BS 8110 for structural concrete
*BS 8484 for the provision of lone worker device services
*BS 8485 for the characterization and remediation from ground gas in affected developments
*BS 8494 for detecting and measuring carbon dioxide in ambient air or extraction systems
*BS 8888 for engineering drawing and technical product specification
*BS 15000 for IT Service Management, (ITIL), now ISO/IEC 20000
*BS 3G 101 for general requirements for mechanical and electromechanical aircraft indicators
*BS EN 12195 Load restraining on road vehicles.
*BS EN 60204 Safety of machinery

==PAS Documents==
BSI also publishes a series of PAS documents. 

PAS documents are a flexible and rapid standards development model that is open to all organizations. A PAS is a sponsored piece of work allowing organizations flexibility in the rapid creation of a standard while also allowing for a greater degree of control over the document's development. A typical development time frame for a PAS is around 69 months. Once published by BSI a PAS has all the functionality of a British Standard for the purposes of creating schemes such as management systems and product benchmarks as well as codes of practice. A PAS is a living document and after two years the document will be reviewed and a decision made with the client as to whether or not this should be taken forward to become a formal British standard. The term PAS was originally an acronym derived from "product approval specification", a name which was subsequently changed to publicly available specification. However, according to BSI, not all PAS documents are structured as specifications and the term is now sufficiently well established not to require any further amplification.

===Examples===

* 78|PAS 78: Guide to good practice in commissioning accessible websites]
* 55|PAS 55- 1: Asset management - Specification for the optimized management of physical infrastructure assets]
* PAS 72 Responsible Fishing - Specification of good practice for fishing vessels
* PAS 77 IT Service continuity management code of practice
* PAS 82 Shopfitting and interior contracting. Management system specification
* PAS 100 Composting specification
* PAS 101 Specification for recovered container glass
* PAS 102 Specification for processed glass for selected secondary end markets
* PAS 103 Collected waste plastics packaging
* PAS 104 Wood recycling in the panelboard manufacturing industry
* PAS 105 Recovered paper sourcing and quality. Code of practice
* PAS 911 Fire strategies - guidance and framework for their formulation

==Availability==
Copies of British Standards are sold at the BSI Online Shop or can be accessed via subscription to British Standards Online (BSOL). They can also be ordered via the publishing units of many other national standards bodies (ANSI, DIN, etc.) and from several specialized suppliers of technical specifications.

British Standards, including European and International adoptions are available in many university and public libraries that subscribe to the BSOL platform. Librarians and lecturers at UK-based subscribing universities have full access rights to the collection while students can copy/paste and print but not download a standard. Up to 10% of the content of a standard can be copy/pasted for personal or internal use and up to 5% of the collection made available as a paper or electronic reference collection at the subscribing university. Because of their reference material status standards are not available for interlibrary loan. Public Library users in the UK have access to BSOL on a view-only basis at main as well as branch libraries. Users can also access the collection remotely if they have a valid library card and the library offers secure access to its resources. 

The BSI Knowledge Centre in Chiswick can be contacted directly about viewing standards in their Members Reading Room. 

== See also ==
* Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (EU)

==References==
 

==External links==
* Official website
* BSI Online Shop
* Subscription information to receive British Standards Online

 



[[Building society]]

A building society is a financial institution owned by its members as a mutual organisation. Building societies offer banking and related financial services, especially mortgage lending. These institutions are found in the United Kingdom (UK) and several other countries.

The term "building society" first arose in the 18th century in Great Britain from cooperative savings groups. In the UK today, building societies actively compete with banks for most consumer banking services, especially mortgage lending and savings accounts.

Every building society in the UK is a member of the Building Societies Association. At the start of 2008, there were 59 building societies in the UK, with total assets exceeding 360 billion. The number of societies in the UK fell by four during 2008 due to a series of mergers brought about, to a large extent, by the consequences of the financial crisis of 2007-2010. With three further mergers in each of 2009 and 2010, and a demutualisation and a merger in 2011, the current number of building societies is at 45.

==History==
The origins of the building society as an institution lie in late-18th century Birmingham  a town which was undergoing rapid economic and physical expansion driven by a multiplicity of small metalworking firms, whose many highly skilled and prosperous owners readily invested in property. ; Many of the early building societies were based in taverns or coffeehouses, which had become the focus for a network of clubs and societies for co-operation and the exchange of ideas among Birmingham's highly active citizenry as part of the movement known as the Midlands Enlightenment. ; The first building society to be established was Ketley's Building Society, founded by Richard Ketley, the landlord of the Golden Cross inn, in 1775. ; Members of Ketley's society paid a monthly subscription to a central pool of funds which was used to finance the building of houses for members, which in turn acted as collateral to attract further funding to the society, enabling further construction. By 1781 three more societies had been established in Birmingham, with a fourth in the nearby town of Dudley; and 19 more formed in Birmingham between 1782 and 1795. The first outside the English Midlands was established in Leeds in 1785. 

Most of the original societies were fully terminating, where they would be dissolved when all members had a house: the last of them, First Salisbury, was wound up in March 1980. In the 1830s and 1840s a new development took place with the Permanent Building Society, where the society continued on a rolling basis, continually taking in new members as earlier ones completed purchases, such as Leek United Building Society. The main legislative framework for the Building Society was the Building Society Act of 1874, with subsequent amending legislation in 1894, 1939 (see Coney Hall), and 1960.

In their heyday, there were hundreds of building societies: just about every town in the country had a building society named after that town. Over succeeding decades the number of societies has decreased, as various societies merged to form larger ones, often renaming in the process, and other societies opted for demutualisation followed by  in the great majority of cases  eventual takeover by a listed bank. Most of the existing larger building societies are the end result of the mergers of many smaller societies.

===1980s and 1990s===

In the 1980s, British banking laws were changed to allow building societies to offer banking services equivalent to normal banks. The management of a number of societies still felt that they were unable to compete with the banks, and a new Building Societies Act was passed in 1986 in response to their concerns. This permitted societies to 'demutualise'. If more than 75% of members voted in favour, the building society would then become a limited company like any other. Members' mutual rights were exchanged for shares in this new company. A number of the larger societies made such proposals to their members and all were accepted. Some became independent companies quoted on the London Stock Exchange, others were acquired by larger financial groups.

The process began with the demutualisation of the Abbey National building society in 1989. Then, from 1995 to late-1999, eight societies demutualised accounting for two-thirds of building societies assets as at 1994. Five of these societies became joint stock banks (Plc), one merged with another and the other four were taken over by Plc's (in two cases after the mutual had previously converted to a Plc).

As Tayler (2003) refers, demutualisation moves succeeded immediately because neither Conservative nor Labour party UK Governments created a framework which put obstacles in the way of demutualisation. Political acquiescence in demutualisation was clearest in the case of the position on 'carpet baggers', that is those who joined societies by lodging minimum amounts of 100 or so in the hope of profiting from a distribution of surplus after demutualisation. The deregulating 1986 Building Societies Act contained an anti-carpet bagger provision in the form of a two-year rule. This prescribed a qualifying period of two years before savers could participate in a residual claim. But, before the 1989 Abbey National Building Society demutualisation, the Courts found against the two-year rule after legal action brought by Abbey National itself to circumvent the intent of the legislators. After this the legislation did prevent a cash distribution to members of less than two years standing, but the same result was obtained by permitting the issue of 'free' shares in the acquiring Plc, saleable for cash. The Thatcher Conservative government declined to introduce amending legislation to make good the defect in the 'two-year rule'.

Building societies, like mutual life insurers, arose as people clubbed together to address a common need interest; in the case of the building societies, this was housing and members were originally both savers and borrowers. But it very quickly became clear that 'outsider' savers were needed whose motive was profit through interest on deposits. Thus permanent building societies quickly became mortgage banks and in such institutions there always existed a conflict of interest between borrowers and savers. It was the task of the movement to reconcile that conflict of interest so as to enable savers to conclude that their interests and those of borrowers were to some extent complementary rather than conflictive. Conflict of interest between savers and borrowers was never fully reconciled in the building societies but upon deregulation that reconciliation became something of a lost cause. The management of building societies apparently could expend considerable time and resources (which belonged the organisation) planning their effective captureof as much of the assets as they could. If so, this is arguably insider dealing on a grand scale with the benefit of inside specialist knowledge of the business and resources of the firm not shared with outsiders like politicians and members (and, perhaps, regulators). Once the opportunity to claim was presented by management the savers in particular could be relied upon to seize it. There were sufficient hard up borrowers to take the inducement offered them by management (in spite of few simple sums sufficing to demonstrate that they were probably going to end up effectively paying back the inducement). (Tayler 2003)

Managements promoting demutualisation also thereby met managerial objectives because the end of mutuality brought joint stock company (Plc) style remuneration committee pay standards and share options. Share options for management of converting societies appear to be a powerful factor in management calculation. Rasmusen (1988) refers to this in the following terms:
" ... perks do not rise in proportion to bank size. If a mutual is large, or is expected to grow if it can raise capital by a conversion, its managers derive more value from a conversion but do not suffer much loss of perks than if the bank were small. Their benefit is in the right to purchase the new stock, which are valuable because the new issues are consistently underpriced to USA mutual bank conversions. Moreover, by no means are all mutual managers incompetent, and conversions allows the bank to expand more easily and to grant executive stock options that are valuable to skilled managers".

Instead of deploying their margin advantage as a defence of mutuality, around 1980 building societies began setting mortgage rates with reference to market clearing levels. In sum they began behaving more like banks, seeking to maximise profit instead of the advantages of a mutual organisation. Thus, according to the Bank of England's Boxall and Gallagher (1997), "... there was virtually no difference between banks and building society 'listed' interest rates for home finance mortgage lending between 1984 and 1997. This behaviour resulted in a return on assets for building societies which was at least as high as Plc banks and, in the absence of distribution, led to rapid accumulation of reserves". As Boxall and Gallagher (1997) also observe; "... accumulation of reserves in the early-1990's, beyond regulatory and future growth requirements, is difficult to reconcile with conventional theories of mutual behaviour".

Llewellyn (1996) draws a rather more direct and cynical conclusion;
"By adopting a policy of building up reserves by maintaining an excess margin, building societies simultaneously allowed banks to compete and may have undermined the long run viability of mutuality. A more cynical approach is that some societies may have adopted an excess-margin strategy simply to enhance their value for conversion".

Some of these managements ended up in dispute with their own members. Of the first major conversion of the Abbey in 1989, Kay (1991) observed;
" ... the paradox of the Abbey members who campaigned against flotation to a Plc bank of their building society. They were fighting to preserve a degree of accountability to the membership which the management of the Society patently did not feel. For incumbent management, the contrary views of some of their members were not matters to be weighed in the balance and taken account of in formulation of policy. They were a nuisance to be dealt with by the costly use of public relations advisers and legal processes".

In the end, after a number of large demutualisations, and pressure from carpetbaggers moving from one building society to another to cream off the windfalls, most of the remaining societies modified their rules of membership in the late 1990s. The method usually adopted were membership rules to ensure that anyone newly joining a society would, for the first few years, be unable to get any profit out of a demutualisation. With the chance of a quick profit removed, the wave of demutualisations came to an end in 2000.

One academic study (Heffernan, 2003) found that demutualised societies' pricing behaviour on deposits and mortgages was more favourable to shareholders than to customers, with the remaining mutual building societies offering consistently better rates. 

===2000s and 2010s===
The Butterfill Act was passed in 2007 giving building societies greater powers to merge with other companies. These powers have been used by the Britannia in 2009 and Kent Reliance in 2011 leading to their demutualisation.

Prior to 31 December 2010, deposits with building societies of up to 50,000 per individual, per institution, were normally protected by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), but Nationwide and Yorkshire Building Societies negotiated a temporary change to the terms of the FSCS to protect members of the societies they acquired in late 2008/early 2009. The amended terms allowed former members of multiple societies which merge into one to maintain multiple entitlements to FSCS protection until 30 September 2009 (later extended to 30 December 2010), so (for example) a member with 50,000 in each of Nationwide, Cheshire and Derbyshire at the time of the respective mergers would retain 150,000 of FSCS protection for their funds in the merged Nationwide. http://www.moneymadeclear.fsa.gov.uk/news/product/bs_merger_compensation.html On 31 December 2010 the general FSCS limit for retail deposits was increased to 85,000 for banks and building societies and the transitional arrangements in respect of building society mergers came to an end.

==List of building societies==

===United Kingdom===

====Current====
The remaining building societies are:

(Total group assets of building societies) Source: Building Societies Association updated for subsequent mergers and the administration of Dunfermline Building Society

 Name Group Assets  latest published figure as at 1 February 2013 Building Societies ranked by asset size Building Societies Association. Retrieved 1 February 2013. Former society trading names Provides Current Account 
 1 Nationwide Building Society 196 129m Uses the former Dunfermline, Cheshire and Derbyshire building societies as trading names. 
 2 Yorkshire Building Society 32 647m Uses the former Norwich & Peterborough, Barnsley, and Chelsea building societies as trading names. N & P brand only 
 3 Coventry Building Society 24 487m Used the former Stroud & Swindon Building Society as a trading name (until 2011). 
 4 Skipton Building Society Merger of Skipton Building Society and Scarborough Building Society . Retrieved 29 November 2008. Chesham Building Society AGM 31 March 2010 Chesham BS website Accessed, 1 April 2010 13 910m 
 5 Leeds Building Society 9 860m 
 6 West Bromwich Building Society 7 417m 
 7 Principality Building Society 6 450m 
 8 Newcastle Building Society 4 419m 
 9 Nottingham Building Society 2 478m 
 10 Progressive Building Society 1 655m 
 11 Cumberland Building Society 1 549m 
 12 National Counties Building Society 1 221m 
 13 Saffron Building Society 1 086m 
 14 Cambridge Building Society 1 001m 
 15 Manchester Building Society 878m 
 16 Monmouthshire Building Society 819m 
 17 Furness Building Society 807m 
 18 Leek United Building Society 783m 
 19 Newbury Building Society 731m 
 20 Hinckley & Rugby Building Society 573m 
 21 Darlington Building Society 524m 
 22 Ipswich Building Society 518m 
 23 Market Harborough Building Society 410m 
 24 Melton Mowbray Building Society 367m 
 25 Tipton & Coseley Building Society 365m 
 26 Scottish Building Society 343m 
 27 Hanley Economic Building Society 331m 
 28 Marsden Building Society 323m 
 29 Dudley Building Society 321m 
 30 Loughborough Building Society 276m 
 31 Mansfield Building Society 261m 
 32 Bath Investment & Building Society 253m 
 33 Vernon Building Society 251m 
 34 Harpenden Building Society 238m 
 35 Teachers Building Society 224m 
 36 Stafford Railway Building Society 216m 
 37 Swansea Building Society 181m 
 38 Chorley & District Building Society 175m 
 39 Beverley Building Society 174m 
 40 Buckinghamshire Building Society 172m 
 41 Holmesdale Building Society 141m 
 42 Ecology Building Society 103m 
 43 Earl Shilton Building Society 101m 
 44 Penrith Building Society 87m 
 45 City of Derry Building Society 41m Merging with Progressive Building Society in 2014 

====Demutualised====
Ten building societies of the United Kingdom demutualised between 1989 and 2000, either becoming a bank or being acquired by a larger bank. Building Society Takeovers and Flotations Building Societies Association website . Retrieved 5 April 2007. By 2008, every building society that floated on the stock market in the wave of demutualisations of the 1980s and 1990s had either been sold to a conventional bank, or been nationalised. 

 Name Fate Successor Year Current position 
 Abbey National Converted to plc Santander 1989 The new Bank, also known as \"Abbey\", was acquired by Banco Santander & now rebranded as Santander. 
 Cheltenham and Gloucester was taken over by Lloyds Bank plc 1994 Became part of Lloyds TSB, although C&G still had a branch network which became part of TSB Bank plc in summer 2013. 
 National & Provincial Building Society was taken over by Abbey National plc 1995 Business merged into Abbey National (now Santander), name no longer used. 
 Alliance & Leicester Converted to plc Santander 1997 Acquired by Banco Santander, which also owns Abbey, in October 2008, and merged into Santander in 2010. 
 Bristol and West was taken over by the Bank of Ireland 1997 Became a division of Bank of Ireland but its savings balances and branch network transferred to the Britannia Building Society in 2005 (which in turn merged with Co-operative Financial Services in 2009). Bristol & West mortgages ceased trading on 10 January 2009. After 158 years, the end is nigh for Bristol & West, the Guardian, 10. January 2009 
 Halifax Converted to plc 1997 Became part of HBOS in 2001, which itself became part of Lloyds Banking Group in 2009. Trading name still in use. 
 Northern Rock Converted to plc Virgin Money 1997 Nationalised following near bankruptcy in February 2008, due to the 2007 financial crisis. Bought by Virgin Money in January 2012. Northern Rock Company Information  Retrieved 16 June 2012. 
 The Woolwich Converted to plc Barclays 1997 Now part of Barclays plc. Woolwich brand name now only used for mortgages from Barclays with the Woolwich branch network merging with that of Barclays in 2007. 
 Birmingham Midshires was taken over by Halifax plc 1999 Now owned by Lloyds Banking Group. The brand name is still retained, but running entirely by post and internet. 
 Bradford & Bingley Converted to plc 2000 Nationalisation with sale of savings book to Abbey (now Santander). 

====No longer exist====
The following is an incomplete list of building societies in the United Kingdom that no longer exist independently, since they either merged with or were taken over by other building societies or mutuals. Building Society Mergers and Conversions since 1980 Building Societies Association website . Retrieved 5 April 2007. However, they may still have an active presence on the high street (or online) as a trading name or as a distinct brand. This is typically because brands will often build up specific reputations and attract certain clientele, and this can continue to be marketed successfully.

 Name Fate Successor Year 
 Abbey Road Building Society and National Building Society merged to form the Abbey National Building Society in 1944 
 Bingley Permanent Building Society and Bradford Equitable Building Society merged to form the Bradford & Bingley Building Society in 1964 
 Co-operative Permanent Building Society changed its name to Nationwide Building Society in 1970 
 Leicester Permanent Building Society and Leicester Temperance Building Society merged to form the Leicester Building Society in 1974 
 Bedfordshire Building Society and Temperance Permanent merged to form Gateway Building Society in 1974 The Temperance Permanent was so-called because the directors were required to sign the pledge, a requirement which was dropped with the merger and name-change  to the reported dismay of some members. Times, Friday, 25 April 1975; pg. 4; Issue 59379; col E, 'Temperance abandoned by building society'. Retrieved from InfoTrac on 17 July 2008. 
 Leek & Westbourne Building Society and Oldbury Britannia Building Society merged to form Britannia Building Society in 1975 
 Huddersfield & Bradford Building Society and West Yorkshire Building Society merged to form Yorkshire Building Society in 1982 
 Coventry Economic Building Society and Coventry Provident Building Society merged to form the Coventry Building Society in 1983 
 Burnley Building Society and Provincial Building Society merged to form the National & Provincial Building Society in 1984 
 London Permanent Building Society (est 1914) merged into Cheltenham and Gloucester in 1984 
 Alliance Building Society and Leicester Building Society merged to form the Alliance & Leicester Building Society in 1985 
 Waltham Abbey Building Society (1847) merged with the Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society in 1985 
 Birmingham & Bridgwater Building Society and Midshires Building Society merged to form the Birmingham Midshires Building Society in 1986 
 Norwich Building Society and Peterborough Building Society merged to form the Norwich & Peterborough Building Society in 1986 
 Anglia Building Society and Nationwide Building Society merged to form which changed name to the Nationwide Anglia Building Society Nationwide Building Society in 1987 in 1991 
 Gateway Building Society and Woolwich Equitable Building Society merged to form the Woolwich Building Society in 1988 
 Wessex Building Society and Portman Building Society merged to form the Portman Wessex Building Society in 1989 
 Regency & West of England Building Society and Portman Wessex Building Society merged to form Portman Building Society in 1990 
 Hendon Building Society was taken over by Bradford & Bingley Building Society in 1991 
 Haywards Heath Building Society merged with the Yorkshire Building Society in 1992 
 Cheshunt Building Society merged with the Bristol and West Building Society in 1992 
 Heart of England Building Society merged with the Cheltenham & Gloucester Building Society in 1993 
 St. Pancras Building Society merged with the Portman Building Society in 1993 
 Leeds Permanent Building Society merged with the Halifax Building Society in 1995 
 City & Metropolitan Building Society merged with the Stroud & Swindon Building Society in 1996 
 Nottingham Imperial Building Society merged with the Newcastle Building Society in 2000 
 Gainsborough Building Society merged with the Yorkshire Building Society in 2001 
 Ilkeston Permanent Building Society merged with the Derbyshire Building Society in 2001 
 Clay Cross Building Society merged with the Derbyshire Building Society in 2003 
 Staffordshire Building Society merged with the Portman Building Society in 2003 
 Lambeth Building Society merged with the Portman Building Society in 2006 
 Mercantile Building Society merged with the Leeds Building Society in 2006 
 Universal Building Society merged with the Newcastle Building Society in 2006 
 Portman Building Society merged with the Nationwide Building Society in 2007 
 Cheshire Building Society merged with the Nationwide Building Society in 2008 
 Derbyshire Building Society merged with the Nationwide Building Society in 2008 
 Barnsley Building Society merged with the Yorkshire Building Society in 2008 
 Catholic Building Society merged with the Chelsea Building Society in 2008 
 Scarborough Building Society merged with the Skipton Building Society in 2009 
 Dunfermline Building Society most assets and liabilities transferred to Nationwide Building Society in 2009 
 Britannia Building Society acquired by The Co-operative Bank in 2009 Britannia and Co-operative Financial Services unveil plans for super-mutual (Retrieved 22 January 2009) 
 Chelsea Building Society merged with the Yorkshire Building Society in 2010 
 Chesham Building Society merged with the Skipton Building Society in 2010 
 Kent Reliance Building Society acquired by OneSavings Plc to form OneSavings Bank in 2011 
 Norwich and Peterborough Building Society merged with the Yorkshire Building Society in 2011 
 Century Building Society merged with the Scottish Building Society in 2013 
 Shepshed Building Society merged with the Nottingham Building Society in 2013 

=== Australia ===
In Australia, building societies evolved along British lines. Because of strict regulations on banks, building societies flourished until the deregulation of the Australian financial industry in the 1980s. Eventually many of the smaller building societies disappeared, while some of the largest (such as St. George) officially attained the status of banks.

A particular difference between Australian building societies and those elsewhere, is that Australian building societies are required to incorporate as limited companies.

Current building societies are
*IMB Banking & Financial Services
*ABS Building Society
*Greater Building Society
*Heritage Building Society
*Hume Building Society
*Lifeplan Australia Building Society
*Maitland Mutual Building Society
*Newcastle Permanent Building Society
*The Rock Building Society (Rockhampton and Surrounds)

=== Ireland ===
The Republic of Ireland had around 40 building societies at the mid-20th century peak. Many of these were very small and, as the Irish commercial banks began to originate residential mortgages, the small building societies ceased to be competitive. Most merged or dissolved or, in the case of First Active plc, converted into conventional banks. The last remaining building societies, EBS Building Society and Irish Nationwide Building Society, demutualised and were transferred or acquired into Bank subsidiaries in 2011 following the effects of the 20082011 Irish financial crisis.

Leeds Building Society Ireland and Nationwide UK (Ireland) are Irish branches of building societies based in the United Kingdom.

 Name Demutualised Successor 
 Irish Industrial Benefit Building Society (18731969) Irish Industrial Building Society (19691975) Irish Nationwide Building Society (1975  Feb 2011) :acquired Irish Mutual Building Society, 1989 ::formerly Allied Irish Building Society(1976) :acquired Garda Building Society, 1983 :acquired Metropolitan Building Society, 1991 February 2011 deposit book Irish Life & Permanent plc / permanent tsb (February 2011  June 2011) loan book Anglo Irish Bank (February 2011  June 2011) Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (Jul 2011) 
 Educational Building Society (1991) :acquired The Family Building Society, 1975 EBS Building Society (19912011) :acquired Midland and Western Building Society, 1994 :acquired Norwich Irish Building Society, 1998 July 2011 EBS Ltd, subsidiary of Allied Irish Banks 
 Irish Temperance Permanent Building Society (1888) Irish Permanent Benefit Building Society (18881940) Irish Permanent Building Society (19401994) :acquired Provident Building Society, 1974 :acquired Cork Mutual Building Society, 1975 :acquired Munster & Leinster Building Society, 1978 :acquired Guinness & Mahon, 1994 1994 Irish Permanent plc (19941999) Irish Life & Permanent plc (1999) merged with TSB Bank, 2001 Irish Life & Permanent plc / permanent tsb 
 Irish Civil Services and General Building Society (18641867) Irish Civil Service and General (Permanent Benefit) Building Society (18671874) Irish Civil Service (Permanent) Building Society (18741969) :acquired City and County Permanent Benefit Building Society, 1932 Irish Civil Service Building Society (19691984) :acquired O'Connell Benefit Building Society, 1983 1984 subsidiary of Bank of Ireland :renamed ICS Building Society (1986) 
 Workingman's Benefit Building Society (1960) First National Building Society (19601998) :acquired Grafton Savings and Building Society, 1974 :acquired The Guinness Permanent Building Society, 1984 :acquired Ireland Benefit Building Society, 1984 :acquired Postal Service Permanent Building Society, 1985 :acquired Irish Life Building Society, 1993 1998 First Active plc (19982004) acquired by RBS 2004 and merged into Ulster Bank 2009 

====Society closures====
* Ballygall Building Society, 1977
* City and Provincial Building Society, 1978
* Dublin Model Building Society, 1984
* Dublin Savings Building Society, 1977
* Four Provinces Building Society, 1978
* Independent Building Society, 1977
* Irish Savings Building Society, 1984
* National Provincial Building Society, 1977
* Progressive Building Society, 1977
* West of Ireland Building Society, 1977

=== Jamaica ===
In Jamaica, four building societies compete with commercial banks and credit unions for most consumer financial services.

=== New Zealand ===
In New Zealand, a number of building societies were established. Some, including Countrywide Building Society and United Building Society, became banks in the 1980s and 1990s. Remaining building societies include:
*Nelson Building Society
*Southland Building Society, which moved in October 2008 to become a registered bank known as SBS Bank. However,it remained a building society and so retained its mutual structure.
*Heartland Building Society, created in 2011 through merger of Canterbury Building Society, Southern Cross Building Society and two other financial institutions.
* General Equity Building Society 
* Hastings Building Society 
* Heretaunga Building Society 
* International Building & Investment Society
* Kiwi Deposit Building Society (now in dissolution) 
* Loan And Building Society 
* Manawatu Permanent Building Society 
* Manchester Unity Building Society 
* The Napier Building Society (Permanent)
* Wairarapa Building Society

Registration as a building society in the past where largely a formality. Nowadays the Registrar of Building Societies seeks that every Building Society has minimum subscribed members with full paid-up capital no less the NZD 200,000 also makes sure all its members fully registered with all companies that are members must not be dormant. All member companies must have their annual returns lodged, the registrars assessment of any new or old new entity will be based on its compliance with the registrars rules, The financial soundness of every Building Society must have independent Audited accounts so that the public my assess the risk of dealing with such an institution, as if a part of the registration compliance under the building societies act of 1965.

* Building societies that accept deposits in New Zealand are subject to certain prudential regulations (see The Reserve Bank of New Zealand) (New Zealand central bank) monitors compliance with these regulations. However, in the past the Reserve Bank did not supervise individual building societies for financial soundness this will all change as at 1 May 2014 with the new regulations taking hold of all financial non-bank deposit takers (NBDT).
* Building Societies that do not take deposits in New Zealand are prudentially now supervised by the FMA and under the new act for NBDT's have to report to all the regulators like the RBN, new act that all Building Societies will come under by 1 May 2014 will put them in a very strong regularly framework. New Zealand law now provides for offshore finance industry that are registered in New Zealand they are now provisions for the licensing or supervision now for offshore financial institutions that are incorporated in New Zealand including any and all offshore financial services in or outside of New Zealand Furthermore as now the FMA is cracking down on any entity that is not registered under the FMA to provide financial services with fully complying with their rules, The risk is now reduced as persons outside New Zealand may know that the FMA and the RBN are now monitoring and have audited NBDT on their local and international business books like building societies that are registered in New Zealand are now supervised by financial institutions. All Building Societies by the 1st of May 2014 will have to have a rating and have trustees for local deposit taking and follow the new RBN act for non-bank deposit takers. All New Zealand Building Societies are full Audited and all their information is found on the registrar of companies under other search. Look up FMA registration like General Equity see link. http://www.business.govt.nz/fsp/app/ui/fsp/version/searchSummaryOtherFSP/FSP177744/3.do?noReturn=true

=== Zimbabwe ===
In Zimbabwe, Central Africa Building Society (CABS) is the leading building society offering a diverse range of financial products and services that include transaction and savings accounts, mobile banking, mortgage loans, money market investments, term deposits and pay-roll loans.

==Similar organisations in other countries==
In other countries there are mutual organisations similar to building societies:
*Austria: In Austria there are four co-operative banks: Allgemeine Bausparkasse (ABV), Raiffeisen-Bausparkasse, Bausparkasse Wstenrot AG and Bausparkasse der Sparkassen (savings bank).

*Finland: In Finland the Mortgage Society of Finland, a permanent building society, was founded in 1860. Since 2002 mortgage loans are handled by Suomen AsuntoHypoPankki, the licensed bank owned by the society.

*Germany: In Germany there are 11 Bausparkassen der Sparkassen (savings bank) named Landesbausparkassen (LBS) and 15 Bausparkassen of the private banks, for example Schwbisch Hall, Wstenrot, Deutsche Bank Bauspar AG and so on.

*United States: In the United States, savings and loan associations have a similar organisation and purpose.

==Operational differences from banks==
;Roll numbers:

Because most building societies were not direct members of the UK clearing system, it was common for them to use a roll number to identify accounts rather than to allocate a six-digit sort-code and eight-digit account number to the BACS standards.

More recently, building societies have tended to obtain sort-code and account number allocations within the clearing system, and hence the use of roll numbers has diminished. When using BACS, one needs to enter roll numbers for the reference field and the building society's generic sort code and account number would be entered in the standard BACS fields. 

==See also==

*Banking in the United Kingdom
*Cooperative banking
*Demutualisation
*Mutual organisation
*Mutualism

==References==

==Further reading==

* Llewellyn, D. and Holmes, M. (1991) "In Defence of Mutuality: A Redress to an Emerging Conventional Wisdom", Annals of Public and Co-operative Economics, Vol.62(3): pp. 319354 (p. 327).
* Rasmusen, E. (1988) "Mutual banks and stock banks", Journal of Law and Economics, October, Vol.31: pp. 395421 (p. 412).
* Kay, J. (1991) "The Economics of Mutuality", Annals of Public and Co-operative Economics, Vol.62(3): pp. 309317 (p. 317).
* Boxall, A. and Gallagher, N. (1997) "Mutuality at the Cross Roads", Financial Stability Review, Issue 3: pp. 105117 (p. 112).
* Llewellyn, D. (1996) "Some Reflections on the Mutuality v. Conversion Debate", Journal of Co-operative Studies, September, Vol.29(2): pp. 5771 (p. 61).
* Tayler, G. (2003) "UK Building Society Demutualisation Motives", Business Ethics: A European Review,Vol.12(4): pp. 394402.

==External links==

*Building Societies Association
*The History of Building Societies from the Building Societies Association website.

* 

 



[[Blue Steel (missile)]]

The Avro Blue Steel was a British air-launched, rocket-propelled nuclear stand-off missile, built to arm the V bomber force. It was the primary British nuclear deterrent weapon until the Royal Navy started operating Polaris missile armed nuclear submarines.

==Development==
Avro Blue Steel nuclear missile (front) at the Midland Air Museum 
Avro Blue Steel missile (side view) at the Midland Air Museum behind the wing of an Avro Vulcan bomber
Rear view of Blue Steel missile at RAF Cosford aerospace museum, showing the twin-chamber "Stentor" rocket motor

Blue Steel was the result of a Ministry of Supply memorandum from 5 November 1954 that predicted that by 1960 Soviet air defences would make it prohibitively dangerous for V bombers to attack with nuclear gravity bombs. The answer was for a rocket-powered, supersonic missile capable of carrying a large nuclear (or projected thermonuclear) warhead with a range of at least 50 mi. This would keep the bombers out of range of Soviet ground-based defences installed around the target area, allowing the warhead to "dash" in at high speed.

There would have to be a balance between the size of the warhead, the need for it to be carried by any of the three V-bomber types in use, and that it should be able to reach Mach 3. At the time the only strategic warheads available in the UK were the Orange Herald and Green Bamboo, both of which were very large weapons demanding a large missile fuselage. The Air Staff issued this requirement for a stand-off bomb as OR.1132 in September 1954. Gibson, Buttler T British Secret Projects: Hypersonics, Ramjets and Missiles Midland Publishing 2007 

The Ministry of Supply selected Avro out of the British manufacturers though it had no previous experience in working on guided weapons other than some private venture work; Handley Page had suggested a 500 nmi missile but the Elliots gyro based guidance system was inaccurate beyond 100 nmi.
Avro began work proper in 1955, with the assigned Rainbow Code name of "Blue Steel" which it would keep in service. With Elliots working on the guidance system Armstrong Siddeley would develop the liquid fuel engine.
Its design period was protracted, with various development problems exacerbated by the fact that designers lacked information on the actual size and weight of the proposed boosted-fission warhead Green Bamboo, or its likely thermonuclear successor derived from the Granite series. The large girth of Blue Steel was determined by the 45 in implosion sphere diameter of Green Bamboo.

Avro proposed that Blue Steel would evolve over time, subsequent versions increasing speed (to Mach 4.5) and range. The ultimate Blue Steel would be a 900 nmi range weapon that could be launched by the supersonic Avro 730 under development. They were told to limit themselves to the specification of OR.1132. The project was delayed by the need to develop the stainless steel fabrication techniques; this would have been gained in building the Avro 730 but that had been cancelled by then. Elliots guidance system was plagued by accuracy problems delaying test flights.

As it turned out, neither of the originally-proposed UK-designed warheads were actually fitted, being superseded by Red Snow, an Anglicised variant of the U.S. W-28 thermonuclear warhead of 1.1 Mt yield. Red Snow was smaller and lighter than the earlier warhead proposals. The missile was fitted with a state-of-the-art inertial navigation unit. This system allowed the missile to strike within 100 metres of its designated target. In addition, the pilots of the Avro Vulcan or Handley Page Victor bombers could tie their systems into those of the missile and make use of the guidance system to help plot their own flight plan, since the unit in the missile was more advanced than that in the aircraft.

Blue Steel emerged as a pilotless, winged aircraft roughly the size of the experimental Saunders-Roe SR.53 interceptor, with clipped delta wings and small canard foreplanes. It was powered by a two-chamber Armstrong Siddeley Stentor Mark 101 rocket engine, burning a combination of hydrogen peroxide and kerosene. The fuel was a considerable operational problem, because fuelling the missile before launch took nearly half an hour, and was quite hazardous.

On launch the rocket engine's first chamber developing 24000 lbf thrust would power the missile along a predetermined course to the target at around Mach 1.5. Once close to the target, the second chamber of the engine (6,000 lb) would accelerate the missile to Mach 3. Over the target the engine would cut out and the missile would free-fall before detonating its warhead as an air burst.

To speed the trials at Woomera, the test rounds were flown there by Victors and Vulcans in Operation Blue Ranger. The trials began in 1960 about the time the original requirement expected the weapon to be in service.

Blue Steel finally entered service in February 1963, being carried by Vulcans and Victors, although its limitations were already apparent. The short range of the missile meant that the V bombers were still vulnerable to enemy surface-to-air missiles. A replacement for Blue Steel, the Mark 2, was planned with increased range and a ramjet engine, but was cancelled in 1960 to minimise delays to the Mk.1. The UK sought to acquire the much longer-ranged United States Air Force AGM-48 Skybolt air-launched ballistic missile, and was greatly frustrated when that weapon was cancelled in late 1962.

Blue Steel required up to seven hours of launch preparation, and was highly unreliable; the Royal Air Force estimated in 1963 that half the missiles would fail to fire and would have to be dropped over their targets, contradicting their purpose of serving as standoff weapons. Even as it deployed Blue Steel, a high-altitude weapon, that year the government decided that because of anti-aircraft missiles' increasing effectiveness, V bombers would have to convert from high-altitude to low-altitude attacks. With no effective long-range weapon the original Blue Steel served on after a crash programme of minor modifications to permit a low-level launch at 1000 ft, even though its usefulness in a hot war was likely limited. A stop-gap weapon (WE.177B) was quickly produced to extend the life of the V-bomber force in the strategic role until the Polaris missile was deployed. This WE.177 laydown weapon supplemented the remaining modified Blue Steel missiles using a low-level penetration followed by a pop-up manoeuvre to release the weapon at 1000 ft Forty-eight live operational rounds were deployed on 48 Vulcan and Victor bombers plus a further five live rounds as operational spares. An additional four non-nuclear rounds were produced for various RAF requirements, and there were 16 other unspecified training rounds.

Blue Steel was officially retired on 31 December 1970, with the United Kingdom's strategic nuclear capacity passing to the submarine fleet.

==Operator==
; 
* Royal Air Force - (V bombers)

==Specifications==
* Length: 10.7 m
* Wingspan: 4 m
* Diameter: 1.22 m (48 in) minimum
* Launch Weight: 7270 lb
* Speed: Mach 2.3
* Ceiling: 21500 m
* Maximum Range: 240 km
* Guidance: Inertial
* CEP: ~100 metres
* Warhead: Red Snow thermonuclear (1.1 Mt)

==See also==
*Rainbow Codes
*AGM-28 Hound Dog
*Raduga Kh-22

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography

==External links==

*Video of Blue Steel in operation
*http://www.spaceuk.org/bsteel/bsteel.htm
*http://www.skomer.u-net.com/projects/bluesteel.htm
*Official history: RAF Nuclear Deterrent Forces: Author: Wynne. pps 201. 456. ISBN 0-11-772833-0. Publisher: HMSO, 1994.
*http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/world/uk/blue_steel.htm
*http://www.vectorsite.net/twcruz.html
*The Vulcan Gets New Striking Power an AVRO advertisement for the Vulcan from Flight in February 1959, showing the (still unnamed) Blue Steel.
*"Blue Steel And Its Engine" a 1960 Flight article on the Blue Steel



[[Branch Davidians]]

The Branch Davidians (also known as "The Branch") are a religious group that originated in 1955 from a schism in the Davidian Seventh-day Adventists ("Davidians"), a reform movement that began as an offshoot from the Seventh-day Adventist Church ("Adventists") around 1930. The majority of those who accepted the reform message had been disfellowshipped (removed from membership) from the Seventh-day Adventist Church because of aberrant teachings.

From its inception in 1930, the reform movement believed themselves to be living in a time when Bible prophecies of a final divine judgment were coming to pass as a prelude to Christ's second coming. The name "Branch Davidian" is most widely known for the Waco Siege of 1993 on their property (known as the Mount Carmel Center) near Waco, Texas. The 51-day siege, by the ATF, FBI, and Texas National Guard, resulted in the deaths of the Branch Davidians' leader, David Koresh, as well as 82 other Branch Davidian men, women, and children, and four ATF agents. 

== History ==
In 1929 Victor Houteff, a Bulgarian immigrant and a Seventh-day Adventist Sabbath School teacher in a local church in Southern California, claimed that he had a new message for the entire church. He presented this message in a book, Rod|The Shepherd's Rod: The 144,000A Call for Reformation]. The Adventist leadership rejected Houteff's message as contrary to the Adventists' basic teachings and disfellowshipped (removed from membership) Houteff and his followers. However, there was some controversy over the method the leadership took to disfellowship Houteff. For a historical view of the leadership's investigation of Houteff's teachings, see "The Great Controversy over the Shepherd's Rod" (Tract #7). 

In 1935 Houteff established his headquarters to the west of Waco, Texas. 

== Koresh group name controversy ==
By the time of the siege, Koresh had encouraged his followers to think of themselves as "students of the Seven Seals" rather than as "Branch Davidians." During the standoff one of his followers publicly announced that he wanted them to thereafter be identified by the name "Koreshians". "Mr. Ricks negotiator said today that Ms. Schroeder had told him that members of the sect, a renegade offshoot of Seventh-day Adventists, henceforth wanted to be known as Koreshians." By Robert Reinhold, Published: March 15, 1993 New York Times added. 

== See also ==
*Unintended Consequences (novel)

== References ==

== External links ==
* The General Association of Branch Davidian Seventh Day Adventists



[[Burwash Hall]]

Burwash dining hall viewed from Charles St.

Burwash Hall is the second oldest of the residence buildings at Toronto's Victoria College. Construction began in 1911 and was completed in 1913. It was named after Nathanael Burwash, a former president of Victoria. The building is an extravagant Neo-Gothic work with turrets, gargoyles, and battlements. The architect was Henry Sproatt.

The building is divided between the large dining hall in the northwest and the student residence proper. The residence area is divided into two sections. The Upper Houses, built in 1913, consist of four houses: North House, Middle House, Gate House, and South House. The Lower Houses were built in 1931 and were originally intended to house theology students at Emmanuel College, whose current building was opened the same year. Ryerson House, Nelles House, Caven House, Bowles-Gandier House are now mostly home to undergraduate arts and science students. The latter two are mostly reserved for students in the new Vic One Programme.

Famous residents of Burwash include Vincent Massey, Lester B. Pearson, Don Harron, and Donald Sutherland. The upper houses were gutted and renovated in 1995. The lower houses have only been partially upgraded. Before the renovations the entire building was all male, but now every house is co-ed.

Each Upper House consists of three floors. The lower floor contains a common room equipped with kitchen facilities, couches and a television. The upper floors each have their own kitchen and dining area. All except North House have a very high bathroom ratio, with Gate House being the best with nine washrooms for its twenty-eight residents. Upper Houses are divided between double rooms and singles, with about sixty percent of the population being in doubles.

The Lower Houses each have four floors, but are much narrower with each level having only four rooms. Each level also has its own kitchen, but these are much smaller than in the Upper Houses. The Lower Houses do have far larger and better fitted common rooms that are similar to the ones the Upper Houses had before the renovations. The rooms in the Lower Houses are also considered more luxurious with hardwood floors and large sizes. Rooms in the Lower Houses are more expensive, however. Until 2003 the Lower Houses were restricted to upper year students but with the double cohort of graduates from Ontario schools many of the rooms were transformed into doubles and now hold first years.

To the west the Upper Houses look out on the Vic Quad and the main Victoria College building across it. West of the Lower Houses is the new Lester B. Pearson Garden of Peace and International Understanding and the E.J. Pratt Library beyond it. From the eastern side of the building, the Upper Houses look out at Rowell Jackman Hall and the Lower Houses see the St. Michael's College residence of Elmsley. The only exception is the view from Gate House's tower that looks down St. Mary's Street.

The dining hall is perhaps the best known part of the building to outsiders. It is the University of Toronto's largest, holding some 250 students and sixteen large tables. Hanging on the western wall is Queen Victoria's burial flag, given to the college soon after her death. Under the flag is the high table where the professors and college administration lunch. Historically, the Upper Houses each had their own table. Gate sat in the southwest corner, Middle sat in the far northeast, South sat in the table to the west of Middle, while North sat to the west of the southeast corner. The only lower house to have had a designated table was Caven, in the northwest corner beside the alumni table. (Note that prior to the 1995 renovations, some of these houses, particularly North and Caven, 'traditionally' sat elsewhere)

==Gate House==
Gate House as viewed from the Victoria Quad.
Gate House is one of the four Upper Houses of the Burwash Hall residence. Until 2007, when Victoria administration made it co-ed, Gate House was one of the last remaining all-male residence building in the University of Toronto. The Gate House emblem is the Phoenix, visible in the bottom-right corner of the Victoria College insignia.

Gate House, with the rest of Upper Burwash, opened in 1913 and has held students every year since then except 1995, when it was renovated. As an all-male residence from 1913 to 2007 it held a number of unique traditions. For 20 years Gate House hosted an annual party called Novemberfest in the Burwash dining hall. The Victoria Dean of Students cancelled Novemberfest in 2003, when police discovered widespread underage drinking and over 800 people in the dining hall, in violation of the fire code. Another Gate House tradition that no longer occurs is the "stirring the chicken," a dinner and keg party where house members cook chicken fajitas for hundreds of guests. Until 2007, Gate House held secretive first-year initiation ceremonies called Traditionals, which involved writing slogans on campus buildings in chalk, singing songs to the all-women's residence (who would then sing back to them), and leading first-years around the house blindfolded. Since Novemberfest, Gate House continued to have conflict with the Administration. In 2004 the Dean evicted three Gate House residents for allegedly "hog-tying" a first-year student. In 2007 President Paul W. Gooch wrote that Gate House undertook an "escalating series of actions" that were "defiant" and "disparaging of women", in response to Gate members constructing a 2.5-metre snow penis and placing a cooked pig's head in an Annesley bathroom. As punishment, during the fall exam period Gooch evicted two residents and relocated the remainder of Gate House to other places in the residence system, banned all current Gate House students from entering the building in 2008. Since this decision Gate House has become a co-ed residence identical to the other Upper Burwash houses. Notable residents of Gate House include Lester B. Pearson, former Prime Minister of Canada, and Simon Pulsifer, who Time Magazine nicknamed "The Duke of Data" for his contributions to Wikipedia. 
 

During its 93 years as a men's residence, Gate House developed a distinct character and reputation. These antics included pranks, toga parties, streaking, caroling to other residences, hazing rituals, "beer bashes" and "incessant pounding" on the Gate House table in the dining hall. Paul Gooch wrote that these traditions gave Gate House an "ethos" that contradicted his vision of residence life. 

The all-male Gate House was known as a social centre and spirited, tight-knit community. According to Grayson Lee, who created the snow penis sculpture in 2007, most of its residents were "heartbroken" to leave. Former Gate House President Dave Ruhl commented that "the Gate House camaraderie is unique" and that living there was "one of the most important parts of the university experience" for many. 

The Reuters news agency nicknamed Gate House "U of T's Animal House" because Donald Sutherland's memories of its parties are said to have influenced the script of the 1978 movie. The Toronto Star described Gooch's decision to put an end to its traditions, activities and distinguishing characteristics as "neutering Animal House." 

Gate House has three floors which house 28 students, as well as a don and the Victoria College Residence Life Co-ordinator. Above the gate there is a tower that rises three stories higher and has a turret-style roof. The tower is locked during the school year and entering it is a Level 4 offense under the Victoria residence agreement for which the punishment is eviction from residence.

The first floor has one double room and one bathroom available to students. About half of the floor is taken up by the apartment of the Residence Life Coordinator. Lastly, on the first floor there is a house common room with a kitchen and two couches. The second floor has three double rooms and seven single rooms. It has three single washrooms and one larger communal one, as well as its own kitchen. This floor is home to the residence don, who has a larger room with a private washroom. The third floor is identical to the second except that in place of the don's room there are two single rooms.

Past Presidents of Gate House Include:
*2011 Laura Crowe (First female president)
*2010 Greg Racz
*2009 Amreet Sidhu
*2008 Travis Jeffery
*2008 Alizain Hirji (Impeached by the Council of Residence Presidents at Vic in 2009)
*2007 John Duncan Edwards 
*2007 Chris Hummel (Evicted on October 5 by the Dean of Students)
*2006 David Ruhl
*2005 Adam Thom
*2004 Trevor Hill
*2003 Jonathan "1080" Bedley
*2002 Matt Stockburn
*2001 Tafari Mbadiwe
*2000 Burt James
*1999 Jon Davies
*1998 Mike Warner
*1997 Lance "Beezer" Fukumoto
*1996 Neil Cheddie
*1995 None (closed for renovations)
*1994 Aidan Cunniffe
*1994 David Harkness (Evicted on September 1994 by the Dean of Students)
*1993 Nick Gieschen
*1992 Greg "El Presidente" Sarney
*1991 Stephan Mostowy
*1990 Darrel Cox
*1989 Bruce "Bastard" Landon
*1988 Terry Mark
*1987 Eric "Yogi" Krause
*1986 Scott Anderson
*1985 Rob Sephton
*198384 Vince Johnston
*198283 Fred Jones
*198182 Jamie Hunter
*1981 Vijit Coomaraswamy
*198081 Paul "Loaf" Gordon
*197980 Jonathan "Bert" Wardlaw

==References==



[[Benzodiazepine]]

A benzodiazepine (sometimes colloquially "benzo"; often abbreviated "BZD") is a psychoactive drug whose core chemical structure is the fusion of a benzene ring and a diazepine ring. The first such drug, chlordiazepoxide (Librium), was discovered accidentally by Leo Sternbach in 1955, and made available in 1960 by HoffmannLa Roche, which has also marketed the benzodiazepine diazepam (Valium) since 1963. 

Benzodiazepines enhance the effect of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) at the GABAA receptor, resulting in sedative, hypnotic (sleep-inducing), anxiolytic (anti-anxiety), anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant properties; also seen in the applied pharmacology of high doses of many shorter-acting benzodiazepines are amnesic-dissociative actions. These properties make benzodiazepines useful in treating anxiety, insomnia, agitation, seizures, muscle spasms, alcohol withdrawal and as a premedication for medical or dental procedures. Benzodiazepines are categorized as either short-, intermediate-, or long-acting. Short- and intermediate-acting benzodiazepines are preferred for the treatment of insomnia; longer-acting benzodiazepines are recommended for the treatment of anxiety. 

In general, benzodiazepines are safe and effective in the short term, although cognitive impairments and paradoxical effects such as aggression or behavioral disinhibition occasionally occur. A minority react reverse and contrary to what would normally be expected. For example, a state of panic may worsen considerably following intake of a benzodiazepine. Long-term use is controversial due to concerns about adverse psychological and physical effects, increased questioning of effectiveness, and, because benzodiazepines are prone to cause tolerance, physical dependence, and, upon cessation of use after long-term use, a withdrawal syndrome. Due to adverse effects associated with the long-term use of benzodiazepines, withdrawal from benzodiazepines, in general, leads to improved physical and mental health. The elderly are at an increased risk of suffering from both short- and long-term adverse effects, including an associated roughly 50% increase in the risk of dementia. 

There is controversy concerning the safety of benzodiazepines in pregnancy. While they are not major teratogens, uncertainty remains as to whether they cause cleft palate in a small number of babies and whether neurobehavioural effects occur as a result of prenatal exposure; they are known to cause withdrawal symptoms in the newborn. Benzodiazepines can be taken in overdoses and can cause dangerous deep unconsciousness. However, they are much less toxic than their predecessors, the barbiturates, and death rarely results when a benzodiazepine is the only drug taken; however, when combined with other central nervous system depressants such as alcohol and opiates, the potential for toxicity and fatal overdose increases. Benzodiazepines are commonly misused and taken in combination with other drugs of abuse. In addition, all benzodiazepines are listed in Beers List, which is significant in clinical practice.

==Medical uses==
Midazolam 1 & 5 mg/mL injections (US)

Benzodiazepines possess sedative, hypnotic, anxiolytic, anticonvulsant, muscle relaxant, and amnesic actions, which are useful in a variety of indications such as alcohol dependence, seizures, anxiety, panic, agitation, and insomnia. Most are administered orally; however, they can also be given intravenously, intramuscularly, or rectally. In general, benzodiazepines are well-tolerated and are safe and effective drugs in the short term for a wide range of conditions. Tolerance can develop to their effects and there is also a risk of dependence, and upon discontinuation a withdrawal syndrome may occur. These factors, combined with other possible secondary effects after prolonged use such as psychomotor, cognitive, or memory impairments, limit their long-term applicability. The effects of long-term use or misuse include the tendency to cause or worsen cognitive deficits, depression, and anxiety. 

===Panic disorder===
Due to their effectiveness, tolerability, and rapid onset of anxiolytic action, benzodiazepines are frequently used for the treatment of anxiety associated with panic disorder. However, there is disagreement among expert bodies regarding the long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder. The views range from those that hold that benzodiazepines are not effective long-term and that they should be reserved for treatment-resistant cases to that they are as effective in the long term as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. 

The American Psychiatric Association (APA) guidelines note that, in general, benzodiazepines are well tolerated, and their use for the initial treatment for panic disorder is strongly supported by numerous controlled trials. APA states that there is insufficient evidence to recommend any of the established panic disorder treatments over another. The choice of treatment between benzodiazepines, SSRIs, serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and psychotherapy should be based on the patient's history, preference, and other individual characteristics. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are likely to be the best choice of pharmacotherapy for many patients with panic disorder, but benzodiazepines are also often used, and some studies suggest that these medications are still used with greater frequency than the SSRIs. One advantage of benzodiazepines is that they alleviate the anxiety symptoms much faster than antidepressants, and therefore may be preferred in patients for whom rapid symptom control is critical. However, this advantage is offset by the possibility of developing benzodiazepine dependence. APA does not recommend benzodiazepines for persons with depressive symptoms or a recent history of substance abuse. The APA guidelines state that, in general, pharmacotherapy of panic disorder should be continued for at least a year, and that clinical experience support continuing benzodiazepine treatment to prevent recurrence. Although major concerns about benzodiazepine tolerance and withdrawal have been raised, there is no evidence for significant dose escalation in patients using benzodiazepines long-term. For many such patients stable doses of benzodiazepines retain their efficacy over several years. 

Guidelines issued by the UK-based National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), carried out a systematic review using different methodology and came to a different conclusion. They questioned the accuracy of studies that were not placebo-controlled. And, based on the findings of placebo-controlled studies, they do not recommend use of benzodiazepines beyond two to four weeks, as tolerance and physical dependence develop rapidly, with withdrawal symptoms including rebound anxiety occurring after six weeks or more of use. Nevertheless, benzodiazepines continue to be prescribed for the long-term treatment of anxiety disorders, although specific antidepressants and psychological therapies are recommended as the first-line treatment options with the anticonvulsant drug pregabalin indicated as a second- or third-line treatment and suitable for long-term use. NICE stated that long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia is an unlicensed indication, does not have long-term efficacy, and is, therefore, not recommended by clinical guidelines. Psychological therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy are recommended as a first-line therapy for panic disorder; benzodiazepine use has been found to interfere with therapeutic gains from these therapies. 

Benzodiazepines are usually administered orally; however, very occasionally lorazepam or diazepam may be given intravenously for the treatment of panic attacks. 

===Generalized anxiety disorder===
Benzodiazepines have robust efficacy in the short-term management of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), but were not shown to be effective in producing long-term improvement overall. According to National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), benzodiazepines can be used in the immediate management of GAD, if necessary. However, they should not usually be given for longer than 24 weeks. The only medications NICE recommends for the longer term management of GAD are antidepressants. 

Likewise, Canadian Psychiatric Association (CPA) recommends benzodiazepines alprazolam, bromazepam, lorazepam, and diazepam only as a second-line choice, if the treatment with two different antidepressants was unsuccessful. Although they are second-line agents, benzodiazepines can be used for a limited time to relieve severe anxiety and agitation. CPA guidelines note that after 46 weeks the effect of benzodiazepines may decrease to the level of placebo, and that benzodiazepines are less effective than antidepressants in alleviating ruminative worry, the core symptom of GAD. However, in some cases, a prolonged treatment with benzodiazepines as the add-on to an antidepressant may be justified. 

===Insomnia===
Normison (temazepam) 10 mg tablets

Benzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia. Their use beyond 2 to 4 weeks is not recommended due to the risk of dependence. It is preferred that benzodiazepines be taken intermittently and at the lowest effective dose. They improve sleep-related problems by shortening the time spent in bed before falling asleep, prolonging the sleep time, and, in general, reducing wakefulness. 

However, they worsen sleep quality by increasing light sleep and decreasing deep sleep. Other drawbacks of hypnotics, including benzodiazepines, are possible tolerance to their effects, rebound insomnia, and reduced slow-wave sleep and a withdrawal period typified by rebound insomnia and a prolonged period of anxiety and agitation. The list of benzodiazepines approved for the treatment of insomnia is fairly similar among most countries, but which benzodiazepines are officially designated as first-line hypnotics prescribed for the treatment of insomnia can vary distinctly between countries. Longer-acting benzodiazepines such as nitrazepam and diazepam have residual effects that may persist into the next day and are, in general, not recommended. 

It is not clear as to whether the new nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (Z-drugs) are better than the short-acting benzodiazepines. The efficacy of these two groups of medications is similar. According to the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, indirect comparison indicates that side-effects from benzodiazepines may be about twice as frequent as from nonbenzodiazepines. Some experts suggest using nonbenzodiazepines preferentially as a first-line long-term treatment of insomnia. However, the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence did not find any convincing evidence in favor of Z-drugs. NICE review pointed out that short-acting Z-drugs were inappropriately compared in clinical trials with long-acting benzodiazepines. There have been no trials comparing short-acting Z-drugs with appropriate doses of short-acting benzodiazepines. Based on this, NICE recommended choosing the hypnotic based on cost and the patient's preference. 

Older adults should not use benzodiazepines to treat insomnia unless other treatments have failed to be effective. , which cites
*
*
* When benzodiazepines are used, patients, their caretakers, and their physician should discuss the increased risk of harms, including evidence which shows twice the incidence of traffic collisions among driving patients as well as falls and hip fracture for all older patients. 

===Seizures===
Prolonged convulsive epileptic seizures are a medical emergency that can usually be dealt with effectively by administering fast-acting benzodiazepines, which are potent anticonvulsants. In a hospital environment, intravenous clonazepam, lorazepam, and diazepam are first-line choices, clonazepam due to its stronger and more potent anticonvulsant action, lorazepam due to its faster onset and diazepam for its longer duration of action. In the community, intravenous administration is not practical and so rectal diazepam or (more recently) buccal midazolam are used, with a preference for midazolam as its administration is easier and more socially acceptable. 

When benzodiazepines were first introduced, they were enthusiastically adopted for treating all forms of epilepsy. However, drowsiness and tolerance become problems with continued use and none are now considered first-line choices for long-term epilepsy therapy. Clobazam is widely used by specialist epilepsy clinics worldwide and clonazepam is popular in the Netherlands, Belgium and France. It was approved for use in the United States in 2011. In the UK, both clobazam and clonazepam are second-line choices for treating many forms of epilepsy. Clobazam also has a useful role for very short-term seizure prophylaxis and in catamenial epilepsy. Discontinuation after long term use in epilepsy requires additional caution because of the risks of rebound seizures. Therefore, the dose is slowly tapered over a period of up to six months or longer. 

===Alcohol withdrawal===
Chlordiazepoxide is the most commonly used benzodiazepine for alcohol detoxification, but diazepam may be used as an alternative. Both are used in the detoxification of individuals who are motivated to stop drinking, and are prescribed for a short period of time to reduce the risks of developing tolerance and dependence to the benzodiazepine medication itself. The benzodiazepines with a longer half-life make detoxification more tolerable, and dangerous alcohol withdrawal effects are less likely to occur. On the other hand, short-acting benzodiazepines may lead to breakthrough seizures, and are, therefore, not recommended for detoxification in an outpatient setting. Oxazepam and lorazepam are often used in patients at risk of drug accumulation, in particular, the elderly and those with cirrhosis, because they are metabolized differently from other benzodiazepines, through conjugation. 

Benzodiazepines are the preferred choice in the management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome, in particular, for the prevention and treatment of the dangerous complication of seizures and in subduing severe delirium. Lorazepam is the only benzodiazepine with predictable intramuscular absorption and it is the most effective in preventing and controlling acute seizures. 

===Anxiety===
Benzodiazepines are sometimes used in the treatment of acute anxiety, as they bring about rapid and marked or moderate relief of symptoms in most individuals; however, they are not recommended beyond 24 weeks of use due to risks of tolerance and dependence and a lack of long-term effectiveness. As for insomnia, they may also be used on an irregular/"as-needed" basis, such as in cases where said anxiety is at its worst. Compared to other pharmacological treatments, benzodiazepines are twice as likely to lead to a relapse of the underlying condition upon discontinuation. Psychological therapies and other pharmacological therapies are recommended for the long-term treatment of generalised anxiety disorder. Antidepressants have higher remission rates and are, in general, safe and effective in the short and long term. 

===Other indications===
Benzodiazepines are often prescribed for a wide range of conditions:
* They can be very useful in intensive care to sedate patients receiving mechanical ventilation or those in extreme distress. Caution is exercised in this situation due to the occasional occurrence of respiratory depression, and it is recommended that benzodiazepine overdose treatment facilities should be available. 
* Benzodiazepines are effective as medication given a couple of hours before surgery to relieve anxiety. They also produce amnesia, which can be useful, as patients will not be able to remember any unpleasantness from the procedure. They are also used in patients with dental phobia as well as some ophthalmic procedures like refractive surgery; although such use is controversial and only recommended for those who are very anxious. Midazolam is the most commonly prescribed for this use because of its strong sedative actions and fast recovery time, as well as its water solubility, which reduces pain upon injection. Diazepam and lorazepam are sometimes used. Lorazepam has particularly marked amnesic properties that may make it more effective when amnesia is the desired effect. 
* Benzodiazepines are well known for their strong muscle-relaxing properties and can be useful in the treatment of muscle spasms, although tolerance often develops to their muscle relaxant effects. Baclofen or tizanidine are sometimes used as an alternative to benzodiazepines. Tizanidine has been found to have superior tolerability compared to diazepam and baclofen. 
* Benzodiazepines are also used to treat the acute panic caused by hallucinogen intoxication. Benzodiazepines are also used to calm the acutely agitated individual and can, if required, be given via an intramuscular injection. They can sometimes be effective in the short-term treatment of psychiatric emergencies such as acute psychosis as in schizophrenia or mania, bringing about rapid tranquillization and sedation until the effects of lithium or neuroleptics (antipsychotics) take effect. Lorazepam is most commonly used but clonazepam is sometimes prescribed for acute psychosis or mania; their long-term use is not recommended due to risks of dependence. 
* Clonazepam, a benzodiazepine is used to treat many forms of parasomnia. Rapid eye movement behavior disorder responds well to low doses of clonazepam. Restless legs syndrome can be treated using clonazepam as a third line treatment option as the use of clonazepam is still investigational. 
* Benzodiazepines are sometimes used for obsessive compulsive disorder, although they are generally believed to be ineffective for this indication; effectiveness was, however, found in one small study. Benzodiazepines can be considered as a treatment option in treatment resistant cases. 
* Antipsychotics are generally a first-line treatment for delirium; however, when delirium is caused by alcohol or sedative hypnotic withdrawal, benzodiazepines are a first-line treatment. 
* There is some evidence that low doses of benzodiazepines reduce adverse effects of electroconvulsive therapy. 

==Adverse effects==

The most common side-effects of benzodiazepines are related to their sedating and muscle-relaxing action. They include drowsiness, dizziness, and decreased alertness and concentration. Lack of coordination may result in falls and injuries, in particular, in the elderly. Another result is impairment of driving skills and increased likelihood of road traffic accidents. Decreased libido and erection problems are a common side effect. Depression and disinhibition may emerge. Hypotension and suppressed breathing may be encountered with intravenous use. Less common side effects include nausea and changes in appetite, blurred vision, confusion, euphoria, depersonalization and nightmares. Cases of liver toxicity have been described but are very rare. 

===Paradoxical effects===
Paradoxical reactions, such as increased seizures in epileptics, aggression, violence, impulsivity, irritability and suicidal behavior sometimes occur. These reactions have been explained as consequences of disinhibition and the subsequent loss of control over socially unacceptable behavior. Paradoxical reactions are rare in the general population, with an incidence rate below 1% and similar to placebo. However, they occur with greater frequency in recreational abusers, individuals with borderline personality disorder, children, and patients on high-dosage regimes. In these groups, impulse control problems are perhaps the most important risk factor for disinhibition; learning disabilities and neurological disorders are also significant risks. Most reports of disinhibition involve high doses of high-potency benzodiazepines. Paradoxical effects may also appear after chronic use of benzodiazepines. 

===Cognitive effects===
The short-term use of benzodiazepines adversely affects multiple areas of cognition, the most notable one being that it interferes with the formation and consolidation of memories of new material and may induce complete anterograde amnesia. However, researchers hold contrary opinions regarding the effects of long-term administration. One view is that many of the short-term effects continue into the long-term and may even worsen, and are not resolved after quitting benzodiazepines. Another view maintains that cognitive deficits in chronic benzodiazepine users occur only for a short period after the dose, or that the anxiety disorder is the cause of these deficits.

While the definitive studies are lacking, the former view received support from a 2004 meta-analysis of 13 small studies. This meta-analysis found that long-term use of benzodiazepines was associated with moderate to large adverse effects on all areas of cognition, with visuospatial memory being the most commonly detected impairment. Some of the other impairments reported were decreased IQ, visiomotor coordination, information processing, verbal learning and concentration. The authors of the meta-analysis and a later reviewer noted that the applicability of this meta-analysis is limited because the subjects were taken mostly from withdrawal clinics; the coexisting drug, alcohol use, and psychiatric disorders were not defined; and several of the included studies conducted the cognitive measurements during the withdrawal period.

===Long-term effects===
The long-term effects of benzodiazepine use can include cognitive impairment as well as affective and behavioural problems. Feelings of turmoil, difficulty in thinking constructively, loss of sex-drive, agoraphobia and social phobia, increasing anxiety and depression, loss of interest in leisure pursuits and interests, and an inability to experience or express feelings can also occur. Not everyone, however, experiences problems with long-term use. Additionally an altered perception of self, environment and relationships may occur. 

===Withdrawal syndrome===
Diazepam 2 mg and 5 mg diazepam tablets, which are commonly used in the treatment of benzodiazepine withdrawal.

====Tolerance, dependence and withdrawal====
The main problem of the chronic use of benzodiazepines is the development of tolerance and dependence. Tolerance manifests itself as diminished pharmacological effect and develops relatively quickly to the sedative, hypnotic, anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant actions of benzodiazepines. Tolerance to anti-anxiety effects develops more slowly with little evidence of continued effectiveness beyond four to six months of continued use. In general, tolerance to the amnesic effects does not occur. However, controversy exists as to tolerance to the anxiolytic effects with some evidence that benzodiazepines retain efficacy and opposing evidence from a systematic review of the literature that tolerance frequently occurs and some evidence that anxiety may worsen with long-term use. The question of tolerance to the amnesic effects of benzodiazepines is, likewise, unclear. Some evidence suggests that partial tolerance does develop, and "the memory impairment is limited to a narrow window within 90 minutes after each dose". 

Discontinuation of benzodiazepines or abrupt reduction of the dose, even after a relatively short course of treatment (three to four weeks), may result in two groups of symptoms  rebound and withdrawal. Rebound symptoms are the return of the symptoms for which the patient was treated but worse than before. Withdrawal symptoms are the new symptoms that occur when the benzodiazepine is stopped. They are the main sign of physical dependence. 

====Withdrawal symptoms and management====
Chlordiazepoxide 5 mg capsules, which are sometimes used as an alternative to diazepam for benzodiazepine withdrawal. Like diazepam it has a long elimination half-life and long-acting active metabolites.

The most frequent symptoms of withdrawal from benzodiazepines are insomnia, gastric problems, tremors, agitation, fearfulness, and muscle spasms. The less frequent effects are irritability, sweating, depersonalization, derealization, hypersensitivity to stimuli, depression, suicidal behavior, psychosis, seizures, and delirium tremens. Severe symptoms usually occur as a result of abrupt or over-rapid withdrawal. Abrupt withdrawal can be dangerous, therefore a gradual reduction regimen is recommended. 

Symptoms may also occur during a gradual dosage reduction, but are typically less severe and may persist as part of a protracted withdrawal syndrome for months after cessation of benzodiazepines. Approximately 10% of patients will experience a notable protracted withdrawal syndrome, which can persist for many months or in some cases a year or longer. Protracted symptoms tend to resemble those seen during the first couple of months of withdrawal but usually are of a sub acute level of severity. Such symptoms do gradually lessen over time, eventually disappearing altogether. 

Benzodiazepines have a reputation with patients and doctors for causing a severe and traumatic withdrawal; however, this is in large part due to the withdrawal process being poorly managed. Over-rapid withdrawal from benzodiazepines increases the severity of the withdrawal syndrome and increases the failure rate. A slow and gradual withdrawal customised to the individual and, if indicated, psychological support is the most effective way of managing the withdrawal. Opinion as to the time needed to complete withdrawal ranges from four weeks to several years. A goal of less than six months has been suggested, but due to factors such as dosage and type of benzodiazepine, reasons for prescription, lifestyle, personality, environmental stresses, and amount of available support, a year or more may be needed to withdraw. 

Withdrawal is best managed by transferring the physically dependent patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam because it has the longest half-life of all of the benzodiazepines, is metabolised into long-acting active metabolites and is available in low-potency tablets, which can be quartered for smaller doses. A further benefit is that it is available in liquid form, which allows for even smaller reductions. Chlordiazepoxide, which also has a long half-life and long-acting active metabolites, can be used as an alternative. 

Nonbenzodiazepines are contraindicated during benzodiazepine withdrawal as they are cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and can induce dependence. Alcohol is also cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and more toxic and thus caution is needed to avoid replacing one dependence with another. During withdrawal, fluoroquinolone-based antibiotics are best avoided if possible; they displace benzodiazepines from their binding site and reduce GABA function and, thus, may aggravate withdrawal symptoms. Antipsychotics are not recommended for benzodiazepine withdrawal (or other CNS depressant withdrawal states) especially clozapine, olanzapine or low potency phenothiazines e.g. chlorpromazine as they lower the seizure threshold and can worsen withdrawal effects; if used extreme caution is required. 

Withdrawal from long term benzodiazepines is beneficial for most individuals. Withdrawal of benzodiazepines from long-term users, in general, leads to improved physical and mental health particularly in the elderly; although some long term users report continued benefit from taking benzodiazepines, this may be the result of suppression of withdrawal effects. 

==Overdose==
The use of flumazenil is controversial following benzodiazepine overdose.

Although benzodiazepines are much safer in overdose than their predecessors, the barbiturates, they can still cause problems in overdose. Taken alone, they rarely cause severe complications in overdose; statistics in England showed that benzodiazepines were responsible for 3.8% of all deaths by poisoning from a single drug. However, combining these drugs with alcohol, opiates or tricyclic antidepressants markedly raises the toxicity. The elderly are more sensitive to the side effects of benzodiazepines, and poisoning may even occur from their long-term use. The various benzodiazepines differ in their toxicity; temazepam appears to be most toxic in overdose and when used with other drugs. The symptoms of a benzodiazepine overdose may include; drowsiness, slurred speech, nystagmus, hypotension, ataxia, coma, respiratory depression, and cardiorespiratory arrest. 

A reversal agent for benzodiazepines exists, flumazenil (Anexate). Its use as an antidote is not routinely recommended due to the high risk of resedation and seizures. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 326 patients, 4 patients suffered serious adverse events and 61% became resedated following the use of flumazenil. Numerous contraindications to its use exist. It is contraindicated in patients with a history of long-term use of benzodiazepines, those having ingested a substance that lowers the seizure threshold or may cause an arrhythmia, and in those with abnormal vital signs. One study found that only 10% of the patient population presenting with a benzodiazepine overdose are suitable candidates for treatment with flumazenil. 

==Contraindications==
Because of their muscle relaxant action, benzodiazepines may cause respiratory depression in susceptible individuals. For that reason, they are contraindicated in people with myasthenia gravis, sleep apnea, bronchitis, and COPD. Caution is required when benzodiazepines are used in people with personality disorders or intellectual disability because of frequent paradoxical reactions. In major depression, they may precipitate suicidal tendencies and are sometimes used for suicidal overdoses. Individuals with a history of alcohol, opioid and barbiturate abuse should avoid benzodiazepines, as there is a risk of life-threatening interactions with these drugs. 

===Pregnancy===

In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration has categorized benzodiazepines into either category D or X meaning potential for harm in the unborn has been demonstrated. 

Exposure to benzodiazepines during pregnancy has been associated with a slightly increased (from 0.06 to 0.07%) risk of cleft palate in newborns, a controversial conclusion as some studies find no association between benzodiazepines and cleft palate. Their use by expectant mothers shortly before the delivery may result in a floppy infant syndrome, with the newborns suffering from hypotonia, hypothermia, lethargy, and breathing and feeding difficulties. Cases of neonatal withdrawal syndrome have been described in infants chronically exposed to benzodiazepines in utero. This syndrome may be hard to recognize, as it starts several days after delivery, for example, as late as 21 day for chlordiazepoxide. The symptoms include tremors, hypertonia, hyperreflexia, hyperactivity, and vomiting and may last for up to three to six months. Tapering down the dose during pregnancy may lessen its severity. If used in pregnancy, those benzodiazepines with a better and longer safety record, such as diazepam or chlordiazepoxide, are recommended over potentially more harmful benzodiazepines, such as temazepam Temazepam-Rxlist Pregnancy Category@ or triazolam. Using the lowest effective dose for the shortest period of time minimizes the risks to the unborn child. 

===Elderly===
The benefits of benzodiazepines are least and the risks are greatest in the elderly. The elderly are at an increased risk of dependence and are more sensitive to the adverse effects such as memory problems, daytime sedation, impaired motor coordination, and increased risk of motor vehicle accidents and falls, and an increased risk of hip fractures. The long-term effects of benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine dependence in the elderly can resemble dementia, depression, or anxiety syndromes, and progressively worsens over time. Adverse effects on cognition can be mistaken for the effects of old age. The benefits of withdrawal include improved cognition, alertness, mobility, reduced risk incontinence, and a reduced risk of falls and fractures. The success of gradual-tapering benzodiazepines is as great in the elderly as in younger people. Benzodiazepines should be prescribed to the elderly only with caution and only for a short period at low doses. Short to intermediate-acting benzodiazepines are preferred in the elderly such as oxazepam and temazepam. The high potency benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam and long-acting benzodiazepines are not recommended in the elderly due to increased adverse effects. Nonbenzodiazepines such as zaleplon and zolpidem and low doses of sedating antidepressants are sometimes used as alternatives to benzodiazepines. 

Long-term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment, but its relationship with dementia remains inconclusive. The association of a past history of benzodiazepine use and cognitive decline is unclear, with some studies reporting a lower risk of cognitive decline in former users, some finding no association and some indicating an increased risk of cognitive decline. 

Benzodiazepines are sometimes prescribed to treat behavioral symptoms of dementia. However, like antidepressants, they have little evidence of effectiveness, although antipsychotics have shown some benefit. Cognitive impairing effects of benzodiazepines that occur frequently in the elderly can also worsen dementia. A 2012 study concludes that new use of benzodiazepine by persons 65 and over is associated with an approximately 50% increase in the risk of dementia. 

==Pharmacology==
Benzodiazepines share a similar chemical structure, and their effects in humans are mainly produced by the allosteric modification of a specific kind of neurotransmitter receptor, the GABAA receptor, which increases the overall conductance of these inhibitory channels; this results in the various therapeutic effects as well as adverse effects of benzodiazepines. Other less important mechanisms of action are also known. 

===Types of benzodiazepines===
* 2-keto compounds:
::chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, diazepam, flurazepam, halazepam, prazepam, and others. 
* 3-hydroxy compounds:
::lorazepam, lormetazepam, oxazepam, temazepam 
* 7-nitro compounds:
::clonazepam, flunitrazepam, nimetazepam, nitrazepam 
* Triazolo compounds:
::adinazolam, alprazolam, estazolam, triazolam 
* Imidazo compounds
::climazolam, loprazolam, midazolam 

===Chemistry===
Left: The 1,4-benzodiazepine ring system. Right: 5-phenyl-1H-benzodiazepin-2(3H)-one forms the skeleton of many of the most common benzodiazepine pharmaceuticals, such as diazepam (7-chloro-1-methyl substituted).
A pharmacophore model of the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABAA receptor. White sticks represent the carbon atoms of the benzodiazepine diazepam, while green represents carbon atoms of the nonbenzodiazepine CGS-9896. Red and blue sticks are oxygen and nitrogen atoms that are present in both structures. The red spheres labeled H1 and H2/A3 are, respectively, hydrogen bond donating and accepting sites in the receptor, while L1, L2, and L3 denote lipophilic binding sites.

The term benzodiazepine is the chemical name for the heterocyclic ring system (see figure to the right), which is a fusion between the benzene and diazepine ring systems. ; Under HantzschWidman nomenclature, a diazepine is a heterocycle with two nitrogen atoms, five carbon atom and the maximum possible number of cumulative double bonds. The "benzo" prefix indicates the benzene ring fused onto the diazepine ring. 

Benzodiazepine drugs are substituted 1,4-benzodiazepines, although the chemical term can refer to many other compounds that do not have useful pharmacological properties. Different benzodiazepine drugs have different side groups attached to this central structure. The different side groups affect the binding of the molecule to the GABAA receptor and so modulate the pharmacological properties. Many of the pharmacologically active "classical" benzodiazepine drugs contain the 5-phenyl-1H-benzodiazepin-2(3H)-one substructure (see figure to the right). CAS registry number:; other names: Ro 05-2921, dechlorodemethyldiazepam. Benzodiazepines have been found to mimic protein reverse turns structurally which enable them with their biological activity in many cases., 

Nonbenzodiazepines also bind to the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABAA receptor and possess similar pharmacological properties. While the nonbenzodiazepines are by definition structurally unrelated to the benzodiazepines, both classes of drugs possess a common pharmacophore (see figure to the lower-right), which explains their binding to a common receptor site. 

===Mechanism of action===
Schematic diagram of the (1)2(2)2(2) GABAA receptor complex that depicts the five-protein subunits that form the receptor, the chloride (Cl-) ion channel pore at the center, the two GABA active binding sites at the 1 and 2 interfaces and the benzodiazepine (BZD) allosteric binding site at the 1 and 2 interface.

Benzodiazepines work by increasing the efficiency of a natural brain chemical, GABA, to decrease the excitability of neurons. This reduces the communication between neurons and, therefore, has a calming effect on many of the functions of the brain.

GABA controls the excitability of neurons by binding to the GABAA receptor. The GABAA receptor is a protein complex located in the synapses of neurons. All GABAA receptors contain an ion channel that conducts chloride ions across neuronal cell membranes and two binding sites for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), while a subset of GABAA receptor complexes also contain a single binding site for benzodiazepines. Binding of benzodiazepines to this receptor complex does not alter binding of GABA. Unlike other positive allosteric modulators that increases ligand binding, benzodiazepine binding acts as a positive allosteric modulator by increasing the total conduction of chloride ions across the neuronal cell membrane when GABA is already bound to its receptor. This increased chloride ion influx hyperpolarizes the neuron's membrane potential. As a result, the difference between resting potential and threshold potential is increased and firing is less likely.
Different GABAA receptor subtypes have varying distributions within different regions of the brain and, therefore, control distinct neuronal circuits. Hence, activation of different GABAA receptor subtypes by benzodiazepines may result in distinct pharmacological actions. In terms of the mechanism of action of benzodiazepines, their similarities are too great to separate them into individual categories such as anxiolytic or hypnotic. For example, a hypnotic administered in low doses will produce anxiety-relieving effects, whereas a benzodiazepine marketed as an anti-anxiety drug will at higher doses induce sleep. 

The subset of GABAA receptors that also bind benzodiazepines are referred to as benzodiazepine receptors (BzR). The GABAA receptor is a heteromer composed of five subunits, the most common ones being two s, two s, and one  (22). For each subunit, many subtypes exist (16, 13, and 13). GABAA receptors that are made up of different combinations of subunit subtypes have different properties, different distributions in the brain and different activities relative to pharmacological and clinical effects. Benzodiazepines bind at the interface of the  and  subunits on the GABAA receptor. Binding also requires that alpha subunits contain a histidine amino acid residue, (i.e., 1, 2, 3, and 5 containing GABAA receptors). For this reason, benzodiazepines show no affinity for GABAA receptors containing 4 and 6 subunits with an arginine instead of a histidine residue. Once bound to the benzodiazepine receptor, the benzodiazepine ligand locks the benzodiazepine receptor into a conformation in which it has a greater affinity for the GABA neurotransmitter. This increases the frequency of the opening of the associated chloride ion channel and hyperpolarizes the membrane of the associated neuron. The inhibitory effect of the available GABA is potentiated, leading to sedatory and anxiolytic effects. For instance, those ligands with high activity at the 1 are associated with stronger hypnotic effects, whereas those with higher affinity for GABAA receptors containing 2 and/or 3 subunits have good anti-anxiety activity. 
 
The benzodiazepine class of drugs also interact with peripheral benzodiazepine receptors. Peripheral benzodiazepine receptors are present in peripheral nervous system tissues, glial cells, and to a lesser extent the central nervous system. These peripheral receptors are not structurally related or coupled to GABAA receptors. They modulate the immune system and are involved in the body response to injury. Benzodiazepines also function as weak adenosine reuptake inhibitors. It has been suggested that some of their anticonvulsant, anxiolytic, and muscle relaxant effects may be in part mediated by this action. 

==Pharmacokinetics==

 Benzodiazepine Half-life (range, h) Speed of Onset 
 Alprazolam 1215 Intermediate 
 Chlordiazepoxide 1030 Intermediate 
 Clonazepam 1850 Slow 
 Diazepam 2080 Fast 
 Lorazepam 1020 Intermediate 
 Oxazepam 510 Slow 
 Prazepam 50200 Slow 
 
A benzodiazepine can be placed into one of three groups by its elimination half-life, or time it takes for the body to eliminate half of the dose. Some benzodiazepines have long-acting active metabolites, such as diazepam and chlordiazepoxide, which are metabolised into desmethyldiazepam. Desmethyldiazepam has a half-life of 36200 hours, and flurazepam, with the main active metabolite of desalkylflurazepam, with a half-life of 40250 hours. These long-acting metabolites are partial agonists. 
* Short-acting compounds have a median half-life of 112 hours. They have few residual effects if taken before bedtime, rebound insomnia may occur upon discontinuation, and they might cause daytime withdrawal symptoms such as next day rebound anxiety with prolonged usage. Examples are brotizolam, midazolam, and triazolam.
* Intermediate-acting compounds have a median half-life of 1240 hours. They may have some residual effects in the first half of the day if used as a hypnotic. Rebound insomnia, however, is more common upon discontinuation of intermediate-acting benzodiazepines than longer-acting benzodiazepines. Examples are alprazolam, estazolam, flunitrazepam, clonazepam, lormetazepam, lorazepam, nitrazepam, and temazepam.
* Long-acting compounds have a half-life of 40250 hours. They have a risk of accumulation in the elderly and in individuals with severely impaired liver function, but they have a reduced severity of rebound effects and withdrawal. Examples are diazepam, clorazepate, chlordiazepoxide, and flurazepam.

==Interactions==
Individual benzodiazepines may have different interactions with certain drugs. Depending on their metabolism pathway, benzodiazepines can be divided roughly into two groups. The largest group consists of those that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes and possess significant potential for interactions with other drugs. The other group comprises those that are metabolized through glucuronidation, such as lorazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam, and, in general, have few drug interactions. 

Many drugs, including oral contraceptives, some antibiotics, antidepressants, and antifungal agents, inhibit cytochrome enzymes in the liver. They reduce the rate of elimination of the benzodiazepines that are metabolized by CYP450, leading to possibly excessive drug accumulation and increased side-effects. In contrast, drugs that induce cytochrome P450 enzymes, such as St John's wort, the antibiotic rifampicin, and the anticonvulsants carbamazepine and phenytoin, accelerate elimination of many benzodiazepines and decrease their action. Taking benzodiazepines with alcohol, opioids and other central nervous system depressants potentiates their action. This often results in increased sedation, impaired motor coordination, suppressed breathing, and other adverse effects that have potential to be lethal. Antacids can slow down absorption of some benzodiazepines; however, this effect is marginal and inconsistent. 

==History==
The molecular structure of chlordiazepoxide, the first benzodiazepine. It was marketed by HoffmannLa Roche from 1960 branded as Librium.

The first benzodiazepine, chlordiazepoxide (Librium), was synthesized in 1955 by Leo Sternbach while working at HoffmannLa Roche on the development of tranquilizers. The pharmacological properties of the compounds prepared initially were disappointing, and Sternbach abandoned the project. Two years later, in April 1957, co-worker Earl Reeder noticed a "nicely crystalline" compound left over from the discontinued project while spring-cleaning in the lab. This compound, later named chlordiazepoxide, had not been tested in 1955 because of Sternbach's focus on other issues. Expecting the pharmacology results to be negative and hoping to publish the chemistry-related findings, researchers submitted it for a standard battery of animal tests. However, the compound showed very strong sedative, anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant effects. These impressive clinical findings led to its speedy introduction throughout the world in 1960 under the brand name Librium. Following chlordiazepoxide, diazepam marketed by HoffmannLa Roche under the brand name Valium in 1963, and for a while the two were the most commercially successful drugs. The introduction of benzodiazepines led to a decrease in the prescription of barbiturates, and by the 1970s they had largely replaced the older drugs for sedative and hypnotic uses. 

The new group of drugs was initially greeted with optimism by the medical profession, but gradually concerns arose; in particular, the risk of dependence became evident in the 1980s. Benzodiazepines have a unique history in that they were responsible for the largest-ever class-action lawsuit against drug manufacturers in the United Kingdom, involving 14,000 patients and 1,800 law firms that alleged the manufacturers knew of the dependence potential but intentionally withheld this information from doctors. At the same time, 117 general practitioners and 50 health authorities were sued by patients to recover damages for the harmful effects of dependence and withdrawal. This led some doctors to require a signed consent form from their patients and to recommend that all patients be adequately warned of the risks of dependence and withdrawal before starting treatment with benzodiazepines. The court case against the drug manufacturers never reached a verdict; legal aid had been withdrawn and there were allegations that the consultant psychiatrists, the expert witnesses, had a conflict of interest. This litigation led to changes in the British law, making class action lawsuits more difficult. 

In 2010, formerly classified documents from a Medical Research Council (UK) meeting of experts emerged and revealed that the MRC was aware of research 30 years ago that suggested that benzodiazepines could cause brain damage in some people similar to that which occurs from alcohol abuse and failed to follow-up with larger clinical trials. The MRC turned down research proposals in the 1980s by Professor Lader and also proposals by Professor Ashton in 1995 to study whether benzodiazepines had permanent effects on the brain. The MRC responded that it has always been open to research proposals in this area that meet required standards. It was further alleged that the MRC documents were relevant to a large class-action lawsuit, which started in the mid-1980s against drug companies and one solicitor stated that it was strange that the MRC had 'hidden' the documents. Jim Dobbin, MP and chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Involuntary Tranquilliser Addiction, described the documents as a "huge scandal," given the large number of people who experience symptoms such as physical, cognitive, and psychological problems as a result of benzodiazepine use, which can persist even after withdrawing. 

Although antidepressants with anxiolytic properties have been introduced, and there is increasing awareness of the adverse effects of benzodiazepines, prescriptions for short-term anxiety relief have not significantly dropped. For treatment of insomnia, benzodiazepines are now less popular than nonbenzodiazepines, which include zolpidem, zaleplon and eszopiclone. Nonbenzodiazepines are molecularly distinct, but nonetheless, they work on the same benzodiazepine receptors and produce similar sedative effects. 

==Recreational use==
Xanax (alprazolam) 2 mg tri-score tablets

Benzodiazepines are considered to be major drugs of abuse. Benzodiazepine abuse is mostly limited to individuals who abuse other drugs, i.e., poly-drug abusers. On the international scene, benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV controlled drugs by the INCB, apart from flunitrazepam which is a Schedule III drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Some variation in drug scheduling exists in individual countries; for example, in the United Kingdom, midazolam and temazepam are Schedule III controlled drugs. British law requires temazepam (but not midazolam) to be stored in safe custody. Safe custody requirements ensures that pharmacists and doctors holding stock of temazepam must store it in securely fixed double-locked steel safety cabinets and maintain a written register, which must be bound and contain separate entries for temazepam and must be written in ink with no use of correction fluid (although a written register is not required for temazepam in the United Kingdom). Disposal of expired stock must be witnessed by a designated inspector (either a local drug-enforcement police officer or official from health authority). Home Office (2005). Explanatory memorandum to the misuse of drugs and the misuse of drugs (supply to addicts) (amendment) regulations 2005.No.2864. Accessed 201003 Benzodiazepine abuse ranges from occasional binges on large doses, to chronic and compulsive drug abuse of high doses. 

Benzodiazepines are used recreationally and by problematic drug misusers. Mortality is higher among poly-drug misusers that also use benzodiazepines. Heavy alcohol use also increases mortality among poly-drug users. Dependence and tolerance, often coupled with dosage escalation, to benzodiazepines can develop rapidly among drug misusers; withdrawal syndrome may appear after as little as three weeks of continuous use. Long-term use has the potential to cause both physical and psychological dependence and severe withdrawal symptoms such as depression, anxiety (often to the point of panic attacks), and agoraphobia. Benzodiazepines and, in particular, temazepam are sometimes used intravenously, which, if done incorrectly or in an unsterile manner, can lead to medical complications including abscesses, cellulitis, thrombophlebitis, arterial puncture, deep vein thrombosis, and gangrene. Sharing syringes and needles for this purpose also brings up the possibility of transmission of hepatitis, HIV, and other diseases. Benzodiazepines are also misused intranasally, which may have additional health consequences. Once benzodiazepine dependence has been established, a clinician usually converts the patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam before beginning a gradual reduction program. 

A 19992005 Australian police survey of detainees reported preliminary findings that self-reported users of benzodiazepines were less likely than non-user detainees to work full-time and more likely to receive government benefits, use methamphetamine or heroin, and be arrested or imprisoned. Benzodiazepines are sometimes used for criminal purposes; they serve to incapacitate a victim in cases of drug assisted rape or robbery. 

Overall, anecdotal evidence suggests that temazepam may be the most psychologically habit-forming (addictive) benzodiazepine. Temazepam abuse reached epidemic proportions in some parts of the world, in particular, in Europe and Australia, and is a major drug of abuse in many Southeast Asian countries. This led authorities of various countries to place temazepam under a more restrictive legal status. Some countries, such as Sweden, banned the drug outright. Temazepam also has certain pharmacokinetic properties of absorption, distribution, elimination, and clearance that make it more apt to abuse compared to many other benzodiazepines. 

==Veterinary use==
Benzodiazepines are used in veterinary practice in the treatment of various disorders and conditions. As in humans, they are used in the first-line management of seizures, status epilepticus, and tetanus, and as maintenance therapy in epilepsy (in particular, in cats). They are widely used in small and large animals (including horses, swine, cattle and exotic and wild animals) for their anxiolytic and sedative effects, as pre-medication before surgery, for induction of anesthesia and as adjuncts to anesthesia. 

==See also==

* Psycholeptic

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Benzodiazepines  information from mental health charity The Royal College of Psychiatrists
* 
* 

 



[[Bell curve]]

Bell curve may refer to:

* A Gaussian function, a specific kind of function whose graph is a bell-shaped curve
* Normal (Gaussian) distribution, whose density function is a Gaussian function
* The Bell Curve, a 1994 book by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray
* Bell curve grading, a method of evaluating scholastic performance



[[Body mass index]]

A graph of body mass index as a function of body mass and body height is shown above. The dashed lines represent subdivisions within a major class. For instance the "Underweight" classification is further divided into "severe", "moderate", and "mild" subclasses. 

The body mass index (BMI), or Quetelet index, is a measure of relative weight based on an individual's mass and height.

Devised between 1830 and 1850 by the Belgian polymath Adolphe Quetelet during the course of developing "social physics", it is defined as the individual's body mass divided by the square of their height  with the value universally being given in units of kg/m2.

 
 
  

 The factor for Imperial or US customary units is more precisely 703.06957964, but that level of precision is not meaningful for this calculation.

BMI can also be determined using a table e.g., the Body Mass Index Table from the National Institutes of Health's NHLBI. or from a chart which displays BMI as a function of mass and height using contour lines, or colors for different BMI categories, and may use two different units of measurement. For example, in the UK, where people often know their weight in stone and height in feet and inches  see 

The BMI is used in a wide variety of contexts as a simple method to assess how much an individual's body weight departs from what is normal or desirable for a person of his or her height. There is however often vigorous debate, particularly regarding at which value of the BMI scale the threshold for overweight and obese should be set, but also about a range of perceived limitations and problems with the BMI.

Even though many other differently calculated ratios have been invented, Such as the Ponderal index and others given in the "See also" section others haven't been used as often.

==Usage==
While the formula previously called the Quetelet Index for BMI dates to the beginning of the 19th century, the new term "body mass index" for the ratio and its popularity date to a paper published in the July edition of 1972 in the Journal of Chronic Diseases by Ancel Keys, which found the BMI to be the best proxy for body fat percentage among ratios of weight and height; the interest in measuring body fat being due to obesity becoming a discernible issue in prosperous Western societies. BMI was explicitly cited by Keys as being appropriate for population studies, and inappropriate for individual diagnosis. Nevertheless, due to its simplicity, it came to be widely used for individual diagnosis.

'BMI' provides a simple numeric measure of a person's thickness or thinness, allowing health professionals to discuss overweight and underweight problems more objectively with their patients. However, BMI has become controversial because many people, including physicians, have come to rely on its apparent numerical authority for medical diagnosis, but that was never the BMI's purpose; it is meant to be used as a simple means of classifying sedentary (physically inactive) individuals, or rather, populations, with an average body composition. For these individuals, the current value settings are as follows: a BMI of 18.5 to 25 may indicate optimal weight, a BMI lower than 18.5 suggests the person is underweight, a number above 25 may indicate the person is overweight, a number above 30 suggests the person is obese.

For a given height, BMI is proportional to mass. However, for a given mass, BMI is inversely proportional to the square of the height. So, if all body dimensions double, and mass scales naturally with the cube of the height, then BMI doubles instead of remaining the same. This results in taller people having a reported BMI that is uncharacteristically high compared to their actual body fat levels. In comparison, the Ponderal index is based on this natural scaling of mass with the third power of the height. However, many taller people are not just "scaled up" short people, but tend to have narrower frames in proportion to their height. Nick Korevaar (a mathematics lecturer from the University of Utah) suggests that instead of squaring the body height (an exponent of 2, as the BMI does) or cubing the body height (an exponent of 3, as the Ponderal index does), it would be more appropriate to use an exponent of between 2.3 and 2.7 (as originally noted by Quetelet). (For a theoretical basis for such values see MacKay. )

==BMI Prime==
BMI Prime, a simple modification of the BMI system, is the ratio of actual BMI to upper limit BMI (currently defined at BMI 25). As defined, BMI Prime is also the ratio of body weight to upper body weight limit, calculated at BMI 25. Since it is the ratio of two separate BMI values, BMI Prime is a dimensionless number, without associated units. Individuals with BMI Prime less than 0.74 are underweight; those between 0.74 and 1.00 have optimal weight; and those at 1.00 or greater are overweight. BMI Prime is useful clinically because individuals can tell, at a glance, by what percentage they deviate from their upper weight limits. For instance, a person with BMI 34 has a BMI Prime of 34/25 = 1.36, and is 36% over his or her upper mass limit. In South East Asian and South Chinese populations (see international variation section below) BMI Prime should be calculated using an upper limit BMI of 23 in the denominator instead of 25. Nonetheless, BMI Prime allows easy comparison between populations whose upper limit BMI values differ. 

==Categories==

A frequent use of the BMI is to assess how much an individual's body weight departs from what is normal or desirable for a person of his or her height. The weight excess or deficiency may, in part, be accounted for by body fat (adipose tissue) although other factors such as muscularity also affect BMI significantly (see discussion below and overweight). The WHO regards a BMI of less than 18.5 as underweight and may indicate malnutrition, an eating disorder, or other health problems, while a BMI greater than 25 is considered overweight and above 30 is considered obese. These ranges of BMI values are valid only as statistical categories

 Category BMI range  kg/m2 BMI Prime 
 Very severely underweight less than 15 less than 0.60 
 Severely underweight from 15.0 to 16.0 from 0.60 to 0.64 
 Underweight from 16.0 to 18.5 from 0.64 to 0.74 
 Normal (healthy weight) from 18.5 to 25 from 0.74 to 1.0 
 Overweight from 25 to 30 from 1.0 to 1.2 
 Obese Class I (Moderately obese) from 30 to 35 from 1.2 to 1.4 
 Obese Class II (Severely obese) from 35 to 40 from 1.4 to 1.6 
 Obese Class III (Very severely obese) over 40 over 1.6 

===BMI-for-age===

 BMI for age percentiles for boys 2 to 20 years of age. 

BMI is used differently for children. It is calculated the same way as for adults, but then compared to typical values for other children of the same age. Instead of set thresholds for underweight and overweight, then, the BMI percentile allows comparison with children of the same sex and age. A BMI that is less than the 5th percentile is considered underweight and above the 95th percentile is considered obese for people 20 and under. People under 20 with a BMI between the 85th and 95th percentile are considered to be overweight.

Recent studies in Britain have indicated that females between the ages 12 and 16 have a higher BMI than males of the same age by 1.0 kg/m2 on average. 

===International variations===
These recommended distinctions along the linear scale may vary from time to time and country to country, making global, longitudinal surveys problematic.

====Hong Kong====
The Hospital Authority of Hong Kong recommends BMI as following: 

 Category BMI range  kg/m2 
 Underweight < 18.5 
 Normal Range 18.5 - 22.9 
 Overweight - At Risk 23.0 - 24.9 
 Overweight - Moderately Obese 25.0 - 29.9 
 Overweight - Severely Obese  30.0 

====Japan====

Japan Society for the Study of Obesity (2000) 

 Category BMI range  kg/m2 
 Low 18.5 and below 
 Normal from 18.5 to 25.0 (Standard weight is 22) 
 Obese (Level 1) from 25.0 to 30.0 
 Obese (Level 2) from 30.0 to 35.0 
 Obese (Level 3) from 35.0 to 40.0 
 Obese (Level 4) 40.0 and above 

 

====Singapore====
In Singapore, the BMI cut-off figures were revised in 2005, motivated by studies showing that many Asian populations, including Singaporeans, have higher proportion of body fat and increased risk for cardiovascular diseases and diabetes mellitus, compared with Caucasians at the same BMI. The BMI cut-offs are presented with an emphasis on health risk rather than weight. 

 BMI range  kg/m2 Health Risk 
 27.5 and above High risk of developing heart disease, high blood pressure, stroke, diabetes 
 23.0 to 27.4 Moderate risk of developing heart disease, high blood pressure, stroke, diabetes 
 18.5 to 22.9 Low Risk (healthy range) 
 18.4 and below Risk of developing problems such as nutritional deficiency and osteoporosis 

====United States====
In 1998, the U.S. National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention brought U.S. definitions into line with World Health Organization guidelines, lowering the normal/overweight cut-off from BMI 27.8 to BMI 25. This had the effect of redefining approximately 29 million Americans, previously healthy to overweight. It also recommends lowering the normal/overweight threshold for South East Asian body types to around BMI 23, and expects further revisions to emerge from clinical studies of different body types.

The U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey of 1994 indicated that 59% of American men and 49% of women had BMIs over 25. Morbid obesitya BMI of 40 or morewas found in 2% of the men and 4% of the women. The newest survey in 2007 indicates a continuation of the increase in BMI: 63% of Americans are overweight or obese, with 26% now in the obese category (a BMI of 30 or more). There are differing opinions on the threshold for being underweight in females; doctors quote anything from 18.5 to 20 as being the lowest index, the most frequently stated being 19. A BMI nearing 15 is usually used as an indicator for starvation and the health risks involved, with a BMI less than 17.5 being an informal criterion for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.

==Health consequences of overweight and obesity in adults==
The BMI ranges are based on the relationship between body weight and disease and death. Overweight and obese individuals are at increased risk for many diseases and health conditions, including the following: 

* Hypertension
* Dyslipidemia (for example, high LDL cholesterol, low HDL cholesterol, or high levels of triglycerides)
* Type 2 diabetes
* Coronary heart disease
* Stroke
* Gallbladder disease
* Osteoarthritis
* Sleep apnea and respiratory problems
* Some cancers (endometrial, breast, and colon).

However recent research has shown that those classified as overweight, having a BMI between 25 and 29.9, show lower overall mortality than all other categories. 

==Applications==

===Statistical device===
The BMI is generally used as a means of correlation between groups related by general mass and can serve as a vague means of estimating adiposity. The duality of the BMI is that, whilst easy-to-use as a general calculation, it is limited in how accurate and pertinent the data obtained from it can be. Generally, the index is suitable for recognizing trends within sedentary or overweight individuals because there is a smaller margin for errors. 

This general correlation is particularly useful for consensus data regarding obesity or various other conditions because it can be used to build a semi-accurate representation from which a solution can be stipulated, or the RDA for a group can be calculated. Similarly, this is becoming more and more pertinent to the growth of children, due to the majority of their exercise habits. 

The growth of children is usually documented against a BMI-measured growth chart. Obesity trends can be calculated from the difference between the child's BMI and the BMI on the chart.

===Clinical practice===
BMI has been used by the WHO as the standard for recording obesity statistics since the early 1980s. In the United States, BMI is also used as a measure of underweight, owing to advocacy on behalf of those suffering with eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.

BMI can be calculated quickly and without expensive equipment. However, BMI categories do not take into account many factors such as frame size and muscularity. The categories also fail to account for varying proportions of fat, bone, cartilage, water weight, and more.

Despite this, BMI categories are regularly regarded as a satisfactory tool for measuring whether sedentary individuals are underweight, overweight or obese with various exemptions, such as: athletes, children, the elderly, and the infirm.

One basic problem, especially in athletes, is that muscle weight contributes to BMI. Some professional athletes would be overweight or obese according to their BMI, despite carrying little fat, unless the number at which they are considered overweight or obese is adjusted upward in some modified version of the calculation. In children and the elderly, differences in bone density and, thus, in the proportion of bone to total weight can mean the number at which these people are considered underweight should be adjusted downward.

===Medical underwriting===
In the United States, where medical underwriting of private health insurance plans is widespread, most private health insurance providers will use a particular high BMI as a cut-off point in order to raise insurance rates for or deny insurance to higher-risk patients, thereby reducing the cost of insurance coverage to all other subscribers in a lower BMI range. The cutoff point is determined differently for every health insurance provider and different providers will have vastly different ranges of acceptability. Many will implement phased surcharges, in which the subscriber will pay an additional penalty, usually as a percentage of the monthly premium, based on membership in an actuarially determined risk tier corresponding to a given range of BMI points above a certain acceptable limit, up to a maximum BMI past which the individual will simply be denied admissibility regardless of price. This can be contrasted with group insurance policies which do not require medical underwriting and where insurance admissibility is guaranteed by virtue of being a member of the insured group, regardless of BMI or other risk factors that would likely render the individual inadmissible to an individual health plan.

==Limitations and shortcomings==
This graph shows the correlation between body mass index (BMI) and percent body fat (%BF) for 8550 men in NCHS' NHANES 1994 data. Data in the upper left and lower right quadrants show some limitations of BMI. 
The medical establishment has acknowledged major shortcomings of BMI. Because the BMI depends upon weight and the square of height, it ignores basic scaling laws whereby mass increases to the 3rd power of linear dimensions. Hence, larger individuals, even if they had exactly the same body shape and relative composition, always have a larger BMI. Also, its assumptions about the distribution between lean mass and adipose tissue are inexact. BMI generally overestimates adiposity on those with more lean body mass (e.g., athletes) and underestimates excess adiposity on those with less lean body mass. A study in June 2008 by Romero-Corral et al. examined 13,601 subjects from the United States' third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) and found that BMI-defined obesity (BMI > 30) was present in 21% of men and 31% of women. Using body fat percentages (BF%), however, BF%-defined obesity was found in 50% of men and 62% of women. While BMI-defined obesity showed high specificity (95% for men and 99% for women), BMI showed poor sensitivity (36% for men and 49% for women). Despite this undercounting of obesity by BMI, BMI values in the intermediate BMI range of 2030 were found to be associated with a wide range of body fat percentages. For men with a BMI of 25, about 20% have a body fat percentage below 20% and about 10% have body fat percentage above 30%. 

Mathematician Keith Devlin and the restaurant industry association Center for Consumer Freedom argue that the error in the BMI is significant and so pervasive that it is not generally useful in evaluation of health. University of Chicago political science professor Eric Oliver says BMI is a convenient but inaccurate measure of weight, forced onto the populace, and should be revised. 

A study published by Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) in 2005 showed that overweight people had a similar relative risk of mortality to normal weight people as defined by BMI, while underweight and obese people had a higher death rate. High BMI is associated with type 2 diabetes only in persons with high serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. 

In an analysis of 40 studies involving 250,000 people, patients with coronary artery disease with normal BMIs were at higher risk of death from cardiovascular disease than people whose BMIs put them in the overweight range (BMI 2529.9). In the overweight, or intermediate, range of BMI (2529.9), the study found that BMI failed to discriminate between bodyfat percentage and lean mass. The study concluded that "the accuracy of BMI in diagnosing obesity is limited, particularly for individuals in the intermediate BMI ranges, in men and in the elderly. These results may help to explain the unexpected better survival in overweight/mild obese patients." 

A 2010 study that followed 11,000 subjects for up to eight years concluded that BMI is not a good measure for the risk of heart attack, stroke or death. A better measure was found to be the waist-to-height ratio. A 2011 study that followed 60,000 participants for up to 13 years found that waisthip ratio was a better predictor of ischaemic heart disease mortality. 

BMI is particularly inaccurate for people who are fit or athletic, as the higher muscle mass tends to put them in the overweight category by BMI, even though their body fat percentages frequently fall in the 1015% category, which is below that of a more sedentary person of average build who has a normal BMI number. Body composition for athletes is often better calculated using measures of body fat, as determined by such techniques as skinfold measurements or underwater weighing and the limitations of manual measurement have also led to new, alternative methods to measure obesity, such as the body volume index. However, recent studies of American football linemen who undergo intensive weight training to increase their muscle mass show that they frequently suffer many of the same problems as people ordinarily considered obese, notably sleep apnea. 

BMI also does not account for body frame size; a person may have a small frame and be carrying more fat than optimal, but their BMI reflects that they are normal. Conversely, a large framed individual may be quite healthy with a fairly low body fat percentage, but be classified as overweight by BMI. Accurate frame size calculators use several measurements (wrist circumference, elbow width, neck circumference and others) to determine what category an individual falls into for a given height. The standard is to use frame size in conjunction with ideal height/weight charts and add roughly 10% for a large frame or subtract roughly 10% for a smaller frame.

For example, a chart may say the ideal weight for a man 5 ft is 165 lb. But if that man has a slender build (small frame), he may be overweight at 165 lb and should reduce by 10%, to roughly 150 lb. In the reverse, the man with a larger frame and more solid build can be quite healthy at 180 lb. If one teeters on the edge of small/medium or medium/large, a dose of common sense should be used in calculating their ideal weight. However, falling into your ideal weight range for height and build is still not as accurate in determining health risk factors as waist/height ratio and actual body fat percentage.

A further limitation of BMI relates to loss of height through aging. In this situation, BMI will increase without any corresponding increase in weight.

The exponent of 2 in the denominator of the formula for BMI is arbitrary. It is meant to reduce variability in the BMI associated only with a difference in size, rather than with differences in weight relative to one's ideal weight. If taller people were simply scaled-up versions of shorter people, the appropriate exponent would be 3, as weight would increase with the cube of height. However, on average, taller people have a slimmer build relative to their height than do shorter people, and the exponent which matches the variation best is less than 3. An analysis based on data gathered in the US suggested an exponent of 2.6 would yield the best fit for children aged 2 to 19 years old. For US adults, exponent estimates range from 1.92 to 1.96 for males and from 1.45 to 1.95 for females. The exponent 2 is used by convention and for simplicity.

As a possible alternative to BMI, the concepts fat-free mass index (FFMI) and fat mass index (FMI) were introduced in the early 1990s, and Body Shape Index in 2012.

===Varying standards===

It is not clear where on the BMI scale the threshold for overweight and obese should be set. Because of this the standards have varied over the past few decades. Between 1980 and 2000 the U.S. Dietary Guidelines have defined overweight at a variety of levels ranging from a BMI of 24.9 to 27.1. In 1985 the National Institutes of Health (NIH) consensus conference recommended that overweight BMI be set at a BMI of 27.8 for men and 27.3 for women. In 1988 a NIH report concluded that a BMI over 25 is overweight and a BMI over 30 is obese. In the 1990s the World Health Organization (WHO) decided that a BMI of 25 to 30 should be considered overweight and a BMI over 30 is obese, the standards the NIH set. This became the definitive guide for determining if someone is overweight.

The current WHO and NIH ranges of normal weights are proved to be associated with decreased risks of some diseases such as diabetes type II; however using the same range of BMI for men and women is considered arbitrary, and makes the definition of underweight quite unsuitable for men. 

==Global statistics==
Researchers at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine calculated the average BMI for 177 countries using UN data on population, WHO estimates of global weight, and mean height from national health examination surveys. 

 Country Average BMI Assuming equal male and female population (generally correct within 5%) Relative size of average BMI Male BMI Relative size of male BMI Female BMI Relative size of female BMI Ratio of male to female BMI Relative size of ratio 
 Afghanistan 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahamas 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Barbados 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Belize 
 Benin 
 Bhutan 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Botswana 
 Brazil 
 Brunei 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
 Colombia 
 Comoros 
 Congo 
 Costa Rica 
 Cte d'Ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Cuba 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Djibouti 
 Dominican Republic 
 DR Congo 
 East Timor 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt 
 El Salvador 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Estonia 
 Ethiopia 
 Fiji 
 Finland 
 France 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Ghana 
 Greece 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Guyana 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Hungary 
 Iceland 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Jamaica 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Latvia 
 Lebanon 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonia 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mali 
 Malta 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Mexico 
 Micronesia 
 Moldova 
 Mongolia 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Namibia 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 North Korea 
 Norway 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Qatar 
 Romania 
 Russian Federation 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Lucia 
 Samoa 
 So Tom and Prncipe 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Senegal 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Solomon Islands 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Korea 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 St Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sudan 
 Suriname 
 Swaziland 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzania 
 Thailand 
 Togo 
 Tonga 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vanuatu 
 Venezuela 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Country Average BMI Assuming equal male and female population (generally correct within 5%) Relative size of average BMI Male BMI Relative size of male BMI Female BMI Relative size of female BMI Ratio of male to female BMI Relative size of ratio 

==See also==
* Allometric law
* Body water
* Pignet Index
Other measures of obesity:
* Body adiposity index
* Body fat percentage
* Body volume index
* Ponderal index
* Rohrer's index
* Sagittal Abdominal Diameter (SAD)
* Waist-hip ratio
*Waist-to-height ratio

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
*
*
* 

==External links==

* U.S. National Center for Health Statistics:
**BMI Growth Charts for children and young adults
**BMI calculator ages 219
**BMI calculator ages 20 and older



[[Behistun Inscription]]

;
The Behistun Inscription (also Bistun or Bisutun), (Persian: , Old Persian: Bagastana, meaning "the place of god") is a multi-lingual inscription located on Mount Behistun in the Kermanshah Province of Iran, near the city of Kermanshah in western Iran.

Authored by Darius the Great sometime between his coronation as king of the Persian Empire in the summer of 522 BC and his death in autumn of 486 BC, the inscription begins with a brief autobiography of Darius, including his ancestry and lineage. Later in the inscription, Darius provides a lengthy sequence of events following the deaths of Cyrus the Great and Cambyses II in which he fought nineteen battles in a period of one year (ending in December 521 BC) to put down multiple rebellions throughout the Persian Empire. The inscription states in detail that the rebellions, which had resulted from the deaths of Cyrus the Great and his son Cambyses II, were orchestrated by several impostors and their co-conspirators in various cities throughout the empire, each of whom falsely proclaimed kinghood during the upheaval following Cyrus's death.

Darius the Great proclaimed himself victorious in all battles during the period of upheaval, attributing his success to the "grace of Ahura Mazda".

The inscription includes three versions of the same text, written in three different cuneiform script languages: Old Persian, Elamite, and Babylonian (a later form of Akkadian). In effect, then, the inscription is to cuneiform what the Rosetta Stone is to Egyptian hieroglyphs: the document most crucial in the decipherment of a previously lost script.

The inscription is approximately 15 metres high by 25 metres wide and 100 metres up a limestone cliff from an ancient road connecting the capitals of Babylonia and Media (Babylon and Ecbatana, respectively). The Old Persian text contains 414 lines in five columns; the Elamite text includes 593 lines in eight columns, and the Babylonian text is in 112 lines. The inscription was illustrated by a life-sized bas-relief of Darius I, the Great, holding a bow as a sign of kingship, with his left foot on the chest of a figure lying on his back before him. The supine figure is reputed to be the pretender Gaumata. Darius is attended to the left by two servants, and nine one-metre figures stand to the right, with hands tied and rope around their necks, representing conquered peoples. Faravahar floats above, giving his blessing to the king. One figure appears to have been added after the others were completed, as was Darius's beard, which is a separate block of stone attached with iron pins and lead.
The route up to the inscription

==History==
After the fall of the Persian Empire's Achaemenid Dynasty and its successors, and the lapse of Old Persian cuneiform writing into disuse, the nature of the inscription was forgotten, and fanciful explanations became the norm. For centuries, instead of being attributed to Darius I, the Great, it was believed to be from the reign of Khosrau II of Persia  one of the last Sassanid kings, who lived over 1000 years after the time of Darius I.

The inscription is mentioned by Ctesias of Cnidus, who noted its existence some time around 400 BC and mentioned a well and a garden beneath the inscription. He incorrectly concluded that the inscription had been dedicated "by Queen Semiramis of Babylon to Zeus". Tacitus also mentions it and includes a description of some of the long-lost ancillary monuments at the base of the cliff, including an altar to "Herakles". What has been recovered of them, including a statue dedicated in 148 BC, is consistent with Tacitus's description. Diodorus also writes of "Bagistanon" and claims it was inscribed by Semiramis.

A legend began around Mount Behistun (Bisutun), as written about by the Persian poet and writer Ferdowsi in his Shahnameh (Book of Kings) , about a man named Farhad, who was a lover of King Khosrow's wife, Shirin. The legend states that, exiled for his transgression, Farhad was given the task of cutting away the mountain to find water; if he succeeded, he would be given permission to marry Shirin. After many years and the removal of half the mountain, he did find water, but was informed by Khosrow that Shirin had died. He went mad, threw his axe down the hill, kissed the ground and died. It is told in the book of Khosrow and Shirin that his axe was made out of a pomegranate tree, and, where he threw the axe, a pomegranate tree grew with fruit that would cure the ill. Shirin was not dead, according to the story, and mourned upon hearing the news.

In 1598, the Englishman Robert Sherley saw the inscription during a diplomatic mission to Persia on behalf of Austria, and brought it to the attention of Western European scholars. His party incorrectly came to the conclusion that it was Christian in origin. E. Denison Ross, The Broadway Travellers: Sir Anthony Sherley and his Persian Adventure, Routledge, 2004, ISBN 0-415-34486-7 
French General Gardanne thought it showed "Christ and his twelve apostles", and Sir Robert Ker Porter thought it represented the Lost Tribes of Israel and Shalmaneser of Assyria. Robert Ker Porter, Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia, ancient Babylonia, &c. &c. : during the years 1817, 1818, 1819, and 1820, volume 2, Longman, 1821 
Italian explorer Pietro della Valle visited the inscription in the course of a pilgrimage in around 1621CE.

==Translation==
Column 1 (DB I 1-15), sketch by Friedrich von Spiegel (1881)
German surveyor Carsten Niebuhr visited in around 1764 for Frederick V of Denmark, publishing a copy of the inscription in the account of his journeys in 1778. Carsten Niebuhr, Reisebeschreibung von Arabien und anderen umliegenden Lndern, 2 volumes, 1774 and 1778 
Niebuhr's transcriptions were used by Georg Friedrich Grotefend and others in their efforts to decipher the Old Persian cuneiform script. Grotefend had deciphered ten of the 37 symbols of Old Persian by 1802, after realizing that unlike the Semitic cuneiform scripts, Old Persian text is alphabetic and each word is separated by a vertical slanted symbol. 

The Old Persian text was copied and deciphered before the recovery and copying of the Elamite and Babylonian inscriptions had even been attempted, which proved to be a good deciphering strategy, since Old Persian script was easier to study due to its alphabetic nature and the fact that the language it represents had naturally evolved into Middle Persian, and in turn, to the living modern Persian language dialects, and was also related to the Avestan language, used in the Zoroastrian book the Avesta.

In 1835, Sir Henry Rawlinson, an officer of the British East India Company army assigned to the forces of the Shah of Iran, began studying the inscription in earnest. As the town of Bisutun's name was anglicized as "Behistun" at this time, the monument became known as the "Behistun Inscription". Despite its relative inaccessibility, Rawlinson was able to scale the cliff and copy the Old Persian inscription. The Elamite was across a chasm, and the Babylonian four meters above; both were beyond easy reach and were left for later.

With the Persian text, and with about a third of the syllabary made available to him by the work of Georg Friedrich Grotefend, Rawlinson set to work on deciphering the text. Fortunately, the first section of this text contained a list of the same Persian kings found in Herodotus in their original Persian forms as opposed to Herodotus's Greek transliterations; for example Darius is given as the original Dryavu instead of the Hellenized . By matching the names and the characters, Rawlinson was able to decipher the type of cuneiform used for Old Persian by 1838 and presented his results to the Royal Asiatic Society in London and the Socit Asiatique in Paris.

In the interim, Rawlinson spent a brief tour of duty in Afghanistan, returning to the site in 1843. He first crossed a chasm between the Persian and Elamite scripts by bridging the gap with planks, subsequently copying the Elamite inscription. He was then able to find an enterprising local boy to climb up a crack in the cliff and suspend ropes across the Babylonian writing, so that papier-mch casts of the inscriptions could be taken. Rawlinson, along with several other scholars, most notably Edward Hincks, Julius Oppert, William Henry Fox Talbot, and Edwin Norris, either working separately or in collaboration, eventually deciphered these inscriptions, leading eventually to the ability to read them completely.

The translation of the Old Persian sections of the Behistun Inscription paved the way to the subsequent ability to decipher the Elamite and Babylonian parts of the text, which greatly promoted the development of modern Assyriology.

==Later research and activity==
The site was visited by A. V. Williams Jackson in 1903. A. V. Williams Jackson, The Great Behistun Rock and Some Results of a Re-Examination of the Old Persian Inscriptions on It, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 24, pp. 77-95, 1903 
Later expeditions, in 1904 sponsored by the British Museum and led by Leonard William King and Reginald Campbell Thompson and in 1948 by George G. Cameron of the University of Michigan, obtained photographs, casts and more accurate transcriptions of the texts, including passages that were not copied by Rawlinson. W. King and R. C. Thompson, The sculptures and inscription of Darius the Great on the Rock of Behistn in Persia : a new collation of the Persian, Susian and Babylonian texts, Longmans, 1907 George G. Cameron, The Old Persian Text of the Bisitun Inscription, Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 47-54, 1951 George G. Cameron, The Elamite Version of the Bisitun Inscriptions, Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 59-68, 1960 W. C. Benedict and Elizabeth von Voigtlander, Darius' Bisitun Inscription, Babylonian Version, Lines 1-29, Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 1956 
It also became apparent that rainwater had dissolved some areas of the limestone in which the text was inscribed, while leaving new deposits of limestone over other areas, covering the text.

In 1938, the inscription became of interest to the Nazi German think tank Ahnenerbe, although research plans were cancelled due to the onset of World War II.

Close-up of the inscription showing damage
The monument later suffered some damage from Allied soldiers using it for target practice in World War II, during the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran. http://ancientstandard.com/2011/03/30/the-behistun-inscription-the-iranian-rosetta-stone/ http://atlantisonline.smfforfree2.com/index.php?topic=2799.5;wap2 

In 1999, Iranian archeologists began the documentation and assessment of damages to the site incurred during the 20th century. Malieh Mehdiabadi, who was project manager for the effort, described a photogrammetric process by which two-dimensional photos were taken of the inscriptions using two cameras and later transmuted into 3-D images. 

In recent years, Iranian archaeologists have been undertaking conservation works. The site became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2006. 

In 2012, the Bisotun Cultural Heritage Center organized an international effort to re-examine the inscription. Intl. experts to reread Bisotun inscriptions, Tehran Times, May 27, 2012 

==Other historical monuments in the Behistun complex==

The site covers an area of 116 hectares. Archeological evidence indicates that this region became a human shelter 40,000 years ago. There are 18 historical monuments other than the inscription of Darius the Great in the Behistun complex that have been registered in the Iranian national list of historical sites. Some of them are:

* Hunters' cave
* Farhad Tarash
* Median fortress
* Parthian town
* Seleucid statue of Herakles
* Parthian site of worship

* Behistun Palace (said to be Palace of Khosrau II)
* Ilkhanid caravanserai
* Median temple
* Bas relief of Mithridates II of Parthia
* Bas relief of Gotarzes II of Parthia

* Sheikh Ali khan Zangeneh text endowment
* Safavid caravanserai
* Balash stone
* Carved Sassanian stones
* Royal Road

Image:Seleucid statue of Hercules 2.jpg|Statue of Herakles in Behistun complex
Image:Godarz.jpg|Bas relief of Mithridates II of Parthia and bas relief of Gotarzes II of Parthia and Sheikh Ali khan Zangeneh text endowment

In the first image, Herakles with curly hair and a beard rests on the lion skin. Beside him, an olive tree is seen carved on the wall, while a quiver full of arrows is hanging from it, and a club resting close by. Behind the head of Herakles, an inscription of seven lines in old Greek is written on a smooth space with a frame similar to Greek temples. According to this inscription, the statue was carved in 139 BC on the occasion of a conquest for Seleucid Greeks (under Demetrius II Nicator) against the Parthians (under Mithridates I of Parthia), though the Seleucids were later defeated and driven from the region.

The second image is a bas relief of Mithridates II of Parthia: this was carved in 123110 BC and represents Parthian king Mithridates and four of his satraps who are respecting the king. Bas relief of Gotarzes II of Parthia shows the conquest of that king over Meherdates, an Arsacid prince who lived in Rome. An inscription in Greek is seen on the left side of the top outer frame of the relief. Sheikh Ali khan Zangeneh text endowment: According to this text, written in Sloth calligraphy, Sheikh Ali khan Zangeneh, a local ruler of the 17th century, dedicates four shares (out of six) of his properties in Ghareh-vali and Chambatan (local villages) for Sadaats (descendants of the prophet Mohammad), and two remaining shares for the Bisotoun Safavid caravansarai.

==See also==
* Behistun palace
* Darius I of Persia
* Full translation of the Behistun Inscription
* Achaemenid empire
* Taq-e Bostan (Rock reliefs of various Sassanid kings)
* Pasargadae (Tomb of Pasargadae Cyrus the Great)
* Ka'ba-i Zartosht (The "Cube of Zoroaster", a monument at Naqsh-e Rustam)
* Naqsh-e Rajab
* Cities of the Ancient Near East
* Gaumata (False Smerdis)

==Notes==

==References==
*Adkins, Lesley, Empires of the Plain: Henry Rawlinson and the Lost Languages of Babylon, St. Martin's Press, New York, 2003.
*Rawlinson, H.C., Archaeologia, 1853, vol. xxxiv, p. 74.
*Thompson, R. Campbell. "The Rock of Behistun". Wonders of the Past. Edited by Sir J. A. Hammerton. Vol. II. New York: Wise and Co., 1937. (pp. 760767) 
*Cameron, George G. "Darius Carved History on Ageless Rock". National Geographic Magazine. Vol. XCVIII, Num. 6, December 1950. (pp. 825844)
*Rubio, Gonzalo. "Writing in another tongue: Alloglottography in the Ancient Near East". In Margins of Writing, Origins of Cultures (ed. Seth Sanders. 2nd printing with postscripts and corrections. Oriental Institute Seminars, 2. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), pp. 3370.
*Louis H. Gray, Notes on the Old Persian Inscriptions of Behistun, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 23, pp. 5664, 1902
*A. T. Olmstead, Darius and His Behistun Inscription, The American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 392416, 1938

==External links==

*The Behistun Inscription, livius.org article by Jona Lendering, including Persian text (in cuneiform and transliteration), English translation, and additional materials
*English translation of the inscription text
*Case Western Reserve University Digital Library  the complete text of the Behistun inscription, in transcribed cuneiform and English translation, available in PDF format
*Brief description of Bisotun from UNESCO
*"Bisotun receives its World Heritage certificate", Cultural Heritage News Agency, Tehran, July 3, 2008
* Other monuments of Behistun

 



[[Barry Goldwater]]

Barry Morris Goldwater (January 2, 1909 Internet Accuracy Project, Senator Barry Goldwater. Retrieved September 23, 2010.  May 29, 1998) was a businessman and five-term United States Senator from Arizona (195365, 196987) and the Republican Party's nominee for president in the 1964 election. An articulate and charismatic figure during the first half of the 1960s, he was known as "Mr. Conservative".

Goldwater is the politician most often credited for sparking the resurgence of the American conservative political movement in the 1960s. He also had a substantial impact on the libertarian movement. 

Goldwater rejected the legacy of the New Deal and fought through the conservative coalition against the New Deal coalition. He mobilized a large conservative constituency to win the hard-fought Republican primaries. Goldwater's conservative campaign platform ultimately failed to gain the support of the electorate and he lost the 1964 presidential election to incumbent Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson by one of the largest landslides in history, bringing down many Republican candidates as well. The Johnson campaign and other critics painted him as a reactionary, while supporters praised his crusades against the Soviet Union, labor unions, and the welfare state. His defeat allowed Johnson and the Democrats in Congress to pass the Great Society programs, but the defeat of so many older Republicans in 1964 also cleared the way for a younger generation of American conservatives to mobilize. Goldwater was much less active as a national leader of conservatives after 1964; his supporters mostly rallied behind Ronald Reagan, who became governor of California in 1967 and the 40th President of the United States in 1981.

Goldwater returned to the Senate in 1969, and specialized in defense policy, bringing to the table his experience as a senior officer in the Air Force Reserve. In 1974, as an elder statesman of the party, Goldwater successfully urged President Richard Nixon to resign when evidence of a cover-up in the Watergate scandal became overwhelming and impeachment was imminent. By the 1980s, the increasing influence of the Christian right on the Republican Party so conflicted with Goldwater's views that he became a vocal opponent of the religious right on issues such as abortion, gay rights, and the role of religion in public life. A significant accomplishment in his career was the passage of the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986, which restructured the higher levels of the Pentagon by placing the chain of command from the President to the Secretary of Defense directly to the commanders of the Unified Combatant Commands.

==Personal life==

Goldwater was born in Phoenix, in what was then the Arizona Territory, the son of Baron M. Goldwater and his wife, Hattie Josephine ("JoJo") Williams. His father's Jewish family had founded Goldwater's, the largest department store in Phoenix. The family name had been changed from Goldwasser to Goldwater at least as early as the 1860 census in Los Angeles, California. Goldwater's paternal grandparents, Michel and Sarah (Nathan) Goldwasser, had been married in the Great Synagogue of London. Goldwater's mother, who was Protestant, came from a New England family that included the famous theologian, Roger Williams of Rhode Island. Goldwater's parents were married in an Episcopal church in Phoenix; for his entire life, Goldwater was an Episcopalian, though on rare occasions he referred to himself as "Jewish". While he did not often attend church, he stated that "If a man acts in a religious way, an ethical way, then he's really a religious manand it doesn't have a lot to do with how often he gets inside a church". A Jewish essayist famously remarked of Goldwater: 

The family department store made the Goldwaters comfortably wealthy. Goldwater graduated from Staunton Military Academy, an elite private school in Virginia, and attended the University of Arizona for one year, where he joined the Sigma Chi fraternity. Barry had never been close to his father, but he took over the family business after Baron's death in 1930. He became a Republican (in a heavily Democratic state), promoted innovative business practices, and opposed the New Deal, especially because it fostered labor unions. Goldwater came to know former president Herbert Hoover, whose conservative politics he admired greatly. In 1934, he married Margaret "Peggy" Johnson, wealthy daughter of a prominent industrialist from Muncie, Indiana. They had four children: Joanne (born January 1, 1936), Barry (born July 15, 1938), Michael (born March 15, 1940), and Peggy (born July 27, 1944). Goldwater became a widower in 1985, and in 1992 he married Susan Wechsler, a nurse 32 years his junior.

With the American entry into World War II, Goldwater received a reserve commission in the United States Army Air Forces. He became a pilot assigned to the Ferry Command, a newly formed unit that flew aircraft and supplies to war zones worldwide. He spent most of the war flying between the USA and India, via the Azores and North Africa or South America, Nigeria, and Central Africa. He also flew "the hump" over the Himalayas to deliver supplies to the Republic of China. Remaining in the Air Force Reserve after the war, he eventually retired as a command pilot with the rank of major general. By that time, he had flown 165 different types of aircraft. Following World War II, Goldwater was a leading proponent of creating the United States Air Force Academy, and later served on the Academy's Board of Visitors. The visitor center at the USAF Academy is now named in his honor. As a colonel he also founded the Arizona Air National Guard, and he would desegregate it two years before the rest of the US military. Goldwater was instrumental in pushing the Pentagon to support desegregation of the armed services. Goldwater retired as an Air Force major general, and he continued piloting B-52 aircraft until late in his military career. To those who called him "rash", he would remind people of the old saying that "there are no old, bold pilots".

In 1940, Goldwater became one of the first people to run the Colorado River recreationally through Grand Canyon when he participated as an oarsman on Norman Nevills' second commercial river trip. Goldwater joined the trip in Green River, Utah and rowed his own boat down to Lake Mead. Goldwater ran track and cross country in high school, where he specialized in the 880 yard run. His parents strongly encouraged him to compete in these sports, to Goldwater's dismay. He often went by the nickname of "Rolling Thunder."

In 1963, he joined the Arizona Society of the Sons of the American Revolution.

In 1970, the Arizona Historical Foundation published the daily journal that Goldwater maintained on the Grand Canyon trip, along with the photographs he took, in a 209 page volume titled .

Goldwater's son Barry Goldwater, Jr. served as a United States House of Representatives member from California from 1969 to 1983.

==Political career==
In a heavily Democratic state Goldwater became a conservative Republican and a friend of Herbert Hoover. He was outspoken against New Deal liberalism, especially its close ties to labor unions that he considered corrupt. A pilot, outdoorsman and photographer, he criss-crossed Arizona and developed a deep interest in both the natural history and the human history of the state. He entered Phoenix politics in 1949 when he was elected to the City Council as part of a nonpartisan team of candidates who promised to clean up widespread prostitution and gambling. The group won every mayoral and council election for two decades. Goldwater rebuilt the weak Republican party and was instrumental in electing Howard Pyle as governor in 1950. Robert Alan Goldberg, Barry Goldwater (1995) pp 67-98 

As a Republican he won a seat in the US Senate in 1952, when he upset veteran Democrat and Senate majority leader Ernest McFarland. He defeated McFarland again in 1958, with a strong showing in his first reelection in a year in which the Democrats picked up 13 seats in the Senate. He stepped down from the Senate in 1964 for his presidential campaign.

===Policies===
Goldwater soon became most associated with labor-union reform and anti-communism; he was an active supporter of the conservative coalition in Congress. However, he rejected the wildest fringes of the anti-communist movement; in 1956, he sponsored the passage through the Senate of the final version of the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act, despite vociferous opposition from opponents who claimed that the Act was a communist plot to establish concentration camps in Alaska. His work on labor issues led to Congress passing major anti-corruption reforms in 1957, and an all-out campaign by the AFL-CIO to defeat his 1958 reelection bid. He voted against the censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1954, but he never actually charged any individual with being a communist/Soviet agent. Goldwater emphasized his strong opposition to the worldwide spread of communism in his 1960 book The Conscience of a Conservative. The book became an important reference text in conservative political circles.

In 1964, Goldwater ran a conservative campaign that emphasized states' rights. Goldwater's 1964 campaign was a magnet for conservatives since he opposed interference by the federal government in state affairs. Although he had supported all previous federal civil rights legislation and had supported the original senate version of the bill, Goldwater made the decision to oppose the Civil Rights Act of 1964. His stance was based on his view that the act was an intrusion of the federal government into the affairs of states and that the Act interfered with the rights of private persons to do or not do business with whomever they chose. In the segregated city of Phoenix in the 1950s, he had quietly supported civil rights for blacks, but would not let his name be used. Goldberg, Barry Goldwater (1995) pp 88-90 

All this appealed to white Southern Democrats, and Goldwater was the first Republican to win the electoral votes of all of the Deep South states (South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana) since Reconstruction (although Dwight Eisenhower did carry Louisiana in 1956). However, Goldwater's vote on the Civil Rights Act proved devastating to his campaign everywhere outside the South (besides Dixie, Goldwater won only in Arizona, his home state), contributing to his landslide defeat in 1964.

While Goldwater had been depicted by his opponents in the Republican primaries as a representative of a conservative philosophy that was extreme and alien, his voting records show that his positions were in harmony with those of his fellow Republicans in the Congress. What distinguished him from his predecessors was, according to Hans J. Morgenthau, his firmness of principle and determination, which did not allow him to be content with mere rhetoric. 

Goldwater fought in 1971 to stop US funding of the United Nations after the People's Republic of China was admitted to the organization. He said:

===Elections===
In 1964, he fought and won a bitterly contested, multi-candidate race for the Republican Party's presidential nomination. His main rival was New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller, whom he defeated by a narrow margin in the bitterly fought California primary. His nomination was opposed by liberal Republicans, who thought Goldwater's demand for rollback, defeat of the Soviet Union, would foment a nuclear war. Goldwater lost to President Lyndon Johnson by a massive landslide, pulling down the GOP, which lost many seats in both houses of Congress. Goldwater carried only his home state and five Deep South states.

Goldwater remained popular in Arizona, and in the 1968 Senate election he was elected (this time) to the seat of retiring Senator Carl Hayden. He was subsequently reelected in 1974 and 1980. The 1974 election saw Goldwater easily reelected. His final campaign in 1980 was close, with Goldwater winning in a near draw against Democratic challenger Bill Schulz. Goldwater said later that the close result convinced him not to run again. 

Two self-published books advanced the Goldwater cause: and by a Texas historian. Both were best-sellers but failed to bolster Goldwater's electoral prospects.

===Retirement===
Goldwater seriously considered retirement in 1980 before deciding to run for reelection. Peggy Goldwater reportedly hoped that her husband's Senate term, due to end in January 1981, would be his last. Goldwater decided to run, planning to make the term his last in the Senate. Goldwater faced a surprisingly tough battle for reelection. He was viewed by some as out of touch and vulnerable for several reasons; most importantly, because he had planned to retire in 1981, Goldwater had not visited many areas of Arizona outside of Phoenix and Tucson. He was also challenged by a formidable opponent, Bill Schulz, a former Republican turned Democrat and a wealthy real estate developer. Schulz was able to infuse massive amounts of money into the campaign from his own fortune.

Arizona's changing population also hurt Goldwater. The state's population had soared, and a huge portion of the electorate had not lived in the state when Goldwater was previously elected; hence, many voters were less familiar with Goldwater's actual beliefs, and he was on the defensive for much of the campaign. Early returns on election night seemed to indicate that Schulz would win. The counting of votes continued through the night and into the next morning. At around daybreak, Goldwater learned that he had been reelected thanks to absentee ballots, which were among the last to be counted. Goldwater's surprisingly close victory in 1980 came despite Reagan's 61% landslide over Jimmy Carter in Arizona. Republicans regained control of the Senate, putting Goldwater in the most powerful position he ever had in the Senate.

Goldwater retired in 1987, serving as chair of the Senate Intelligence and Armed Services Committees in his final term. Despite his reputation as a firebrand in the 1960s, by the end of his career he was considered a stabilizing influence in the Senate, one of the most respected members of either major party. Though Goldwater remained staunchly anti-communist and "hawkish" on military issues, he was a key supporter of the fight for ratification of the Panama Canal Treaty in the 1970s, which would give control of the canal zone to the Republic of Panama. His most important legislative achievement may have been the Goldwater-Nichols Act, which reorganized the US military's senior-command structure.

Goldwater was an active amateur radio "ham" operator, with call letters K7UGA. Many hams were delighted to make contact with him in his retirement years.

===Political relationships===
Goldwater was grief-stricken by the assassination of Kennedy and was greatly disappointed that his opponent in the 1964 race would not be Kennedy but instead Kennedy's Vice President, the former Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas. Goldwater disliked Johnson (who he said "used every dirty trick in the bag"), and Richard M. Nixon of California (whom he later called "the most dishonest individual I have ever met in my life"). Goldwater, after he had again become a senator, advocated for Nixon to resign at the height of Watergate, warning that fewer than ten senators would vote against conviction after Nixon was impeached by the House of Representatives. The term "Goldwater moment" has subsequently been used to describe situations when influential members of Congress disagree so strongly with a president from their own party that they rise up and take a stand in opposition.

His 1984 Cable Franchise Policy and Communications Act allowed local governments to require the transmission of public, educational, and government access (PEG) channels, barred cable operators from exercising editorial control over content of programs carried on PEG channels, and absolved them from liability for their content.

====U.S. presidential campaign, 1964====

Republican primaries results by state

In South Dakota and Florida, Goldwater finished second to "unpledged delegates", but he finished before all other candidates.
At the time of Goldwater's presidential candidacy, the Republican Party was split between its conservative wing (based in the West and South) and moderate/liberal wing (based in the Northeast). He alarmed even some of his fellow partisans with his brand of staunch fiscal conservatism and militant anti-communism. He was viewed by many traditional Republicans as being too far on the right wing of the political spectrum to appeal to the mainstream majority necessary to win a national election. As a result, moderate Republicans recruited a series of opponents, including New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts and Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton, to challenge Goldwater. Goldwater would defeat Rockefeller in the winner-take-all California primary and secure the nomination. He also had a solid backing from Southern Republicans. A bright young Birmingham lawyer, John Grenier, secured commitments from 271 of 279 southern convention delegates to back Goldwater. Grenier went on to serve as executive director of the national GOP during the Goldwater campaign. This was the Number 2 position to party chairman Dean Burch, Goldwater's fellow Arizonan.

Goldwater famously declared in his bold acceptance speech at the 1964 Republican Convention, "I would remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue." This paraphrase of Cicero was included at the suggestion of Harry V. Jaffa, though the speech was primarily written by Karl Hess. Because of President Johnson's popularity, however, Goldwater held back from attacking the president directly; he did not even mention Johnson by name in his convention speech.

Past comments came back to haunt Goldwater throughout his campaign. Once he had called the Eisenhower administration "a dime-store New Deal", and the former president never fully forgave him. Eisenhower did, however, film a television commercial with Goldwater. Eisenhower qualified his voting for Goldwater in November by remarking that he had voted not specifically for Goldwater, but for the Republican Party. In December 1961, Goldwater had told a news conference that "sometimes I think this country would be better off if we could just saw off the Eastern Seaboard and let it float out to sea". That comment boomeranged on him during the campaign in the form of a Johnson television commercial, as did remarks about making Social Security voluntary, and statements in Tennessee about selling the Tennessee Valley Authority, a large local New Deal employer.

The Goldwater campaign spotlighted Ronald Reagan, who appeared in a campaign ad. In turn, Reagan gave a stirring, nationally televised speech, "A Time for Choosing", in support of Goldwater. The speech prompted Reagan to seek the California Governorship in 1966 and jump-started his political career. Conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly, later well known for her fight against the Equal Rights Amendment, first became known for writing a pro-Goldwater book, A Choice, Not an Echo, attacking the moderate Republican establishment.

Former U.S. Senator Prescott Bush, a moderate Republican from Connecticut, was a friend of Goldwater and supported him in the general election campaign. Bush's son, George H. W. Bush (then running for the Senate from Texas against Democrat Ralph Yarborough), was also a strong Goldwater supporter in both the nomination and general election campaigns.

Future Chief Justice of the United States and fellow Arizonan William H. Rehnquist also first came to the attention of national Republicans through his work as a legal adviser to Goldwater's presidential campaign. Rehnquist had begun his law practice in 1953 in the firm of Denison Kitchel of Phoenix, Goldwater's national campaign manager and friend of nearly three decades. 

Goldwater was painted as a dangerous figure by the Johnson campaign, which countered Goldwater's slogan "In your heart, you know he's right" with the lines "In your guts, you know he's nuts", and "In your heart, you know he might" (that is, he might actually use nuclear weapons as opposed to using only deterrence). Johnson himself did not mention Goldwater in his own acceptance speech at the 1964 Democratic National Convention.

Goldwater's provocative advocacy of aggressive tactics to prevent the spread of communism in Asia led to effective counterattacks from Lyndon B. Johnson and his supporters, who claimed that Goldwater's militancy would have dire consequences, possibly even nuclear war. In a May 1964 speech, Goldwater suggested that nuclear weapons should be treated more like conventional weapons and used in Vietnam, specifically that they should have been used at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 to defoliate trees. Regarding Vietnam, Goldwater charged that Johnson's policy was devoid of "goal, course, or purpose", leaving "only sudden death in the jungles and the slow strangulation of freedom". Matthews 2002 Goldwater's rhetoric on nuclear war was viewed by many as quite uncompromising, a view buttressed by off-hand comments such as, "Let's lob one into the men's room at the Kremlin." He also advocated that field commanders in Vietnam and Europe should be given the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons (which he called "small conventional nuclear weapons") without presidential confirmation. 

Goldwater did his best to counter the Johnson attacks, criticizing the Johnson administration for its perceived ethical lapses, and stating in a commercial that "we, as a nation, are not far from the kind of moral decay that has brought on the fall of other nations and people.... I say it is time to put conscience back in government. And by good example, put it back in all walks of American life." Goldwater campaign commercials included statements of support by actor Raymond Massey and moderate Republican senator Margaret Chase Smith. 

Before the 1964 election, the muckraking Fact magazine, published by Ralph Ginzburg, ran a special issue titled "The Unconscious of a Conservative: A Special Issue on the Mind of Barry Goldwater". The two main articles contended that Goldwater was mentally unfit to be president. The magazine attempted to support this claim with the results of an unscientific poll of psychiatrists it had conducted. Fact had mailed questionnaires to 12,356 psychiatrists, and published a "sampling" of the comments made by the 2,417 psychiatrists who responded, of whom 1,189 said Goldwater was unfit to be president. Not one of the psychiatrists had actually interviewed Goldwater himself. 

After the election, Goldwater sued the publisher, the editor and the magazine for libel in Goldwater v. Ginzburg. "Although the jury awarded Goldwater only $1.00 in compensatory damages against all three defendants, it went on to award him punitive damages of $25,000 against Ginzburg and $50,000 against Fact magazine, Inc." According to Warren Boroson, then-managing editor of Fact and now a financial columnist, the main biography of Goldwater in the magazine was written by David Bar-Illan, the Israeli pianist. 

=====Daisy=====
A Democratic campaign advertisement known as Daisy showed a young girl counting daisy petals, from one to ten. Immediately following this scene, a voiceover counted down from ten to one. The child's face was shown as a still photograph followed by images of nuclear explosions and mushroom clouds. The campaign advertisement ended with a plea to vote for Johnson, implying that Goldwater (who was not mentioned by name) would provoke a nuclear war if he was elected. The advertisement, which featured only a few spoken words of narrative and relied on imagery for its emotional impact, was one of the most provocative in American political campaign history, and many analysts credit it as being the birth of the modern style of "negative political ads" on television. The ad aired only once and was immediately pulled, but was then shown many times by television stations. 

=====Results=====
Presidential election results by state.
Goldwater only won his home state of Arizona and five states in the Deep South, depicted in red. The Southern states, traditionally Democratic up to that time, voted Republican primarily as a statement of opposition to the Civil Rights Act, which had been passed by Johnson and the Northern Democrats, as well as the majority of Republicans in Congress, earlier that year. Charles S Bullock III, and Mark J. Rozell, The Oxford Handbook of Southern Politics (2012) p 303 

In the end, Goldwater received 38.4% of the popular vote, and carried six states: Arizona (with 50.45% of the popular vote) and the core states of the Deep South: Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. In carrying Georgia by a margin of 54-45, Goldwater became the first Republican nominee to win the state.

In all, Johnson won an overwhelming 486 electoral votes, to Goldwater's 52. Goldwater, with his customary bluntness, remarked, "We would have lost even if Abraham Lincoln had come back and campaigned with us." He maintained later in life that he would have won the election if the country had not been in a state of extended grief (referring to the assassination of John F. Kennedy), and that it was simply not ready for a third President in just 14 months.

Goldwater's poor showing pulled down many supporters. Of the 57 Republican Congressmen who endorsed Goldwater before the convention, 20 were defeated for reelection, along with many promising young Republicans. On the other hand, the defeat of so many older politicians created openings for young conservatives to move up the ladder. While the loss of moderate Republicans was temporarythey were back by 1966Goldwater also permanently pulled many conservative Southerners and white ethnics out of the New Deal Coalition. Goldberg, Barry Goldwater 232-37 

"In the South, Goldwater broke through and won five statesthe best showing in the region for a GOP candidate since Reconstruction. In Mississippiwhere Franklin D. Roosevelt had won nearly 100 percent of the vote just 28 years earlierGoldwater claimed a staggering 87 percent." Kornacki, Steve (February 3, 2011) The "Southern Strategy", fulfilled, Salon It has frequently been argued that Goldwater's strong performance in Southern states previously regarded as Democratic strongholds foreshadowed a larger shift in electoral trends in the coming decades that would make the South a Republican bastion (an end to the "Solid South")first in presidential politics and eventually at the congressional and state levels, as well. 

===Goldwater and the revival of American conservatism===
Although Goldwater was not as important in the American conservative movement as Ronald Reagan after 1965, he shaped and redefined the movement from the late 1950s to 1964. Arizona Senator John McCain, who had succeeded Goldwater in the Senate in 1987, summed up Goldwater's legacy, "He transformed the Republican Party from an Eastern elitist organization to the breeding ground for the election of Ronald Reagan." Columnist George Will remarked after the 1980 Presidential election that it took 16 years to count the votes from 1964 and Goldwater won. 

The Republican Party recovered from the 1964 election debacle, picking up 47 seats in the House of Representatives in the 1966 mid-term election. Further Republican successes ensued, including Goldwater's return to the Senate in 1968. In January of that year, Goldwater wrote an article in the National Review "affirming that he not against liberals, that liberals are needed as a counterweight to conservatism, and that he had in mind a fine liberal like Max Lerner". Rothbard, Murray N.. "Confessions of a Right-Wing Liberal". Ludwig von Mises Institute. 

Goldwater was a strong supporter of the environment. He explained his position in 1969:

Throughout the 1970s, as the conservative wing under Reagan gained control of the party, Goldwater concentrated on his Senate duties, especially in military affairs. He played little part in the election or administration of Richard Nixon, but he helped force Nixon's resignation in 1974. In 1976 he helped block Rockefeller's renomination as vice president. When Reagan challenged Ford for the presidential nomination in 1976, Goldwater endorsed Ford, looking for consensus rather than conservative idealism. As one historian notes, "The Arizonan had lost much of his zest for battle." Kolkey, Jonathan Martin. The New Right, 19601968: With Epilogue, 19691980. University Press of America. 1983. quote p. 254 Brennan, Mary C. Turning Right in the Sixties: The Conservative Capture of the GOP. University of North Carolina Press. 1995. ch. 6 Reinhard, David W. The Republican Right since 1945. University Press of Kentucky. 1983, p. 230. 

In 1979, when President Carter normalized relations with Communist China, Goldwater and some other senators sued him in the Supreme Court, arguing that the president could not terminate the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with Republic of China (Taiwan) without the approval of Congress. The case, Goldwater v. Carter, was dismissed by the court as a political question.

===Later life===
Signing autographs at the Fiesta Bowl parade in 1983.
By the 1980s, with Ronald Reagan as president and the growing involvement of the religious right in conservative politics, Goldwater's libertarian views on personal issues were revealed; he believed that they were an integral part of true conservatism. Goldwater viewed abortion as a matter of personal choice, not intended for government intervention.

As a passionate defender of personal liberty, he saw the religious right's views as an encroachment on personal privacy and individual liberties. In his 1980 Senate reelection campaign, Goldwater won support from religious conservatives but in his final term voted consistently to uphold legalized abortion and, in 1981, gave a speech on how he was angry about the bullying of American politicians by religious organizations, and would "fight them every step of the way". Goldwater also disagreed with the Reagan administration on certain aspects of foreign policy (for example, he opposed the decision to mine Nicaraguan harbors). Notwithstanding his prior differences with Dwight D. Eisenhower, Goldwater in a 1986 interview rated him the best of the seven Presidents with whom he had worked.

On May 12, 1986, Goldwater was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Ronald Reagan.

After his retirement in 1987, Goldwater described the Arizona Governor Evan Mecham as "hardheaded" and called on him to resign, and two years later stated that the Republican party had been taken over by a "bunch of kooks".

He is a 1987 recipient of the Langley Gold Medal from the Smithsonian Institution. In 1988, in recognition of his career, Princeton University's American Whig-Cliosophic Society awarded Goldwater the James Madison Award for Distinguished Public Service. 

In a 1994 interview with the Washington Post, the retired senator said,

Goldwater visited the small town of Bowen, Illinois in 1989 to see first hand where his mother was raised.

In response to Moral Majority founder Jerry Falwell's opposition to the nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor to the Supreme Court, of which Falwell had said, "Every good Christian should be concerned", Goldwater retorted: "Every good Christian ought to kick Falwell right in the ass." Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 315 (According to John Dean, Goldwater actually suggested that good Christians ought to kick Falwell in the "nuts", but the news media "changed the anatomical reference." ) Goldwater also had harsh words for his one-time political proteg, President Reagan, particularly after the Iran-Contra Affair became public in 1986. Journalist Robert MacNeil, a friend of Goldwater's from the 1964 Presidential campaign, recalled interviewing him in his office shortly afterward. "He was sitting in his office with his hands on his cane... and he said to me, 'Well, aren't you going to ask me about the Iran arms sales?' It had just been announced that the Reagan administration had sold arms to Iran. And I said, 'Well, if I asked you, what would you say?' He said, 'I'd say it's the god-damned stupidest foreign policy blunder this country's ever made!'", though aside from the Iran-Contra scandal, Goldwater thought nonetheless that Reagan was a good president. In 1988 during that year's presidential campaign, he pointedly told vice-presidential nominee Dan Quayle at a campaign event in Arizona "I want you to go back and tell George Bush to start talking about the issues." 

Some of Goldwater's statements in the 1990s alienated many social conservatives. He endorsed Democrat Karan English in an Arizona congressional race, urged Republicans to lay off Bill Clinton over the Whitewater scandal, and criticized the military's ban on homosexuals: "Everyone knows that gays have served honorably in the military since at least the time of Julius Caesar." He also said, "You don't need to be 'straight' to fight and die for your country. You just need to shoot straight." Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 332 A few years before his death he addressed establishment Republicans by saying, "Do not associate my name with anything you do. You are extremists, and you've hurt the Republican party much more than the Democrats have." 

In 1996, he told Bob Dole, whose own presidential campaign received lukewarm support from conservative Republicans: "We're the new liberals of the Republican party. Can you imagine that?" In that same year, with Senator Dennis DeConcini, Goldwater endorsed an Arizona initiative to legalize medical marijuana against the countervailing opinion of social conservatives. 

==Hobbies and interests==

===Amateur radio===
Goldwater was an avid amateur radio operator from the early 1920s onwards, with the call signs 6BPI, K3UIG and K7UGA. The latter is now used by an Arizona club honoring him as a commemorative call. During the Vietnam War, he spent many hours giving servicemen overseas the ability to talk to their families at home over the Military Affiliate Radio System (MARS).

Goldwater was also a prominent spokesman for amateur radio and its enthusiasts. Beginning in 1969 up to his death he appeared in numerous educational and promotional films (and later videos) about the hobby that were produced for the American Radio Relay League (the United States national society representing the interests of radio amateurs) by such producers as Dave Bell (W6AQ), ARRL Southwest Director John R. Griggs (W6KW), Alan Kaul (W6RCL), Forrest Oden (N6ENV), and the late Roy Neal (K6DUE). His first appearance was in Dave Bell's "The World of Amateur Radio" where Goldwater discussed the history of the hobby and demonstrated a live contact with Antarctica. His last on-screen appearance dealing with "ham radio" was in 1994, explaining a then-upcoming, Earth-orbiting ham radio relay satellite.

Electronics were a hobby for Goldwater beyond amateur radio. He enjoyed assembling Heathkits, completing more than 100 and often visiting their maker in Benton Harbor, Michigan to buy more, before the company exited the kit business in 1992. Fisher, Lawrence M. "Plug Is Pulled on Heathkits, Ending a Do-It-Yourself Era" The New York Times, March 30, 1992. 

===Kachina dolls===
Over half of the kachina dolls at the Heard Museum were donated by Goldwater
In 1916, Goldwater visited the Hopi Reservation with Phoenix architect John Rinker Kibby, and obtained his first kachina doll. Eventually his doll collection included 437 items and was presented in 1969 to the Heard Museum in Phoenix. 

===Photography===
Goldwater was an accomplished amateur photographer and in his estate left some 15,000 of his images to three Arizona institutions. He was very keen on candid photography. He got started in photography after receiving a camera as a gift from his wife on their first Christmas together. He was known to use a 4x5 Graflex, Rolleiflex camera,16 MM Bell and Howell motion picture camera, and Nikon FT 35 mm. He was a member of the Royal Photographic Society from 1941 becoming a Life Member in 1948. Information provided by The Royal Photographic Society, United Kingdom, dated October 6, 2011, "Royal Photographic Society". 

For decades, he contributed photographs of his home state to Arizona Highways and was best known for his Western landscapes and pictures of native Americans in the United States. Three books with his photographs are People and Places, from 1967; Barry Goldwater and the Southwest, from 1976; and Delightful Journey, first published in 1940 and reprinted in 1970. Ansel Adams wrote a foreword to the 1976 book. Arizona Republic, May 31, 1998 

Goldwater's photography interests occasionally crossed over with his political career, as well. John F. Kennedy, as president, was known to invite former congressional colleagues to the White House for a drink. On one occasion, Goldwater brought his camera and photographed President Kennedy. When Kennedy received the photo, he returned it to Goldwater, with the inscription, "For Barry Goldwater  Whom I urge to follow the career for which he has shown such talent  photography!  from his friend  John Kennedy." This quip became a classic of American political humor after it was made famous by humorist Bennett Cerf. The photo itself was prized by Goldwater for the rest of his life, and recently sold for $17,925 in a Heritage auction. 

Son Michael Prescott Goldwater formed the Goldwater Family Foundation with the goal of making his father's photography available via the internet. (Barry Goldwater Photographs) was launched in September 2006 to coincide with the HBO documentary "Mr. Conservative", produced by granddaughter CC Goldwater.

===UFOs===
Goldwater was one of the more prominent American politicians to openly show an interest in UFOs.

On March 28, 1975, Goldwater wrote to Shlomo Arnon: "The subject of UFOs has interested me for some long time. About ten or twelve years ago I made an effort to find out what was in the building at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base where the information has been stored that has been collected by the Air Force, and I was understandably denied this request. It is still classified above Top Secret." Goldwater further wrote that there were rumors the evidence would be released, and that he was "just as anxious to see this material as you are, and I hope we will not have to wait much longer." 

The April 25, 1988, issue of The New Yorker carried an interview where Goldwater said he repeatedly asked his friend, Gen. Curtis LeMay, if there was any truth to the rumors that UFO evidence was stored in a secret room at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, and if he (Goldwater) might have access to the room. According to Goldwater, an angry LeMay gave him "holy hell" and said, "Not only can't you get into it but don't you ever mention it to me again." 

In a 1988 interview on Larry King's radio show, Goldwater was asked if he thought the U.S. Government was withholding UFO evidence; he replied "Yes, I do." He added:

==Goldwater Scholarship==
The Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship and Excellence in Education Program was established by Congress in 1986. Its goal is to provide a continuing source of highly qualified scientists, mathematicians, and engineers by awarding scholarships to college students who intend to pursue careers in these fields.

The Scholarship is widely considered the most prestigious award in the U.S. conferred upon undergraduates studying the sciences. It is awarded to about 300 students (college sophomores and juniors) nationwide in the amount of $7500 per academic year (for their senior year, or junior and senior years). It honors Goldwater's keen interest in science and technology.

==Death==
Goldwater's public appearances ended in late 1996 after he suffered a massive stroke; family members then disclosed he was in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease. He died on May 29, 1998, at the age of 89 at his long-time home in Paradise Valley, Arizona, of complications from the stroke. Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, Goldwater, Barry Morris, (19091988). Retrieved January 1, 2007. His ashes were buried at the Episcopal Christ Church of the Ascension in Paradise Valley, Arizona. A memorial statue set in a small park has been erected to honor the memory of Goldwater in that town, near his former home and current resting place.

==Buildings and monuments==
Barry M. Goldwater Terminal 4 entrance at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport
Among the buildings and monuments named after Barry Goldwater are: the Barry M. Goldwater Terminal at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, Goldwater Memorial Park in Paradise Valley, Arizona, the Barry Goldwater Air Force Academy Visitor Center at the United States Air Force Academy, and Barry Goldwater High School in northern Phoenix. In 2010 former Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods, himself a Goldwater scholar and supporter, founded the Goldwater Women's Tennis Classic Tournament to be held annually at the Phoenix Country Club in Phoenix, AZ. 

==Documentary==
Goldwater's granddaughter, CC Goldwater, has co-produced with longtime friend and independent film producer Tani L. Cohen a documentary on Goldwater's life, Mr. Conservative: Goldwater on Goldwater, first shown on HBO on September 18, 2006. 

==Books==
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .

==Relatives==
Goldwater's son, Barry Goldwater, Jr., served as a Congressman from California from 1969 to 1983. He was the first Congressman to serve while having a father in the Senate. Goldwater's nephew, Don Goldwater, sought the Arizona Republican Party nomination for Governor of Arizona in 2006, but was defeated by Len Munsil.

==See also==

* Electoral history of Barry Goldwater
* Goldwater v. Carter, 444 U.S. 996 (1979).
* Barry Goldwater, Jr., son
* Don Goldwater, a nephew
* Goldwater Institute
* Goldwater rule

==Notes==

==References==

===Primary===
* .
* by Goldwater's speechwriter.

===Secondary===
* .
* .
* .
* , the standard scholarly biography.
* .
* .
* .
* Shermer, Elizabeth Tandy (ed.) (2013). Barry Goldwater and the Remaking of the American Political Landscape. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2013.
* Smith, Dean. The Goldwaters of Arizona (1986), includes brief coverage of the parents
* .
* .

==External links==

* Retrieved on 2009-03-03
* 
* The Goldwater Institute
* 

 



[[Baralong incidents]]

The Baralong incidents were naval engagements of the First World War in August and September 1915, involving the Royal Navy Q-ship , later renamed HMS Wyandra, and two German U-boats.

Baralong sank , which had been preparing to sink a nearby merchant ship, the Nicosian. About a dozen of the crewmen managed to escape the sinking submarine, and Lieutenant Godfrey Herbert, commanding officer of Baralong, ordered the surviving sailors to be summarily executed after they boarded the Nicosian. All the survivors of U-27s sinking, including several who had reached the Nicosian, were shot by Baralongs crew. Later, Baralong sank in an incident which has also been described as a war crime. Coles (1986) p. Bridgland (1999) pp. 20-55 

==First incident==

===Action of 19 August 1915===
After the sinking of by a German submarine in May 1915, Lieutenant-Commander Godfrey Herbert, commanding officer of Baralong, was visited by two officers of the Admiralty's Secret Service branch at the naval base at Queenstown, Ireland. He was told, "This Lusitania business is shocking. Unofficially, we are telling you... take no prisoners from U-boats." Bridgland (1999) p. 21 

Interviews with his subordinate officers have established Herbert's undisciplined manner of commanding his ship. Herbert allowed his men to engage in drunken binges during shore leave. During one such incident, at Dartmouth, several members of Baralongs crew were arrested after destroying a local saloon. Herbert paid their bail, then left port with the indicted crewmen aboard. Beginning in April 1915, Herbert ordered his subordinates cease calling him "Sir", and to address him only by the pseudonym "Captain William McBride." Messimer (2002) p. 23 

Throughout the summer of 1915, Baralong continued routine patrol duties in the Irish Sea without encountering the enemy.

On 19 August 1915, sank the White Star Liner with the loss of 44 lives - this included three Americans and led to a diplomatic incident between Germany and the U.S. Baralong had been about 20 mi from the scene, and had received a distress call from the ship. Baralongs crew was infuriated by the attack and by their inability to locate survivors. 

Meanwhile, about 100 mi south of Queenstown, , commanded by Kapitnleutnant Bernard Wegener, stopped the British steamer Nicosian in accordance with the rules laid down by the London Declaration. A boarding party of six men from U-27 discovered that Nicosian was carrying munitions and 250 American mules earmarked for the British Army in France. The Germans allowed the freighter's crew and passengers to board lifeboats, and prepared to sink the freighter with the U-boat's deck gun.

U-27 was lying off Nicosians port quarter and firing into it when Baralong appeared on the scene, flying the ensign of the United States as a false flag. When she was half a mile away, Baralong ran up a signal flag indicating that she was going to rescue Nicosians crew. Wegener acknowledged the signal, then ordered his men to cease firing, and took U-27 along the port side of Nicosian to intercept Baralong. As the submarine disappeared behind the steamship, Herbert steered Baralong on a parallel course along Nicosians starboard side. Messimer (2002) pp. 4647 

The action of 19 August 1915

Before U-27 came round Nicosians bow, Baralong hauled down the American flag, hoisted the Royal Navy's White Ensign, and unmasked her guns. As U-27 came into view from behind Nicosian, Baralong opened fire with her three 12-pounder guns at a range of 600 yd, firing 34 rounds for only a single shot from the submarine. U-27 rolled over and began to sink. O'Neill (2006) p. 9 

According to Tony Bridgland; "Herbert screamed, 'Cease fire!' But his men's blood was up. They were avenging the Arabic and the Lusitania. For them this was no time to cease firing, even as the survivors of the crew appeared on the outer casing, struggling out of their clothes to swim away from her. There was a mighty hiss of compressed air from her tanks and the U-27 vanished from sight in a vortex of giant rumbling bubbles, leaving a pall of smoke over the spot where she had been. It had taken only a few minutes to fire the thirty-four shells into her." Messimer (2002) pp. 29-30 

Meanwhile, Nicosians crew were cheering wildly from the lifeboats. Captain Manning was heard to yell, "If any of those bastard Huns come up, lads, hit 'em with an oar!" Messimer (2002) p. 30 

Twelve men survived the sinking of the submarine: the crews of her two deck guns and those who had been on the conning tower. They swam to Nicosian and attempted to join the six-man boarding party by climbing up her hanging lifeboat falls The ropes by which a boat is lowered from the deck of a ship to the water and pilot ladder. Herbert, worried that they might try to scuttle the steamer, ordered his men to open fire with small arms, killing all in the water. Gibson & Prendergast, p. 53 Grant (2002) p. 27 Halpern (1994) p. 301 Wegener is described by some accounts as being shot while trying to swim to the Baralong. 

Herbert sent Baralongs 12 Royal Marines, under the command of a Corporal Collins, to find the surviving German sailors aboard Nicosian. As they departed, Herbert told Collins, "Take no prisoners." Messimer (2002) p. 42 The Germans were discovered in the engine room and shot on sight. According to Sub-Lieutenant Gordon Steele: "Wegener ran to a cabin on the upper deck -- I later found out it was Manning's bathroom. The marines broke down the door with the butts of their rifles, but Wegener squeezes through a scuttle and dropped into the sea. He still had his life-jacket on and put up his arms in surrender. Corporal Collins, however, took aim and shot him through the head." Bridgland (1999) p. 43 Corporal Collins later recalled that, after Wegener's death, Herbert threw a revolver in the German captain's face and screamed, "What about the Lusitania, you bastard!" An alternative account says that the Germans who boarded Nicosian were killed by the freighter's engine room staff; this report apparently came from the officer in command of the muleteers. McGill & Norris (2007) pp. 320-1 

===Aftermath===
In Herbert's report to the Admiralty, he stated he feared the survivors from the U-boat's crew would board the freighter and scuttle her, so he ordered the Royal Marines on his ship to shoot the survivors. If they had scuttled the freighter, it could have been counted as negligence on the part of Herbert. Moments before Baralong began her attack, the submarine was firing on the freighter. It is not known if the escaping sailors actually intended to scuttle the freighter.

The Admiralty, upon receiving Herbert's report, immediately ordered its suppression, but the strict censorship imposed on the event failed when Americans who had witnessed the incident from Nicosians lifeboats spoke to newspaper reporters after their return to the United States. Halpern 

===German memorandum===
The German government delivered a memorandum on the incident via the American ambassador in Berlin, who received it on 6 December 1915. In it, they cited six US citizens as witnesses, stating they had made sworn depositions regarding the incident before public notaries in the US.

The statements said that five survivors from U-27 managed to board Nicosian, while the rest were shot and killed on Herbert's orders while clinging to the merchant vessel's lifeboat falls. It was further stated that when Herbert ordered his Marines to board Nicosian, he gave the order "take no prisoners". Four German sailors were found in Nicosians engine room and propeller shaft tunnel, and were killed. According to the witness statements, U-27s commander was shot while swimming towards Baralong. the British reply is not included 

The memorandum demanded that the captain and crew of Baralong be tried for the murder of unarmed German sailors, threatening to "take the serious decision of retribution for an unpunished crime". Sir Edward Grey replied through the American ambassador that the incident could be grouped together with the Germans' sinking of SS Arabic, their attack on a stranded British submarine on the neutral Dutch coast, and their attack on the steamship Ruel, and suggested that they be placed before a tribunal composed of US Navy officers. Hesperides (2007) pp. 58-59 

===German reaction===
A debate took place in the Reichstag on 15 January 1916, where the incident was described as a "cowardly murder" and Grey's note as being "full of insolence and arrogance". It was announced that reprisals had been decided, but not what form they would take. 

The outrage aroused in Germany by Baralongs actions was used by the Kaiserliche Marine to justify attacking and sinking ships without warning at sea during the First World War, and was used again in the Second World War as a reason for the Kriegsmarine to do the same. A German medal was issued commemorating the event. Baralong and her crew were also placed on the Kaiserliche Marines "Black List": any member of her crew was to be shot on sight if captured.

As a precaution to protect the ships against any reprisals against their crews, HMS Wyandra was transferred to the Mediterranean, and took the name of sister ship Manica, while Baralongs name was deleted from Lloyd's Register. Nicosian was renamed Nevisian, and the crew was issued new Discharge Books, with the voyage omitted. O'Neill (2006) p. 10 

Baralongs crew were later awarded 185 prize bounty for sinking U-27. Chatterton (1980) p. 26 

A Kriegsmarine submarine flotilla formed on 25 June 1938 was named "Wegener" in memory of U-27s commander.

==Second incident==

===Action of 24 September 1915===
On 24 September 1915, Baralong sank the U-boat , for which her commanding officer at the time, Lieutenant-Commander A. Wilmot-Smith, was later awarded 170 prize bounty. 

U-41 was in the process of sinking SS Urbino with gunfire when Baralong arrived on the scene, flying an American flag. When U-41 surfaced near Baralong, the latter opened fire while continuing to fly the American flag, and sank the U-boat.

===Aftermath of the second incident===
Unlike the neutral Americans in the first incident, the only witnesses to the second attack were the German and British sailors present. Oberleutnant zur See Iwan Crompton, after returning to Germany from a prisoner-of-war camp, reported that Baralong had run down the lifeboat he was in; he leapt clear and was shortly after taken aboard Baralong. The British crew denied that they had run down the lifeboat. Messimer, pp. 61-62 

Crompton later published an account of U-41s exploits in 1917, U-41: der zweite Baralong-Fall, which called the sinking of U-41 a "second Baralong case". Hadley (1995) p. 36 

The event was also commemorated in a propaganda medal designed by the German engraver Karl Goetz. This was one of many medals that were popular in Germany from around 1910 to 1940.

==See also==
*Unrestricted submarine warfare
*Merchant raiders
*Commerce raiding
*Tonnage war

==Notes==
;Notes

;Citations

==References==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*



[[Banda]]

Banda may refer to:

==People==
*Banda (surname)
*Hastings Banda, the first president of Malawi

==Places==
;Ghana
*Banda, Ghana, a town in Kpandai District
*Banda Traditional Area, formerly in Tain/Banda District

;India
*Banda, Maharashtra, a small town in Maharashtra
*Banda, Uttar Pradesh, a city and district headquarters of Banda district, Uttar Pradesh
*Banda district, a district in Uttar Pradesh
*Banda (Lok Sabha constituency), Uttar Pradesh
*Banda (Vidhan Sabha constituency), Madhya Pradesh

;Indonesia
*Banda Islands, a group of ten small volcanic islands in the Banda Sea
*Banda Sea, the sea of the South Moluccas, a part of the Pacific Ocean

;Uganda
*Banda, Uganda, a neighbourhood that lies partly in Kira and partly in Kampala
*Banda sub-county, an administrative subdivision of Namayingo District

==Music==
*Banda music, a form of Mexican music
*Band (Garage Band):
A band is a group of four or more of persons that sing one or more geners.
*Banda (opera), a musical ensemble which is used in addition to the main opera orchestra and plays the music which is actually heard by the characters in the opera

==Other uses==
*Banda people, an ethnic group of the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Cameroon, and Sudan
*Banda languages, spoken by the Banda people
*Banda machine, a type of low-volume document copying machine
*Banda, a large smoked fish in Chad
*Banda, a caste of adivasis in Orissa, Chhattisgarh, and Jharkhand
*Banda, a vulgar slang used in Orissa

==See also==
*



[[Bladder (disambiguation)]]

Bladder often refers to the urinary bladder, which collects urine for excretion in animals.

Bladder may also refer to:

==Biology==
* Urinary bladder
** Urinary bladder (Chinese medicine)
** Bladder control; see Urinary incontinence
** Artificial urinary bladder, in humans
** Pig bladder, urinary bladder of a domestic pig, with many human uses
* Gallbladder, which stores bile for digestion
* Swim bladder, in bony fishes, an internal organ that helps to control buoyancy

==Technology==
* Waterskin, a traditional container for transporting water
* Hydration system, sometimes known as a bladder
* Wine bladder, see Bag-In-Box
* Pneumatic bladder, an old technology with many industrial applications
* Fuel bladder

==See also==
*
*Gallbladder (disambiguation)



[[Bob Young (businessman)]]

Bob Young
Robert "Bob" Young is a serial entrepreneur whose biggest success has been Red Hat Inc, the open source software company. He is also the owner of the Hamilton Tiger-Cats of the Canadian Football League. He was born in Ancaster, Ontario, Canada. He attended Trinity College School in Port Hope, Ontario. He received a Bachelor of Arts from Victoria College at the University of Toronto. 

Prior to Red Hat, Young built a couple of computer rental and leasing businesses, including founding Vernon Computer Rentals in 1984. Descendants of Vernon are still operating under that name. After leaving Vernon, Young founded the ACC Corp Inc. in 1993. 

Marc Ewing and Young's partnership started in 1994 when ACC acquired the Red Hat trademarks from Ewing. In early 1995, ACC changed its name to Red Hat Software, which has subsequently changed to simply Red Hat, Inc. Young served as Red Hat's CEO until 1999. 

After leaving Red Hat he founded Lulu.com in 2002, a self-publishing web-site that claims to be the world's fastest-growing provider of print-on-demand books. He is Lulu's CEO. In 2006 Young established the Lulu Blooker Prize, a book prize for books that began as blogs. He launched the prize partly as a means of promoting Lulu.

Young also co-founded Linux Journal in 1994, and in 2003, he purchased the Hamilton Tiger-Cats, a Canadian Football League franchise. 

Young is a strong believer in user-generated content and open source software. In a 2008 interview he described the way that online social media has empowered consumers:

Today the Internet connects every single one of your customers, not just to you but to each other. So you produce a lemon of a car and you wont know where to hide because your customers are going to tell each other about it and then the rest of the world about it. So it is actually a fundamentally healthy thing from a consumer point of view.

Conversely if you do have a better product suddenly you have these businesses that grow like topsy. If you come up with an innovation that serves, that resonates with customers, the Internet will allow that innovation to spread dramatically faster than any other technology has enabled a new innovation to be adopted in the history of mankind. Expert Business Advice: Bob Young on why the people are more powerful than ever (video) Retrieved 2009-10-06 

Young focuses his philanthropic efforts to support an increased access to information and advancement of knowledge. In 1999 he founded The Center for the Public Domain. Young currently supports Creative Commons, the Public Knowledge Project, the Dictionary of Old English, the Internet Archive, ibiblio, the NCSU eGames, "NCSU eGames official site" accessed 2012-01-05 and the Bald Head Island Conservancy, "BHIC official site" accessed 2012-01-05 among others. He is a Visionaries' Circle supporter of the Loran Scholars program.

==Family==
Joyce Young, Bob Young's aunt, purchased stock in Red Hat Inc. shortly after its founding. When Red Hat's stock rose significantly after its initial public offering in 1999, they sold enough stock to recoup their initial investment, and retained some stocks. By January 2000, the remaining stock was valued in the millions. In June 2000, she donated $40 million to the Hamilton Community Foundation to be used largely in improvement of Hamilton-area health facilities, an act that represented one of the single largest charitable donations in Canadian history. The couple also made significant donations to the Royal Military College of Canada.

==See also==
* Center for the Public Domain

==References==



[[Babylon 5]]

Babylon 5 is an American space opera television series created by writer and producer J. Michael Straczynski, under the Babylonian Productions label, in association with Straczynski's Synthetic Worlds Ltd. and Warner Bros. Domestic Television. After the successful airing of a backdoor pilot movie, Warner Bros. commissioned the series as part of the second-year schedule of programs provided by its Prime Time Entertainment Network (PTEN). The pilot episode was broadcast on February 22, 1993 in the US. The first season premiered in the US on January 26, 1994, and the series ultimately ran for the intended five seasons. Describing it as having "always been conceived as, fundamentally, a five-year story, a novel for television," Straczynski wrote 92 of the 110 episodes, and served as executive producer, along with Douglas Netter. 

Set between the years 2257 and 2281, it depicts a future where Earth has sovereign states, and a unifying Earth government. Colonies within the solar system, and beyond, make up the Earth Alliance, and contact has been made with other spacefaring races. The ensemble cast portray alien ambassadorial staff and humans assigned to the five-mile-long Babylon 5 space station, a center for trade and diplomacy. Described as "one of the most complex programs on television," the various story arcs drew upon the prophesies, religious zealotry, racial tensions, social pressures, and political rivalries which existed within each of their cultures, to create a contextual framework for the motivations and consequences of the protagonists' actions. With a strong emphasis on character development set against a backdrop of conflicting ideologies on multiple levels, Straczynski wanted "to take an adult approach to SF, and attempt to do for television SF what Hill Street Blues did for cop shows." 

Generally viewed as having "launched the new era of television CGI visual effects," it received multiple awards during its initial run, including two consecutive Hugo Awards for best dramatic presentation, and continues to regularly feature prominently in various polls and listings highlighting top-rated science fiction series. Not appearing on American television since 2003, it continues to be shown in international markets such as Fox in the UK, the TV4-ScifFi Channel in Sweden, and the FBC TV channel in Fiji. Initially written by Straczynski, DC began publishing Babylon 5 comics in 1994, with stories that closely tied in with events depicted in the show, with events in the comics eventually being referenced onscreen in the actual television series. The franchise continued to expand into short stories, RPG games, and novels, with the Technomage trilogy of books being the last to be published in 2001, shortly after the spin-off television series, Crusade, was cancelled.

All rights except for a possible movie are controlled by Warner (movie rights are retained by Straczynski).

== Plot summary ==
=== Backstory ===

At the beginning of the series, five dominant civilizations are represented. The dominant species are the Humans, Minbari, Narn, Centauri, and the Vorlons. "The Shadows" and their various allies are malevolent species who appear later in the series. Several dozen less powerful species from the League of Non-Aligned Worlds appear, including the Drazi, Brakiri, Vree, Markab, and pak'ma'ra. The station's first three predecessors (the original Babylon station, Babylon 2 and Babylon 3) were sabotaged or accidentally destroyed before their completion. The fourth station, Babylon 4, vanished 24 hours after it became fully operational. 

=== Synopsis ===

The television series takes its name from the Babylon 5 space station, located in the Epsilon Eridani star system, at the fifth Lagrangian point between the fictional planet Epsilon III and its moon. Babylon 5 is an O'Neill cylinder five miles long and a half-mile to a mile in diameter. Living areas accommodate the various alien species, providing differing atmospheres and gravities. Human visitors to the alien sectors are shown using breathing equipment and other measures to tolerate the conditions. 

The five seasons of the series each correspond to one fictional sequential year in the period 22582262. Each season shares its name with an episode that is central to that season's plot. As the series starts, the Babylon 5 station is welcoming ambassadors from various races in the galaxy. Earth has just barely survived an accidental war with the much more powerful Minbari, who, despite their superior technology, mysteriously surrendered at the brink of the destruction of the human race during the Battle of the Line.

=== Season 1  Year 2258 ===

During 2258, Commander Jeffrey Sinclair is in charge of the station. Much of the story revolves around his gradual discovery that it was his capture by the Minbari at the Battle of the Line which ended the war against Earth. Upon capturing Sinclair, the Minbari came to believe that Valen, a great Minbari leader and hero of the last Minbari-Shadow war, had been reincarnated as the Commander. Concluding that others of their species had been, and were continuing to be reborn as humans, and in obedience to the edict that Minbari do not kill one another, lest they harm the soul, they stopped the war just as Earth's final defenses were on the verge of collapse.

Meanwhile, tensions between the Centauri Republic, which is an empire in decline, and the Narn Regime, a former dominion which rebelled and gained freedom, are increasing. Ambassador G'Kar of the Narn wishes for his people to strike back at the Centauri for what they did, and Ambassador Londo Mollari of the Centauri wishes for his people to become again the great empire they once were. As part of these struggles, Mollari makes a deal with a mysterious ally to strike back at the Narn, further heightening tensions.

It is gradually revealed that Ambassador Delenn is a member of the mysterious and powerful Grey Council, the ruling body of the Minbari. Towards the end of 2258, she begins the transformation into a Minbari-human hybrid, ostensibly to build a bridge between the humans and Minbari. The year ends with the death of Earth Alliance president Luis Santiago. The death is officially ruled an accident, but some members of the military, including the staff of Babylon 5, believe it to be an assassination.

=== Season 2  Year 2259 ===

At the beginning of 2259, Captain John Sheridan replaces Sinclair as the military governor of the station after Sinclair is reassigned as ambassador to Minbar. He and the command staff gradually learn that the assassination of President Santiago was arranged by his then-Vice President, Morgan Clark, who has now become president. Conflict develops between the Babylon 5 command staff and the Psi Corps, an increasingly autocratic organization which oversees and controls the lives of human telepaths.

The Shadows, an ancient and extremely powerful race who have recently emerged from hibernation, are revealed to be the cause of a variety of mysterious and disturbing events, including the attack on the Narn outpost at the end of 2258. Centauri Ambassador Londo Mollari unknowingly enlists their aid through his association with their mysterious human representative Mr. Morden in the ongoing conflict with the Narn. The elderly and ailing Centauri emperor, long an advocate of reconciliation with the Narn, unfortunately has insufficient control to prevent others from instigating war against the Narn Regime. When the emperor dies suddenly during a peace mission to Babylon 5, a number of conspirators, including Ambassador Londo Mollari and Lord Refa, take control of the Centauri government by assassinating their opponents and placing the late emperor's unstable nephew on the throne. Their first act is to start open aggression against the Narn. After a full-scale war breaks out, the Centauri with the help of the Shadows through Londo eventually conquer Narn in a brutal attack involving mass drivers, outlawed weapons of mass destruction. Towards the end of the year, the Clark administration begins to show increasingly totalitarian characteristics, clamping down on dissent and restricting freedom of speech. The Vorlons are revealed to be the basis of legends about angels on various worlds, including Earth, and are the ancient enemies of the Shadows. They enlist the aid of Sheridan and the Babylon 5 command staff in the struggle against the Shadows.

=== Season 3  Year 2260 ===

The Psi Corps and President Clark, whose government has discovered Shadow vessels buried in Earth's solar system, begin to harness the vessels' advanced technology. The Clark administration continues to become increasingly xenophobic and totalitarian, and gradually develops an Orwellian government style, including an organization called Night Watch which targets citizens who hold views contrary to those of Clark's regime.

Sheridan and Delenn's "conspiracy of light" works to uncover clues about how to defeat the Shadows. During a mission near Ganymede, one of the moons of Jupiter, their ship is seen by an Earth Alliance vessel, but not recognized. Though they escape and no shots were fired in the encounter, President Clark uses it as an excuse to declare martial law. This triggers a war of independence on Mars, which had long had a strained political relationship with Earth. Babylon 5 attempts to avoid conflict with Earth, but in response to civilian bombings on Mars, concerns with Night Watch, and illegal orders meant to oppress their populations, they choose to declare independence from Earth, along with several other outlying Earth Alliance colonies. In response, the Earth Alliance attempts to retake Babylon 5 by force, but with the aid of the Minbari, who have allied with the station against the growing Shadow threat, the attack is repelled.

Becoming concerned over the Shadows' growing influence among his people, Centauri ambassador Londo Mollari attempts to sever ties with them. Mr. Morden, the Shadows' human representative, tricks him into restoring the partnership by engineering the murder of Mollari's mistress while putting the blame on a rival Centauri House. Open warfare breaks out between the Shadows and the alliance led by Babylon 5 and the Minbari. It is learned that genetic manipulation by the Vorlons is the source of human telepathy, as it is later discovered that Shadow ships are vulnerable to telepathic attacks. Displeased at the Vorlons' lack of direct action against the Shadows, Captain John Sheridan browbeats Vorlon ambassador Kosh Naranek into launching an attack against their mutual enemy. Kosh's deeds lead to his subsequent assassination by the Shadows.

Former station commander Jeffrey Sinclair returns to Babylon 5 to enlist the aid of Captain Sheridan, Delenn, Ivanova and Marcus in stealing the Babylon 4 space station and sending it 1,000 years back in time to use it as a base of operations against the Shadows in the previous Minbari-Shadow war. Undergoing the same transformation as Delenn at the end of Season 1, Sinclair transforms into a Minbari and is subsequently revealed to be the actual Valen of Minbari legend, rather than simply a reincarnation. Meanwhile, as a result of the unstable time travel, Sheridan sees a vision of the downfall of Centauri Prime when it is attacked by Shadow allies after the Shadow war, and he becomes determined to prevent that future.

Sheridan and Delenn begin a romantic relationship, but their lives and the war are interrupted by the sudden reappearance of Sheridan's wife, who was presumed dead after taking part in an archaeological expedition to Z'ha'dum years prior. She tells Sheridan that the Shadows are not evil, hoping to bring him back with her and recruit him to their cause. He soon realizes that her mind has been tampered with and corrupted by the Shadows, but accepts her offer to visit Z'ha'dum because he hopes it will save the galaxy sooner and prevent the downfall of Centauri Prime. He takes with him a pair of nuclear warheads, which he uses to destroy their largest city, and is last seen jumping into a miles-deep pit to escape the explosion.

Shadow vessels appear at the station, but disappear after Sheridan's attack. However, after they leave, station personnel realize that Garibaldi, who left in a fighter to defend against the vessels, never returned.

=== Season 4  Year 2261 ===

In 2261, the Vorlons join the Shadow War, but their tactics become a concern for the alliance when the Vorlons begin destroying entire planets which they deem to have been "influenced" by the Shadows. Disturbed by this turn of events, Babylon 5 recruits several other powerful and ancient races (the First Ones) to their cause, against both the Shadows and the Vorlons. Captain John Sheridan returns to the station after escaping from Z'ha'dum and reunites the galaxy against the Shadows, but at a price: barring illness or injury, he has only 20 years left to live. He is accompanied by a mysterious alien named Lorien who claims to be the first sentient being in the galaxy, and who breathed life into Sheridan at Z'ha'dum. Once Sheridan returns, he and Delenn formalize their relationship and begin planning to marry, though most of their plans are put on hold due to the ongoing war.

Hours before Sheridan's return, Garibaldi is rescued and returned to the station, in rather dubious circumstances. Over the course of the next several months, he becomes markedly more paranoid and suspicious of other alien races and of Sheridan than he was before, causing worry among his friends and colleagues. After the Shadows are defeated Garibaldi leaves his post as security chief and works on his own as a "provider of information". He begins working for one William Edgars, a Mars tycoon, who is married to Garibaldi's former love. While he works ever closer with Edgars, he becomes increasingly aggressive toward Sheridan and eventually leaves Babylon 5.

Centauri Emperor Cartagia forges a relationship with the Shadows. With the reluctant help of his enemy G'Kar, Londo Mollari engineers the assassination of Cartagia and repudiates his agreement with the Shadows. In exchange for G'Kar's help, Londo frees the Narn from Centauri occupation. Londo afterwards kills Mr. Morden and destroys the Shadow vessels based on the Centauri homeworld, in an attempt to save his planet from destruction by the Vorlons. Aided by the other ancient races, and several younger ones, Sheridan lures both the Vorlons and the Shadows into an immense battle, during which the Vorlons and Shadows reveal that they have been left as guardians of the younger races, but due to philosophical differences, ended up using them as pawns in their endless proxy wars throughout the ages. The younger races reject their continued interference, and the Vorlons and Shadows, along with the remaining First Ones, agree to depart the galaxy in order to allow the younger races to find their own way.

Minbar is gripped by a brief civil war between the Warrior and Religious castes. Delenn secretly meets with Neroon of the Warrior caste and convinces him that neither side can be allowed to win. She tells him that she will undergo a ritual wherein she will be willing to sacrifice herself, but will stop the ritual before she actually dies. When Neroon sees that she actually intends to go through the entire ritual, he rescues her and sacrifices himself instead, declaring that, although he was born Warrior caste, in his heart he is Religious caste.

As part of the ongoing conflict between Earth and Babylon 5, Garibaldi eventually betrays Sheridan and arranges his capture in order to gain Edgars' trust and learn his plans. Garibaldi later learns that Edgars created a virus that is dangerous only to telepaths. It is then revealed that after Garibaldi was captured the previous year, he was taken to the Psi Corps and re-programmed by Bester to provide information to him at the right time. Bester releases Garibaldi of his programming, and allows him to remember everything he has done since being kidnapped. Edgars is killed and his wife disappears, but is reunited with Garibaldi after the end of the war. 

Sheridan is tortured and interrogated by those who hope to break him and turn him into a propaganda tool for Earth's totalitarian government. Fortunately, Garibaldi is able to help free Sheridan and return him to the campaign to free Earth. An alliance led by Babylon 5 frees Earth from totalitarian rule by president Clark in a short but bloody war. This culminates in Clark's suicide and the restoration of democratic government due to Susanna Luchenko (played by Beata Poniak) becoming president of Earth's Alliance. Mars is granted full independence, and Sheridan agrees to resign his commission. The League of Non-Aligned Worlds is dissolved and reformed into the Interstellar Alliance, with Sheridan elected as its first president and continuing his command of the Rangers, who are to act as a galactic equivalent of United Nations peacekeepers. Londo and G'Kar enter an uneasy alliance to help both their races as well as Sheridan in forming the Interstellar Alliance. During the Battle Ivanova is critically injured, promised only a few days to live. Marcus, who had fallen in love with Ivanova, finds the same alien healing device used to revive Garibaldi at the beginning of the second season, and uses it to transfer his life energy into Ivanova, causing her to live and him to die. This causes her immense emotional anguish, and she chooses to leave Babylon 5.

Sheridan and Delenn complete their marriage ceremony while en route to Babylon 5, where they will head the Interstellar Alliance for the next year.

In the season finale, the events of 100, 500, 1000, and one million years into the future are shown, depicting Babylon 5's lasting influence throughout history. Among the events shown are the political aftermath of the 2261 civil war, a subsequent nuclear war on Earth involving a new totalitarian government in the year AD 2762, the resulting fall of Earth into a pre-industrial society, the loss and restoration of humanity's knowledge of space travel, and the final evolution of mankind into energy beings similar to the Vorlons, after which Earth's sun goes nova.

=== Season 5  Year 2262 and beyond===

In 2262, Earthforce Captain Elizabeth Lochley is appointed to command Babylon 5, which is now also the headquarters of the Interstellar Alliance. The station grows in its role as a sanctuary for rogue telepaths running from the Psi Corps, resulting in conflict. G'Kar, former Narn ambassador to Babylon 5, becomes unwillingly a spiritual icon after a book that he wrote while incarcerated during the Narn-Centauri War is published without his knowledge. The Drakh, former allies of the Shadows who remained in the galaxy, take control of Regent Virini on Centauri Prime through a parasitic creature called a Keeper, then incite a war between the Centauri and the Interstellar Alliance, in order to isolate the Centauri from the Alliance and gain a malleable homeworld for themselves.

Centauri Prime is devastated by Narn and Drazi warships and Londo Mollari becomes emperor, then ends the war. However, the Drakh blackmail him into accepting a Drakh Keeper, under threat of the complete nuclear destruction of the planet. Vir Cotto, Mollari's loyal and more moral aide, becomes ambassador to Babylon 5 in his stead. G'Kar also leaves Babylon 5 to escape his unwanted fame and explore the rim. Sheridan and Delenn move to a city on Minbar, where the new headquarters of the Interstellar Alliance are located, while celebrating their first year of marriage and the upcoming birth of their son, and mourning the loss of dear friendships. Garibaldi marries and settles down on Mars, where he and his wife share ownership of a prominent pharmaceutical company. Most other main characters, including Stephen Franklin and Lyta Alexander, leave Babylon 5 as well.

As shown in flash-forwards earlier in the series, the next several years include the reign of Londo Mollari as Centauri Emperor. Sixteen years later, Londo sacrifices his life to rescue Sheridan and Delenn from the Drakh, in the hope that they in turn can save Centauri Prime. To prevent the Drakh from discovering his ruse, he asks G'Kar, now an old friend, to kill him, but Londo's Keeper wakes up and forces him to kill G'Kar in return. They die at each other's throats, in accordance with Londo's vision many decades earlier, and Vir Cotto succeeds him as emperor, free of Drakh influence.

Three years after Londo's death, Sheridan himself is on the verge of death and takes one last opportunity to gather his old friends together. Shortly after his farewell party, Sheridan says goodbye to Delenn, though in Minbari fashion they use the word "goodnight" to signify their hope of an eventual reunion. Sheridan then takes a final trip to the obsolete Babylon 5 station before its decommissioning. He returns to the site of the final battle between the Vorlons and the Shadows and apparently dies, but is instead claimed by The First One, who invites him to join the other First Ones on a journey beyond the rim of the galaxy. Babylon 5 station is destroyed in a demolition shortly after Sheridan's departure, its existence no longer necessary as the Alliance has taken over its diplomatic purposes and other trading routes have been established. This final episode features a cameo by Straczynski as the technician who switches off the lights before Babylon 5 is demolished.

== Themes ==
Throughout its run, Babylon 5 found ways to portray themes relevant to modern and historical social issues. It marked several firsts in television science fiction, such as the exploration of the political and social landscapes of the first human colonies, their interactions with Earth, and the underlying tensions. Babylon 5 was also one of the first television science fiction shows to denotatively refer to a same-sex relationship. In the show, sexual orientation is as much of an issue as "being left-handed or right-handed". Unrequited love is explored as a source of pain for the characters, though not all the relationships end unhappily. 

=== Order vs. chaos; authoritarianism vs. free will ===

The clash between order and chaos, and the people caught in between, plays an important role in Babylon 5. The conflict between two unimaginably powerful older races, the Vorlons and the Shadows, is represented as a battle between two competing ideologies, each seeking to turn the humans and the other younger races to their beliefs. The Vorlons represent an authoritarian philosophy: you will do what we tell you to, because we tell you to do it. The Vorlon question, "Who are you?" focuses on identity as a catalyst for shaping personal goals; the intention is not to solicit a "correct" answer, but to "tear down the artifices we construct around ourselves until we're left facing ourselves, not our roles." The Shadows represent a philosophy of evolution through fire, of sowing the seeds of conflict in order to engender progress. The question the Shadows ask is "What do you want?" In contrast to the Vorlons, they place personal desire and ambition first, using it to shape identity, encouraging conflict between groups who choose to serve their own glory or profit. The representation of order and chaos was informed by the Babylonian myth that the universe was born in the conflict between both. The climax of this conflict comes with the younger races' exposing of the Vorlons' and the Shadows' "true faces" and the rejection of both philosophies, heralding the dawn of a new age without their interference.

The notion that the war was about "killing your parents" is echoed in the portrayal of the civil war between the human colonies and Earth. Deliberately dealing in historical and political metaphor, with particular emphasis upon McCarthyism and the HUAC, the Earth Alliance becomes increasingly authoritarian, eventually sliding into a dictatorship. The show examines the impositions on civil liberties under the pretext of greater defense against outside threats which aid its rise, and the self-delusion of a populace which believes its moral superiority will never allow a dictatorship to come to power, until it is too late. The successful rebellion led by the Babylon 5 station results in the restoration of a democratic government, and true autonomy for Mars and the colonies. Episode 4x21, "Rising Star" 

=== War and peace ===
The Babylon 5 universe deals with numerous armed conflicts which range on an interstellar scale. The story begins in the aftermath of a war which brought the human race to the brink of extinction, caused by a misunderstanding during a first contact situation. The Babylon 5 station is subsequently built in order to foster peace through diplomacy, described as the "last, best hope for peace" in the opening credits monologue during its first three seasons. Wars between separate alien civilizations are featured. The conflict between the Narn and the Centauri is followed from its beginnings as a minor territorial dispute amplified by historical animosity, through to its end, in which weapons of mass destruction are employed to subjugate and enslave an entire planet. The war is an attempt to portray a more sobering kind of conflict than usually seen on science fiction television. Informed by the events of the first Gulf War, the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Soviet invasion of Prague, the intent was to recreate these moments when "the world held its breath" and the emotional core of the conflict was the disbelief that the situation could have occurred at all, and the desperation to find a way to bring it to an end. By the start of the third season, the opening monologue had changed to say that the hope for peace had "failed" and the Babylon 5 station had become the "last, best hope for victory", indicating that while peace is a laudable accomplishment, it can also mean a capitulation to an enemy intent on committing horrendous acts, and that "peace is a byproduct of victory against those who do not want peace." 

The Shadow War also features prominently in the show, during which an advanced alien species attempts to sow the seeds of conflict in order to promote technological and cultural advancement. The gradual discovery of the scheme and the rebellion against it, serve as the backdrop to the first three seasons, but also as a metaphor for the war within ourselves. The concurrent limiting of civil liberties and Earth's descent into a dictatorship are "shadow wars" of their own. In ending the Shadow War before the conclusion of the series, the show was able to more fully explore its aftermath, and it is this "war at home" which forms the bulk of the remaining two seasons. The struggle for independence between Mars and Earth culminates with a civil war between the human colonies (led by the Babylon 5 station) and the home planet. Choosing Mars as both the spark for the civil war, and the staging ground for its dramatic conclusion, enabled the viewer to understand the conflict more fully than had it involved an anonymous colony orbiting a distant star. The conflict, and the reasons behind it, were informed by Nazism, McCarthyism and the breakup of Yugoslavia, and the unraveling of the former Balkan country also served as partial inspiration for another civil war, which involved the alien Minbari. 

The post-war landscape has its roots in the Reconstruction. The attempt to resolve the issues of the American Civil War after the conflict had ended, and this struggle for survival in a changed world was also informed by works such as Alas, Babylon, a novel dealing with the after-effects of a nuclear war on a small American town. The show expresses that the end of these wars is not an end to war itself. Events shown hundreds of years into the show's future tell of wars which will once again bring the human race to the edge of annihilation, demonstrating that mankind will not change, and the best that can be hoped for after it falls is that it climbs a little higher each time, until it can one day "take place among the stars, teaching those who follow." 

=== Religion ===

Many of Earth's contemporary religions are shown to still exist, with the main human characters often having religious convictions, including Roman Catholicism, including the Jesuits, Judaism and the fictional Foundationism, which was created after first contact with alien races. Alien beliefs in the show range from the Centauri's Bacchanalian-influenced religions, of which there are up to seventy different denominations, to the more pantheistic, as with the Narn and Minbari religions. In the show's third season, a community of Cistercian monks takes up residence on the Babylon 5 station, in order to learn what other races call God, and to come to a better understanding of the different religions through study at close quarters. 

References to both human and alien religion is often subtle and brief, but can also form the main theme of an episode. The first season episode "The Parliament of Dreams" is a conventional "showcase" for religion, in which each species on the Babylon 5 station has an opportunity to demonstrate its beliefs, while "Passing Through Gethsemane" focuses on a specific position of Roman Catholic beliefs, as well as concepts of justice, vengeance and biblical forgiveness. Other treatments have been more contentious, such as the David Gerrold-scripted "Believers", in which alien parents would rather see their son die than undergo a life-saving operation because their religious beliefs forbid it. When religion is an integral part of an episode, various characters can be used to express differing view points. Such as in "Soul Hunter", where the concept of an immortal soul is touched upon, and whether after death it is destroyed, reincarnated or simply does not exist. The character arguing the latter, Doctor Stephen Franklin, often appears in the more spiritual storylines as his scientific rationality is used to create dramatic conflict. Undercurrents of religions such as Buddhism have been viewed by some in various episode scripts, and while identifying himself as an atheist, Straczynski believes that passages of dialog can take on distinct meanings to viewers of differing faiths, and that the show ultimately expresses ideas which cross religious boundaries. 

=== Sacrifice ===
A major theme in Babylon 5 is the concept of sacrifice for a greater cause. Kosh sacrifices his life for a first victory against the Shadows. John Sheridan is ready to die at Z'ha'dum. Delenn is ready to die in the starfire wheel to restore Minbari society. Marcus Cole gives his life to save Susan Ivanova. Londo Mollari willingly accepts complete enslavement by a Drakh keeper to save the Centauri from annihilation. Many minor characters also willingly give their lives such as the crew of Drazi or Minbari ships in the final confrontation with the Shadows to save the Army of Light's leaders, some Centauri staying back at the island of Selini to allow the destruction of the Shadow warships, and so on. Captain Ericsson of White Star 14 is knowingly given a false report detailing the opening of an Army of Light base on Coriana VI at approximately the same time as the Vorlons' arrival. It is a suicide mission; he is to intrude into Shadow space and engage the Shadows as if on a real raid, so that when the Shadows destroyed his ship and discovered the file, they would be convinced the report is true and rush to Coriana. By forcing a direct confrontation, Sheridan believes he can finally get the Vorlons and Shadows into a position where he can resolve the war. Ericsson grimly accepts the mission and gives a final Anla'Shok salute to Delenn before signing off. "Some of us must be sacrificed if all are to be saved." is the spiritual epiphany experienced by G'Kar. This reflects the Vorlon philosophy in contrast to the self-interest philosophy of the Shadows.

=== Dreams and visions ===
The subliminal and subconscious play a very significant role in the Babylon 5 universe. Every single major character experiences, on at least one occasion, some altered state of consciousness in which he or she receives some sort of important mental message. This could either be one that further fleshes out the character for the benefit of the viewer, or one of transcendental and transpersonal nature that anticipates important further developments in the storyline. Some of these signs and portents resemble lucid dreams, but many are quite bizarre and "dreamlike", frequently in a spiritual context.

=== Addiction ===
Substance abuse and its impact on human personalities also plays a significant role in the Babylon 5 storyline. The station's security chief, Michael Garibaldi, is a textbook relapsing-remitting alcoholic of the binge drinking type; he practices complete abstinence from alcohol throughout most of the series (with one notable exception) until the middle of season five. He only recovers physically and socially and breaks the cycle at the end of the season. His eventual replacement as Chief of Security, Zack Allen, was given a second chance by Garibaldi after overcoming his own addiction to an unspecified drug. Dr. Stephen Franklin develops an (initially unrecognized) addiction to injectable stimulant drugs while trying to cope with the chronic stress and work overload in Medlab (stemming from the Markab extinction), and wanders off to the homeless and deprived in Brown Sector, where he suffers through a severe withdrawal syndrome. Executive Officer Susan Ivanova mentions that her father became an alcoholic after her mother had committed suicide after having been drugged by the authorities over a number of years. Captain Elizabeth Lochley tells Garibaldi that her father was an alcoholic and that she is a recovering alcoholic herself. Season 5, Episode 19: The Wheel of Fire Among the aliens, Londo Mollari is at least a heavy abuser of alcohol, mostly in the form of the Centauri national drink, Brivari (though in Centauri culture, sobriety, as opposed to drunkenness, is considered a vice).

Numerous other references to substance abuse and drug dealing are scattered throughout the storyline, including Dust, a white powder with a black-market presence comparable to cocaine. "Dust" turns out to be a "designer drug" developed by Psi Corps and placed into the black market as an experiment to see if psychic abilities could be brought out in "mundanes" (non-telepaths).

Perhaps ironically, Jeff Conaway, who played Zack Allen, had his own very real addiction issues for most of his adult life. Co-star Bruce Boxleitner stated unequivically that during Conaway's tenure on the show, he was the consummate professional, always coming to work on time and sober, and that his death due to pneumonia and encephalopathy due to his drug use was tragic, and Zack Allen was, in a sense, a mirror for Conaway.

== Cast ==

=== Regular cast ===
* Mary Kay Adams as Na'Toth (Season 2)
* Julie Caitlin Brown as Na'Toth (Season 1 regular, Season 5 guest)
* Richard Biggs as Dr. Stephen Franklin
* Bruce Boxleitner as John Sheridan (Seasons 25)
* Jason Carter as Marcus Cole (Seasons 34)
* Claudia Christian as Susan Ivanova (Seasons 14)
* Jeff Conaway as Zack Allan (Season 2 recurring, Seasons 35 regular)
* Jerry Doyle as Michael Garibaldi
* Mira Furlan as Delenn
* Stephen Furst as Vir Cotto
* Peter Jurasik as Londo Mollari
* Andreas Katsulas as G'Kar
* Bill Mumy as Lennier
* Michael O'Hare as Jeffrey Sinclair (PilotSeason 1 regular, Seasons 23 recurring)
* Robert Rusler as Warren Keffer (Season 2)
* Tracy Scoggins as Elizabeth Lochley (Season 5)
* Patricia Tallman as Lyta Alexander (Pilot, Seasons 23 recurring, Seasons 45 regular)
* Andrea Thompson as Talia Winters (Seasons 12)

=== Recurring guests ===
* Wayne Alexander as Lorien / Shiv'kala the Drakh / Sebastian/"Jack" / others (12 episodes)
* Ardwight Chamberlain (voice)/Jeffery Willerth (in the encounter-suit) as Kosh Naranek (seasons one  four) (23 episodes)
* Tim Choate as Zathras (4 episodes)
* Joshua Cox as David Corwin (34 episodes)
* David L. Crowley as Lou Welch (7 episodes)
* Robin Atkin Downes as Byron (9 episodes)
* William Forward as Lord Antono Refa (6 episodes)
* Robert Foxworth as General William Hague (2 episodes)
* Denise Gentile as Lise Hampton (9 episodes)
* Melissa Gilbert as Anna Sheridan (2 episodes)
* Lenore Kasdorf as ISN Reporter (3 episodes)
* Walter Koenig as Alfred Bester (12 episodes)
* Wortham Krimmer as Emperor Cartagia (5 episodes)
* Damian London as Regent Virini (9 episodes)
* Leigh McCloskey as Thomas (2 episodes)
* Marjorie Monaghan as Number One (7 episodes)
* Julia Nickson-Soul as Catherine Sakai (3 episodes)
* John Schuck as Draal (2 episodes)
* Marshall Teague as Ta'Lon / Nelson Drake (6 episodes)
* Louis Turenne as Brother Theo / Draal (5 episodes)
* John Vickery as Neroon / Mr. Welles (6 episodes)
* Ed Wasser as Morden / Guerra (14 episodes)
* Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. as William Edgars (4 episodes)
* Beata Pozniak as Dr. Katya Petrova Fielding (7 episodes)

In addition, several other actors have filled more than one minor role on the series. Kim Strauss played the Drazi Ambassador in four episodes, as well as nine other characters in ten more episodes. Some actors had difficulty dealing with the application of prosthetics required to play some of the alien characters. The producers therefore used the same group of people (as many as 12) in various mid-level speaking roles, taking full head and body casts from each. The group came to be unofficially known by the production as the "Babylon 5 Alien Rep Group." 

== Production ==

=== Origin ===
Having worked on a number of television science fiction shows which had regularly gone over budget, creator J. Michael Straczynski concluded that a lack of long-term planning was to blame, and set about looking at ways in which a series could be done responsibly. Taking note of the lessons of mainstream television, which brought stories to a centralized location such as a hospital, police station, or law office, he decided that instead of " in search of new worlds, building them anew each week", a fixed space station setting would keep costs at a reasonable level. A fan of sagas such as the Foundation series, Childhood's End, The Lord of the Rings, Dune and the Lensman series, Straczynski wondered why no one had done a television series with the same epic sweep, and concurrently with the first idea started developing the concept for a vastly ambitious epic covering massive battles and other universe-changing events. Realizing that both the fixed-locale series and the epic could be done in a single series, he began to sketch the initial outline of what would become Babylon 5. 

Straczynski set five goals for Babylon 5. He said that the show "would have to be good science fiction" as well as good television  "rarely are shows both good fiction and good TV; there're generally one or the other in original." It would have to do for science fiction television what Hill Street Blues had done for police dramas, by taking an adult approach to the subject. It would have to be reasonably budgeted, and "it would have to look unlike anything ever seen before on TV, presenting individual stories against a much broader canvas." He further stressed that his approach was "to take fiction seriously, to build characters for grown-ups, to incorporate real science but keep the characters at the center of the story." Some of the staples of television science fiction were also out of the question (the show would have "no kids or cute robots"). The idea was not to present a perfect utopian future, but one with greed and homelessness; one where characters grow, develop, live, and die; one where not everything was the same at the end of the day's events. Citing Mark Twain as an influence, Straczynski said he wanted the show to be a mirror to the real world and to covertly teach. 

=== Format ===
Described as a "window on the future" by series production designer John Iacovelli, the story is set in the 23rd century on a large O'Neill Colony named "Babylon 5"a five-mile-long, 2.5 million-ton rotating colony designed as a gathering place for the sentient species of the galaxy, in order to foster peace through diplomacy, trade, and cooperation. Instead, acting as a center of political intrigue and conflict, the station becomes the linchpin of a massive interstellar war. This is reflected in the opening monologue of each episode, which includes the words "last, best hope for peace" in season one, changing to "last, best hope for victory" by season three.

The series consists of a coherent five-year story arc taking place over five seasons of 22 episodes each. Unlike most television shows at the time, Babylon 5 was conceived as a "novel for television", with a defined beginning, middle, and end; in essence, each episode would be a single "chapter" of this "novel". Many of the tie-in novels, comic books, and short stories were also developed to play a significant canonical part in the overall story. 

The cost of the series totalled an estimated $90 million for 110 episodes. 

=== Writing ===
Creator and showrunner J. Michael Straczynski wrote 92 of the 110 episodes of Babylon 5, including all 44 episodes in the third and fourth seasons; according to Straczynski, a feat never before accomplished in American television. Other writers to have contributed scripts to the show include Peter David, Neil Gaiman, Kathryn M. Drennan, Lawrence G. DiTillio, D. C. Fontana, and David Gerrold. Harlan Ellison, a creative consultant on the show, received story credits for two episodes. Each writer was informed of the overarching storyline, enabling the show to be produced consistently under-budget. The rules of production were strict; scripts were written six episodes in advance, and changes could not be made once production had started. 

Though conceived as a whole, it was necessary to adjust the plotline to accommodate external influences. Each of the characters in the series was written with a "trap door" into their background so that, in the event of an actor's unexpected departure from the series, the character could be written out with minimal impact on the storyline. In the words of Straczynski, "As a writer, doing a long-term story, it'd be dangerous and short-sighted for me to construct the story without trap doors for every single character. ... That was one of the big risks going into a long-term storyline which I considered long in advance;..." The character of Talia Winters was to have undergone a transformation into a Psi Corps secret agent, having been revealed as a "sleeper", whose true personality was buried subconsciously, and who acted as a spy, observing the events on the station and the actions of her command staff. Divided Loyalties When Winters's portrayer Andrea Thompson left the series, this revelation was used to drop the character from the series.

Ratings for Babylon 5 continued to rise during the show's third season, but going into the fourth season, the impending demise of network PTEN left a fifth year in doubt. Unable to get word one way or the other from parent company Warner Bros., and unwilling to short-change the story and the fans, Straczynski began preparing modifications to the fourth season in order to allow for both eventualities. Straczynski identified three primary narrative threads which would require resolution: the Shadow war, Earth's slide into a dictatorship, and a series of sub-threads which branched off from those. Estimating they would still take around 27 episodes to resolve without having the season feel rushed, the solution came when the TNT network commissioned two Babylon 5 television films. Several hours of material was thus able to be moved into the films, including a three-episode arc which would deal with the background to the EarthMinbari War, and a sub-thread which would have set up the sequel series, Crusade. Further standalone episodes and plot-threads were dropped from season four, which could be inserted into Crusade, or the fifth season, were it to be given the greenlight. The intended series finale, "Sleeping in Light", was filmed during season four as a precaution against cancellation. When word came that TNT had picked up Babylon 5, this was moved to the end of season five and replaced with a newly filmed season four finale, "The Deconstruction of Falling Stars". 

=== Costume ===
Ann Bruice Aling was costume designer for the 5 seasons of the show, after production designer John Iacovelli suggested her for the position having previously worked with Bruice on a number of film and theatrical productions. 

With the variety of costumes required she compared Babylon 5 to "eclectic theatre", with fewer rules about period, line, shape and textures having to be adhered to. Preferring natural materials whenever possible, such as ostrich leather in the Narn body armor, Bruice combined and layered fabrics as diverse as rayon and silk with brocades from the 1930s and '40s to give the clothing the appearance of having evolved within different cultures. 

With an interest in costume history, she initially worked closely with J. Michael Straczinski to get a sense of the historical perspective of the major alien races, "so I knew if they were a peaceful people or a warring people, cold climate etc. and then I would interpret what kind of sensibility that called for." Collaborating with other departments to establish co-ordinated visual themes for each race, a broad palette of colors was developed with Iacovelli, which he referred to as "spicy brights". These warm shades of grey and secondary colors, such as certain blues for the Minbari, would often be included when designing both the costumes and relevant sets. As the main characters evolved, Bruice referred back to Straczynski and producer John Copeland who she viewed as "surprisingly more accessible to me as advisors than other producers and directors", so the costumes could reflect these changes. Ambassador Londo Mollari's purple coat became dark blue and more tailored while his waistcoats became less patterned and brightly colored as Bruice felt "Londo has evolved in my mind from a buffoonish character to one who has become more serious and darker." 

Normally there were three changes of costume for the primary actors; one for on set, one for the stunt double and one on standby in case of "coffee spills". For human civilians, garments were generally purchased off-the-rack and altered in various ways, such as removing lapels from jackets and shirts while rearranging closures, to suggest future fashions. For some of the main female characters a more couture approach was taken, as in the suits worn by Talia Winters which Bruice described as being designed and fitted to within "an inch of their life". Costumes for the destitute residents of downbelow would be distressed through a combination of bleaching, sanding, dipping in dye baths and having stage blood added. 

Like many of the crew on the show, members of the costume department made onscreen cameos. During the season 4 episode "Atonement", the tailors and costume supervisor appeared as the Minbari women fitting Zack Allan for his new uniform as the recently promoted head of security. His complaints, and the subsequent stabbing of him with a needle by costume supervisor Kim Holly, was a light hearted reference to the previous security uniforms. A design carried over from the pilot movie, which were difficult to work with and wear due to the combination of leather and wool. 

=== Prosthetic makeup and animatronics ===
While the original pilot film featured some aliens which were puppets and animatronics, the decision was made early on in the show's production to portray most alien species as humanoid in appearance. Barring isolated appearances, fully computer-generated aliens were discounted as an idea due to the "massive rendering power" required. Long-term use of puppets and animatronics was also discounted due to the technological limitations in providing convincing interaction with the human actors ("if you want any real emotion from the character, you're going to have to have an actor inside" in original). 

=== Visuals ===

In anticipation of future HDTV broadcasts and Laserdisc releases, rather than the usual format, the series was shot in , with the image cropped to 4:3 for initial television transmissions. Babylon 5 also distinguished itself at a time when models and miniature were still standard by becoming one of the first television shows to use computer technology in creating visual effects. This was achieved using Amiga-based Video Toasters at first, and later Pentium, Macs, and Alpha-based systems. It also attempted to respect Newtonian physics in its effects sequences, with particular emphasis on the effects of inertia. 

Foundation Imaging provided the special effects for the pilot film (for which it won an Emmy) and the first three seasons of the show. After the show's co-executive producer (Douglas Netter) and producer (John Copeland) approached Straczynski with the idea of producing the effects in-house, Straczynski agreed to replace Foundation, for season 4 and 5, once a new team had been established by Netter Digital, and an equal level of quality was assured, by using similar technology and a number of former Foundation employees. The Emmy-winning alien make-up was provided by Optic Nerve Studios.

The show's success was seen as a great asset for Commodore Business Machines, the makers of the Amiga computer, and for NewTek, the company which made the Video Toaster card and its accompanying 3-D animation program, Lightwave 3D. On the strength of Babylon 5, Lightwave 3D would be employed on other shows, eventually becoming an industry standard.

=== Music and scoring ===

Christopher Franke composed and scored the musical soundtrack for all 5 years of the show when Stewart Copeland, who worked on the original telefilm, was unable to return for the first season due to recording and touring commitments. Given creative freedom by the producers, Franke also orchestrated and mixed all the music which one reviewer described as having "added another dimension of mystery, suspense, and excitement to the show, with an easily distinguishable character that separates "Babylon 5" from other sci-fi television entries of the era." 

With his recording studio in the same building as his home located in the Hollywood Hills, Franke would attend creative meetings before scoring the on average 25 minutes of music for each episode. Utilising Cubase software through an electronic keyboard, or for more complex pieces a light pen and graphics tablet, he would begin by developing the melodic content round which the ambient components and transitions were added. Using playbacks with digital samples of the appropriate instruments, such as a group of violins, he would decide which tracks to produce electronically or record acoustically. 

Utilizing the "acoustic dirt produced by live instruments and the ability to play so well between two semitones" and the "frequency range, dynamics and control" provided by synthesizers, he described his approach "as experimental friendly as possible without leaving the happy marriage between the orchestral and electronic sounds". While highlighting Babylon 5 was produced on a "veritable shoestring", and as such would have been unable to afford a full orchestral score every week, at least one reviewer felt that the soundtrack would have benefitted from a greater use of the Berlin Symphonic Film Orchestra, which Franke established in 1991.

Scores for the acoustic tracks were emailed to his Berlin scoring stage, and would require from four musicians to the full orchestra, with a maximum of 24 present at any one time. One of three conductors would also be required for any score that involved more than 6 musicians. Franke would direct recording sessions via six fibre optic digital telephone lines to transmit and receive video, music and the SMPTE timecode. The final edit and mixing of the tracks would take place in his Los Angeles studio. Initially concerned composing for an episodic television show could become "annoying because of the repetition", Franke found the evolving characters and story of Babylon 5 afforded him the opportunity to continually "push the envelope". 

A total of 24 episode and three television film soundtracks were released under Franke's record label, Sonic Images Records, between 1995 and 2001. These contain the musical scores in the same chronological order as they played in the corresponding episodes, or television films. Three compilation albums were also produced, containing extensively re-orchestrated and remixed musical passages taken from throughout the series to create more elaborate suites. In 2007 his soundtrack for 5: The Lost Tales|The Lost Tales] was released under the Varse Sarabande record label.

 Music CD Releases 
 Episodic Soundtracks Tracks Running Time Release Date Catalog No. 
 Severed Dreams 5 33:15 Sep 16, 1997 SID-0310 
 A Late Delivery From Avalon 6 26:37 Sep 16, 1997 SID-0312 
 Walkabout 6 28:58 Sep 16, 1997 SID-0318 
 Shadow Dancing 6 33:50 Sep 16, 1997 SID-0321 
 ZHaDum 6 36:23 Sep 16, 1997 SID-0322 
 The Fall of Night 6 22:45 April 14, 1998 SID-0222 
 Interludes and Examinations 6 30:14 April 14, 1998 SID-0315 
 Into The Fire 6 35:05 April 14, 1998 SID-0406 
 No Surrender, No Retreat 6 30:53 April 14, 1998 SID-0415 
 The Face of the Enemy 6 32:20 April 14, 1998 SID-0417 
 The Ragged Edge 6 22:42 April 14, 1998 SID-0513 
 Chrysalis 6 24:51 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0112 
 The Coming of Shadows 6 26:00 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0209 
 War Without End, Part 1 6 32:04 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0316 
 War Without End, Part 2 6 32:41 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0317 
 Whatever Happened To Mr. Garibaldi 6 28:41 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0402 
 The Long Night 6 24:32 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0405 
 Lines of Communication 6 31:44 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0411 
 Endgame 6 35:25 Aug 11, 1998 SID-0420 
 Falling Toward Apotheosis 6 23:03 Feb 16, 1999 SID-0404 
 Darkness Ascending 6 32:41 Feb 16, 1999 SID-0516 
 Objects at Rest 6 27:52 Feb 16, 1999 SID-0522 
 Sleeping in Light 6 24:40 Feb 16, 1999 SID-0523 
 And The Rock Cried Out, No Hiding Place 6 27:59 Jan 9, 2001 SID-0320 
 Movie Soundtracks 
 In The Beginning 6 57:12 Aug 11, 1998 SID-8812 
 Thirdspace 5 59:22 Jan 12, 1999 SID-8900 
 The River of Souls 6 49:55 May 18, 1999 SID-8907 
 The Lost Tales (released by Varse Sarabande) 28 39:39 July 24, 2007 VSD-6829 
 Extended Compilations 
 Babylon 5 Vol.1  Babylon 5 Suites 6 58:03 April 11, 1995 SID-6502 
 Babylon 5 Vol.2  Messages from Earth 6 57:03 Feb 11, 1997 SID-6602 
 The Best of Babylon 5 6 50:02 Jan 9, 2001 SID-8931 

== Star Trek: Deep Space Nine controversy ==

The pilot episode of (DS9) aired just weeks before Babylon 5 debuted. Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski indicated that Paramount Television was aware of his concept as early as 1989, when he attempted to sell the show to the studio, and provided them with the series bible, pilot script, artwork, lengthy character background histories, and plot synopses for 22 "or so planned episodes taken from the overall course of the planned series". 

Paramount passed on Babylon 5, but later announced Deep Space Nine was in development, two months after Warner Bros. announced its plans for Babylon 5. Straczynski has stated on numerous occasions that, even though he is confident that Deep Space Nine producer/creators Rick Berman and Michael Piller did not see this material, he thinks Paramount may have used his bible and scripts to steer development of Deep Space Nine. In 1993 he said, "Okay, YOU (Paramount) know what happened, and *I* know what happened, but let's try to be grown-up about it for now,' though I must say that the shape-changing thing nearly tipped me back over the edge again. If there are no more major similarities that crop up in the next few weeks or months, with luck we can continue that way."
 
Babylon 5s first-run syndicated ratings averaged between 3 and 4% of US households from 1995 to 1997, whereas DS9 ranged from 4 to 5% during the same time span. The PTEN vs. UPN network rivalry may have been a factor in the development of such similar shows, since both networks were competing for control of the same independent stations and for status as the fifth major network (after ABC, CBS, NBC, FOX). Each nascent network wanted the other to fail. Ultimately PTEN dissolved in 1997, while The WB and UPN merged to form The CW in 2006.

== Use of the Internet ==
Original Babylon 5 promo logo

The show employed Internet marketing to create a buzz among online readers far in advance of the airing of the pilot episode, with Straczynski participating in online communities on USENET (in the rec.arts.sf.tv.babylon5.moderated newsgroup), and the GEnie and CompuServe systems before the Web came together as it exists today. The station's location, in "grid epsilon" at coordinates of 470/18/22, was a reference to GEnie ("grid epsilon" = "GE") and the original forum's address on the system's bulletin boards (page 470, category 18, topic 22). Also during this time, Warner Bros. executive Jim Moloshok created and distributed electronic trading cards to help advertise the series. In 1995, Warner Bros. started the Official Babylon 5 Website on the now defunct Pathfinder portal. In September 1995, they hired a fan to take over the site and move it to its own domain name, and to oversee the Keyword B5 area on America Online.

== Broadcast history ==
The pilot film, 5: The Gathering|The Gathering], premiered on February 22, 1993, and the regular series initially aired from January 26, 1994 through November 25, 1998, first on the short-lived Prime Time Entertainment Network, then on cable network TNT. The show aired every week in the United Kingdom on Channel 4 without a break; as a result the last four or five episodes of the early seasons were shown in the UK before the US. The pilot film debuted in the United States with strong viewing figures, achieving a 9.7 in the Nielsen national syndication rankings. The series proper debuted with a 6.8 rating/10 share. Figures dipped in its second week, and while it posted a solid 5.0 rating/8 share, with an increase in several major markets, ratings for the first season continued to fall, to a low of 3.4 during reruns, and then increasing again when new episodes were broadcast in July.

Ratings continued to remain low-to-middling throughout the first four seasons, but Babylon 5 scored well with the demographics required to attract the leading national sponsors and saved up to $300,000 per episode by shooting off the studio lot, therefore remaining profitable for the network. The fifth season, shown on cable network TNT, had ratings about 1.0% lower than seasons two through four.

In the United Kingdom, Babylon 5 was one of the better-rated US television shows on Channel 4, and achieved high audience Appreciation Indexes, with season 4's "Endgame" achieving the rare feat of beating the prime-time soap operas for first position. TV Zone, January 1998 issue 

On November 25, 1998, after five seasons and 109 aired episodes, Babylon 5 successfully completed its five-year story arc when TNT aired the 110th (epilogue) episode "Sleeping in Light".

== Awards ==
Awards presented to Babylon 5 include:
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Special Visual Effects, 1993 (5: The Gathering|The Gathering]) 
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Hairstyling for a Series , 1994 (episode, "The Parliament of Dreams") 
* Hugo Award: Best Dramatic Presentation, 1996 (episode, "The Coming of Shadows") 
* Hugo Award: Best Dramatic Presentation, 1997 (episode, "Severed Dreams") 
* Saturn Award: Best Syndicated/Cable Television Series, 1998 
* Space Frontier Foundation Award: Vision of the Future, 1994
* Space Frontier Foundation Award: Vision of the Future, 1996
* E Pluribus Unum Award: (Presented By American Cinema Association), 1997 
Nominated Awards include:
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Makeup for a Series, 1995 (episode, "Acts of Sacrifice") 
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Hairstyling for a Series, 1995 (episode, "The Geometry of Shadows")
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series, 1995 (episode, "The Geometry Of Shadows")
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Cinematography for a Series, 1996
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Makeup for a Series, 1997 (episode, "The Summoning")
* Emmy Award: Outstanding Makeup for a Series, 1998 (television movie, 5: In the Beginning|In The Beginning])

== Babylon 5 media franchise ==

In November 1994, DC began publishing monthly Babylon 5 comics. A number of short stories and novels were also produced between 1995 and 2001. Additional books were published by the gaming companies Chameleon Eclectic and Mongoose Publishing, to support their desk-top strategy and role-playing games.

Three telefilms were released by Turner Network Television (TNT) in 1998, after funding a fifth season of Babylon 5, following the demise of the Prime Time Entertainment Network the previous year. In addition to 5: In the Beginning|In the Beginning], 5: Thirdspace|Thirdspace], and 5: The River of Souls|The River of Souls], they released a re-edited special edition of the original 1993 telefilm, 5: The Gathering|The Gathering]. In 1999, a fifth telefilm was also produced, 5: A Call to Arms|A Call to Arms], which acted as a pilot movie for the spin-off series Crusade, which TNT cancelled after 13 episodes had been filmed.

Dell Publishing started publication of a series of Babylon 5 novels in 1995, which were ostensibly considered canon within the TV series' continuity, nominally supervised by creator J. Michael Straczynski, with later novels in the line being more directly based upon Straczynski's own notes and story outlines. In 1997, Del Rey obtained the publication license from Warner Bros., and proceeded to release a number of original trilogies directly scenarized by Straczynski, as well as novelizations of three of the TNT telefilms (In the Beginning, Thirdspace, and A Call to Arms). All of the Del Rey novels are considered completely canonical within the filmic Babylon 5 universe.

In 2000, the Sci-Fi Channel purchased the rights to rerun the Babylon 5 series, and premiered a new telefilm, 5: The Legend of the Rangers|The Legend of the Rangers] in 2002, which failed to be picked up as a series. In 2007, the first in a planned anthology of straight-to-DVD short stories entitled, 5: The Lost Tales|The Lost Tales], was released by Warner Home Video, but no others were produced, due to funding issues. 

== Home video releases ==

In July 1995, Warner Home Video began distributing Babylon 5 VHS video tapes under its Beyond Vision label in the UK. Beginning with the original telefilm, 5: The Gathering|The Gathering], these were PAL tapes, showing video in the same ratio (image)#Current video standards|4:3 aspect ratio] as the initial television broadcasts. By the release of Season 2, tapes included closed captioning of dialogue and Dolby Surround sound. Columbia House began distributing NTSC tapes, via mail order in 1997, followed by repackaged collector's editions and three-tape boxed sets in 1999, by which time the original pilot telefilm had been replaced by the re-edited TNT special edition. Additional movie and complete season boxed-sets were also released by Warner Bros. until 2000.

Image Entertainment released Babylon 5 laserdiscs between December 1998 and September 1999. Produced on double-sided 12-inch Pioneer discs, each contained two episodes displayed in the 4:3 broadcast aspect-ratio, with Dolby Surround audio and closed captioning for the dialogue. Starting with two TNT telefilms, 5: In the Beginning|In the Beginning] and the re-edited special edition of The Gathering, Seasons 1 and 5 were released simultaneously over a six-month period. Seasons 2 and 4 followed, but with the decision to halt production due to a drop in sales, precipitated by rumors of a pending DVD release, only the first twelve episodes of Season 2 and the first six episodes of Season 4 were ultimately released. 

In November 2001, Warner Home Video began distributing Babylon 5 DVDs with a two-movie set containing the re-edited TNT special edition of The Gathering and In The Beginning. The telefilms were later individually released in region 2 in April 2002, though some markets received the original version of The Gathering in identical packaging.

DVD boxed sets of the individual seasons, each containing six discs, began being released in October 2002. Each included a printed booklet containing episode summaries, with each disc containing audio options for German, French, and English, plus subtitles in a wider range of languages, including Arabic and Dutch. Video was displayed in anamorphic widescreen with Dolby Digital 5.1 sound. Disc 1 of each set contained an introduction to the season by J. Michael Straczynski, while disc 6 included featurettes containing interviews with various production staff, as well as information on the fictional universe, and a gag reel. Three episodes in each season also contained commentary from either Straczynski, members of the main cast, and/or the episode director.

Since its initial release, a number of repackaged DVD boxed sets have been produced for various regional markets. With slightly altered cover art, they included no additional content, but the discs were more securely stored in slimline cases, rather than the early "book" format, with hard plastic pages used during the original release of the first three seasons.

 Initial DVD release 
 Episode box sets Region 1 Region 2 Region 4 
 Babylon 5: The Complete First Season Nov 5, 2002 Oct 28, 2002 Nov 27, 2002 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Second Season April 29, 2003 May 26, 2003 Jul 9, 2003 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Third Season Aug 12, 2003 Nov 10, 2003 Dec 19, 2003 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Fourth Season Jan 6, 2004 April 19, 2004 Aug 19, 2004 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Fifth Season April 13, 2004 Jan 2005 Dec 16, 2004 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Television Series Aug 17, 2004 N/A N/A 
 Babylon 5: The Complete Universe (inc. all movies and Crusade episodes) N/A October 24, 2005 N/A 
 Movie releases and box sets 
 Babylon 5: The Gathering / In the Beginning Dec 4, 2001 N/A Nov 21, 2001 
 Babylon 5: The Gathering N/A April 8, 2002 N/A 
 Babylon 5: In the Beginning N/A April 8, 2002 N/A 
 Babylon 5: The Movie Collection Aug 17, 2004 N/A Mar 2, 2005 
 Babylon 5: Movie Box Set N/A Feb 21, 2005 N/A 
 Babylon 5: The Legend of the Rangers March 14, 2006 Oct 24, 2005 Nov 16, 2005 
 Babylon 5: The Lost Tales July 31, 2007 Sep 3, 2007 Jan 2, 2008 

=== Other releases ===
Seasons 1 and 2, and parts of Season 3, of Babylon 5 have been released as advertisement-supported downloads through the In2TV and Hulu download services. Additionally, every episode from Seasons 1 to 5, as well as the pilot film , are available for purchase on the Xbox Live Marketplace in the United States. All five seasons, and five of the movies (In The Beginning, Thirdspace, River of Souls, A Call To Arms, Legend of the Rangers) are currently available through iTunes.

=== Mastering problems ===
While the series was in pre-production, studios were looking at ways for their existing shows to make the transition from the then-standard ratio (image)#4:3 standard|4:3 aspect ratio] to the widescreen formats that would accompany the next generation of televisions. After visiting Warner Bros., who were stretching the horizontal interval for an episode of & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman|Lois & Clark], producer John Copeland convinced them to allow Babylon 5 to be shot on Super 35mm film stock. "The idea being that we would telecine to 4:3 for the original broadcast of the series. But what it also gave us was a negative that had been shot for the new 16x9 widescreen-format televisions that we knew were on the horizon." 

Though the CGI scenes, and those containing live action combined with digital elements, could have been created in a suitable widescreen format, a cost-saving decision was taken to produce them in the 4:3 aspect ratio. The intention was to then crop the top and bottom of the images, and upscale the resolution for any future widescreen release or broadcast. In 2000, when the show was transferred to widescreen for airing on the Sci-Fi Channel prior to its eventual DVD release, the plan was not followed, as John Copeland recalls: "They did another video hack, and simply used a digital post production device like a DVE (Digital Video Enhancer) to blow the material up. They essentially stretched it approximately 1/3 to fill the larger aspect ratio." 

The scenes containing live action ready to be composited with matte paintings, CGI animation, etc., were delivered on tape already telecined to the 4:3 aspect-ratio, and contained a high level of grain, which resulted in further image noise being present when enlarged and stretched for widescreen. For the purely live-action scenes, rather than using the film negatives, "Warners had even forgotten that they had those. They used PAL versions and converted them to NTSC for the US market. They actually didn't go back and retransfer the shows." 

With the resulting aliasing, and the progressive scan transfer of the video to DVD, this has created a number of visual flaws throughout the widescreen release. In particular, quality has been noted to drop significantly in composite shots. 

== See also ==
* Babylon 5 influences
* Babylon 5's use of the Internet
* Index of Babylon 5 articles
* List of television series that include time-travel
* rec.arts.sf.tv.babylon5.moderated
* The Be Five
* The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5

== References ==

==External links==

*
*
*
*
*The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5: Babylon 5 reference and episode guide
*The Babylon 5 Scrolls: Babylon 5 production diaries hosted at Infinispace.net
*Early Babylon 5 Designs: Information from the original 1991 promotional flyer, with different character names and Peter Ledger's artwork

 



[[BeOS]]

BeOS is an operating system for personal computers first developed by Be Inc. in 1991. It was first written to run on BeBox hardware. BeOS was built for digital media work and was written to take advantage of modern hardware facilities such as symmetric multiprocessing by utilizing modular I/O bandwidth, pervasive multithreading, preemptive multitasking and a 64-bit journaling file system known as BFS. The BeOS GUI was developed on the principles of clarity and a clean, uncluttered design.

BeOS was positioned as a multimedia platform which could be used by a substantial population of desktop users and a competitor to Mac OS and Microsoft Windows. However, it was ultimately unable to achieve a significant market share and proved commercially unviable for Be Inc. The company was acquired by Palm Inc. and today BeOS is mainly used and developed by a small population of enthusiasts.

The open-source OS Haiku, a complete reimplementation of BeOS, is designed to start up where BeOS left off. Alpha 4 of Haiku was released in November 2012. 

== Design ==

BeOS was optimized for digital media work and was written to take advantage of modern computer hardware facilities such as symmetric multiprocessing by utilizing modular I/O bandwidth, pervasive multithreading, preemptive multitasking and a 64-bit journaling file system known as BFS. The BeOS GUI was developed on the principles of clarity and a clean, uncluttered design.

The API was written in C++ for ease of programming. It has partial POSIX compatibility and access to a command-line interface through Bash, although internally it is not a Unix-derived operating system.

BeOS used Unicode as the default encoding in the GUI, though support for input methods such as bidirectional text input was never realized.

== History ==
Initially designed to run on AT&T Hobbit-based hardware, BeOS was later modified to run on PowerPC-based processors: first Be's own systems, later Apple Inc.'s PowerPC Reference Platform and Common Hardware Reference Platform, with the hope that Apple would purchase or license BeOS as a replacement for its aging Mac OS. Apple CEO Gil Amelio started negotiations to buy Be Inc., but negotiations stalled when Be CEO Jean-Louis Gasse wanted $200 million; Apple was unwilling to offer any more than $125 million. Apple's board of directors decided NeXTSTEP was a better choice and purchased NeXT in 1996 for $429 million, bringing back Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. 

In 1997, Power Computing began bundling BeOS (on a CD for optional installation) with its line of PowerPC-based Macintosh clones. These systems could dual boot either the Mac OS or BeOS, with a start-up screen offering the choice. 

Due to Apple's moves and the mounting debt of Be Inc., BeOS was soon ported to the Intel x86 platform with its R3 release in March 1998. Through the late 1990s, BeOS managed to create a niche of followers, but the company failed to remain viable. Be Inc. also released a stripped-down, but free, copy of BeOS R5 known as BeOS Personal Edition (BeOS PE). BeOS PE could be started from within Microsoft Windows or Linux, and was intended to nurture consumer interest in its product and give developers something to tinker with. Be Inc. also released a stripped-down version of BeOS for Internet Appliances (BeIA), which soon became the company's business focus in place of BeOS. 

In 2001 Be's copyrights were sold to Palm, Inc. for some $11 million. BeOS R5 is considered the last official version, but BeOS R5.1 "Dano", which was under development before Be's sale to Palm and included the BeOS Networking Environment (BONE) networking stack, was leaked to the public shortly after the company's demise. 

In 2002, Be Inc. sued Microsoft claiming that Hitachi had been dissuaded from selling PCs loaded with BeOS, and that Compaq had been pressured not to market an Internet appliance in partnership with Be. Be also claimed that Microsoft acted to artificially depress Be Inc.'s initial public offering (IPO). The case was eventually settled out of court for $23.25 million with no admission of liability on Microsoft's part. 

After the split from Palm, PalmSource used parts of BeOS's multimedia framework for its failed Palm OS Cobalt product. PalmSource Introduces Palm OS Cobalt, PalmSource press release, 10 February 2004. With the takeover of PalmSource, the BeOS rights now belong to Access Co. ACCESS Completes Acquisition of PalmSource, ACCESS press release, November 14, 2005. 

=== Continuation and clones ===

In the years that followed the demise of Be Inc. a handful of projects formed to recreate BeOS or key elements of the OS with the eventual goal of then continuing where Be Inc. left off. This was facilitated by the fact that Be Inc. released some components of BeOS under a free licence. Here is a list of these projects:
* BlueEyedOS: It uses a modified version of the Linux kernel which allows it to run Beos applications. It is free and open source software. There have been no releases since 2003. 
* Cosmoe: A user interface for Linux that can run most BeOS applications. It is free and open source software. The last release was in 2004 and its website is no longer online. 
* E/OS: short for Emulator Operating System. A Linux and FreeBSD-based operating system that aimed to run Windows, DOS, AmigaOS and BeOS applications. It is free and open source software. Active development ended in July 2008.
* Haiku: A complete reimplementation of BeOS not based on Linux. It is free and open source software. The first alpha release, "Haiku R1 / Alpha 1", was released on September 14, 2009. The second alpha release, "Haiku R1 / Alpha 2", was made available on May 9, 2010, and the third alpha release, "Haiku R1 / Alpha 3", on June 18, 2011. "Haiku R1 / Alpha 4" was released November 12, 2012. As of 2014, it is the only BeOS clone still under development.

Zeta was a commercially available operating system based on the BeOS R5.1 codebase. Originally developed by yellowTAB, the operating system was then distributed by magnussoft. During development by yellowTAB, the company received criticism from the BeOS community for refusing to discuss its legal position with regard to the BeOS codebase (perhaps for contractual reasons). Access Co. (which bought PalmSource, until then the holder of the intellectual property associated with BeOS) has since declared that yellowTAB had no right to distribute a modified version of BeOS, and magnussoft has ceased distribution of the operating system. 

=== Version history ===

 Release Date Hardware 
 DR1DR5 October 1995 AT&T Hobbit 
 DR6 (developer release) January 1996 PowerPC 
 DR7 April 1996 
 DR8 September 1996 
 Advanced Access Preview Release May 1997 
 PR1 (preview release) June 1997 
 PR2 October 1997 
 R3 March 1998 PowerPC and Intel x86 
 R3.1 June 1998 
 R3.2 July 1998 
 R4 November 4, 1998 
 R4.5 (\"Genki\") June 1999 
 R5 PE/Pro (\"Maui\") March 2000 
 R5.1 (\"Dano\") November 2001 Intel x86 

== Products using BeOS ==

BeOS (and now Zeta) continue to be used in media appliances such as the Edirol DV-7 video editors from Roland corporation which run on top of a modified BeOS and the TuneTracker radio automation software that runs on BeOS and Zeta, but is also sold as a "Station-in-a-Box" with the Zeta operating system included. 

The Tascam SX-1 digital audio recorder runs a heavily modified version of BeOS that will only launch the recording interface software. 

iZ Technology sells the RADAR 24 and RADAR V, hard disk-based, 24-track professional audio recorders based on BeOS 5, although the newer RADAR 6 is not based on BeOS.

Magicbox, a manufacturer of signage and broadcast display machines, uses BeOS to power their Aavelin product line. 

Final Scratch, a 12 vinyl timecode record-driven DJ software/hardware system, was first developed on BeOS. The "ProFS" version was sold to a few dozen DJs prior to the 1.0 release, which ran on a Linux virtual partition. 

== See also ==
* Haiku (operating system)
* Access Co.
* bootman
* Comparison of operating systems
* Gobe Productive
* Hitachi Flora Prius
* KDL
* List of BeOS programs
* NetPositive
* OpenTracker
* Pe (text editor)

== References ==

== External links ==
* The Dawn of Haiku, by Ryan Leavengood, IEEE Spectrum May 2012, p 40-43,51-54.
* BeOS 5.0 (Personal Edition) as a free download (Most likely to be documented for early 2000-01 hardware.)
* Mirror of the old www.be.com site
* BeOS Celebrating Ten Years
* BeGroovy A blog dedicated to all things BeOS 
* BeOS: The Mac OS X might-have-been, reghardware.co.uk
* Programming the Be Operating System: An O'Reilly Open Book (out of print, but can be downloaded)
* 
* (BeOS)



[[Biome]]

China and the United States have the highest number of biomes.
Biomes are climatically and geographically defined as contiguous areas with similar climatic conditions on the Earth, such as communities of plants, animals, and soil organisms, The World's Biomes, Retrieved August 19, 2008, from University of California Museum of Paleontology and are often referred to as ecosystems. Some parts of the earth have more or less the same kind of abiotic and biotic factors spread over a large area, creating a typical ecosystem over that area. Such major ecosystems are termed as biomes. Biomes are defined by factors such as plant structures (such as trees, shrubs, and grasses), leaf types (such as broadleaf and needleleaf), plant spacing (forest, woodland, savanna), and climate. Unlike ecozones, biomes are not defined by genetic, taxonomic, or historical similarities. Biomes are often identified with particular patterns of ecological succession and climax vegetation (quasiequilibrium state of the local ecosystem). An ecosystem has many biotopes and a biome is a major habitat type. A major habitat type, however, is a compromise, as it has an intrinsic inhomogeneity. Some examples of habitats are ponds, trees, streams, creeks, under rocks and burrows in the sand or soil.

The biodiversity characteristic of each extinction, especially the diversity of fauna and subdominant plant forms, is a function of abiotic factors and the biomass productivity of the dominant vegetation. In terrestrial biomes, species diversity tends to correlate positively with net primary productivity, moisture availability, and temperature. 

Ecoregions are grouped into both biomes and ecozones.

A fundamental classification of biomes are:
# Terrestrial (land) biomes
# Aquatic biomes (including freshwater biomes and marine biomes)

Biomes are often known in English by local names. For example, a temperate grassland or shrubland biome is known commonly as steppe in central Asia, prairie in North America, and pampas in South America. Tropical grasslands are known as savanna in Australia, whereas in southern Africa they are known as certain kinds of veld (from Afrikaans).

Sometimes an entire biome may be targeted for protection, especially under an individual nation's biodiversity action plan.

Climate is a major factor determining the distribution of terrestrial biomes. Among the important climatic factors are:
* Latitude: Arctic, boreal, temperate, subtropical, tropical
* Humidity: humid, semihumid, semiarid, and arid
** seasonal variation: Rainfall may be distributed evenly throughout the year or be marked by seasonal variations.
** dry summer, wet winter: Most regions of the earth receive most of their rainfall during the summer months; Mediterranean climate regions receive their rainfall during the winter months.
* Elevation: Increasing elevation causes a distribution of habitat types similar to that of increasing latitude.

The most widely used systems of classifying biomes correspond to latitude (or temperature zoning) and humidity. Biodiversity generally increases away from the poles towards the equator and increases with humidity.

==Biome classification schemes==
The distribution of vegetation types as a function of mean annual temperature and precipitation.
In this scheme, climates are classified based on the biological effects of temperature and rainfall on vegetation under the assumption that these two abiotic factors are the largest determinants of the type of vegetation found in an area. Holdridge uses the four axes to define 30 so-called "humidity provinces", which are clearly visible in the Holdridge diagram. While his scheme largely ignores soil and sun exposure, Holdridge did acknowledge that these, too, were important factors in biome determination.

===Holdridge scheme===
Biomes are classification schemes defined by climatic parameters. Particularly in the 1970s and 1980s, there was a significant push to understand the relationships between these climatic parameters and properties of ecosystem energetics because such discoveries would enable the prediction of rates of energy capture and transfer among components within ecosystems. Such a study was conducted by Sims et al. (1978) on North American grasslands. The study found a positive logistic correlation between evapotranspiration in mm/yr and above-ground net primary production in g/m2/yr. More general results from the study were that precipitation and water use lead to above-ground primary production, solar radiation and temperature lead to belowground primary production (roots), and temperature and water lead to cool and warm season growth habit. Pomeroy, Lawrence R. and James J. Alberts, editors. Concepts of Ecosystem Ecology. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1988. These findings help explain the categories used in Holdridges bioclassification scheme, which were then later simplified in Whittakers. The number of classification schemes and the variety of determinants used in those schemes, however, should be taken as strong indicators that biomes do not all fit perfectly into the classification schemes created

====Whittaker's biome-type classification scheme====

Whittaker appreciated biome-types as a representation of the great diversity of the living world, and saw the need to establish a simple way to classify them. He based his classification scheme on two abiotic factors: precipitation and temperature. His scheme can be seen as a simplification of Holdridge's, one more readily accessible, but perhaps missing the greater specificity that Holdridge's provides.

Whittaker based his representation of global biomes on both previous theoretical assertions and an ever-increasing empirical sampling of global ecosystems. He was in a unique position to make such a holistic assertion because he had previously compiled a review of biome classification. Whittaker, Robert H., Botanical Review, Classification of Natural Communities, Vol. 28, No. 1 (JanMar 1962), pp. 1239. 

====Key definitions for understanding Whittaker's scheme====

*Physiognomy: The apparent characteristics, outward features, or appearance of ecological communities or species
*Biome: a grouping of terrestrial ecosystems on a given continent that are similar in vegetation structure, physiognomy, features of the environment and characteristics of their animal communities
*Formation: a major kind of community of plants on a given continent
*Biome-type: grouping of convergent biomes or formations of different continents, defined by physiognomy
*Formation-type: a grouping of convergent formations

Whittaker's distinction between biome and formation can be simplified: formation is used when applied to plant communities only, while biome is used when concerned with both plants and animals. Whittaker's convention of biome-type or formation-type is simply a broader method to categorize similar communities. Whittaker, Robert H. Communities and Ecosystems. New York: MacMillan Publishing Company, Inc., 1975. 

====Whittaker's parameters for classifying biome-types====

Whittaker, seeing the need for a simpler way to express the relationship of community structure to the environment, used what he called "gradient analysis" of ecocline patterns to relate communities to climate on a worldwide scale. Whittaker considered four main ecoclines in the terrestrial realm. 
# Intertidal levels: The wetness gradient of areas that are exposed to alternating water and dryness with intensities that vary by location from high to low tide
# Climatic moisture gradient
# Temperature gradient by altitude
# Temperature gradient by latitude

Along these gradients, Whittaker noted several trends that allowed him to qualitatively establish biome-types.
* The gradient runs from favorable to extreme, with corresponding changes in productivity.
* Changes in physiognomic complexity vary with the favorability of the environment (decreasing community structure and reduction of stratal differentiation as the environment becomes less favorable).
* Trends in diversity of structure follow trends in species diversity; alpha and beta species diversities decrease from favorable to extreme environments.
* Each growth-form (i.e. grasses, shrubs, etc.) has its characteristic place of maximum importance along the ecoclines.
*The same growth forms may be dominant in similar environments in widely different parts of the world.

Whittaker summed the effects of gradients (3) and (4) to get an overall temperature gradient, and combined this with gradient (2), the moisture gradient, to express the above conclusions in what is known as the Whittaker classification scheme. The scheme graphs average annual precipitation (x-axis) versus average annual temperature (y-axis) to classify biome-types.

===Walter system===

The Heinrich Walter classification scheme, developed by Heinrich Walter, a German ecologist, differs from both the Whittaker and Holdridge schemes because it takes into account the seasonality of temperature and precipitation. The system, also based on precipitation and temperature, finds 9 major biomes, with the important climate traits and vegetation types summarized in the accompanying table. The boundaries of each biome correlate to the conditions of moisture and cold stress that are strong determinants of plant form, and therefore the vegetation that defines the region. Extreme conditions, such as flooding in a swamp, can create different kinds of communities within the same biome.

*I: Equatorial
**Always moist and lacking temperature seasonality
**Evergreen tropical rain forest
*II: Tropical
**Summer rainy season and cooler winter dry season
**Seasonal forest, scrub, or savanna
*III: Subtropical
**Highly seasonal, arid climate
**Desert vegetation with considerable exposed surface
*IV: Mediterranean
**Winter rainy season and summer drought
**Sclerophyllous (drought-adapted), frost-sensitive shrublands and woodlands
*V: Warm temperate
**Occasional frost, often with summer rainfall maximum
**Temperate evergreen forest, somewhat frost-sensitive
*VI: Nemoral
**Moderate climate with winter freezing
**Frost-resistant, deciduous, temperate forest
*VII: Continental
**Arid, with warm or hot summers and cold winters
**Grasslands and temperate deserts
*VIII: Boreal
**Cold temperate with cool summers and long winters
**Evergreen, frost-hardy, needle-leaved forest (taiga)
*IX: Polar
**Very short, cool summers and long, very cold winters
**Low, evergreen vegetation, without trees, growing over permanently frozen soils

===Bailey system===
Robert G. Bailey almost developed a biogeographical classification system for the United States in a map published in 1976. He subsequently expanded the system to include the rest of North America in 1981, and the world in 1989. The Bailey system, based on climate, is divided into seven domains (polar, humid temperate, dry, humid, and humid tropical), with further divisions based on other climate characteristics (subarctic, warm temperate, hot temperate, and subtropical; marine and continental; lowland and mountain). http://www.fs.fed.us/land/ecosysmgmt/index.html Bailey System, US Forest Service 

* 100 Polar Domain
** 120 Tundra Division (Kppen: Ft)
** M120 Tundra Division  Mountain Provinces
** 130 Subarctic Division (Kppen: E)
** M130 Subarctic Division  Mountain Provinces
* 200 Humid Temperate Domain
** 210 Warm Continental Division (Kppen: portion of Dcb)
** M210 Warm Continental Division  Mountain Provinces
** 220 Hot Continental Division (Kppen: portion of Dca)
** M220 Hot Continental Division  Mountain Provinces
** 230 Subtropical Division (Kppen: portion of Cf)
** M230 Subtropical Division  Mountain Provinces
** 240 Marine Division (Kppen: Do)
** M240 Marine Division  Mountain Provinces
** 250 Prairie Division (Kppen: arid portions of Cf, Dca, Dcb)
** 260 Mediterranean Division (Kppen: Cs)
** M260 Mediterranean Division  Mountain Provinces
* 300 Dry Domain
** 310 Tropical/Subtropical Steppe Division
** M310 Tropical/Subtropical Steppe Division  Mountain Provinces
** 320 Tropical/Subtropical Desert Division
** 330 Temperate Steppe Division
** 340 Temperate Desert Division
* 400 Humid Tropical Domain
** 410 Savanna Division
** 420 Rainforest Division

===WWF system===
A team of biologists convened by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) developed an ecological land classification system that identified fourteen biomes, Olson, David M. et al. (2001); Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth, BioScience, Vol. 51, No. 11., pp. 933938. called major habitat types, and further divided the world's land area into 867 terrestrial ecoregions. Each terrestrial ecoregion has a specific EcoID, format XXnnNN (XX is the ecozone, nn is the biome number, NN is the individual number). This classification is used to define the Global 200 list of ecoregions identified by the WWF as priorities for conservation. The WWF major habitat types are:

*01 Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests (tropical and subtropical, humid)
*02 Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests (tropical and subtropical, semihumid)
*03 Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests (tropical and subtropical, semihumid)
*04 Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests (temperate, humid)
*05 Temperate coniferous forests (temperate, humid to semihumid)
*06 Boreal forests/taiga (subarctic, humid)
*07 Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands (tropical and subtropical, semiarid)
*08 Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands (temperate, semiarid)
*09 Flooded grasslands and savannas (temperate to tropical, fresh or brackish water inundated)
*10 Montane grasslands and shrublands (alpine or montane climate)
*11 Tundra (Arctic)
*12 Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub or sclerophyll forests (temperate warm, semihumid to semiarid with winter rainfall)
*13 Deserts and xeric shrublands (temperate to tropical, arid)
*14 Mangrove (subtropical and tropical, salt water inundated)

====Freshwater biomes====
According to the WWF, the following are classified as freshwater biomes: "Freshwater Ecoregions of the World: Major Habitat Types" . Accessed May 12, 2008. 

* Large lakes
* Large river deltas
* Polar freshwaters
* Montane freshwaters
* Temperate coastal rivers
* Temperate floodplain rivers and wetlands

* Temperate upland rivers
* Tropical and subtropical coastal rivers
* Tropical and subtropical floodplain rivers and wetlands
* Tropical and subtropical upland rivers
* Xeric freshwaters and endorheic basins
* Oceanic islands

* Streams and rivers

====Realms or ecozones (terrestrial and freshwater, WWF)====

* NA Nearctic
* PA Palearctic
* AT Afrotropic
* IM Indomalaya

* AA Australasia
* NT Neotropic
* OC Oceania
* AN Antarctic

====Marine biomes====

=====Marine biomes (H) (major habitat types), Global 200 (WWF)=====

Biomes of the coastal and continental shelf areas (neritic zone  List of ecoregions (WWF))
* Polar
* Temperate shelves and sea
* Temperate upwelling
* Tropical upwelling
* Tropical coral WWF: Marine Ecoregions of the World 

=====Realms or ecozones (marine, WWF)=====

* North temperate Atlantic
* Eastern tropical Atlantic
* Western tropical Atlantic
* South temperate Atlantic
* North temperate Indo-Pacific
* Central Indo-Pacific
* Eastern Indo-Pacific

* Western Indo-Pacific
* South temperate Indo-Pacific
* Southern Ocean
* Antarctic
* Arctic
* Mediterranean

=====Other marine habitat types=====
* Hydrothermal vents
* Cold seeps
* Benthic zone
* Pelagic zone (trades and westerlies)
* Abyssal
* Hadal (ocean trench)

======Major habitats, nonglobal 200 (WWF)======
* Littoral/Intertidal zone
* Kelp forest
* Pack ice
* Rain forest

====Summary  ecological taxonomy (WWF)====
* Biosphere (List of ecoregions)
** Ecozones or realms (8)
*** Terrestrial biomes (major habitat types, 14)
**** Ecoregions (867) vbn,
***** Ecosystems (biotopes)
*** Freshwater biomes (major habitat types, 12)
**** Ecoregions (426)
***** Ecosystems (biotopes)
** Marine ecozones or realms (13)
*** Continental Shelf biomes (major habitat types, 5)
**** (Marine provinces) (62)
***** Ecoregions (232)
****** Ecosystems (biotopes)
*** Open & Deep Sea Biomes (major habitat types)
** Endolithic biome

Example
* Biosphere
** Ecozone: Palearctic ecozone
*** Terrestrial biome: temperate broadleaf and mixed forests
**** Ecoregion: Dinaric Mountains mixed forests (PA0418)
***** Ecosystem: Orjen, vegetation belt between 1,1001,450 m, Oromediterranean zone, nemoral zone (temperate zone)
****** Biotope: Oreoherzogio-Abietetum illyricae Fuk. (Plant list)
******* Plant: Silver fir (Abies alba)

==Anthropogenic biomes==
Humans have fundamentally altered global patterns of biodiversity and ecosystem processes. As a result, vegetation forms predicted by conventional biome systems are rarely observed across most of Earth's land surface. Anthropogenic biomes provide an alternative view of the terrestrial biosphere based on global patterns of sustained direct human interaction with ecosystems, including agriculture, human settlements, urbanization, forestry and other uses of land. Anthropogenic biomes offer a new way forward in ecology and conservation by recognizing the irreversible coupling of human and ecological systems at global scales and moving us toward an understanding how best to live in and manage our biosphere and the anthropogenic biosphere we live in. The main biomes in the world are freshwater, marine, coniferous, deciduous, ice, mountains, boreal, grasslands, tundra, and rainforests.

===Major anthropogenic biomes===
* Dense settlements

* Croplands
* Rangelands
* Forested

==Other biomes==
The endolithic biome, consisting entirely of microscopic life in rock pores and cracks, kilometers beneath the surface, has only recently been discovered, and does not fit well into most classification schemes.

===Map of biomes===
}

===Freshwater biomes===

Major continental divides, showing drainage into the major oceans and seas of the world  grey areas are endorheic basins that do not drain to the ocean.

The drainage basins of the principal oceans and seas of the world are marked by continental divides. The grey areas are endorheic basins that do not drain to the ocean.

==See also==

*Altitudinal zonation
*Biomics
*Biosphere reserve
*Earth Science
*Ecoregion
*Ecology
*Ecosystem
*Ecosystem diversity
*Ecotope
*Ecozone
*Climate classification
*Effect of climate change on plant biodiversity
*Gene pool
*Genetic pollution
*Genetic erosion
*Growing region
*Habitat
*Human microbiome
*Kuchler plant association
*Life zones
*Natural environment
*Nature
*Pedology
*Pliocene
*World Network of Biosphere Reserves

==References==

==External links==

*Interesting facts about the Tundra Biome
*Biomes of the world (Missouri Botanic Garden)
*Global Currents and Terrestrial Biomes Map
* WorldBiomes.com is a site covering the 5 principal world biome types: aquatic, desert, forest, grasslands, and tundra.
* UWSP's online textbook The Physical Environment:  Earth Biomes
* Panda.org's Habitats  describes the 14 major terrestrial habitats, 7 major freshwater habitats, and 5 major marine habitats.
* Panda.org's Habitats Simplified  provides simplified explanations for 10 major terrestrial and aquatic habitat types.
* UCMP Berkeley's The World's Biomes  provides lists of characteristics for some biomes and measurements of climate statistics.
* Gale/Cengage has an excellent Biome Overview of terrestrial, aquatic, and man-made biomes with a particular focus on trees native to each, and has detailed descriptions of desert, rain forest, and wetland biomes.
* NASA's Earth Observatory Mission: Biomes gives an exemplar of each biome that is described in detail and provides scientific measurements of the climate statistics that define each biome.
* Google Map of Terrestrial Biomes

 


[[Behavior]]

Behavior or behaviour is the range of actions and mannerisms made by organisms, systems, or artificial entities in conjunction with themselves or their environment, which includes the other systems or organisms around as well as the (inanimate) physical environment. It is the response of the system or organism to various stimuli or inputs, whether internal or external, conscious or subconscious, overt or covert, and voluntary or involuntary.

==Biology== 

Although there is some disagreement as to how to precisely define behaviour in a biological context, one common interpretation based on a meta-analysis of scientific literature states that "behavior is the internally coordinated responses (actions or inactions) of whole living organisms (individuals or groups) to internal and/or external stimuli" 

Behaviors can be either innate or learned. 

Behavior can be regarded as any action of an organism that changes its relationship to its environment. Behavior provides outputs from the organism to the environment. Dusenbery, David B. (2009). Living at Micro Scale, p. 124. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. ISBN 978-0-674-03116-6. 
===Human===

Human behavior is believed to be influenced by the endocrine system and the nervous system. It is most commonly believed that complexity in the behavior of an organism is correlated to the complexity of its nervous system. Generally, organisms with more complex nervous systems have a greater capacity to learn new responses and thus adjust their behavior.

==Other fields==
Behavior outside of psychology includes physical property and chemical reactions.

===Earth sciences===
In environmental modeling and especially in hydrology, a "behavioral model" means a model that is acceptably consistent with observed natural processes, i.e., that simulates well, for example, observed river discharge. It is a key concept of the so-called Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation (GLUE) methodology to quantify how uncertain environmental predictions are.

===Management===
In management, behaviors are associated with desired or undesired focuses. Managers generally note what the desired outcome is, but behavioral patterns can take over. These patterns are the reference to how often the desired behavior actually occurs. Before a behavior actually occurs, antecedents focus on the stimuli that influence the behavior that is about to happen. After the behavior occurs, consequences fall into place. They can come in the form of rewards or punishments.

==See also==

* Applied behavior analysis
* Behavioral cusp
* Behavioral economics
* Behavioural genetics
* Behavioral sciences
* Behaviorism
* Cognitive bias
* Ethology
* Evolutionary physiology
* Experimental analysis of behavior
* Human sexual behavior

* Instinct
* Motivation
* Normality (behavior)
* Organizational studies
* Radical behaviorism
* Reasoning
* Rebellion
* Social relation
* Theories of political behavior
* Work behavior

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Links to review articles by Eric Turkheimer and co-authors on behavior research
* A Unified Theory of Human Behavior

 



[[Battle of Marathon]]

The Battle of Marathon (Greek: , Mach tou Marathnos) took place in 490 BC, during the first Persian invasion of Greece. It was fought between the citizens of Athens, aided by Plataea, and a Persian force commanded by Datis and Artaphernes. The battle was the culmination of the first attempt by Persia, under King Darius I, to subjugate Greece. The Greek army decisively defeated the more numerous Persians, marking a turning point in the Greco-Persian Wars.

The first Persian invasion was a response to Greek involvement in the Ionian Revolt, when Athens and Eretria had sent a force to support the cities of Ionia in their attempt to overthrow Persian rule. The Athenians and Eretrians had succeeded in capturing and burning Sardis, but were then forced to retreat with heavy losses. In response to this raid, Darius swore to burn down Athens and Eretria. According to Herodotus, Darius asked for his bow, he placed an arrow upon the string and he discharged it upwards towards heaven, and as he shot into the air he said: "Zeus, grant me to take vengeance upon the Athenians!". Also he charged one of his servants, to say to him, every day before dinner, three times: "Master, remember the Athenians." Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore, 105 "...he inquired into who the Athenians were; and when he had been informed, he asked for his bow, and having received it and placed an arrow upon the string, he discharged it upwards towards heaven, and as he shot into the air he said: "Zeus, that it may be granted me to take vengeance upon the Athenians!" Having so said he charged one of his attendants, that when dinner was set before the king he should say always three times: "Master, remember the Athenians."" 

At the time of the battle, Sparta and Athens were the two largest city states. Once the Ionian revolt was finally crushed by the Persian victory at the Battle of Lade in 494 BC, Darius began plans to subjugate Greece. In 490 BC, he sent a naval task force under Datis and Artaphernes across the Aegean, to subjugate the Cyclades, and then to make punitive attacks on Athens and Eretrea. Reaching Euboea in mid-summer after a successful campaign in the Aegean, the Persians proceeded to besiege and capture Eretria. The Persian force then sailed for Attica, landing in the bay near the town of Marathon. The Athenians, joined by a small force from Plataea, marched to Marathon, and succeeded in blocking the two exits from the plain of Marathon.

The Greeks could not hope to face the superior Persian cavalry; however, when learning that the Persian cavalry was temporarily absent from the camp, Miltiades ordered a general attack against the Persians. He reinforced his flanks, luring the Persians' best fighters into his centre. The inward wheeling flanks enveloped the Persians, routing them. The Persian army broke in panic towards their ships, and large numbers were slaughtered. The defeat at Marathon marked the end of the first Persian invasion of Greece, and the Persian force retreated to Asia. Darius then began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece; however, in 486 BC, his Egyptian subjects revolted, indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition. After Darius died, his son Xerxes I restarted the preparations for a second invasion of Greece, which finally began in 480 BC.

The Battle of Marathon was a watershed in the Greco-Persian wars, showing the Greeks that the Persians could be beaten; the eventual Greek triumph in these wars can be seen to begin at Marathon. Since the following two hundred years saw the rise of the Classical Greek civilization, which has been enduringly influential in western society, the Battle of Marathon is often seen as a pivotal moment in European history. The battle is perhaps now more famous as the inspiration for the marathon race. Although thought to be historically inaccurate, the legend of the Greek messenger Pheidippides running to Athens with news of the victory became the inspiration for this athletic event, introduced at the 1896 Athens Olympics, and originally run between Marathon and Athens.

== Sources ==

The main source for the Greco-Persian Wars is the Greek historian Herodotus. Herodotus, who has been called the 'Father of History', Cicero, On the Laws I, 5 was born in 484 BC in Halicarnassus, Asia Minor (then under Persian overlordship). He wrote his 'Enquiries' (GreekHistoria; English(The) Histories) around 440430 BC, trying to trace the origins of the Greco-Persian Wars, which would still have been relatively recent history (the wars finally ended in 450 BC). Herodotus's approach was entirely novel, and at least in Western society, he does seem to have invented 'history' as we know it. As Holland has it: "For the first time, a chronicler set himself to trace the origins of a conflict not to a past so remote so as to be utterly fabulous, nor to the whims and wishes of some god, nor to a people's claim to manifest destiny, but rather explanations he could verify personally." Holland, pp. xvixvii. 

Some subsequent ancient historians, despite following in his footsteps, criticised Herodotus, starting with Thucydides. Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, e.g. I, 22 Finley, p. 15. Nevertheless, Thucydides chose to begin his history where Herodotus left off (at the Siege of Sestos), and may therefore have felt that Herodotus's history was accurate enough not to need re-writing or correcting. Plutarch criticised Herodotus in his essay "On The Malignity of Herodotus", describing Herodotus as "Philobarbaros" (barbarian-lover), for not being pro-Greek enough, which suggests that Herodotus might actually have done a reasonable job of being even-handed. Holland, p. xxiv. A negative view of Herodotus was passed on to Renaissance Europe, though he remained well read. However, since the 19th century his reputation has been dramatically rehabilitated by archaeological finds which have repeatedly confirmed his version of events. Holland, p. 377. The prevailing modern view is that Herodotus generally did a remarkable job in his Historia, but that some of his specific details (particularly troop numbers and dates) should be viewed with skepticism. Nevertheless, there are still some historians who believe Herodotus made up much of his story. Fehling, pp. 1277. 

The Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus, writing in the 1st century BC in his Bibliotheca Historica, also provides an account of the Greco-Persian wars, partially derived from the earlier Greek historian Ephorus. This account is fairly consistent with Herodotus's. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica The Greco-Persian wars are also described in less detail by a number of other ancient historians including Plutarch, Ctesias of Cnidus, and are alluded by other authors, such as the playwright Aeschylus. Archaeological evidence, such as the Serpent Column, also supports some of Herodotus's specific claims. Note to Herodotus IX, 81 

== Background ==

A map showing the Greek world at the time of the battle

The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt, the earliest phase of the Greco-Persian Wars. However, it was also the result of the longer-term interaction between the Greeks and Persians. In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly expansionistic, but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples. Holland, pp. 4755 Holland, pp. 5862 Moreover, the Persian king Darius was a usurper, and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule. Even before the Ionian Revolt, Darius had begun to expand the Empire into Europe, subjugating Thrace, and forcing Macedon to become allied to Persia. Attempts at further expansion into the politically fractious world of Ancient Greece may have been inevitable. However, the Ionian Revolt had directly threatened the integrity of the Persian empire, and the states of mainland Greece remained a potential menace to its future stability. Holland, 171178 Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean, and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt. Herodotus V, 105 

The Ionian revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos, a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Milesian tyrant Aristagoras. Holland, pp. 154157 In the aftermath, Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power, but before he could do so, Aristagoras abdicated, and declared Miletus a democracy. The other Ionian cities followed suit, ejecting their Persian-appointed tyrants, and declaring themselves democracies. Herodotus V, 97 Aristagoras then appealed to the states of mainland Greece for support, but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops. Holland, pp. 157161 

The involvement of Athens in the Ionian Revolt arose from a complex set of circumstances, beginning with the establishment of the Athenian Democracy in the late 6th century BC. 

In 510 BC, with the aid of Cleomenes I, King of Sparta, the Athenian people had expelled Hippias, the tyrant ruler of Athens. Herodotus V, 65 With Hippias's father Peisistratus, the family had ruled for 36 out of the previous 50 years and fully intended to continue Hippias's rule. Hippias fled to Sardis to the court of the Persian satrap, Artaphernes and promised control of Athens to the Persians if they were to help restore him. Herodotus V, 96 In the meantime, Cleomenes helped install a pro-Spartan tyranny under Isagoras in Athens, in opposition to Cleisthenes, the leader of the traditionally powerful Alcmaeonidae family, who considered themselves the natural heirs to the rule of Athens. Holland, pp. 131132 Cleisthenes, however, found himself being politically defeated by a coalition led by Isagoras and decided to change the rules of the game by appealing to the demos (the people), in effect making them a new faction in the political arena. This tactic succeeded, but the Spartan King, Cleomenes I, returned at the request of Isagoras and so the Cleisthenes, the Alcmaeonids and other prominent Athenian families were exiled from Athens. When Isagoras attempted to create a narrow oligarchic government, the Athenian people, in a spontaneous and unprecedented move, expelled Cleomenes and Isagoras. Holland, pp. 133136 Cleisthenes was thus restored to Athens (507 BC), and at breakneck speed began to reform the state with the aim of securing his position. The result was not actually a democracy or a real civic state, but he enabled the development of a fully democratic government, which would emerge in the next generation as the demos realized its power. For a full account and analysis see R.M. Berthold, Dare To Struggle. The History and Society of Greece (2009) pp. 8194 The new-found freedom and self-governance of the Athenians meant that they were thereafter exceptionally hostile to the return of the tyranny of Hippias, or any form of outside subjugation; by Sparta, Persia or anyone else. 

Darius I of Persia, as imagined by a Greek painter, 4th century BC

Cleomenes was not pleased with the events, and marched on Athens with the Spartan army. Holland, pp. 136138 Cleomenes's attempts to restore Isagoras to Athens ended in a debacle, but fearing the worst, the Athenians had by this point already sent an embassy to Artaphernes in Sardis, to request aid from the Persian Empire. Holland, p. 142 Artaphernes requested that the Athenians give him an 'earth and water', a traditional token of submission, which the Athenian ambassadors acquiesced to. However, they were severely censured for this when they returned to Athens. At some point later Cleomenes instigated a plot to restore Hippias to the rule of Athens. This failed and Hippias again fled to Sardis and tried to persuade the Persians to subjugate Athens. Herodotus V, 96 The Athenians dispatched ambassadors to Artaphernes to dissuade him from taking action, but Artaphernes merely instructed the Athenians to take Hippias back as tyrant. Needless to say, the Athenians balked at this, and resolved instead to be openly at war with Persia. Having thus become the enemy of Persia, Athens was already in a position to support the Ionian cities when they began their revolt. The fact that the Ionian democracies were inspired by the example of Athens no doubt further persuaded the Athenians to support the Ionian Revolt; especially since the cities of Ionia were originally Athenian colonies. 

The Athenians and Eretrians sent a task force of 25 triremes to Asia Minor to aid the revolt. Herodotus V, 99 Whilst there, the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes, marching to Sardis and burning the lower city. Holland, p. 160 However, this was as much as the Greeks achieved, and they were then pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen, losing many men in the process. Despite the fact that their actions were ultimately fruitless, the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius's lasting enmity, and he vowed to punish both cities. Holland, p. 168 The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade (494 BC) all but ended the Ionian Revolt, and by 493 BC, the last hold-outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet. Holland, p. 176 The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire's border to the islands of the eastern Aegean Herodotus VI, 31 and the Propontis, which had not been part of the Persian dominions before. Herodotus VI, 33 The completion of the pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece, and to punish Athens and Eretria. Holland, pp. 177178 

In 492 BC, once the Ionian Revolt had finally been crushed, Darius dispatched an Persian invasion of Greece#492 BC: Mardonius's Campaign|expedition] to Greece under the command of his son-in-law, Mardonius. Mardonius re-conquered Thrace and compelled Alexander I of Macedon to make Macedon a client kingdom to Persia, before the wrecking of his fleet brought a premature end to the campaign. Herodotus VI, 44 
However in 490 BC, following up the successes of the previous campaign, Darius decided to send a maritime expedition led by Artaphernes, (son of the satrap to whom Hippias had fled) and Datis, a Median admiral. Mardonius had been injured in the prior campaign and had fallen out of favor. The Persian invasion of Greece#490 BC: Datis and Artaphernes' Campaign|expedition] was intended to bring the Cyclades into the Persian empire, to punish Naxos (which had resisted a Persian assault in 499 BC) and then to head to Greece to force Eretria and Athens to submit to Darius or be destroyed. Herodotus VI, 94 After island-hopping across the Aegean, including successfully attacking Naxos, the Persian task force arrived off Euboea in mid summer. The Persians then proceeded to besiege, capture and burn Eretria. They then headed south down the coast of Attica, en route to complete the final objective of the campaignto punish Athens.

== Prelude ==
Initial disposition of forces at Marathon.
A picture reconstructing the beached Persian ships at Marathon before the battle.

The Persians sailed down the coast of Attica, and landed at the bay of Marathon, roughly 25 mi from Athens, on the advice of the exiled Athenian tyrant Hippias (who had accompanied the expedition). Herodotus VI, 102 Under the guidance of Miltiades, the Athenian general with the greatest experience of fighting the Persians, the Athenian army marched quickly to block the two exits from the plain of Marathon, and prevent the Persians moving inland. Cornelius Nepos, Miltiades, IV At the same time, Athens's greatest runner, Pheidippides (or Philippides in some accounts) had been sent to Sparta to request that the Spartan army march to the aid of Athens. Herodotus VI, 105 Pheidippides arrived during the festival of Carneia, a sacrosanct period of peace, and was informed that the Spartan army could not march to war until the full moon rose; Athens could not expect reinforcement for at least ten days. Holland, pp. 187190 The Athenians would have to hold out at Marathon for the time being, although they were reinforced by the full muster of 1,000 hoplites from the small city of Plataea; a gesture which did much to steady the nerves of the Athenians, and won unending Athenian gratitude to Plataea.

For approximately five days the armies therefore confronted each other across the plain of Marathon, in stalemate. The flanks of the Athenian camp were protected either by a grove of trees, or an abbatis of stakes (depending on the exact reading). Cornelius Nepos, Miltiades, VI Lazenby, p. 56 Since every day brought the arrival of the Spartans closer, the delay worked in favor of the Athenians. There were ten Athenian strategoi (generals) at Marathon, elected by each of the ten tribes that the Athenians were divided into; Miltiades was one of these. Herodotus VI, 103 In addition, in overall charge, was the War-Archon (polemarch), Callimachus, who had been elected by the whole citizen body. Herodotus VI, 109 Herodotus suggests that command rotated between the strategoi, each taking in turn a day to command the army. Herodotus VI, 110 He further suggests that each strategos, on his day in command, instead deferred to Miltiades. In Herodotus's account, Miltiades is keen to attack the Persians (despite knowing that the Spartans are coming to aid the Athenians), but strangely, chooses to wait until his actual day of command to attack. This passage is undoubtedly problematic; the Athenians had little to gain by attacking before the Spartans arrived, and there is no real evidence of this rotating generalship. Lazenby, pp. 5759 There does, however, seem to have been a delay between the Athenian arrival at Marathon, and the battle; Herodotus, who evidently believed that Miltiades was eager to attack, may have made a mistake whilst seeking to explain this delay. 

As is discussed below, the reason for the delay was probably simply that neither the Athenians nor the Persians were willing to risk battle initially. Lazenby, pp. 5962 Holland, pp. 191195 This then raises the question of why the battle occurred when it did. Herodotus explicitly tells us that the Greeks attacked the Persians (and the other sources confirm this), but it is not clear why they did this before the arrival of the Spartans. There are two main theories to explain this. 

The first theory is that the Persian cavalry left Marathon for an unspecified reason, and that the Greeks moved to take advantage of this by attacking. This theory is based on the absence of any mention of cavalry in Herodotus' account of the battle, and an entry in the Suda dictionary. The entry   ("without cavalry") is explained thus: The cavalry left. When Datis surrendered and was ready for retreat, the Ionians climbed the trees and gave the Athenians the signal that the cavalry had left. And when Miltiades realized that, he attacked and thus won. From there comes the above-mentioned quote, which is used when someone breaks ranks before battle. Suda, entry Without cavalry There are many variations of this theory, but perhaps the most prevalent is that the cavalry was re-embarked on the ships, and was to be sent by sea to attack (undefended) Athens in the rear, whilst the rest of the Persians pinned down the Athenian army at Marathon. This theory therefore utilises Herodotus' suggestion that after Marathon, the Persian army re-embarked and tried to sail around Cape Sounion to attack Athens directly; Herodotus VI, 115 however, according to the first theory this attempt would have occurred before the battle (and indeed have triggered the battle). 

The second theory is simply that the battle occurred because the Persians finally moved to attack the Athenians. Although this theory has the Persians moving to the strategic offensive, this can be reconciled with the traditional account of the Athenians attacking the Persians by assuming that, seeing the Persians advancing, the Athenians took the tactical offensive, and attacked them. Obviously, it cannot be firmly established which theory (if either) is correct. However, both theories imply that there was some kind of Persian activity which occurred on or about the fifth day which ultimately triggered the battle. 

=== Date of the battle ===
Herodotus mentions for several events a date in the lunisolar calendar, of which each Greek city-state used a variant. Astronomical computation allows us to derive an absolute date in the proleptic Julian calendar which is much used by historians as the chronological frame. Philipp August Bckh in 1855 concluded that the battle took place on September 12, 490 BC in the Julian calendar, and this is the conventionally accepted date. However, this depends on when exactly the Spartans held their festival and it is possible that the Spartan calendar was one month ahead of that of Athens. In that case the battle took place on August 12, 490 BC. D.W. Olson et al., pp. 3441 

== Opposing forces ==

=== Athenians ===
Modern drawing of the phalanx formation employed by Greek hoplites

Herodotus does not give a figure for the size of the Athenian army. However, Cornelius Nepos, Pausanias and Plutarch all give the figure of 9,000 Athenians and 1,000 Plataeans; Cornelius Nepos, Miltiades, V Pausanias X, 20 Plutarch, Moralia, 305 B while Justin suggests that there were 10,000 Athenians and 1,000 Plataeans. Justin II, 9 These numbers are highly comparable to the number of troops Herodotus says that the Athenians and Plataeans sent to the Battle of Plataea 11 years later. Herodotus IX, 28 Pausanias noticed on the monument to the battle the names of former slaves who were freed in exchange for military services. Pausanias I, 32 Modern historians generally accept these numbers as reasonable. Lazenby, p. 54 

=== Persians ===
:For a full discussion of the size of the Persian invasion force, see First Persian invasion of Greece

According to Herodotus, the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes. Herodotus VI, 95 Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army, only saying that they were a "large infantry that was well packed". Herodotus VI, 94 Among ancient sources, the poet Simonides, another near-contemporary, says the campaign force numbered 200,000; while a later writer, the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry, of which only 100,000 fought in the battle, while the rest were loaded into the fleet that was rounding Cape Sounion; Cornelius Nepos, Miltiades, IV Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300,000, as does the Suda dictionary. Pausanias IV, 22 Suda, entry Hippias Plato and Lysias give 500,000; Plato, Menexenus, 240 A Lysias, Funeral Oration, 21 and Justinus 600,000. Justinus II, 9 

Modern historians have proposed wide ranging numbers for the infantry, from 20,000100,000 with a consensus of perhaps 25,000; Davis, pp. 913 Holland, p. 390 Lloyd, p. 164 Green, p. 90 estimates for the cavalry are in the range of 1,000. Lazenby, p. 46 

== Strategic and tactical considerations ==
Persian infantry (probably Immortals), shown in a frieze in Darius's palace, Susa

From a strategic point of view, the Athenians had some disadvantages at Marathon. In order to face the Persians in battle, the Athenians had to summon all available hoplites; and even then they were still probably outnumbered at least 2 to 1. Furthermore, raising such a large army had denuded Athens of defenders, and thus any secondary attack in the Athenian rear would cut the army off from the city; and any direct attack on the city could not be defended against. Still further, defeat at Marathon would mean the complete defeat of Athens, since no other Athenian army existed. The Athenian strategy was therefore to keep the Persian army pinned down at Marathon, blocking both exits from the plain, and thus preventing themselves from being outmaneuvered. However, these disadvantages were balanced by some advantages. The Athenians initially had no need to seek battle, since they had managed to confine the Persians to the plain of Marathon. Furthermore, time worked in their favour, as every day brought the arrival of the Spartans closer. Having everything to lose by attacking, and much to gain by not attacking, the Athenians remained on the defensive in the run up to the battle. Tactically, hoplites were vulnerable to attacks by cavalry, and since the Persians had substantial numbers of cavalry, this made any offensive maneuver by the Athenians even more of a risk, and thus reinforced the defensive strategy of the Athenians. 

The Persian strategy, on the other hand, was probably principally determined by tactical considerations. The Persian infantry was evidently lightly armoured, and no match for hoplites in a head-on confrontation (as would be demonstrated at the later battles of Thermopylae and Plataea. Lazenby, p. 256 ) Since the Athenians seem to have taken up a strong defensive position at Marathon, the Persian hesitance was probably a reluctance to attack the Athenians head-on. 

Whatever event eventually triggered the battle, it obviously altered the strategic or tactical balance sufficiently to induce the Athenians to attack the Persians. If the first theory is correct (see above), then the absence of cavalry removed the main Athenian tactical disadvantage, and the threat of being outflanked made it imperative to attack. Conversely, if the second theory is correct, then the Athenians were merely reacting to the Persians attacking them. Since the Persian force obviously contained a high proportion of missile troops, a static defensive position would have made little sense for the Athenians; Lazenby, p. 67 the strength of the hoplite was in the melee, and the sooner that could be brought about, the better, from the Athenian point of view. If the second theory is correct, this raises the further question of why the Persians, having hesitated for several days, then attacked. There may have been several strategic reasons for this; perhaps they were aware (or suspected) that the Athenians were expecting reinforcements. Alternatively, since they may have felt the need to force some kind of victorythey could hardly remain at Marathon indefinitely. 

== Battle ==
The Battle of Marathon
They crashed into Persian army with tremendous force
The distance between the two armies at the point of battle had narrowed to "a distance not less than 8 stadia" or about 1,500 meters. Herodotus VI, 112 Miltiades ordered the two tribes that were forming the center of the Greek formation, the Leontis tribe led by Themistocles and the Antiochis tribe led by Aristides, to be arranged in the depth of four ranks while the rest of the tribes at their flanks were in ranks of eight. Plutarch, Aristides, V Herodotus VI, 111 Some modern commentators have suggested this was a deliberate ploy to encourage a double envelopment of the Persian centre. However, this supposes a level of training that the Greeks did not possess. Lazenby, p. 250 There is little evidence for any such tactical thinking in Greek battles until Leuctra in 371 BC. Lazenby, p. 258 It is therefore probable that this arrangement was made, possibly at the last moment, so that the Athenian line was as long as the Persian line, and would not therefore be outflanked. Lazenby, p. 64 

When the Athenian line was ready, according to one source, the simple signal to advance was given by Miltiades: "At them". Herodotus implies the Athenians ran the whole distance to the Persian lines, shouting their ululating war cry, "! !" ("Eleleu! Eleleu!"). It is doubtful that the Athenians ran the whole distance; in full armour this would be very difficult. Lazenby, pp. 6669 More likely, they marched until they reached the limit of the archers' effectiveness, the "beaten zone" (roughly 200 meters), and then broke into a run towards their enemy. Another possibility is that they ran up to the 200 meter-mark in broken ranks, and then reformed for the march into battle from there. Herodotus suggests that this was the first time a Greek army ran into battle in this way; this was probably because it was the first time that a Greek army had faced an enemy composed primarily of missile troops. All this was evidently much to the surprise of the Persians; "... in their minds they charged the Athenians with madness which must be fatal, seeing that they were few and yet were pressing forwards at a run, having neither cavalry nor archers". Herodotus VI, 110 Indeed, based on their previous experience of the Greeks, the Persians might be excused for this; Herodotus tells us that the Athenians at Marathon were "first to endure looking at Median dress and men wearing it, for up until then just hearing the name of the Medes caused the Hellenes to panic". Passing through the hail of arrows launched by the Persian army, protected for the most part by their armour, the Greek line finally collided with the enemy army. Holland provides an evocative description:

The enemy directly in their path ... realised to their horror that Athenians, far from providing the easy pickings for their bowmen, as they had first imagined, were not going to be halted ... The impact was devastating. The Athenians had honed their style of fighting in combat with other phalanxes, wooden shields smashing against wooden shields, iron spear tips clattering against breastplates of bronze ... in those first terrible seconds of collision, there was nothing but a pulverizing crash of metal into flesh and bone; then the rolling of the Athenian tide over men wearing, at most, quilted jerkins for protection, and armed, perhaps, with nothing more than bows or slings. The hoplites' ash spears, rather than shivering ... could instead stab and stab again, and those of the enemy who avoided their fearful jabbing might easily be crushed to death beneath the sheer weight of the advancing men of bronze. Holland, pp. 194197 

The Athenian wings quickly routed the inferior Persian levies on the flanks, before turning inwards to surround the Persian centre, which had been more successful against the thin Greek centre. The battle ended when the Persian centre then broke in panic towards their ships, pursued by the Greeks. Herodotus VI, 113 Some, unaware of the local terrain, ran towards the swamps where unknown numbers drowned. Pausanias I, 32 Lazenby, p. 71 The Athenians pursued the Persians back to their ships, and managed to capture seven ships, though the majority were able to launch successfully. Herodotus VI, 115 Herodotus VI, 114 Herodotus recounts the story that Cynaegirus, brother of the playwright Aeschylus, who was also among the fighters, charged into the sea, grabbed one Persian trireme, and started pulling it towards shore. A member of the crew saw him, cut off his hand, and Cynaegirus died. 

Herodotus records that 6,400 Persian bodies were counted on the battlefield, and it is unknown how many more perished in the swamps. Herodotus VI, 117 The Athenians lost 192 men and the Plataeans 11. Among the dead were the war archon Callimachus and the general Stesilaos. 

== Aftermath ==

In the immediate aftermath of the battle, Herodotus says that the Persian fleet sailed around Cape Sounion to attack Athens directly. As has been discussed above, some modern historians place this attempt just before the battle. Either way, the Athenians evidently realised that their city was still under threat, and marched as quickly as possible back to Athens. Herodotus VI, 116 
The two tribes which had been in the centre of the Athenian line stayed to guard the battlefield under the command of Aristides. Holland, p. 218 The Athenians arrived in time to prevent the Persians from securing a landing, and seeing that the opportunity was lost, the Persians turned about and returned to Asia. Connected with this episode, Herodotus recounts a rumour that this manoeuver by the Persians had been planned in conjunction with the Alcmaeonids, the prominent Athenian aristocratic family, and that a "shield-signal" had been given after the battle. Although many interpretations of this have been offered, it is impossible to tell whether this was true, and if so, what exactly the signal meant. Lazenby, pp. 7273 On the next day, the Spartan army arrived at Marathon, having covered the 220 km in only three days. The Spartans toured the battlefield at Marathon, and agreed that the Athenians had won a great victory. Herodotus VI, 120 

Hill where the Athenian dead were buried after the Battle of Marathon

The dead of Marathon were buried on the battlefield. On the tomb of the Athenians this epigram composed by Simonides was written:

:   
:   

:Fighting in the forefront of the Hellenes, the Athenians at Marathon
:destroyed the might of the gold-bearing Medes.

In the meanwhile, Darius began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece; however, in 486 BC, his Egyptian subjects revolted, indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition. Holland, p. 203 Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt, and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Holland, pp. 206207 Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt, and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece. Holland, pp. 208211 The epic second Persian invasion of Greece finally began in 480 BC, and the Persians met with initial success at the battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium. Lazenby, p. 151 However, defeat at the Battle of Salamis would be the turning point in the campaign, Lazenby, p. 197 and the next year the expedition was ended by the decisive Greek victory at the Battle of Plataea. Holland, pp. 350355 

== Significance ==
Greek Corinthian-style helmet and the skull reportedly found inside it from the Battle of Marathon, now residing in the Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto.

The defeat at Marathon barely touched the vast resources of the Persian empire, yet for the Greeks it was an enormously significant victory. It was the first time the Greeks had beaten the Persians, proving that the Persians were not invincible, and that resistance, rather than subjugation, was possible. Holland, p. 201 

The battle was a defining moment for the young Athenian democracy, showing what might be achieved through unity and self-belief; indeed, the battle effectively marks the start of a "golden age" for Athens. Holland, p. 138 This was also applicable to Greece as a whole; "their victory endowed the Greeks with a faith in their destiny that was to endure for three centuries, during which western culture was born". Holland, pp xvixvii Fuller, pp. 1132 John Stuart Mill's famous opinion was that "the Battle of Marathon, even as an event in British history, is more important than the Battle of Hastings". Powell et al., 2001 It seems that the Athenian playwright Aeschylus considered his participation at Marathon to be his greatest achievement in life (rather than his plays) since on his gravestone there was the following epigram:

:
:
:
:

:This tomb the dust of Aeschylus doth hide,
:Euphorion's son and fruitful Gela's pride.
:How tried his valor, Marathon may tell,
:And long-haired Medes, who knew it all too well. Anthologiae Graecae Appendix, vol. 3, Epigramma sepulcrale p. 17 

Militarily, a major lesson for the Greeks was the potential of the hoplite phalanx. This style had developed during internecine warfare amongst the Greeks; since each city-state fought in the same way, the advantages and disadvantages of the hoplite phalanx had not been obvious. Marathon was the first time a phalanx faced more lightly armed troops, and revealed how effective the hoplites could be in battle. The phalanx formation was still vulnerable to cavalry (the cause of much caution by the Greek forces at the Battle of Plataea), but used in the right circumstances, it was now shown to be a potentially devastating weapon. Holland, pp. 344352 

== Legacy ==

=== Legends associated with the battle ===
The most famous legend associated with Marathon is that of the runner Pheidippides/Philippides bringing news to Athens of the battle, which is described below.

Statue of Pan, Capitoline Museum, Rome

Pheidippides' run to Sparta to bring aid has other legends associated with it. Herodotus mentions that Pheidippides was visited by the god Pan on his way to Sparta (or perhaps on his return journey). Pan asked why the Athenians did not honor him and the awed Pheidippides promised that they would do so from then on. The god apparently felt that the promise would be kept, so he appeared in battle and at the crucial moment he instilled the Persians with his own brand of fear, the mindless, frenzied fear that bore his name: "panic". After the battle, a sacred precinct was established for Pan in a grotto on the north slope of the Acropolis, and a sacrifice was annually offered. Herodotus VI, 105 

Similarly, after the victory the festival of the Agroteras Thysia ("sacrifice to the Agrotra") was held at Agrae near Athens, in honor of Artemis Agrotera ("Artemis the Huntress"). This was in fulfillment of a vow made by the city before the battle, to offer in sacrifice a number of goats equal to that of the Persians slain in the conflict. The number was so great, it was decided to offer 500 goats yearly until the number was filled. Xenophon notes that at his time, 90 years after the battle, goats were still offered yearly. Plutarch, On the Malice of Herodotus, 26 Xenophon, Anabasis III, 2 Aelian, Varia Historia II, 25 Aristophanes, The Knights, 660 

Plutarch mentions that the Athenians saw the phantom of King Theseus, the mythical hero of Athens, leading the army in full battle gear in the charge against the Persians, Plutarch, Theseus, 35 and indeed he was depicted in the mural of the Stoa Poikile fighting for the Athenians, along with the twelve Olympian gods and other heroes. Pausanias I, 15 Pausanias also tells us that:

Another tale from the conflict is of the dog of Marathon. Aelian relates that one hoplite brought his dog to the Athenian encampment. The dog followed his master to battle and attacked the Persians at his master's side. He also informs us that this dog is depicted in the mural of the Stoa Poikile. Aelian, On the Nature of Animals VII, 38 

=== Marathon run ===

Burton Holmes' photograph entitled "1896: Three athletes in training for the marathon at the Olympic Games in Athens".
According to Herodotus, an Athenian runner named Pheidippides was sent to run from Athens to Sparta to ask for assistance before the battle. He ran a distance of over 225 kilometers (140 miles), arriving in Sparta the day after he left. Herodotus VI, 105106 Then, following the battle, the Athenian army marched the 40 kilometers (25 miles) or so back to Athens at a very high pace (considering the quantity of armour, and the fatigue after the battle), in order to head off the Persian force sailing around Cape Sounion. They arrived back in the late afternoon, in time to see the Persian ships turn away from Athens, thus completing the Athenian victory. Holland, p. 198 

Later, in popular imagination, these two events became confused with each other, leading to a legendary but inaccurate version of events. This myth has Pheidippides running from Marathon to Athens after the battle, to announce the Greek victory with the word "Nenikkamen!" (Attic: (We were victorious!)), whereupon he promptly died of exhaustion. Most accounts incorrectly attribute this story to Herodotus; actually, the story first appears in Plutarch's On the Glory of Athens in the 1st century AD, who quotes from Heracleides of Pontus's lost work, giving the runner's name as either Thersipus of Erchius or Eucles. Plutarch, Moralia, 347C Lucian of Samosata (2nd century AD) gives the same story but names the runner Philippides (not Pheidippides). Lucian, III It should be noted that in some medieval codices of Herodotus the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta before the battle is given as Philippides and in a few modern editions this name is preferred. Lazenby, p. 52 

When the idea of a modern Olympics became a reality at the end of the 19th century, the initiators and organizers were looking for a great popularizing event, recalling the ancient glory of Greece. The idea of organizing a 'marathon race' came from Michel Bral, who wanted the event to feature in the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 in Athens. This idea was heavily supported by Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympics, as well as the Greeks. This would echo the legendary version of events, with the competitors running from Marathon to Athens. So popular was this event that it quickly caught on, becoming a fixture at the Olympic games, with major cities staging their own annual events. The distance eventually became fixed at 26 miles 385 yards, or 42.195 km, though for the first years it was variable, being around 25 mithe approximate distance from Marathon to Athens. 

=== Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ===

Herodotus' account of the battle may point to the first recorded case of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. During the battle, an Athenian named Epizelus became instantly and permanently blind without having been struck. Herodotus Book 6: Erato, 117 "an Athenian, Epizelos the son of Cuphagoras, while fighting in the close combat and proving himself a good man, was deprived of the sight of his eyes, neither having received a blow in any part of his body nor having been hit with a missile, and for the rest of his life from this time he continued to be blind" 

== Depiction ==

The Battle of Marathon was briefly depicted in the opening scenes of the movie (2014)

== See also ==

== Notes ==

== References ==

=== Ancient sources ===
* Herodotus, The Histories
* Thucydides, History of The Peloponnesian Wars
* Diodorus Siculus, Library
* Lysias, Funeral Oration
* Plato, Menexenus
* Xenophon Anabasis
* Aristotle, The Athenian Constitution
* Aristophanes, The Knights
* Cornelius Nepos Lives of the Eminent Commanders (Miltiades)
* Plutarch Parallel Lives (Aristides, Themistocles, Theseus), On the Malice of Herodotus
* Lucian, Mistakes in Greeting
* Pausanias, Description of Greece
* Claudius Aelianus Various history & On the Nature of Animals
* Marcus Junianus Justinus Epitome of the Phillipic History of Pompeius Trogus
* Photius, Bibliotheca or Myriobiblon: Epitome of Persica by Ctesias
* Suda Dictionary

=== Modern studies ===
* Hans W. Giessen, Mythos Marathon. Von Herodot ber Bral bis zur Gegenwart. Verlag Empirische Pdagogik, Landau (= Landauer Schriften zur Kommunikations- und Kulturwissenschaft. Band 17) 2010. ISBN 978-3-941320-46-8. 
* 
* 
* Lacey, Jim. The First Clash: The Miraculous Greek Victory at Marathon and Its Impact on Western Civilization (2011), popular
* Lazenby, J.F. The Defence of Greece 490479 BC. Aris & Phillips Ltd., 1993 (ISBN 0-85668-591-7)
* Lloyd, Alan. Marathon: The Crucial Battle That Created Western Democracy. Souvenir Press, 2004. (ISBN 0-285-63688-X)
* Davis, Paul. 100 Decisive Battles. Oxford University Press, 1999. ISBN 1-57607-075-1
* Powell J., Blakeley D.W., Powell, T. Biographical Dictionary of Literary Influences: The Nineteenth Century, 18001914. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. ISBN 978-0-313-30422-4
* Fuller, J.F.C. A Military History of the Western World. Funk & Wagnalls, 1954.
* Fehling, D. Herodotus and His "Sources": Citation, Invention, and Narrative Art. Translated by J.G. Howie. Leeds: Francis Cairns, 1989.
* 
* Anthologiae Graecae Appendix, vol. 3, Epigramma sepulcrale
* D.W. Olson et al., "The Moon and the Marathon", Sky & Telescope Sep. 2004
* 

* 

* 

== External links ==

Academic Publishing Wiki
The Academic Publishing Wiki has a journal article about this subject:
The struggle for Greece: Marathon and Artemision

* Battle of Marathon animated battle map by Jonathan Webb
* The Importance of the Battle of Marathon on The History Notes website
* Livius, Battle of Marathon by Jona Lendering
* Black-and-white photo-essay of Marathon

* 

* Hood, E. The Greek Victory at Marathon, Clio History Journal, 1995.
* Battle of Marathon by e-marathon.gr 
* The Battle of Marathon September 490 BC 
* The Battle of Marathon September 490 BC, by Major General Dimitris Gedeon, HEAR

* 
* Digital representation of the Battle of Marathon 490 BC
* Marathon, the beginning of history A documentary from ET1, 2011 

 



[[Balance of trade]]

Cumulative current account balance 19802008 based on International Monetary Fund data.
Cumulative current account balance per capita 19802008 based on International Monetary Fund data.

The commercial balance or net exports (sometimes symbolized as NX), is the difference between the monetary value of exports and imports of output in an economy over a certain period, measured in the currency of that economy. It is the relationship between a nation's imports and exports. A positive balance is known as a trade surplus if it consists of exporting more than is imported; a negative balance is referred to as a trade deficit or, informally, a trade gap. The balance of trade is sometimes divided into a goods and a services balance.

== Understand Balance of Trade ==
Trade, in general connotation, means the purchase and sales of commodities. In International Trade, purchase and sale are replaced by imports and exports. Balance of Trade is simply the difference between the value of exports and value of imports. Thus, the Balance of Trade denotes the differences of imports and exports of a merchandise of a country during the course of year. It indicates the value of exports and imports of the country in question. If the value of its exports over a period exceeds its value of imports, it is called favourable balance of trade and, Conversely, if the value of total imports exceeds the total value of exports over a period, it is unfavourable balance of trade. The favourable balance of trade indicates good economic condition of the country.

Policies of early modern Europe are grouped under the heading mercantilism. Early understanding of the imbalances of trade emerged from the practices and abuses of mercantilism in which colonial America's natural resources and cash crops were exported in exchange for finished goods from England, a factor leading to the American Revolution. An early statement appeared in Discourse of the Common Wealth of this Realm of England, 1549: "We must always take heed that we buy no more from strangers than we sell them, for so should we impoverish ourselves and enrich them." Now attributed to Sir Thomas Smith; quoted in Jose rizal, The Wheels of Commerce, vol. II of Civilization and Capitalism 15th18th Century, 1979:204. Similarly a systematic and coherent explanation of balance of trade was made public through Thomas Mun's c1630 "England's treasure by foreign trade, or, The balance of our foreign trade is the rule of our treasure" Thomas Mun, Oxford National Dictionary of Biography 

==Definition==

The balance of trade forms part of the current account, which includes other transactions such as income from the net international investment position as well as international aid. If the current account is in surplus, the country's net international asset position increases correspondingly. Equally, a deficit decreases the net international asset position.

The trade balance is identical to the difference between a country's output and its domestic demand (the difference between what goods a country produces and how many goods it buys from abroad; this does not include money re-spent on foreign stock, nor does it factor in the concept of importing goods to produce for the domestic market).

Measuring the balance of trade can be problematic because of problems with recording and collecting data. As an illustration of this problem, when official data for all the world's countries are added up, exports exceed imports by almost 1%; it appears the world is running a positive balance of trade with itself. This cannot be true, because all transactions involve an equal credit or debit in the account of each nation. The discrepancy is widely believed to be explained by transactions intended to launder money or evade taxes, smuggling and other visibility problems. However, especially for developed countries, accuracy is likely.

Factors that can affect the balance of trade include:
* The cost of production (land, labor, capital, taxes, incentives, etc.) in the exporting economy vis--vis those in the importing economy;
* The cost and availability of raw materials, intermediate goods and other inputs;
* Exchange rate movements;
* Multilateral, bilateral and unilateral taxes or restrictions on trade;
* Non-tariff barriers such as environmental, health or safety standards;
* The availability of adequate foreign exchange with which to pay for imports; and
* Prices of goods manufactured at home (influenced by the responsiveness of supply)

In addition, the trade balance is likely to differ across the business cycle. In export-led growth (such as oil and early industrial goods), the balance of trade will improve during an economic expansion. However, with domestic demand led growth (as in the United States and Australia) the trade balance will worsen at the same stage in the business cycle.

Monetary balance of trade is different from physical balance of trade Physical Trade Balance, OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms (which is expressed in amount of raw materials, known also as Total Material Consumption). Developed countries usually import a lot of raw materials from developing countries. Typically, these imported materials are transformed into finished products, and might be exported after adding value. Financial trade balance statistics conceal material flow. Most developed countries have a large physical trade deficit, because they have a large ecological footprint. Civil society organisations point out the predatory nature of this imbalance, and campaign for ecological debt repayment.

Since the mid-1980s, the United States has had a growing deficit in tradeable goods, especially with Asian nations (China and Japan) which now hold large sums of U.S debt that has funded the consumption. Bivens, L. Josh (14 December 2004). Debt and the dollar Economic Policy Institute. Retrieved on 8 July 2007. MAjor foreign holders of treasury securities. U.S. Treasury.gov The U.S. has a trade surplus with nations such as Australia. The issue of trade deficits can be complex. Trade deficits generated in tradeable goods such as manufactured goods or software may impact domestic employment to different degrees than trade deficits in raw materials.

Economies such as Japan and Germany which have savings surpluses, typically run trade surpluses. China, a high-growth economy, has tended to run trade surpluses. A higher savings rate generally corresponds to a trade surplus. Correspondingly, the U.S. with its lower savings rate has tended to run high trade deficits, especially with Asian nations.

==Views on economic impact==

===Classical theory===
From Classical economic theory, those who ignore the effects of long run trade deficits may be confusing David Ricardo's principle of comparative advantage with Adam Smith's principle of absolute advantage, specifically ignoring the latter. The economist Paul Craig Roberts notes that the comparative advantage principles developed by David Ricardo do not hold where the factors of production are internationally mobile. Roberts, Paul Craig (7 August 2003). Jobless in the USA Newsmax. Retrieved on 6 May 2007. Hira, Ron and Anil Hira with forward by Lou Dobbs, (May 2005). Outsourcing America: What's Behind Our National Crisis and How We Can Reclaim American Jobs. (AMACOM) American Management Association. Citing Paul Craig Roberts, Paul Samuelson, and Lou Dobbs, pp. 3638. Global labor arbitrage, a phenomenon described by economist Stephen S. Roach, where one country exploits the cheap labor of another, would be a case of absolute advantage that is not mutually beneficial. See Roberts, Loc. cit. Paul Craig Roberts (07/28/04)."Global Labor Arbitrage".VDARE. Retrieved on 7 July 2009. Whitney, Mike (June 2006).Labor arbitrage. Entrepreneur. Retrieved on 7 July 2009. In 2010, economist Ian Fletcher authored a significant work entitled, Free Trade Doesn't Work: What Should Replace It and Why, where he has supported a strategic approach to trade rather than an unconditional or unilateral approach. Fletcher, Ian Free Trade Doesn't Work: What Should Replace It and Why (U.S. Business & Industry Council 2011 Edition ISBN 0578082616) 

Small trade deficits are generally not considered to be harmful to either the importing or exporting economy. However, when a national trade imbalance expands beyond prudence (generally thought to be several percent of GDP, for several years), adjustments tend to occur. While unsustainable imbalances Aristovnik, Aleksander, 2006. "Current Account Sustainability in Selected Transition Countries" William Davidson Institute Working Papers Series WP844. may persist for long periods (cf, Singapore and New Zealands surpluses and deficits, respectively), the distortions likely to be caused by large flows of wealth out of one economy and into another tend to become intolerable.

In simple terms, trade deficits are paid for out of foreign exchange reserves, and may continue until such reserves are empty, at which point, the importer can no longer purchase abroad. This is likely to have exchange rate implications: a loss of value in the deficit economys currency relative to the surplus economys currency will change the relative price of tradable goods, and facilitate a return to balance or (quite commonly in historical data) an over-shooting into surplus, the other direction.

When an economy is unable to export enough physical goods to pay for its physical imports, it may be able to find funds elsewhere: Service exports, for example, are more than sufficient to pay for Hong Kong's domestic goods import. In poor countries, foreign aid may compensate, while in developed economies a capital account surplus caused by sales of assets often offsets a current-account deficit. There are some economies where transfers from nationals working abroad contribute significantly to paying for imports. The Philippines, Bangladesh and Mexico are examples of transfer-rich economies.

A country may rebalance the trade deficit by use of quantitative easing at home. This involves a central bank printing money and making it available to other domestic financial institutions at small interest rates, which increases the money supply in the home economy. Inflation usually results, which devalues in real terms the debt owed to foreign creditors if that debt was instantiated in the home currency.

====Adam Smith on the balance of trade====

"In the foregoing part of this chapter I have endeavoured to show, even upon the principles of the commercial system, how unnecessary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods from those countries with which the balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous.
Nothing, however, can be more absurd than this whole doctrine of the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but almost all the other regulations of commerce are founded. When two places trade with one another, this doctrine supposes that, if the balance be even, neither of them either loses or gains; but if it leans in any degree to one side, that one of them loses and the other gains in proportion to its declension from the exact equilibrium." (Smith, 1776, book IV, ch. iii, part ii)
 Smith, Adam. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981, 2 vols., (1776) (reprint of the Clarendon Press edition, Oxford 1976, with Edward Cannan's original index from 1922) 

===Keynesian theory===
In the last few years of his life, John Maynard Keynes was much preoccupied with the question of balance in international trade. He was the leader of the British delegation to the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference in 1944 that established the Bretton Woods system of international currency management.

He was the principal author of a proposal  the so-called Keynes Plan  for an International Clearing Union. The two governing principles of the plan were that the problem of settling outstanding balances should be solved by 'creating' additional 'international money', and that debtor and creditor should be treated almost alike as disturbers of equilibrium. In the event, though, the plans were rejected, in part because "American opinion was naturally reluctant to accept the principle of equality of treatment so novel in debtor-creditor relationships". 
 

His view, supported by many economists and commentators at the time, was that creditor nations may be just as responsible as debtor nations for disequilibrium in exchanges and that both should be under an obligation to bring trade back into a state of balance. Failure for them to do so could have serious consequences. In the words of Geoffrey Crowther, then editor of The Economist, "If the economic relationships between nations are not, by one means or another, brought fairly close to balance, then there is no set of financial arrangements that can rescue the world from the impoverishing results of chaos." 

These ideas were informed by events prior to the Great Depression when  in the opinion of Keynes and others  international lending, primarily by the U.S., exceeded the capacity of sound investment and so got diverted into non-productive and speculative uses, which in turn invited default and a sudden stop to the process of lending. 

Influenced by Keynes, economics texts in the immediate post-war period put a significant emphasis on balance in trade. For example, the second edition of the popular introductory textbook, An Outline of Money, devoted the last three of its ten chapters to questions of foreign exchange management and in particular the 'problem of balance'. However, in more recent years, since the end of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, with the increasing influence of Monetarist schools of thought in the 1980s, and particularly in the face of large sustained trade imbalances, these concerns  and particularly concerns about the destabilising effects of large trade surpluses  have largely disappeared from mainstream economics discourse See for example, Krugman, P and Wells, R (2006). "Economics", Worth Publishers and Keynes' insights have slipped from view. although see Duncan, R (2005). "The Dollar Crisis: Causes, Consequences, Cures", Wiley They are receiving some attention again in the wake of the Financial crisis of 20072010. See for example, 

===Monetarist theory===
Prior to 20th century Monetarist theory, the 19th century economist and philosopher Frdric Bastiat expressed the idea that trade deficits actually were a manifestation of profit, rather than a loss. He proposed as an example to suppose that he, a Frenchman, exported French wine and imported British coal, turning a profit. He supposed he was in France, and sent a cask of wine which was worth 50 francs to England. The customhouse would record an export of 50 francs. If, in England, the wine sold for 70 francs (or the pound equivalent), which he then used to buy coal, which he imported into France, and was found to be worth 90 francs in France, he would have made a profit of 40 francs. But the customhouse would say that the value of imports exceeded that of exports and was trade deficit against the ledger of France. Bastiat: Selected Essays 

By reductio ad absurdum, Bastiat argued that the national trade deficit was an indicator of a successful economy, rather than a failing one. Bastiat predicted that a successful, growing economy would result in greater trade deficits, and an unsuccessful, shrinking economy would result in lower trade deficits. This was later, in the 20th century, echoed by economist Milton Friedman.

In the 1980s, Milton Friedman, a Nobel Prize-winning economist and a proponent of Monetarism, contended that some of the concerns of trade deficits are unfair criticisms in an attempt to push macroeconomic policies favorable to exporting industries.

Friedman argued that trade deficits are not necessarily as important as high exports raise the value of the currency, reducing aforementioned exports, and vice versa for imports, thus naturally removing trade deficits not due to investment. Since 1971, when the Nixon administration decided to abolish fixed exchange rates, America's Current Account accumulated trade deficits have totaled $7.75 Trillion as of 2010. This deficit exists as it is matched by investment coming into the United States- purely by the definition of the balance of payments, any current account deficit that exists is matched by an inflow of foreign investment.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the U.S. had experienced high inflation and Friedman's policy positions tended to defend the stronger dollar at that time. He stated his belief that these trade deficits were not necessarily harmful to the economy at the time since the currency comes back to the country (country A sells to country B, country B sells to country C who buys from country A, but the trade deficit only includes A and B). However, it may be in one form or another including the possible tradeoff of foreign control of assets. In his view, the "worst-case scenario" of the currency never returning to the country of origin was actually the best possible outcome: the country actually purchased its goods by exchanging them for pieces of cheaply made paper. As Friedman put it, this would be the same result as if the exporting country burned the dollars it earned, never returning it to market circulation. Free to Choose video series from PBS 

This position is a more refined version of the theorem first discovered by David Hume. Hume argued that England could not permanently gain from exports, because hoarding gold (i.e., currency) would make gold more plentiful in England; therefore, the prices of English goods would rise, making them less attractive exports and making foreign goods more attractive imports. In this way, countries' trade balances would balance out. 

Friedman believed that deficits would be corrected by free markets as floating currency rates rise or fall with time to encourage or discourage imports in favor of the exports, reversing again in favor of imports as the currency gains strength. In the real world, a potential difficulty is that currency markets are far from a free market, with government and central banks being major players, and this is unlikely to change within the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, recent developments have shown that the global economy is undergoing a fundamental shift. For many years, the U.S. has borrowed and bought while in general, the rest of the world has lent and sold.

As of October 2007, the U.S. dollar weakened against the euro, British pound, and many other currencies. For instance, the euro hit $1.42 in October 2007, the strongest it has been since its birth in 1999. Against this backdrop, American exporters are finding quite favorable overseas markets for their products and U.S. consumers are responding to their general housing slowdown by slowing their spending. Furthermore, China, the Middle East, central Europe and Africa are absorbing more of the world's imports which in the end may result in a world economy that is more evenly balanced. All of this could well add up to a major readjustment of the U.S. trade deficit, which as a percentage of GDP, began in 1991. Michael M. Phillips, World Economy in Flux As America Downshifts 

Friedman contended that the structure of the balance of payments was misleading. In an interview with Charlie Rose, he stated that "on the books" the US is a net borrower of funds, using those funds to pay for goods and services. He essentially claimed that the foreign assets were not carried on the books at their higher, truer value.

Friedman presented his analysis of the balance of trade in Free to Choose, widely considered his most significant popular work.

== Trade Balances' effects upon their nations GDP==

Annual trade surpluses are immediate and direct additions to their nations GDPs.
To some extent exports induce additional increases to the GDPs that are not reflected within the export products prices; thus trade surpluses contributions to their GDP are generally understated.

Products prices generally reflect their producers production supporting expenditures. Producers often benefit from some production supporting goods and services at lesser or no cost to the producers.
 
For example, governments may deliberately locate or increase the capacity of their infrastructure, or provide other additional considerations to retain or attract producers within their own jurisdictions. The curriculum of a nation's schools and colleges may provide job applicants specifically suited to the producers needs, or provide specialized research and development.
All national factors of production, including education, contribute to GDP, and unless globally traded products fully reflect those goods and services, these other export supporting contributions are not entirely identified and attributed to their nations global trade.

Annual trade deficits are immediate and indirect reducers of their nations GDPs.

Trade deficits make no net contribution to their nations GDPs but the importing nations indirectly deny themselves of the benefits earned by producing nations; (refer to Annual trade surpluses are immediate and direct additions to their nations GDPs).
Among whats being denied is familiarity with methods, practices, the manipulation of tools, materials and fabrication processes.

The economic differences between domestic and imported goods occur prior to the goods entry within the final purchasers' nations. After domestic goods have reached their producers shipping dock or imported goods have been unloaded on to the importing nations cargo vessel or entry ports dock, similar goods have similar economic attributes.

Although supporting products not reflected within the prices of specific items are all captured within the producing nations GDP, those supporting but not reflected within prices of globally traded goods are not attributed to nations' global trade. Trade surpluses' contributions and trade deficits' detriments to their nation's GDPs are understated. The entire benefits of production are earned by the exporting nations and denied to the importing nation.

==Difference between Balance of Trade and Balance of Payment==

 Balance of Trade Balance of Payment 
 The Balance of Trade includes only visible imports and exports, i.e. imports and exports of merchandise, the difference of imports and exports is called Balance of Trade. If imports are more than exports, it is unfavourable balance of trade. If exports exceeds imports, it is favourable balance of trade. The Balance of Payments includes all those visible and invisible items exported from and imported into the country in addition to exports and imports of merchandise. 
 Balance of Trade includes revenues received or paid on account of imports and exports of merchandise. It shows only revenue items. Balance of Payments includes all revenue and capital items whether visible or non-visible. Balance of Trade thus form a part of Balance of Payments. 
 Balance of Trade can be favourable or unfavourable. If imports are more than exports, it is unfavourable balance of trade. If exports exceeds imports, it is favourable balance of trade. Balance of Payments is always balanced just like Trading and Profit and Loss A/c of a business. 
 In case of Balance of Trade, there is no deficit or surplus balance. The balance shows favourable or non-favourable. So, external assistance is not required. In case of Balance of Payments, any balance, deficit or surplus is to be financed by external source or assistance or be utilised. 

==See also==
* Current account
* Balance of payments
* Federal Reserve Economic Data
* MarshallLerner condition

Lists:
* List of countries by net exports
* List of countries by current account balance
* List of the largest trading partners of the United States
* List of the largest trading partners of the People's Republic of China
* List of the largest trading partners of India
* List of the largest trading partners of Canada

==Notes==

==External links==

* Are Trade Deficits a Drag on U.S. Economic Growth?
* Where Do U.S. Dollars Go When the United States Runs a Trade Deficit? from Dollars & Sense magazine
* OECD Trade balance statistics
* U.S. Government Export Assistance
* U.S Trade Deficit Depicted in an Infographic
* The Trade Deficit: The Biggest Obstacle to Full Employment, paper by Dean Baker of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, April 2014



[[Biosphere]]

A false-color composite of global oceanic and terrestrial photoautotroph abundance, from September 1997 to August 2000. Provided by the SeaWiFS Project, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center and ORBIMAGE.

The biosphere is the global sum of all ecosystems. It can also be termed the zone of life on Earth, a closed system (apart from solar and cosmic radiation and heat from the interior of the Earth), and largely self-regulating. 
 By the most general biophysiological definition, the biosphere is the global ecological system integrating all living beings and their relationships, including their interaction with the elements of the lithosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere. The biosphere is postulated to have evolved, beginning with a process of biopoesis (life created naturally from non-living matter such as simple organic compounds) or biogenesis (life created from living matter), at least some 3.5 billion years ago. The earliest evidences for life on Earth are graphite found to be biogenic in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland and microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia. 

In a general sense, biospheres are any closed, self-regulating systems containing ecosystems; including artificial ones such as Biosphere 2 and BIOS-3; and, potentially, ones on other planets or moons. 
 

== Origin and use of the term ==

The term "biosphere" was coined by geologist Eduard Suess in 1875, which he defined as: Seuss, E. (1875) Die Entstehung Der Alpen Origin of the Alps. Vienna: W. Braunmuller. 

While this concept has a geological origin, it is an indication of the effect of both Charles Darwin and Matthew F. Maury on the Earth sciences. The biosphere's ecological context comes from the 1920s (see Vladimir I. Vernadsky), preceding the 1935 introduction of the term "ecosystem" by Sir Arthur Tansley (see ecology history). Vernadsky defined ecology as the science of the biosphere. It is an interdisciplinary concept for integrating astronomy, geophysics, meteorology, biogeography, evolution, geology, geochemistry, hydrology and, generally speaking, all life and Earth sciences.

=== Narrow definition ===
A familiar scene on Earth which simultaneously shows the lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere.

Geochemists define the biosphere as being the total sum of living organisms (the "biomass" or "biota" as referred to by biologists and ecologists). In this sense, the biosphere is but one of four separate components of the geochemical model, the other three being lithosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere. The word ecosphere, coined during the 1960s, encompasses both biological and physical components of the planet.

The Second International Conference on Closed Life Systems defined biospherics as the science and technology of analogs and models of Earth's biosphere; i.e., artificial Earth-like biospheres. Others may include the creation of artificial non-Earth biospheres&mdash;for example, human-centered biospheres or a native Martian biosphere&mdash;as part of the topic of biospherics.

=== Gaia hypothesis ===

During the early 1970s, the British chemist James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis, a microbiologist from the United States, added to the hypothesis, specifically noting the ties between the biosphere and other Earth systems. For example, when carbon dioxide amounts increase in the atmosphere, plants grow more quickly. As their growth continues, they remove more and more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

Many scientists are now involved with new topics of study that examine interactions between biotic and abiotic factors in the biosphere, such as geobiology and geomicrobiology.

Ecosystems occur when communities and their physical environment work together as a system. The difference between this and a biosphere is simplethe biosphere is everything in general terms.

== Extent of Earth's biosphere ==
Water covers 71% of the Earth's surface. Image is the Blue Marble photographed from Apollo 17.

Every part of the planet, from the polar ice caps to the equator, features life of some kind. Recent advances in microbiology have demonstrated that microbes live deep beneath the Earth's terrestrial surface, and that the total mass of microbial life in so-called "uninhabitable zones" may, in biomass, exceed all animal and plant life on the surface. The actual thickness of the biosphere on earth is difficult to measure. Birds typically fly at altitudes of 650 to 1,800 metres, and fish that live deep underwater can be found down to -8,372 metres in the Puerto Rico Trench. 

There are more extreme examples for life on the planet: Rppell's vulture has been found at altitudes of 11,300 metres; bar-headed geese migrate at altitudes of at least 8,300 metres; yaks live at elevations between 3,200 to 5,400 metres above sea level; mountain goats live up to 3,050 metres. Herbivorous animals at these elevations depend on lichens, grasses, and herbs.

Microscopic organisms live at such extremes that, taking them into consideration, the thickness of the biosphere is much greater. Culturable microbes have been found in the Earth's upper atmosphere as high as 41 km (Wainwright et al., 2003, in FEMS Microbiology Letters). It is unlikely, however, that microbes are active at such altitudes, where temperatures and air pressure are extremely minor and ultraviolet radiation very intense. More likely, these microbes were brought into the upper atmosphere by winds or possibly volcanic eruptions. Barophilic marine microbes have been found at more than 10 km depth in the Mariana Trench (Takamia et al., 1997, in FEMS Microbiology Letters). In fact, single-celled life forms have been found in the deepest part of the Mariana Trench, Challenger Deep, at depths of 36,201 feet (11,034 meters). National Geographic, 2005 Microbes are not limited to the air, water or the Earth's surface. Culturable thermophilic microbes have been extracted from cores drilled more than 5 km into the Earth's crust in Sweden, Gold T. 1992. The deep, hot biosphere. Proceedings of the National Academy of the USA 89(13): 6045-6049. Szewzyk U, Szewzyk R, Stenstrom TR. 1994. Thermophilic, anaerobic bacteria isolated from a deep borehole in granite in Sweden. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 91(5): 1810-1813. from rocks between 65-75 C.

Temperature increases with increasing depth into the Earth's crust. The rate at which the temperature increases depends on many factors, including type of crust (continental vs. oceanic), rock type, geographic location, etc. The greatest known temperature at which microbial life can exist is 122 C (Methanopyrus kandleri Strain 116), and it is likely that the limit of life in the "deep biosphere" is defined by temperature rather than absolute depth.

Our biosphere is divided into a number of biomes, inhabited by fairly similar flora and fauna. On land, biomes are separated primarily by latitude. Terrestrial biomes lying within the Arctic and Antarctic Circles are relatively barren of plant and animal life, while most of the more populous biomes lie near the equator. Terrestrial organisms in temperate and Arctic biomes have relatively small amounts of total biomass, smaller energy requirements, and display prominent adaptations to cold, including world-spanning migrations, social adaptations, homeothermy, estivation and multiple layers of insulation.

== Specific biospheres ==
For this list, if a word is followed by a number, it is usually referring to a specific system or number. Thus:

* Biosphere 1, the planet Earth.
* Biosphere 2, laboratory in Arizona, United States, which contains 3.15 acres (13,000 m) of closed ecosystem.
* BIOS-3, a closed ecosystem at the Institute of Biophysics in Krasnoyarsk, Siberia, in what was then the Soviet Union.
* Biosphere J (CEEF, Closed Ecology Experiment Facilities), an experiment in Japan. Nakano et al.(1998)"Dynamic Simulation of Pressure Control System for the Closed Ecology Experiment Facility", Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers. 64:107-114. 

==Extraterrestrial biospheres==
No biospheres have been detected beyond the Earth; therefore, the existence of extraterrestrial biospheres remains hypothetical. The rare Earth hypothesis suggests they should be very rare, save ones composed of microbial life only. P. Ward, D.E. Brownlee. 2000. Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Universe On the other hand, new research suggests that Earth analogs may be quite numerous, at least in the Milky Way galaxy. Space.com Given limited understanding of abiogenesis, it is currently unknown what percentage of these planets actually develop biospheres.

It is also possible that artificial biospheres will be created during the future, for example on Mars. R. Zubrin. 1996. The Case for Mars: The Plan to Settle the Red Planet and Why We Must 

== See also ==

== References ==

== External links ==

* Biosphere Definition
* Article on the Biosphere at Encyclopedia of Earth
* GLOBIO.info, an ongoing programme to map the past, current and future impacts of human activities on the biosphere
* Paul Crutzen Interview, freeview video of Paul Crutzen Nobel Laureate for his work on decomposition of ozone talking to Harry Kroto Nobel Laureate by the Vega Science Trust.
* Atlas of the Biosphere



[[Biological membrane]]

Cross-section view of the structures that can be formed by phospholipids in aqueous
A biological membrane or biomembrane is an enclosing or separating membrane that acts as a selectively permeable barrier within living things. Biological membranes, in the form of cell membranes, often consist of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded, integral and peripheral proteins used in communication and transportation of chemicals and ions. The cellular membranes should not be confused with isolating tissues formed by layers of cells, such as mucous membranes and basement membranes.

==Function==
The phospholipid bilayer contains a charged hydrophilic head, which interacts with polar water. It also contains a hydrophobic tail, which meets with the hydrophobic tail of the complementary layer. This maintains the fluidity of the cell.

Membranes in cells typically define enclosed spaces or compartments in which cells may maintain a chemical or biochemical environment that differs from the outside. For example, the membrane around peroxisomes shields the rest of the cell from peroxides, chemicals that can be toxic to the cell, and the cell membrane separates a cell from its surrounding medium. Peroxisomes are one form of vacuole found in the cell that contain by-products of chemical reactions within the cell. Most organelles are defined by such membranes, and are called "membrane-bound" organelles.

===Selective Permeability===

Probably the most important feature of a biomembrane is that it is a selectively permeable structure. This means that the size, charge, and other chemical properties of the atoms and molecules attempting to cross it will determine whether they succeed in doing so. Selective permeability is essential for effective separation of a cell or organelle from its surroundings. Biological membranes also have certain mechanical or elastic properties that allow them to change shape and move as required.

Generally, small hydrophobic molecules can readily cross phospholipid bilayers by simple diffusion. Brown 

Particles that are required for cellular function but are unable to diffuse freely across a membrane enter through a membrane transport protein or are taken in by means of endocytosis, where the membrane allows for a vacuole to join onto it and push its contents into the cell. Many types of specialized plasma membranes can separate cell from external environment: apical, basolateral, presynaptic and postsynaptic ones, membranes of flagella, cilia, microvillus, filopodia and lamellipodia, the sarcolemma of muscle cells, as well as specialized myelin and dendritic spine membranes of neurons. Plasma membranes can also form different types of "supramembrane" structures such as caveola, postsynaptic density, podosome, invadopodium, desmosome, hemidesmosome, focal adhesion, and cell junctions. These types of membranes differ in lipid and protein composition.

Distinct types of membranes also create intracellular organelles: endosome; smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum; sarcoplasmic reticulum; Golgi apparatus; lysosome; mitochondrion (inner and outer membranes); nucleus (inner and outer membranes); peroxisome; vacuole; cytoplasmic granules; cell vesicles (phagosome, autophagosome, clathrin-coated vesicles, COPI-coated and COPII-coated vesicles) and secretory vesicles (including synaptosome, acrosomes, melanosomes, and chromaffin granules).
Different types of biological membranes have diverse lipid and protein compositions. The content of membranes defines their physical and biological properties. Some components of membranes play a key role in medicine, such as the efflux pumps that pump drugs out of a cell.

== See also ==
* Basement membrane
* Biofilm
* Bladder (disambiguation)
* Fetal membranes of amnion and chorion UpToDate Patient Preview > Fetal membranes: Anatomy and biochemistry Author: Seth Guller, PhD. Retrieved on Mars 7, 2010 
* Membrane lipids
* Membrane protein
* Mucous membrane
* Osmosis
* S-layer
* Serous membrane
* Tympanic membrane

==References==

;General

*
*

==External links==
* 

 
membrane

[[Balfour Declaration of 1926]]

King George V (front, centre) with his prime ministers at the 1926 Imperial Conference.Standing (left to right): Monroe (Newfoundland), Coates (New Zealand), Bruce (Australia), Hertzog (Union of South Africa), Cosgrave (Irish Free State).Seated: Baldwin (United Kingdom), King George V, King (Canada).

The Balfour Declaration of 1926, issued by the 1926 Imperial Conference of British Empire leaders in London, was named for Lord President of the Council (and former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom) Arthur Balfour. It declared the United Kingdom and the Dominions to be

The Inter-Imperial Relations Committee, chaired by Balfour, drew up the document preparatory to its unanimous approval by the imperial premiers on 15 November 1926. It was first proposed by South African Prime Minister J. B. M. Hertzog and Canada's Prime Minister at that time, William Lyon Mackenzie King.
Arthur Balfour, Earl of Balfour
The Declaration accepted the growing political and diplomatic independence of the Dominions, in the years after World War I. It also recommended that the governors-general, the representatives of the King who acted for the Crown as de facto head of state in each dominion, should no longer also serve automatically as the representative of the British government in diplomatic relations between the countries. In following years, High Commissioners were gradually appointed, whose duties were soon recognised to be virtually identical to those of an ambassador. The first such British High Commissioner was appointed to Ottawa in 1928.

The conclusions of the imperial premiers conference of 1926 were restated by the 1930 conference and incorporated in the Statute of Westminster of December 1931, by which the British parliament renounced any legislative authority over dominion affairs, except as specifically provided in law.

==Footnotes==

==External links==
*Transcript of the Declaration



[[Balfour Declaration]]

The Balfour Declaration (dated 2 November 1917) was a letter from the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary Arthur James Balfour to Baron Rothschild (Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild), a leader of the British Jewish community, for transmission to the Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland.

The text of the letter was published in the press one week later, on 9 November 1917. The "Balfour Declaration" was later incorporated into the Svres peace treaty with the Ottoman Empire and the Mandate for Palestine. The original document is kept at the British Library.

==Background==

===World War I===

In 1914, war broke out in Europe between the Triple Entente (Britain, France and the Russian Empire) and the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary and later that year, the Ottoman Empire). The war on the Western Front developed into a stalemate. Jonathan Schneer writes:
Thus the view from Whitehall early in 1916: If defeat was not imminent, neither was victory; and the outcome of the war of attrition on the Western Front could not be predicted. The colossal forces in a death-grip across Europe and in Eurasia appeared to have canceled each other out. Only the addition of significant new forces on one side or the other seemed likely to tip the scale. Britain's willingness, beginning early in 1916, to explore seriously some kind of arrangement with "world Jewry" or "Great Jewry" must be understood in this context. 

===Zionism===

In 1896, Theodor Herzl, a Jewish journalist living in Austria-Hungary, published Der Judenstaat ("The Jewish State"), in which he asserted that the only solution to the "Jewish Question" in Europe, including growing antisemitism, was through the establishment of a Jewish State. Political Zionism had just been born. Friedman, Isaiah. "Herzl, Theodor." Encyclopaedia Judaica. Ed. Michael Berenbaum and Fred Skolnik. 2nd ed. Vol. 9. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2007. 5466. Gale Virtual Reference Library. Web. 15 April 2010. A year later, Herzl founded the Zionist Organization (ZO), which at its first congress, "called for the establishment of a home for the Jewish people in Palestine secured under public law". Serviceable means to attain that goal included the promotion of Jewish settlement there, the organisation of Jews in the diaspora, the strengthening of Jewish feeling and consciousness, and preparatory steps to attain those necessary governmental grants. Avish, Shimon. "Herzl, Theodor ." Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa. Ed. Philip Mattar. 2nd ed. Vol. 2. New York: Macmillan Reference USA, 2004. 10211022. Gale Virtual Reference Library. Web. 15 April 2010. Herzl passed away in 1904 without the political standing that was required to carry out his agenda of a Jewish home in Palestine. William L. A History of the Modern Middle East. Boulder, CO: Westview, 2004. Print. p.224 

During the first meeting between Chaim Weizmann and Balfour in 1906, Balfour asked what Weizmann's objections were to the idea of a Jewish homeland in Uganda, (the Uganda Protectorate in East Africa in the British Uganda Programme), rather than in Palestine. According to Weizmann's memoir, the conversation went as follows:
:"Mr. Balfour, supposing I was to offer you Paris instead of London, would you take it?" He sat up, looked at me, and answered: "But Dr. Weizmann, we have London." "That is true," I said, "but we had Jerusalem when London was a marsh." He ... said two things which I remember vividly. The first was: "Are there many Jews who think like you?" I answered: "I believe I speak the mind of millions of Jews whom you will never see and who cannot speak for themselves." ... To this he said: "If that is so you will one day be a force." Weizmann, Trial and Error, p.111, as quoted in W. Lacquer, The History of Zionism", 2003, ISBN 978-1-86064-932-5. p.188 

Two months after Britain's declaration of war on the Ottoman Empire in November 1914, Zionist British cabinet member Herbert Samuel circulated a memorandum entitled The Future of Palestine to his cabinet colleagues. The memorandum stated that "I am assured that the solution of the problem of Palestine which would be much the most welcome to the leaders and supporters of the Zionist movement throughout the world would be the annexation of the country to the British Empire".

===The McMahonHussein Correspondence===

Henry McMahon had exchanged letters with Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca in 1915, in which he had promised Hussein control of Arab lands with the exception of "portions of Syria" lying to the west of "the districts of Damascus, Homs, Hama and Aleppo". Palestine lay to the southwest of the Vilayet of Damascus and wasn't explicitly mentioned. That modern-day Lebanese region of the Mediterranean coast was set aside as part of a future French Mandate. After the war the extent of the coastal exclusion was hotly disputed. Hussein had protested that the Arabs of Beirut would greatly oppose isolation from the Arab state or states, but did not bring up the matter of Jerusalem or Palestine. Dr. Chaim Weizmann wrote in his autobiography Trial and Error that Palestine had been excluded from the areas that should have been Arab and independent. This interpretation was supported explicitly by the British government in the 1922 White Paper.

On the basis of McMahon's assurances the Arab Revolt began on 5 June 1916. However, the British and French also secretly concluded the SykesPicot Agreement on 16 May 1916. Khouri, Fred John (1985). The Arab-Israeli Dilemma. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-2340-3, pp. 810. This agreement divided many Arab territories into British- and French-administered areas and allowed for the internationalisation of Palestine. Hussein learned of the agreement when it was leaked by the new Russian government in December 1917, but was satisfied by two disingenuous telegrams from Sir Reginald Wingate, High Commissioner of Egypt, assuring him that the British government's commitments to the Arabs were still valid and that the Sykes-Picot Agreement was not a formal treaty. 

According to Isaiah Friedman, Hussein was not perturbed by the Balfour Declaration. On 23 March 1918, Hussein wrote in Al Qibla, the daily newspaper of Mecca: It Could Have Been Different 

He called on the Arab population in Palestine to welcome the Jews as brethren and co-operate with them for the common welfare. Palestine, a Twice-promised Land?: The British, the Arabs & Zionism, 19151920 By Isaiah Friedman, page 171 Following the publication of the Declaration the British had dispatched Commander David George Hogarth to see Hussein in January 1918 bearing the message that the "political and economic freedom" of the Palestinian population was not in question. Hogarth reported that Hussein "would not accept an independent Jewish State in Palestine, nor was I instructed to warn him that such a state was contemplated by Great Britain". Huneidi, Sahar (2000). A Broken Trust: Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians, 19201925. IB Tauris. ISBN 978-1-86064-172-5, p. 66. Continuing Arab disquiet over Allied intentions also led during 1918 to the British Declaration to the Seven and the Anglo-French Declaration, the latter promising "the complete and final liberation of the peoples who have for so long been oppressed by the Turks, and the setting up of national governments and administrations deriving their authority from the free exercise of the initiative and choice of the indigenous populations." Report of a Committee Set up to Consider Certain Correspondence Between Sir Henry McMahon and the Sharif of Mecca in 1915 and 1916, UNISPAL, Annex A, paragraph 19. 

Lord Grey had been the Foreign Secretary during the McMahon-Hussein negotiations. Speaking in the House of Lords on 27 March 1923, he made it clear that he entertained serious doubts as to the validity of the British government's interpretation of the pledges which he, as foreign secretary, had caused to be given to Hussein in 1915. He called for all of the secret engagements regarding Palestine to be made public. Report of a Committee Set Up To Consider Certain Correspondence Between Sir Henry McMahon and The Sharif of Mecca Many of the relevant documents in the National Archives were later declassified and published. Among them were the minutes of a Cabinet Eastern Committee meeting, chaired by Lord Curzon,which was held on 5 December 1918. Balfour was in attendance. The minutes revealed that in laying out the government's position Curzon had explained that: "Palestine was included in the areas as to which Great Britain pledged itself that they should be Arab and independent in the future". cited in Palestine Papers, 19171922, Doreen Ingrams, page 48 from the UK Archive files PRO CAB 27/24. 

===SykesPicot Agreement===

In May 1916 the governments of the United Kingdom, France and Russia signed the SykesPicot Agreement, which defined their proposed spheres of influence and control in Western Asia should the Triple Entente succeed in defeating the Ottoman Empire during World War I. The agreement effectively divided the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire outside the Arabian peninsula into areas of future British and French control or influence.

The agreement proposed that an "international administration" would be established in an area shaded brown on the agreement's map, which was later to become Palestine, and that the form of the administration would be "decided upon after consultation with Russia, and subsequently in consultation with the other allies, and the representatives of the Sherif of Mecca". Zionists believed their aspirations had been passed over. William Reginald Hall, British Director of Naval Intelligence criticised the agreement on the basis that "the Jews have a strong material, and a very strong political, interest in the future of the country" and that "in the Brown area the question of Zionism, and also of British control of all Palestine railways, in the interest of Egypt, have to be considered".

==Motivation for the Declaration==

===British Government===
James Gelvin, a Middle East history professor, cites at least three reasons for why the British government chose to support Zionist aspirations. Issuing the Balfour Declaration would appeal to Woodrow Wilson's two closest advisors, who were avid Zionists.

"The British did not know quite what to make of President Woodrow Wilson and his conviction (before America's entrance into the war) that the way to end hostilities was for both sides to accept "peace without victory." Two of Wilson's closest advisors, Louis Brandeis and Felix Frankfurter, were avid Zionists. How better to shore up an uncertain ally than by endorsing Zionist aims? The British adopted similar thinking when it came to the Russians, who were in the midst of their revolution. Several of the most prominent revolutionaries, including Leon Trotsky, were of Jewish descent. Why not see if they could be persuaded to keep Russia in the war by appealing to their latent Jewishness and giving them another reason to continue the fight?" ... These include not only those already mentioned but also Britain's desire to attract Jewish financial resources. 

At that time the British were busy making promises. At a War Cabinet meeting, held on 31 October 1917, Balfour suggested that a declaration favourable to Zionist aspirations would allow Great Britain "'to carry on extremely useful propaganda both in Russia and America" Palestine Papers 19171922, Doreen Ingrams, page 16 

The cabinet believed that expressing support would appeal to Jews in Germany and America, and help the war effort. Wall Street Journal review of Jonathan Shneer, Balfour Declaration "As Mr. Schneer documents, the declaration was, among much else, part of a campaign to foster world-wide Jewish support for the Allied war effort, not least in the U.S." It was also hoped to encourage support from the large Jewish population in Russia. Britain promoted the idea of a national home for the Jewish People, in the hope that Britain would implement it and exercise political control over Palestine, effectively "freeze out France (and anyone else) from any postwar presence in Palestine." p. 178 According to James Renton, Senior Lecturer at Edge Hill University, an Honorary Research Fellow at University College London, and author of The Zionist Masquerade: the Birth of the Anglo-Zionist Alliance: 19141918 (2007), Prime Minister David Lloyd George of the United Kingdom supported the creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine because "it would help secure post-war British control of Palestine, which was strategically important as a buffer to Egypt and the Suez Canal.". James Renton, The Balfour Declaration: its origins and consequences, Jewish Quarterly, Spring 2008, Number 209, http://www.jewishquarterly.org/issuearchive/articleea91.html In addition, Palestine was to later serve as a terminus for the flow of petroleum from Iraq via Jordan, three former Ottoman Turkish provinces that became British League of Nations mandates in the aftermath of the First World War. The oil officially flowed along the Mosul-Haifa oil pipeline from 19351948, and unofficially up until 1954.

===Weizmann-Balfour relationship===
Lord Balfour's desk, in the Museum of the Jewish Diaspora, in Tel Aviv
One of the main proponents of a Jewish homeland in Palestine was Chaim Weizmann, the leading spokesperson in Britain for organised Zionism. Weizmann was a chemist who had developed a process to synthesize acetone via fermentation. Acetone is required for the production of cordite, a powerful propellant explosive needed to fire ammunition without generating tell-tale smoke. Germany had cornered supplies of calcium acetate, a major source of acetone. Other pre-war processes in Britain were inadequate to meet the increased demand in World War I, and a shortage of cordite would have severely hampered Britain's war effort. Lloyd-George, then minister for munitions, was grateful to Weizmann and so supported his Zionist aspirations. In his War Memoirs, Lloyd-George wrote of meeting Weizmann in 1916 that Weizmann:
::... explained his aspirations as to the repatriation of the Jews to the sacred land they had made famous. That was the fount and origin of the famous declaration about the National Home for the Jews in Palestine .... As soon as I became Prime Minister I talked the whole matter over with Mr Balfour, who was then Foreign Secretary.

This may, however, have been only a part of a longer series of discussions about Britain and Zionism held between Weizmann and Balfour which had begun at least a decade earlier. In late 1905 Balfour had requested of Charles Dreyfus, his Jewish constituency representative, that he arrange a meeting with Weizmann, during which Weizmann asked for official British support for Zionism; they were to meet again on this issue in 1914. Harry Defries, Conservative Party Attitudes to Jews 19001950, Routledge, 2001, ISBN 978-0-7146-5221-4. pp.5051. 

==Jewish national home vs. Jewish state==

The records of discussions that led up to the final text of the Balfour Declaration clarifies some details of its wording. The phrase "national home" was intentionally used instead of "state" because of opposition to the Zionist program within the British Cabinet. Following discussion of the initial draft the Cabinet Secretary, Mark Sykes, met with the Zionist negotiators to clarify their aims. His official report back to the Cabinet categorically stated that the Zionists did not want "to set up a Jewish Republic or any other form of state in Palestine immediately. They were looking for some form of protectorate which they got in the Palestine Mandate. See the claim of the World Zionist Association made at the Paris Peace talks in 1919 as reported by the Voltaire News Network. The best indication was that both were intended  a Jewish National Home first, and a state subsequently when the Jewish Population of Palestine became a majority and the Jews became capable of exercising sovereignty. Otherwise, the government being set up would be antidemocratic, as in 1917 the Jewish population estimated at 60,000 constituted only 10% of the total Palestine population estimated at 600,000. See letter of the British Foreign Office by Arnold Toynbee and Lewis Namier dated 19 September 1917, a few weeks before the declaration was published. This motive is also shown in the briefing documents American diplomats carried with them to the Paris Peace Talks in 1919. That this was carried out by the declaration as published is shown by the intentions of those intimately associated with its publication, the understanding of the general public, and Britain's major newspaper contemporaneously. In approving the Balfour Declaration, Leopold Amery, one of the Secretaries to the British War Cabinet of 191718, testified under oath to the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry in January 1946 from his personal knowledge 1/30/46, p 112 that:
"The phrase 'the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people' was intended and understood by all concerned to mean at the time of the Balfour Declaration that Palestine would ultimately become a 'Jewish Commonwealth' or a 'Jewish State', if only Jews came and settled there in sufficient numbers. Also, he had always assumed that the particular reference to not infringing the civil or religious liberties of Arab population was not so much a safeguard against the British Government infringing those liberties ... but a Jewish state infringing those liberties. Therefore, at the time that possibility of a Jewish majority over the whole of the larger Palestine was, he thought envisaged."
Finally he also recalled that Lloyd-George (Prime Minister at the time of publishing the Declaration) had testified earlier (likely in 1939 at the time of the 1939 White Paper): "...There could be no doubt as to what the Cabinet then had in mind. It was not their idea that a Jewish State should be set up immediately by the Peace Treaty... On the other hand, it was contemplated that when the time arrived for according representative institutions to Palestine, if the Jews had meanwhile responded to the opportunity afforded them ... and had become a definite majority of the inhabitants, then Palestine would thus become a Jewish Commonwealth. The notion that the Jews should be a permanent minority never entered into the heads of anyone engaged in framing the policy. That would have been regarded as unjust, and as a fraud on the people to whom we were appealing." (Tulin, Book of Documents submitted to the United Nations General Assembly Relating to the National Home for the Jewish People, The Jewish Agency, New York, 1947, p. 5,6.)

"That the Declaration paved the way for a Jewish State seems, judging from the press, to have been taken for granted. The headlines in the London newspapers  'A state for the Jews' (Daily Express)  'Palestine for the Jews' (The Times, Morning Post, Daily News); The Spectator wrote of the proposal for the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. The Manchester Guardian saw the Declaration as leading to 'the ultimate establishment of a Jewish State.' The Observer wrote: 'It is no idle dream that by the close of another generation the new Zion may become a state.' 
And "When Balfour met Brandeis in Paris in June 1919, he remarked ... that Palestine represented a unique situation. We are dealing not with the wishes of an existing community but are consciously seeking to re-constitute a new community and definitely building for a numerical majority in the future' He had, he went on, great difficulty in seeing how President Wilson could reconcile his adherence to Zionism with the doctrine of self-determination, to which Brandeis replied that 'the whole conception of Zionism as a Jewish homeland was a definite building up for the future as the means of dealing with a world problem and not merely with the disposition of an existing community. 'Balfour gave the argument a slightly different turn at his interview with Meinertzhagen a few weeks later.' He agreed ... in principle, Meinertzhagen wrote in his diary (30 July 1919), in the principle of self-determination, but it could not be indiscriminately applied to the whole world, and Palestine was a case in point ... In any Palestinian plebiscite the Jews of the world must be consulted in which case he sincerely believed that an overwhelming majority would declare for Zionism under a British mandate.' (Leonard Stein, The Balfour Declaration pp. 562, 63, 649.) 

 Both the Zionist Organization and the British government devoted efforts over the following decades, including Winston Churchill's 1922 White Paper, to denying that a state was the intention. See the report of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, UN Document A/364, 3 September 1947 However, in private, many British officials agreed with the interpretation of the Zionists that a state would be established when a Jewish majority was achieved. 

The initial draft of the declaration, contained in a letter sent by Rothschild to Balfour, referred to the principle "that Palestine should be reconstituted as the National Home of the Jewish people." In the final text, the word that was replaced with in to avoid committing the entirety of Palestine to this purpose. Similarly, an early draft did not include the commitment that nothing should be done which might prejudice the rights of the non-Jewish communities. These changes came about partly as the result of the urgings of Edwin Samuel Montagu, an influential anti-Zionist Jew and Secretary of State for India, who was concerned that the declaration without those changes could result in increased anti-Semitic persecution. The draft was circulated and during October the government received replies from various representatives of the Jewish community. Lord Rothschild took exception to the new proviso on the basis that it presupposed the possibility of a danger to non-Zionists, which he denied. Palestine Papers 19171922, Doreen Ingrams, page 13 At San Remo, as shown in the transcript of the San Remo meeting on the evening of 24 April, the French proposed adding to the savings clause so that it would save for non-Jewish communities their "political rights" as well as their civil and religious rights. The French proposal was rejected.

==Authorship==
Sir John Evelyn Shuckburgh of the new Middle East department of the Foreign Office discovered that the correspondence prior to the declaration was not available in the Colonial Office, 'although Foreign Office papers were understood to have been lengthy and to have covered a considerable period'." The 'most comprehensive explanation' of the origin of the Balfour Declaration the Foreign Office was able to provide was contained in a small 'unofficial' note of Jan 1923 affirming that:little is known of how the policy represented by the Declaration was first given form. Four, or perhaps five men were chiefly concerned in the labour  the Earl of Balfour, the late Sir Mark Sykes, and Messrs. Weizmann and Sokolow, with perhaps Lord Rothschild as a figure in the background. Negotiations seem to have been mainly oral and by means of private notes and memoranda of which only the scantiest records seem to be available. Full text of note included CO 733/58, Secret Cabinet Paper CP 60 (23), 'Palestine and the Balfour Declaration, January 1923. FO unofficial note added 'little referring to the Balfour Declaration among such papers as have been preserved'. Shuckburgh's memo asserts that 'as the official records are silent, it can only be assumed that such discussions as had taken place were of an informal and private character'. 

In his posthumously published 1981 book The Anglo-American Establishment, Georgetown University history professor Carroll Quigley explained that the Balfour Declaration was actually drafted by Lord Alfred Milner. Quigley wrote:

This declaration, which is always known as the Balfour Declaration, should rather be called "the Milner Declaration," since Milner was the actual draftsman and was, apparently, its chief supporter in the War Cabinet. This fact was not made public until 21 July 1937. At that time Ormsby-Gore, speaking for the government in Commons, said, "The draft as originally put up by Lord Balfour was not the final draft approved by the War Cabinet. The particular draft assented to by the War Cabinet and afterwards by the Allied Governments and by the United States...and finally embodied in the Mandate, happens to have been drafted by Lord Milner. The actual final draft had to be issued in the name of the Foreign Secretary, but the actual draftsman was Lord Milner." 

More recently, William D. Rubinstein, Professor of Modern History at Aberystwyth University, Wales, wrote that Conservative politician and pro-Zionist Leo Amery, as Assistant Secretary to the British war cabinet in 1917, was the main author of the Balfour Declaration. 

==Reaction to the Declaration==
Balfour Declaration as published in The Times 9 November 1917

===Arab opposition===
The Arabs expressed disapproval in November 1918 at the parade marking the first anniversary of the Balfour Declaration. The Muslim-Christian Association protested the carrying of new "white and blue banners with two inverted triangles in the middle". They drew the attention of the authorities to the serious consequences of any political implications in raising the banners. Zu'aytir, Akram, Watha'iq al-haraka a-wataniyya al-filastiniyya (19181939), ed. Bayan Nuwayhid al-Hut. Beirut 1948. Papers, p. 5. Cited by Huneidi, Sahar "A Broken Trust, Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians". ISBN 978-1-86064-172-5 p.32. 

Later that month, on the first anniversary of the occupation of Jaffa by the British, the Muslim-Christian Association sent a lengthy memorandum and petition to the military governor protesting once more any formation of a Jewish state. 'Petition from the Moslem-Christian Association in Jaffa, to the Military Governor, on the occasion of the First Anniversary of British Entry into Jaffa', 16 November 1918, Zu'aytir papers pp. 78. Cited by Huneidi p.32. 

On November 1918 the large group of Palestinian Arab dignitaries and representatives of political associations addressed a petition to the British authorities in which they denounced the declaration. The document stated:

===Zionist reaction===
Chaim Weizmann and Nahum Sokolow, the principal Zionist leaders based in London, had asked for the reconstitution of Palestine as "the" Jewish national home. As such, the declaration fell short of Zionist expectations. Balfour Declaration. (2007). In Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 12 August 2007, from Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 

===British opinion===
British public and government opinion became increasingly less favourable to the commitment that had been made to Zionist policy. In February 1922, Winston Churchill telegraphed Herbert Samuel asking for cuts in expenditure and noting: CO 733/18, Churchill to Samuel, Telegram, Private and Personal, 25 February 1922. Cited Huneidi, Sahar "A Broken Trust, Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians" 2001, ISBN 978-1-86064-172-5, p.57. In both Houses of Parliament there is growing movement of hostility, against Zionist policy in Palestine, which will be stimulated by recent Northcliffe articles. I do not attach undue importance to this movement, but it is increasingly difficult to meet the argument that it is unfair to ask the British taxpayer, already overwhelmed with taxation, to bear the cost of imposing on Palestine an unpopular policy.

===Response by Central Powers===
Immediately following the publication of the declaration Germany entered negotiations with Turkey to put forward counter proposals. A German-Jewish Society was formed: Vereinigung jdischer Organisationen Deutschlands zur Wahrung der Rechte der Juden des Ostens (V.J.O.D.) and in January 1918 the Turkish Grand Vizier, Talaat, issued a statement which promised legislation by which "all justifiable wishes of the Jews in Palestine would be able to find their fulfilment". MacMunn, Lieut.-General Sir George (1928) Military Operations. Egypt and Palestine. From the outbreak of war with Germany to June 1917. HMSO. Pages 219,220. 

==See also==
* Faisal-Weizmann Agreement
* British Mandate of Palestine
* Gathering of Israel
* 1947 UN Partition Plan
* Declaration of Independence, 14 May 1948
* Madagascar Plan
* British Uganda Program

==References==

==Further reading==
* Schneer, Jonathan. The Balfour Declaration: The Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict (Random House, 2010) 464pp; ISBN 978-1-4000-6532-5
* Smith, Charles. Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2007.

==External links==
* Original article reprinting the declaration from The Times, 9 November 1917
* Balfour Declaration lexicon entry Knesset website 
* Happy Birthday Balfour Declaration- 91 Years Later- Jerusalem Post
* Text of the 1922 White Paper from the Avalon Project
* Donald Macintyre, The Independent, 26 May 2005, "The birth of modern Israel: A scrap of paper that changed history"
* 
* Balfour: 117 words that changed the face of the Middle East
* From the Balfour Declaration to Partition  to Two States?
* Theodore Herzl and Rev. William Hechler and the Zionist Beginnings
* http://www.jewish-american-society-for-historic-preservation.org/images/Brandeis_Blackstone_article.doc



[[Black Hand (Serbia)]]

Unification or Death (), Constitution of the Black Hand  World War I Document Archive. Wwi.lib.byu.edu. Retrieved on 8 November 2011. unofficially known as the Black Hand ( , Crna ruka), was a secret military society Lutz, Hermann. "The Serbian 'Black Hand'," The Freeman, Vol. 7, N. 164, pp. 179-181, May 2, 1923. formed on 6 September 1901 by members of the Serbian Army in the Kingdom of Serbia. Anti, Antonije: Notes, Museum of city Zajeer, Zajear, 2010. It was formed with the aim of uniting all of the territories with majority South Slavic population not ruled by the Kingdom of Serbia or Kingdom of Montenegro in the manner of earlier national unification processes, primarily Italian in 1870 and German in 1871. Through its connections to the June 1914 assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, which was committed by the members of youth movement Young Bosnia, the Black Hand is often viewed as the organization that may have contributed to the start of World War I, fueling the July Crisis of 1914 and giving Austria-Hungary a pretext to its invasion of independent Serbia. David Stevenson, 1914-1918, 2012 Penguin, reissue, p.12 

==History==
The Black Hand was founded on 6 September 1901. Antonije Anti:School's nest of conspiracy, Evening news, feuilleton, 20 November 2010 (Serbian) The conspirators' first meeting was in the same year. In attendance: captains Radomir Aranelovi, Milan F. Petrovi, and Dragutin Dimitrijevi, as well as lieutenants Antonije Anti, Dragutin Duli, Milan Marinkovi, and Nikodije Popovi. They made a plan to kill the royal couple  King Alexander I Obrenovi and Queen Draga. The birthday of Queen Draga was 11 September 1864 (Old Style), and in honour of this occasion preparations were being made to hold a celebration at the palace Kolarac. The main weapons of assassination chosen organised the successful assassination of King Alexander I of Serbia and his consort Draga; he confirmed that Captain Dragutin Dimitrijevic, who had personally led the group of Army officers who killed the royal couple in the Old Palace at Belgrade on the night of 28/29 May 1903 (Old Style), was also the Black Hand's leader. C. L. Sulzberger The Fall of Eagles, 1977, Crown Publisher's, Inc., New York, pp. 202, 221 ISBN 0517528177 

On 8 October 1908, just two days after Austria annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina, many men, some of them ranking Serbian ministers, officials and generals, held a meeting at City Hall in Belgrade. They founded a semi-secret societyNarodna Odbrana (National Defense) which gave the Greater Serbia idea a focus and an organization. The purpose of the group was to liberate Serbs under the control of Austria-Hungary. They also undertook anti-Austrian propaganda and organized spies and saboteurs to operate within the empire's provinces. Satellite groups were formed in Slovenia, Bosnia, Herzegovina and Istria. The Bosnian group went under the name Mlada Bosna (Young Bosnia). In 1909, Austria pressured the Serbian government to put a stop to their anti-Austrian insurrection. Russia was not ready to stand fully behind Serbia should hostilities escalate, so Belgrade was grudgingly forced to comply. From then on, Narodna Odbrana concentrated on education and propaganda within Serbia, trying to fashion itself as a cultural organization.

===Birth of the Black Hand===

Ritual cross of the Black Hand
The Black Hand was formed when ten men met on 9 May 1911 to form Ujedinjenje ili Smrt (Unification or Death), better known as the Black Hand.

By 1914, there were many hundred members, perhaps as many as 3500. Many members were Serbian army officers. The professed goal of the group was the creation of a Greater Serbia, by use of violence, if necessary. The Black Hand trained guerillas and saboteurs and planned political murders. The Black Hand was organized at the grassroots level in 3- to 5-member cells, supervised by district committees and by a Central committee in Belgrade whose ten-member Executive Committee was led, more or less, by Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevi (also known as Apis). To ensure secrecy, members rarely knew much more than the members of their own cell and one superior above them. New members swore "I (...), by entering into the society, do hereby swear by the Sun which shineth upon me, by the Earth which feedeth me, by God, by the blood of my forefathers, by my honour and by my life, that from this moment onward and until my death, I shall faithfully serve the task of this organisation and that I shall at all times be prepared to bear for it any sacrifice. I further swear by God, by my honour and by my life, that I shall unconditionally carry into effect all its orders and commands. I further swear by my God, by my honour and by my life, that I shall keep within myself all the secrets of this organisation and carry them with me into my grave. May God and my brothers in this organisation be my judges if at any time I should wittingly fail or break this oath." Pressonline.rs Press (2011-10-07). Retrieved on 2011-11-08. 

The Black Hand took over the terrorist actions of Narodna Odbrana, and worked deliberately at obscuring any distinctions between the two groups, trading on the prestige and network of the older organization. Black Hand members held important army and government positions. Crown Prince Alexander was an enthusiastic and financial supporter. The group held influence over government appointment and policy. The Serbian government was fairly well informed of Black Hand activities.
Friendly relations had fairly well cooled by 1914. The Black Hand was displeased with Prime minister Nikola Pai. They thought he did not act aggressively enough towards the Pan-Serb cause. They engaged in a bitter power struggle over several issues, such as who would control territories Serbia annexed in the Balkan Wars. By this point, standing up and saying 'no' to the Black Hand was a dangerous act. Political murder was one of their well known tools.

It was also in 1914 that Apis allegedly decided that Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the heir-apparent of Austria, should be assassinated. Towards that end it is claimed that three young Bosnian-Serbs were recruited to kill the Archduke. They were definitely trained in bomb throwing and marksmanship by current and former members of the Serbian military. Gavrilo Princip, Nedeljko abrinovi and Trifko Grabe were smuggled across the border back into Bosnia via a chain of underground-railroad style contacts.
The decision to kill the Archduke was apparently initiated by Apis, and not sanctioned by the full Executive Committee (assuming Apis was involved at all, a question that remains in dispute Vladimer Dedijer, The Road to Sarajevo ). Those involved probably realized that their plot would invite war between Austria and Serbia. They had every reason to expect that Russia would side with Serbia. In all likelihood, they did not anticipate that their personal ideals and secret political aspirations would mushroom into world war.
Others in the government and some on the Black Hand Executive Council were not as confident of Russian aid. Russia had let them down recently. When word of the plot allegedly percolated through Black Hand leadership and the Serbian government (the Prime Minister Pai was definitely informed of two armed men being smuggled across the border; it is not clear if Pai knew they planned to assassinate Franz Ferdinand), Apis was supposedly told not to proceed. He may have made a half-hearted attempt to intercept the young assassins at the border, but they had already crossed. Other sources say the attempted 'recall' was only begun after the assassins had reached Sarajevo. This 'recall' appears to make Apis look like a loose cannon, and the young assassins as independent zealots. In fact, the 'recall' took place a full two weeks before the Archduke's visit. The assassins idled around in Sarajevo for a month. Nothing more was done to stop them.

===Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand===

The organization of Bosnian anti-Habsburg and anti-Austrian students called Young Bosnia carried out the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. After the unsuccessful grenade attack of Nedeljko abrinovi, Gavrilo Princip succeeded in killing the Archduke and his wife with two bullets from his handgun because Ferdinand's driver took a wrong turn. Until a few weeks later, the guilt for the crime had settled loosely on Serbia in general. Long-existing tensions between Serbia and Austria-Hungary eventually drew in the other European powers and escalated into the beginning of First World War. The Serbians prevented Austria-Hungary from investigating in the assassination of the archduke.

===Demise===
Towards the end of 1916, due to political intrigues, Serbian Prime Minister Pasic decided to destroy the leaders of the Black Hand and break up the organization. By the spring of 1917, many Black Hand leaders, including Apis, had been arrested.
A sham trial before a military tribunal in Salonika was held in May 1917 for Apis and others. Among the charges was that the Black Hand had attempted to murder Prince Regent Alexander. Though witnesses against them were numerous, the evidence cited was nearly all hearsay or outright fabrication. Apis and six others were sentenced to death. Three obtained commutations to long prison terms, but Apis and three comrades were executed by firing squad on 26 June 1917.

With the demise of the Black Hand in June 1917 after the Salonika Trial, The White Hand steadily gained control of the young and ambitious Prince Alexander. In what became Yugoslavia after the war, the White Hand grew into an essential piece of the state's machinery. It continued the imperialistic work of the Black Hand, using the same techniques. The death of Vojislav Petrovic, an ex-attache to the Yugoslav Legation in London, was said to be the work of Narodna Odbrana. Petrovic was preparing a book on the history of the Sarajevo assassinations and the Black Hand.

===Activity in the Kingdom of Montenegro===

In 1908 (the affair is known under the name Bombaka afera) the Serbian nationalists tried to kill the Montenegrin king, considering him an obstacle to the unification of all Serbs in one state. The Montenegrin police were tipped off about the plot and arrested the plotters.

In 1909 (the affair is known under the name Kolainska afera) Serbian nationalist tried to organize an insurrection against the Montenegrin king and government. The plot also failed.

The Black Hand is considered to have been involved in both plots.

===Balkan Wars===

In 1912, differences between the two main groups of the Narodna Odbranapolitical leaders of the Radical Party and military officersarose. The political leaders preferred a more passive approach for the time being, including more peaceful relations with Austria and concentrating on strengthening Serbia for future struggle, but some of the military officers grew impatient with the more moderate radical policies. Consequently, the more zealous members of the Narodna Odbrana started a new secret society, and the Black Hand was founded.

Reportedly, they were involved in various crimes in Macedonia, during the Balkan Wars:

===World War I===

Dragutin Dimitrijevi "Apis" (right) and his associates.

Just prior to World War I, under the orders of the Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence, Serbian Military Officers and remnants of the by then moribund Black Hand organized and facilitated the assassination of Franz Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria on occasion of his visit to Sarajevo, Bosnia. The Austro-Hungarian investigation of the assassination rounded up all but one of the assassins and also much of the underground railroad that had been used to transport the assassins and their weapons from Serbia to Sarajevo. Within two days following the assassination, Austria-Hungary and Germany advised Serbia that they should open an investigation, but Serbian Foreign Minister Gruic, speaking for Serbia replied, "Nothing had been done so far, and the matter did not concern the Serbian Government," after which "high words" were spoken on both sides. Entreaties by Germany asking Russia to intercede with Serbia were ignored. On 23 July Austria-Hungary delivered a toughly worded letter to Serbia with ten enumerated demands and additional demands in the preamble aimed at the destruction of the anti-Austrian terrorist and propaganda network in Serbia. Austria called attention to Serbia's March 1909 declaration committing to the Great Powers to respect Austria-Hungary's sovereignty over Bosnia-Herzegovina and committing Serbia to maintain good neighborly relations with Austria-Hungary. If the ten enumerated demands and demands in the preamble were not agreed to within 48 hours, Austria-Hungary would recall its ambassador from Serbia. The letter became known as the July Ultimatum. Serbia accepted all but one of the demands, to let the Austrian officers conduct an investigation on Serbian soil, which would have compromised its sovereignty. In response, Austria-Hungary recalled its ambassador.

Austria-Hungary authorized the mobilization and the declaration of war against Serbia on 28 July 1914. The Secret Treaty of 1892 required both Russia and France to mobilize immediately followed by a commencement of action against the Triple Alliance if any member of the Triplice mobilized, and so, soon all the Great Powers of Europe were at war except Italy. Italy cited a clause in the Triple Alliance treaty which only bound it to enter in case of aggression against one of the treaty members, and so remained neutral  for the time being.

The six assassins caught by Austria-Hungary were tried and convicted for treason. The leader, Danilo Ili, was shot by a firing squad.The remaining assassins in custody were not yet twenty years old at the time of the assassination and so were given prison terms. Most of the underground railroad that transported them were also arrested, tried, and convicted. Two of these were executed. A few peripheral conspirators were acquitted. A wide ranging investigation rolled up many additional irredentist youths, and the fifth column that the Black Hand and Serbian Military Intelligence had tried to organize was eliminated. After receiving the Austrian letter, Serbia arrested Major Voja Tankosi (a member of the Black Hand committee who had been pointed out by the assassins) but then promptly released him and returned him to his unit. The seventh assassin escaped to Montenegro where he was arrested. Austria-Hungary asserted its right to extradite him, but Montenegrin authorities instead allowed the assassin to "escape" to Serbia where he joined Major Tankosi's unit; Major Tankosi died in November 1915 covering the Serbian retreat, but not before confessing his role in the assassination to historians at Azania. Masterspy Rade Malobabi, Serbian Military Intelligence's top agent against Austria-Hungary, was arrested on his return from Austria-Hungary after the assassination, but was also later released and given a commission running an army supply store. In 1917 Serbia's government in exile arrested the leadership of the Black Hand wishing to halt their underground influence in both the army and politics. The leadership was tried before a kangaroo court and convicted on false charges unrelated to Sarajevo, such as plotting an assassinations of Nikola Pai and Crown prince Aleksandar; many were given death sentences. Three of the accused were ultimately shot by firing squad, against protests of the new Kerensky government of Russia. Before being shot, Dragutin Dimitrijevi made a written confession to the court that he had ordered Rade Malobabi to organize the assassination of Franz Ferdinand. Malobabi made an implied confession to a priest before he was executed. Vulovi's confession came at trial where he said he received orders signed by Serbia's top military officer to send Malobabic into Austria-Hungary just before the assassination. Much later, a new trial was ordered by Yugoslavia and the convictions were overturned.

== Ideology ==
The group encompassed a range of ideological outlooks, from conspiratorially-minded army officers to idealistic youths, sometimes tending towards republicanism, despite the acquisition of nationalistic royal circles in its activities (the movement's leader, Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevi or "Apis," had been instrumental in the June 1903 coup which had brought King Petar Karaorevi to the Serbian throne following 45 years of rule by the rival Obrenovi dynasty). The group was denounced as nihilist by the Austro-Hungarian press and compared to the Russian People's Will and the Chinese Assassination Corps.

==See also==
*La Mano Negra
*Narodna Odbrana
*White Hand

==References==

==Further reading==
* Albertini, Luigi, Origins of the War of 1914, 3 vol., Oxford University Press, 1953.
* Dedijer, Vladimir, The Road to Sarajevo (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966).
* Fay, Sidney, The Origins of the World War, 2 vols., The Macmillan Company, 1928.
* Jelavich, Barbara, "What the Habsburg Government Knew about the Black Hand," Austrian History Yearbook 22 (1991), pp. 131150
* MacKenzie, David, Apis: The Congenial Conspirator; The Life of Colonel Dragutin T. Dimitrijevi (East European Monographs, No. 265; Boulder, Colo.: East European Monographs; New York: distributed by Columbia University Press, 1989)
* MacKenzie, David, The "Black hand" on Trial: Salonika, 1917 (East East European Monographs, No. 423; Boulder, Colo.: East European Monographs; New York: distributed by Columbia University Press, 1995)
* MacKenzie, David, The Exoneration of the "Black Hand," 1917-1953 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998)
* Owings, W. A. Dolph, Elizabeth Pribic and Nikola Pribic, The Sarajevo Trial (Chapel Hill: Documentary Publications, 1984).
* Remak, Joaquim, Sarajevo: The Story of a Political Murder, Criterion Books, Inc., 1959

==External links==
*Black Hand Over Europe, by Henri Pozzi, 1935 (consisting of War is Coming Again)
*The Black Hand
*Black Hand
*Black Hand Constitution



[[Board of directors]]

A meeting of a board of directors of the LeipzigDresden Railway Company in 1852

A board of directors is a body of elected or appointed members who jointly oversee the activities of a company or organization. Other names include board of governors, board of managers, board of regents, board of trustees, and board of visitors. It is often simply referred to as "the board".

A board's activities are determined by the powers, duties, and responsibilities delegated to it or conferred on it by an authority outside itself. These matters are typically detailed in the organization's bylaws. The bylaws commonly also specify the number of members of the board, how they are to be chosen, and when they are to meet.

In an organization with voting members, the board acts on behalf of, and is subordinate to, the organization's full group, which usually chooses the members of the board. In a stock corporation, the board is elected by the shareholders and is the highest authority in the management of the corporation. In a non-stock corporation with no general voting membership, the board is the supreme governing body of the institution; its members are sometimes chosen by the board itself. 

Typical duties of boards of directors include: 

* governing the organization by establishing broad policies and objectives;
* selecting, appointing, supporting and reviewing the performance of the chief executive;
* ensuring the availability of adequate financial resources;
* approving annual budgets;
* accounting to the stakeholders for the organization's performance;
* setting the salaries and compensation of company management;

The legal responsibilities of boards and board members vary with the nature of the organization, and with the jurisdiction within which it operates. For companies with publicly trading stock, these responsibilities are typically much more rigorous and complex than for those of other types.

Typically the board chooses one of its members to be the chairman, who holds whatever title is specified in the bylaws.

==Directors==

The directors of an organization are the persons who are members of its board. Several specific terms categorize directors by the presence or absence of their other relationships to the organization. This section was developed from numerous definitions in USLegal.com, BusinessDictionary.com, Dictionary.com, The Free Dictionary by Farlex, ibid., ibid., ibid., Macmillan Dictionary, and Economics-dictionary.com. 

===Inside director===
An inside director is a director who is also an employee, officer, major shareholder, or someone similarly connected to the organization. Inside directors represent the interests of the entity's stakeholders, and often have special knowledge of its inner workings, its financial or market position, and so on.

Typical inside directors are:
* A chief executive officer (CEO) who may also be chairman of the board
* Other executives of the organization, such as its chief financial officer (CFO) or executive vice president
* Large shareholders (who may or may not also be employees or officers)
* Representatives of other stakeholders such as labor unions, major lenders, or members of the community in which the organization is located

An inside director who is employed as a manager or executive of the organization is sometimes referred to as an executive director (not to be confused with the title executive director sometimes used for the CEO position). Executive directors often have a specified area of responsibility in the organization, such as finance, marketing, human resources, or production. 

===Outside director===
An outside director is a member of the board who is not otherwise employed by or engaged with the organization, and does not represent any of its stakeholders. A typical example is a director who is president of a firm in a different industry. 

Outside directors bring outside experience and perspective to the board. They keep a watchful eye on the inside directors and on the way the organization is run. Outside directors are often useful in handling disputes between inside directors, or between shareholders and the board. They are thought to be advantageous because they can be objective and present little risk of conflict of interest. On the other hand, they might lack familiarity with the specific issues connected to the organization's governance.

===Terminology ===
*Director - a person appointed to serve on the board of an organization, such as an institution or business.
*Inside director - a director who, in addition to serving on the board, has a meaningful connection to the organization
*Outside director - a director who, other than serving on the board, has no meaningful connections to the organization
*Executive director - an inside director who is also an executive with the organization. The term is also used, in a completely different sense, to refer to a CEO
*Non-executive director - a director who is not an executive with the organization
*Shadow director - an individual who is not a named director but who nevertheless directs or controls the organization

Individual directors often serve on more than one board. This practice results in an interlocking directorate, where a relatively small number of individuals have significant influence over a large number of important entities. This situation can have important corporate, social, economic, and legal consequences, and has been the subject of significant research.

== Process ==

The process for running a board, sometimes called the board process, includes the selection of board members, the setting of clear board objectives, the dissemination of documents or board package to the board members, the collaborative creation of an agenda for the meeting, the creation and follow-up of assigned action items, and the assessment of the board process through standardized assessments of board members, owners, and CEOs. Board Process The science of this process has been slow to develop due to the secretive nature of the way most companies run their boards, however some standardization is beginning to develop. Some who are pushing for this standardization in the USA are the National Association of Corporate Directors, McKinsey Consulting and The Board Group.

==Non-corporate boards==
The role and responsibilities of a board of directors vary depending on the nature and type of business entity and the laws applying to the entity (see types of business entity). For example, the nature of the business entity may be one that is traded on a public market (public company), not traded on a public market (a private, limited or closely held company), owned by family members (a family business), or exempt from income taxes (a non-profit, not for profit, or tax-exempt entity). There are numerous types of business entities available throughout the world such as a corporation, limited liability company, cooperative, business trust, partnership, private limited company, and public limited company.

Much of what has been written about boards of directors relates to boards of directors of business entities actively traded on public markets. See generally, Bowen, William G., The board book: an insider's guide for directors and trustees (2008 W.W. Norton & Co.); Murray, Alan S., Revolt in the boardroom: the new rules of power in corporate America (2007 Collins); Charan, Ram, Boards that deliver: advancing corporate governance from compliance to competitive advantage (2005 Jossey-Bass); Carver, John, Corporate boards that create value: governing company performance from the boardroom (2002 Jossey-Bass); Harvard business review on corporate governance (2000 Harvard Business School Press). More recently, however, material is becoming available for boards of private and closely held businesses including family businesses. See specifically Tutelman and Hause, The Balance Point: New Ways Business Owners Can Use Boards (2008 Famille Press). 

A board-only organization is one whose board is self-appointed, rather than being accountable to a base of members through elections; or in which the powers of the membership are extremely limited.

==Corporations==
In a publicly held company, directors are elected to represent and are legally obligated as fiduciaries to represent the interests of the owners of the companythe shareholders/stockholders. In this capacity they establish policies and make decisions on issues such as whether there is dividend and how much it is, stock options distributed to employees, and the hiring/firing and compensation of upper management.

===Governance===
Theoretically, the control of a company is divided between two bodies: the board of directors, and the shareholders in general meeting. In practice, the amount of power exercised by the board varies with the type of company. In small private companies, the directors and the shareholders are normally the same people, and thus there is no real division of power. In large public companies, the board tends to exercise more of a supervisory role, and individual responsibility and management tends to be delegated downward to individual professional executives (such as a finance director or a marketing director) who deal with particular areas of the company's affairs. Titles Associated with Executive Compensation| Compensation Resources Inc. 

Another feature of boards of directors in large public companies is that the board tends to have more de facto power. Many shareholders grant proxies to the directors to vote their shares at general meetings and accept all recommendations of the board rather than try to get involved in management, since each shareholder's power, as well as interest and information is so small. Larger institutional investors also grant the board proxies. The large number of shareholders also makes it hard for them to organize. However, there have been moves recently to try to increase shareholder activism among both institutional investors and individuals with small shareholdings. 

A contrasting view is that in large public companies it is upper management and not boards that wield practical power, because boards delegate nearly all of their power to the top executive employees, adopting their recommendations almost without fail. As a practical matter, executives even choose the directors, with shareholders normally following management recommendations and voting for them.

In most cases, serving on a board is not a career unto itself, but board members often receive remunerations amounting to hundreds of thousands of dollars per year since they often sit on the boards of several companies. Inside directors are usually not paid for sitting on a board, but the duty is instead considered part of their larger job description. Outside directors are usually paid for their services. These remunerations vary between corporations, but usually consist of a yearly or monthly salary, additional compensation for each meeting attended, stock options, and various other benefits. Tiffany & Co., for example, pays directors an annual retainer of $46,500, an additional annual retainer of $2,500 if the director is also a chairperson of a committee, a per-meeting-attended fee of $2,000 for meetings attended in person, a $500 fee for each meeting attended via telephone, in addition to stock options and retirement benefits. Fees, CEO Evaluation, and Ownership Structure By Joshua Kennon, About.com 

===Two-tier system===
In some European Union and Asian countries, there are two separate boards, an executive board for day-to-day business and a supervisory board (elected by the shareholders and employees) for supervising the executive board. In these countries, the CEO (chief executive or managing director) presides over the executive board and ]] and too much power being concentrated in the hands of one person. There is a strong parallel here with the structure of government, which tends to separate the political cabinet from the management civil service. In the United States, the board of directors (elected by the shareholders) is often equivalent to the supervisory board, while the executive board may often be known as the executive committee (operating committee or executive council), composed of the CEO and their direct reports (other C-level officers, division/subsidiary heads).

===History===

The development of a separate board of directors to manage the company has occurred incrementally and indefinitely over legal history. Until the end of the 19th century, it seems to have been generally assumed that the general meeting (of all shareholders) was the supreme organ of the company, and the board of directors was merely an agent of the company subject to the control of the shareholders in general meeting. Gower, Principles of Company Law (6th ed.), citing Isle of Wight Railway v Tahourdin (1883) 25 Ch D 320. 

However, by 1906, the English Court of Appeal had made it clear in the decision of Automatic Self-Cleansing Filter Syndicate Co v Cunningham 2 Ch 34 that the division of powers between the board and the shareholders in general meaning depended on the construction of the articles of association and that, where the powers of management were vested in the board, the general meeting could not interfere with their lawful exercise. The articles were held to constitute a contract by which the members had agreed that "the directors and the directors alone shall manage." Per Cozens-Hardy LJ at 44 

The new approach did not secure immediate approval, but it was endorsed by the House of Lords in Quin & Axtens v Salmon AC 442 and has since received general acceptance. Under English law, successive versions of Table A have reinforced the norm that, unless the directors are acting contrary to the law or the provisions of the Articles, the powers of conducting the management and affairs of the company are vested in them.

The modern doctrine was expressed in Shaw & Sons (Salford) Ltd v Shaw 2 KB 113 by Greer LJ as follows:

"A company is an entity distinct alike from its shareholders and its directors. Some of its powers may, according to its articles, be exercised by directors, certain other powers may be reserved for the shareholders in general meeting. If powers of management are vested in the directors, they and they alone can exercise these powers. The only way in which the general body of shareholders can control the exercise of powers by the articles in the directors is by altering the articles, or, if opportunity arises under the articles, by refusing to re-elect the directors of whose actions they disapprove. They cannot themselves usurp the powers which by the articles are vested in the directors any more than the directors can usurp the powers vested by the articles in the general body of shareholders."

It has been remarked that this development in the law was somewhat surprising at the time, as the relevant provisions in Table A (as it was then) seemed to contradict this approach rather than to endorse it. See Gower, Principles of Company Law (6th ed.) at 185. 

===Election and removal===
In most legal systems, the appointment and removal of directors is voted upon by the shareholders in general meeting For example, in the United Kingdom, see section 303 of the Companies Act 1985 or through a proxy statement. For publicly traded companies in the U.S., the directors which are available to vote on are largely selected by either the board as a whole or a nominating committee. Although in 2002 the NYSE and the NASDAQ required that nominating committees consist of independent directors as a condition of listing, Chhaochharia V, Grinstein Y. (2007). Corporate governance and firm value: The impact of the 2002 governance rules. The Journal of Finance. nomination committees have historically received input from management in their selections even when the CEO does not have a position on the board. Shareholder nominations can only occur at the general meeting itself or through the prohibitively expensive process of mailing out ballots separately; in May 2009 the SEC proposed a new rule allowing shareholders meeting certain criteria to add nominees to the proxy statement. SEC. (May 2009). SEC Votes to Propose Rule Amendments to Facilitate Rights of Shareholders to Nominate Directors. In practice for publicly traded companies, the managers (inside directors) who are purportedly accountable to the board of directors have historically played a major role in selecting and nominating the directors who are voted on by the shareholders, in which case more "gray outsider directors" (independent directors with conflicts of interest) are nominated and elected. Shivdasani A, Yermack D. (1999). CEO involvement in the selection of new board members: An empirical analysis. Journal of Finance. 

Directors may also leave office by resignation or death. In some legal systems, directors may also be removed by a resolution of the remaining directors (in some countries they may only do so "with cause"; in others the power is unrestricted).

Some jurisdictions also permit the board of directors to appoint directors, either to fill a vacancy which arises on resignation or death, or as an addition to the existing directors.

In practice, it can be quite difficult to remove a director by a resolution in general meeting. In many legal systems, the director has a right to receive special notice of any resolution to remove him or her; In the United Kingdom it is 28 days' notice, see sections 303(2) and 379 of the Companies Act 1985 the company must often supply a copy of the proposal to the director, who is usually entitled to be heard by the meeting. In the United Kingdom, see section 304(1) of the Companies Act 1985. A private company cannot use a written resolution under section 381A  a meeting must be held. The director may require the company to circulate any representations that he wishes to make. In the United Kingdom, see sections 303(2) and (3) of the Companies Act 1985 Furthermore, the director's contract of service will usually entitle him to compensation if he is removed, and may often include a generous "golden parachute" which also acts as a deterrent to removal.

In a recent academic study that was published in the Journal of Applied Finance, Drexel Universitys LeBow College of Business professors Jie Cai, Jacqueline Garner, and Ralph Walkling examined how corporate shareholders voted in nearly 2,500 director elections in the United States. They found that directors received fewer votes from shareholders when their companies performed poorly, had excess CEO compensation, or had poor shareholder protection. They also found that directors received fewer votes when they did not regularly attend board meetings or received negative recommendations from RiskMetrics (a proxy advisory firm). This evidence suggests that some shareholders express their displeasure with a company by voting against its directors. The article also shows that companies often improve their corporate governance by removing poison pills or classified boards and by reducing excessive CEO pay after their directors receive low shareholder support. Cai, J., J. L. Garner, and R. A. Walkling, 2009. Electing Directors. Journal of Finance 64 (5), 23872419. 

Board accountability to shareholders is a recurring issue. In 2010, the New York Times noted that several directors who had overseen companies which had failed in the financial crisis of 20072010 had found new positions as directors. Craig S, Lattman P. (2010). Companies May Fail, but Directors Are in Demand. New York Times. The SEC sometimes imposes a ban (a "D&O bar") on serving on a board as part of its fraud cases, and one of these was upheld in 2013. SEC Wins D&O Bar Against Alleged Hedge Fund Scammer. Law360. 

===Exercise of powers===
The exercise by the board of directors of its powers usually occurs in board meetings. Most legal systems require sufficient notice to be given to all directors of these meetings, and that a quorum must be present before any business may be conducted. Usually, a meeting which is held without notice having been given is still valid if all of the directors attend, but it has been held that a failure to give notice may negate resolutions passed at a meeting, because the persuasive oratory of a minority of directors might have persuaded the majority to change their minds and vote otherwise. See for example Barber's Case (1877) 5 Ch D 963 and Re Portuguese Consolidated Copper Mines (1889) 42 Ch D 160 

In most common law countries, the powers of the board are vested in the board as a whole, and not in the individual directors. Breckland Group Holdings Ltd v London and Suffolk Properties BCLC 100 However, in instances an individual director may still bind the company by his acts by virtue of his ostensible authority (see also: the rule in Turquand's Case).

===Duties===

Because directors exercise control and management over the organization, but organizations are (in theory) run for the benefit of the shareholders, the law imposes strict duties on directors in relation to the exercise of their duties. The duties imposed on directors are fiduciary duties, similar to those that the law imposes on those in similar positions of trust: agents and trustees.

The duties apply to each director separately, while the powers apply to the board jointly. Also, the duties are owed to the company itself, and not to any other entity. Percival v Wright Ch 421 This does not mean that directors can never stand in a fiduciary relationship to the individual shareholders; they may well have such a duty in certain circumstances. For example, if the board is authorised by the shareholders to negotiate with a takeover bidder. It has been held in New Zealand that "depending upon all the surround circumstances and the nature of the responsibility which in a real and practical sense the director has assumed towards the shareholder," Coleman v Myers 2 NZLR 225 

===="Proper purpose"====
Directors must exercise their powers for a proper purpose. While in many instances an improper purpose is readily evident, such as a director looking to feather his or her own nest or divert an investment opportunity to a relative, such breaches usually involve a breach of the director's duty to act in good faith. Greater difficulties arise where the director, while acting in good faith, is serving a purpose that is not regarded by the law as proper.

The seminal authority in relation to what amounts to a proper purpose is the Privy Council decision of Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Ltd AC 821. The case concerned the power of the directors to issue new shares. Following Hogg v. Cramphorn Ltd. Ch 254 It was alleged that the directors had issued a large number of new shares purely to deprive a particular shareholder of his voting majority. An argument that the power to issue shares could only be properly exercised to raise new capital was rejected as too narrow, and it was held that it would be a proper exercise of the director's powers to issue shares to a larger company to ensure the financial stability of the company, or as part of an agreement to exploit mineral rights owned by the company. Teck Corporation v Millar (1972) 33 DLR (3d) 288 If so, the mere fact that an incidental result (even if it was a desired consequence) was that a shareholder lost his majority, or a takeover bid was defeated, this would not itself make the share issue improper. But if the sole purpose was to destroy a voting majority, or block a takeover bid, that would be an improper purpose.

Not all jurisdictions recognised the "proper purpose" duty as separate from the "good faith" duty however. This division was rejected in British Columbia in Teck Corporation v Millar (1972) 33 DLR (3d) 288 

===="Unfettered discretion"====

Directors cannot, without the consent of the company, fetter their discretion in relation to the exercise of their powers, and cannot bind themselves to vote in a particular way at future board meetings. Although as Gower points out, as well understood as the rule is, there is a paucity of authority on the point. But see Clark v Workman 1 Ir R 107 and Dawson International plc v Coats Paton plc 1989 SLT 655 This is so even if there is no improper motive or purpose, and no personal advantage to the director.

This does not mean, however, that the board cannot agree to the company entering into a contract which binds the company to a certain course, even if certain actions in that course will require further board approval. The company remains bound, but the directors retain the discretion to vote against taking the future actions (although that may involve a breach by the company of the contract that the board previously approved).

===="Conflict of duty and interest"====

As fiduciaries, the directors may not put themselves in a position where their interests and duties conflict with the duties that they owe to the company. The law takes the view that good faith must not only be done, but must be manifestly seen to be done, and zealously patrols the conduct of directors in this regard; and will not allow directors to escape liability by asserting that his decision was in fact well founded. Traditionally, the law has divided conflicts of duty and interest into three sub-categories.

=====Transactions with the company=====

By definition, where a director enters into a transaction with a company, there is a conflict between the director's interest (to do well for himself out of the transaction) and his duty to the company (to ensure that the company gets as much as it can out of the transaction). This rule is so strictly enforced that, even where the conflict of interest or conflict of duty is purely hypothetical, the directors can be forced to disgorge all personal gains arising from it. In Aberdeen Ry v Blaikie (1854) 1 Macq HL 461 Lord Cranworth stated in his judgment that:

:"A corporate body can only act by agents, and it is, of course, the duty of those agents so to act as best to promote the interests of the corporation whose affairs they are conducting. Such agents have duties to discharge of a fiduciary nature towards their principal. And it is a rule of universal application that no one, having such duties to discharge, shall be allowed to enter into engagements in which he has, or can have, a personal interest conflicting or which possibly may conflict, with the interests of those whom he is bound to protect... So strictly is this principle adhered to that no question is allowed to be raised as to the fairness or unfairness of the contract entered into..." (emphasis added)

However, in many jurisdictions the members of the company are permitted to ratify transactions which would otherwise fall foul of this principle. It is also largely accepted in most jurisdictions that this principle can be overridden in the company's constitution.

In many countries, there is also a statutory duty to declare interests in relation to any transactions, and the director can be fined for failing to make disclosure. In the United Kingdom, see section 317 of the Companies Act 1985 

=====Use of corporate property, opportunity, or information=====
Directors must not, without the informed consent of the company, use for their own profit the company's assets, opportunities, or information. This prohibition is much less flexible than the prohibition against the transactions with the company, and attempts to circumvent it using provisions in the articles have met with limited success.

In Regal (Hastings) Ltd v Gulliver All ER 378 the House of Lords, in upholding what was regarded as a wholly unmeritorious claim by the shareholders, In summary, the facts were as follows: Company A owned a cinema, and the directors decided to acquire two other cinemas with a view to selling the entire undertaking as a going concern. They formed a new company ("Company B") to take the leases of the two new cinemas. But the lessor insisted on various stipulations, one of which was that Company B had to have a paid up share capital of not less than 5,000 (a substantial sum at the time). Company A was unable to subscribe for more than 2,000 in shares, so the directors arranged for the remaining 3,000 shares to be taken by themselves and their friends. Later, instead of selling the undertaking, they sold all of the shares in both companies and made a substantial profit. The shareholders of Company A sued asking that directors and their friends to disgorge the profits that they had made in connection with their 3,000 shares in Company B  the very same shares which the shareholders in Company A had been asked to subscribe (through Company A) but refused to do so. held that:

:"(i) that what the directors did was so related to the affairs of the company that it can properly be said to have been done in the course of their management and in the utilisation of their opportunities and special knowledge as directors; and (ii) that what they did resulted in profit to themselves."

And accordingly, the directors were required to disgorge the profits that they made, and the shareholders received their windfall.

The decision has been followed in several subsequent cases, Industrial Development Consultants v Cooley 1 WLR 443 (corporate information), Canadian Aero Service v. O'Malley (1973) 40 DLR (3d) 371 (corporate opportunity) and Boardman v Phipps 2 AC 46 (corporate opportunity, which again, the company itself had declined to take up) and is now regarded as settled law.

=====Competing with the company=====
Directors cannot compete directly with the company without a conflict of interest arising. Similarly, they should not act as directors of competing companies, as their duties to each company would then conflict with each other.

====Common law duties of care and skill====
Traditionally, the level of care and skill which has to be demonstrated by a director has been framed largely with reference to the non-executive director. In Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ch 407, it was expressed in purely subjective terms, where the court held that:

:"a director need not exhibit in the performance of his duties a greater degree of skill than may reasonably be expected from a person of his knowledge and experience." (emphasis added)

However, this decision was based firmly in the older notions (see above) that prevailed at the time as to the mode of corporate decision making, and effective control residing in the shareholders; if they elected and put up with an incompetent decision maker, they should not have recourse to complain.

However, a more modern approach has since developed, and in Dorchester Finance Co Ltd v Stebbing BCLC 498 the court held that the rule in Equitable Fire related only to skill, and not to diligence. With respect to diligence, what was required was:

:"such care as an ordinary man might be expected to take on his own behalf."

This was a dual subjective and objective test, and one deliberately pitched at a higher level.

More recently, it has been suggested that both the tests of skill and diligence should be assessed objectively and subjectively; in the United Kingdom, the statutory provisions relating to directors' duties in the new Companies Act 2006 have been codified on this basis. Norman v Theodore Goddard BCLC 1027 

====Remedies for breach of duty====

In most jurisdictions, the law provides for a variety of remedies in the event of a breach by the directors of their duties:
# injunction or declaration
# damages or compensation
# restoration of the company's property
# rescission of the relevant contract
# account of profits
# summary dismissal

====The future====
Historically, directors' duties have been owed almost exclusively to the company and its members, and the board was expected to exercise its powers for the financial benefit of the company. However, more recently there have been attempts to "soften" the position, and provide for more scope for directors to act as good corporate citizens. For example, in the United Kingdom, the Companies Act 2006 requires directors of companies "to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole" and sets out the following six factors regarding a director's duty to promote success:
* the likely consequences of any decision in the long term
* the interests of the companys employees
* the need to foster the companys business relationships with suppliers, customers and others
* the impact of the companys operations on the community and the environment
* the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct, and
* the need to act fairly as between members of a company

This represents a considerable departure from the traditional notion that directors' duties are owed only to the company. Previously in the United Kingdom, under the Companies Act 1985, protections for non-member stakeholders were considerably more limited (see for example, s.309 which permitted directors to take into account the interests of employees but which could only be enforced by the shareholders and not by the employees themselves). The changes have therefore been the subject of some criticism. Director's duties 

===United States===

====SarbanesOxley Act====

The SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 has introduced new standards of accountability on boards of U.S. companies or companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges. Under the Act, directors risk large fines and prison sentences in the case of accounting crimes. Internal control is now the direct responsibility of directors. The vast majority of companies covered by the Act have hired internal auditors to ensure that the company adheres to required standards of internal control. The internal auditors are required by law to report directly to an audit board, consisting of directors more than half of whom are outside directors, one of whom is a "financial expert."

The law requires companies listed on the major stock exchanges (NYSE, NASDAQ) to have a majority of independent directorsdirectors who are not otherwise employed by the firm or in a business relationship with it.

====Size====
According to the Corporate Library's study, the average size of publicly traded company's board is 9.2 members, and most boards range from 3 to 31 members. According to Investopedia, some analysts think the ideal size is seven. http://www.investopedia.com/articles/analyst/03/111903.asp#ixzz27Kekd83e Evaluating The Board Of Directors| investopedia.com| 29 February 2008 State law may specify a minimum number of directors, maximum number of directors, and qualifications for directors (e.g. whether board members must be individuals or may be business entities). https://www.harborcompliance.com/information/corporate-governance-by-state.php U.S. Corporate Governance by State | harborcompliance.com| 22 April 2014 https://www.harborcompliance.com/information/nonprofit-governance-by-state.php U.S. Nonprofit Governance by State | harborcompliance.com| 27 January 2014 

====Committees====
While a board may have several committees, twothe compensation committee and audit committeeare critical and must be made up of at least three independent directors and no inside directors. Other common committees in boards are nominating and governance. Compensation Committee Structure, Function and Best Practices Richard E. Wood 

====Compensation====
Directors of Fortune 500 companies received median pay of $234,000 in 2011. Directorship is a part-time job. A recent National Association of Corporate Directors study found directors averaging just 4.3 hours a week on board work. 

===Criticism===
According to John Gillespie, a former investment banker and co-author of a book critical of boards, Money for Nothing: How the Failure of Corporate Boards is Ruining American Business and Costing Us Trillions "Far too much of their time has been for check-the-box and cover-your-behind activities rather than real monitoring of executives and providing strategic advice on behalf of shareholders". 

==See also==
*Alternate director
*Board of governors
*Board of regents
*Celebrity board director
*Chairman
*Chief executive officer
*Corporate governance
*Corporate title
*Interlocking directorate
*Managing director
*Non-executive director
*Parliamentary procedure in the corporate world
*President
*Supervisory board (in German: "Aufsichtsrat")
*Trustee
*Vorstand, German for "management board"
*Gender representation on corporate boards of directors

==Notes==

==References==
*P Blumberg, Reflections on Proposals for Corporate Reform Through Change in the Composition of the Board of Directors: Special Interest or Public Directors (1973) 53 Boston University Law Review 547
*KJ Hopt, 'The German Two-Tier Board: Experience, Theories, Reforms' in KJ Hopt and others. (eds), Comparative Corporate Governance: The State of the Art and Emerging Research (Clarendon 1998)
*KJ Hopt and PC Leyens, 'Board Models in Europe  Recent Developments of Internal Corporate Governance Structures in Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and Italy' (2004) EGCI Working Paper

==External links==
*Web site of the Board of a large U.S. university, illustrating a typical board's composition, duties, concerns, etc.
*Guidance on director's duties (Lemon & Co)
*National Association of Corporate Directors
*European Directors and Board Members Association
*Corporate Governance Board Leadership Training, Global Corporate Governance Forum
*BoardofDirectors.com.au - Australia's leading Online Directorship Listing
*"The Globe and Mail", Drag your corporate board into the digital age , February 25, 2013

 

[[Balkan Wars]]

The Balkan Wars were two conflicts that took place in the Balkan Peninsula in south-eastern Europe in 1912 and 1913. Four Balkan states defeated the Ottoman Empire in the first war; one of the four, Bulgaria, was defeated in the second war. The Ottoman Empire lost nearly all of its holdings in Europe. Austria-Hungary, although not a combatant, was weakened as a much enlarged Serbia pushed for union of the South Slavic peoples. The war set the stage for the Balkan crisis of 1914 and thus was a "prelude to the First World War." Richard C. Hall, The Balkan Wars 1912-1913: Prelude to the First World War (2000) 

By the early 20th century, Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro and Serbia had achieved independence from the Ottoman Empire, but large elements of their ethnic populations remained under Ottoman rule. In 1912, these countries formed the Balkan League. There were three main causes of the First Balkan War. The Ottoman Empire was unable to reform itself, govern satisfactorily, or deal with the rising ethnic nationalism of its diverse peoples. Secondly the Great Powers quarreled amongst themselves and failed to ensure that the Ottomans would carry out the needed reforms. This led the Balkan states to impose their own solution. Most important, the Balkan League had been formed, and its members were confident that it could defeat the Turks. Ernst C. Helmreich, The diplomacy of the Balkan wars, 1912-1913 (1938) Richard C. Hall, The Balkan Wars, 1912-1913: Prelude to the First World War (2000) online 

The Ottoman Empire lost almost all its European territories to the west of the River Maritsa, drawing present day Turkey's western border. A large influx of Turks started to flee into the Ottoman heartland as a result of the lost lands. By 1914, the remaining core region of the Ottoman Empire had experienced a population increase of around 2.5 million because of the flood of immigration from the Balkans.

In Turkey, it is considered a major disaster (Balkan harbi facias) in the nation's history. The unexpected fall and sudden relinquishing of Turkish-dominated European territories created a psycho-traumatic event amongst the Turks that is said to have triggered the ultimate collapse of the empire itself within five years. Nazm Pasha, the chief of staff of the Ottoman army has been held responsible of the failure and was assassinated in 1913 by Young Turks.

The First Balkan War broke out when the League attacked the Ottoman Empire on 8 October 1912 and was ended seven months later by the Treaty of London. After five centuries, the Ottoman Empire lost virtually all of its possessions in the Balkans.

The Second Balkan War broke out on 16 June 1913. Bulgaria was dissatisfied over the division of the spoils in Macedonia, made in secret by its former allies, Serbia and Greece, and attacked them. The Serbian and Greek armies repulsed the Bulgarian offensive and counter-attacked into Bulgaria, while Romania and the Ottoman Empire also attacked Bulgaria and gained (or regained) territory. In the resulting Treaty of Bucharest, Bulgaria lost most of the territories it had gained in the First Balkan War.

Germany, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and Britain attempting to keep the lid on the simmering cauldron of imperialist and nationalist tensions in the Balkans to prevent a general European war. They were successful in 1912 and 1913 but did not succeed in in 1914.

The fighting during the Balkan Wars was also disastrous for the regions Jewish population. 120,000 Jewish former citizens of the Ottoman Empire became separated from their country by the conflict, and many were either directly victimized or suffered as refugees. Numerous documented incidents attest to the looting of Jewish buisnesses, destruction of synagogues, murder, and conscription on a vast scale that impoverished the women and children. The Balkan Wars and the Jews in The American Jewish Yearbook 5674. Herbert Friedenwald and H. G. Friedman, Eds. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1913, pp. 188-194. 

==Background==

The background to the wars lies in the incomplete emergence of nation-states on the European territory of the Ottoman Empire during the second half of the 19th century. Serbia had gained substantial territory during the Russo-Turkish War, 18771878, while Greece acquired Thessaly in 1881 (although it lost a small area back to the Ottoman Empire in 1897) and Bulgaria (an autonomous principality since 1878) incorporated the formerly distinct province of Eastern Rumelia (1885). All three as well as Montenegro sought additional territories within the large Ottoman-ruled region known as Rumelia, comprising Eastern Rumelia, Albania, Macedonia, and Thrace (see map).

===Policies of the Great Powers===
Throughout the 19th century, the Great Powers shared different aims over the "Eastern Question" and the integrity of the Ottoman Empire. Russia wanted access to the "warm waters" of the Mediterranean; it pursued a pan-Slavic foreign policy and therefore supported Bulgaria and Serbia. Britain wished to deny Russia access to the "warm waters" and supported the integrity of the Ottoman Empire, although it also supported a limited expansion of Greece as a backup plan in case integrity of the Empire was no longer possible. France wished to strengthen its position in the region, especially in the Levant (today's Lebanon, Syria, the Palestinian territories and Israel).

Habsburg-ruled Austria-Hungary wished for a continuation of the existence of the Ottoman Empire, since both were troubled multinational entities and thus the collapse of the one might weaken the other. The Habsburgs also saw a strong Ottoman presence in the area as a counterweight to the Serbian nationalistic call to their own Serb subjects in Bosnia. Italy, it has been argued, wished to recreate the Roman empire, though its primary aim at the time seems to have been the denial of access to the Adriatic Sea to another major sea power. The German Empire, in turn, under the "Drang nach Osten" policy, aspired to turn the Ottoman Empire into its own de facto colony, and thus supported its integrity.

In the late 19th and early 20th century, Bulgaria and Greece contended for Ottoman Macedonia and Thrace. Ethnic Greeks sought the forced "Hellenization" of ethnic Bulgars, who sought "Bulgarization" of Greeks. Both nations sent armed irregulars into Ottoman territory to protect and assist their ethnic kindred. From 1904, there was low intensity warfare in Macedonia between the Greek and Bulgarian bands and the Ottoman army (the Struggle for Macedonia). After the Young Turk revolution of July 1908, the situation changed drastically.

===Young Turk revolution===

It is no surprise that the "Young Turk" revolution occurred in the troubled European provinces of the Empire. There the threat to its integrity was the most pronounced, and the need for reforms was most evident. When the revolt broke out, it was supported by intellectuals, the army, and almost all the ethnic minorities of the Empire, and forced Sultan Abdul Hamid II to re-adopt the long defunct Ottoman constitution of 1876, ushering in the Second Constitutional Era. Hopes were raised among the Balkan ethnicities of reforms and autonomy, and elections were held to form a representative, multi-ethnic, Ottoman parliament. However, following the Sultan's attempted counter-coup, the liberal element of the Young Turks was sidelined and the nationalist element became dominant.

At the same time, in October 1908, Austria-Hungary seized the opportunity of the Ottoman political upheaval to annex the de jure Ottoman province of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878 (see Bosnian Crisis), and Bulgaria declared itself a fully independent kingdom. The Greeks of the autonomous Cretan State proclaimed unification with Greece, though the opposition of the Great Powers prevented the latter action from taking practical effect. It has large influence in the consequent world order.

===Reaction in the Balkan States===

Serbia was frustrated in the north by Austria-Hungary's incorporation of Bosnia. In March 1909, Serbia was forced to accept the annexation and restrain anti-Habsburg agitation by Serbian nationalists. Instead, the Serbian government looked to formerly Serb territories in the south, notably "Old Serbia" (the Sanjak of Novi Pazar and the province of Kosovo).

On 15 August 1909 the Military League, a group of Greek officers, took action against the government to reform their country's national government and reorganize the army. The League found itself unable to create a new political system, until the league summoned the Cretan politician Eleutherios Venizelos to Athens as its political adviser. Venizelos persuaded the king to revise the constitution and asked the League to disband in favor of a National Assembly. In March 1910 the Military League dissolved itself. "Military League", Encyclopdia Britannica Online 

Bulgaria, which had secured Ottoman recognition of her independence in April 1909 and enjoyed the friendship of Russia, also looked to districts of Ottoman Thrace and Macedonia. In August 1910 Montenegro followed Bulgaria's precedent by becoming a kingdom.

===Balkan League===
Bulgarian forces waiting to start their assault on Adrianople

Following Italy's victory in the Italo-Turkish War of 19111912 the Young Turks fell from power after a coup. The Balkan countries saw this as an opportunity to attack the Ottoman Empire and fulfill their desires of expansion.

With the initial encouragement of Russian agents, a series of agreements was concluded between Serbia and Bulgaria in March 1912. Military victory against the Ottoman Empire would not be possible while it could bring reinforcements from Asia. The condition of the Ottoman railways of the time was primitive, so most reinforcement would have to come by sea through the Aegean Sea. Greece was the only Balkan country with a navy powerful enough to deny use of the Aegean to the Ottoman Empire, thus a treaty between Greece and Bulgaria became necessary; it was signed in May 1912.

Montenegro concluded agreements between Serbia and Bulgaria later that year. Bulgaria signed treaties with Serbia to divide the territory of northern Macedonia, but refused any similar agreement with Greece. Bulgaria's policy was that the agreement would limit Serbia's access to Macedonia, while at the same time Bulgaria could take as much as its army could regardless of Greek wishes. Bulgaria thought it could occupy the larger part of Aegean Macedonia and the important port city of Salonika before the Greeks could get there.

This alliance between Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, and Montenegro became known as the Balkan League; its existence was undesirable for all the Great Powers. The League was loose at best, though secret liaison officers were exchanged between the Greek and the Serbian army after the war began. Greece delayed the start of the war several times in the summer of 1912, to better prepare her navy, but Montenegro declared war on 8 October (25 September O.S.). Following an ultimatum to the Ottoman Empire, the remaining members of the alliance entered the conflict on 17 October.

==First Balkan War==

Territorial changes as a result of the First Balkan war, as of April 1913 showing the prewar agreed line of expansion between Serbia and Bulgaria
The apple of discord: King George I of Greece and Tsar Ferdinand of Bulgaria at Thessaloniki, December 1912. Despite their alliance, Greco-Bulgarian antagonism over the city and Macedonia in general did not abate.

The three Slavic allies (Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro) had laid out extensive plans to coordinate their war efforts, in continuation of their secret prewar settlements and under close Russian supervision (Greece was not included). Serbia and Montenegro would attack in the theater of Sandjak, Bulgarian and Serbia in Macedonia and Thrace.

The Ottoman Empire's situation was difficult. Its population of about 26 million people provided a massive pool of manpower, but 3/4 of the population and nearly all of the Muslim component lived in the Asian part of the Empire. Reinforcements had to come from Asia mainly by sea, which depended on the result of battles between the Turkish and Greek navies in the Aegean.

With the outbreak of the war, the Ottoman Empire activated three Army HQs: the Thracian HQ in Constantinople, the Western HQ in Salonika, and the Vardar HQ in Skopje, against the Bulgarians, the Greeks and the Serbians respectively. Most of their available forces were allocated to these fronts. Smaller independent units were allocated elsewhere, mostly around heavily fortified cities.

Montenegro was the first that declared war on 8 October (25 September O.S.). Its main thrust was towards Shkodra, with secondary operations in the Novi Pazar area. The rest of the Allies, after giving a common ultimatum, declared war a week later. Bulgaria attacked towards Eastern Thrace, being stopped only at the outskirts of Constantinople at the atalca line and the isthmus of the Gallipoli peninsula, while secondary forces captured Western Thrace and Eastern Macedonia. Serbia attacked south towards Skopje and Monastir and then turned west to present-day Albania, reaching the Adriatic, while a second Army captured Kosovo and linked with the Montenegrin forces. Greece's main forces attacked from Thessaly into Macedonia through the Sarantaporo strait and after capturing Thessaloniki on 12 November (on 26 October 1912, O.S.) expanded its occupied area and linked up with the Serbian army to the northwest, while its main forces turned east towards Kavala, reaching the Bulgarians. Another Greek army attacked into Epirus towards Ioannina. Balkan Wars Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 

In the naval front the Ottoman fleet twice exited the Dardanelles and was twice defeated by the Greek Navy, in the battles of Elli and Lemnos. Greek dominance on the Aegean Sea made it impossible for the Ottomans to transfer the planned troops from the Middle East to the Thracian (against the Bulgarian) and to the Macedonian (against the Greeks and Serbians) fronts. According to the E.J. Erickson the Greek Navy also played a crucial, albeit indirect role, in the Thracian campaign by neutralizing no less than three Thracian Corps (see First Balkan War, the Bulgarian theater of operations), a significant portion of the Ottoman Army there, in the all-important opening round of the war. After the defeating of the Ottoman fleet the Greek Navy was also free to liberate the islands of the Aegean. "History of Greece" Encyclopdia Britannica Online General Nikola Ivanov identified the activity of the Greek Navy as the chief factor in the general success of the allies. 

In January, after a successful coup by young army officers, the Ottoman Empire decided to continue the war. After a failed Ottoman counter-attack in the Western-Thracian front, Bulgarian forces with the help of the Serbian Army managed to conquer Adrianople while Greek forces managed to take Ioannina after defeating the Ottomans in the battle of Bizani. In the joint Serbian-Montenegrin theater of operation the Montenegrin army besieged and captured the Shkodra, ending the Ottoman presence in Europe west of the atalca line after nearly 500 years. The war ended with the Treaty of London on 30(17) May 1913.

==Second Balkan War==

Cholera was common among the soldiers of the combatant nations
Boundaries on the Balkans after the First and the Second Balkan War (19121913)
Though the Balkan allies had fought together against the common enemy, that was not enough to overcome their mutual rivalries. In the original document for the Balkans league, Serbia promised Bulgaria most of Macedonia. But after the war, Serbia and Greece revealed their plan to keep part of the promised territory. This act prompted the tsar of Bulgaria to invade his allies. The Second Balkan War broke out on 29(16) June 1913 when Bulgaria attacked its erstwhile allies in the First Balkan War, Serbia and Greece, while Montenegro, Romania and the Ottoman Empire intervened later against Bulgaria. When the Greek army entered Thessaloniki in the First Balkan War ahead of the Bulgarian 7th division by only a day, they were asked to allow a Bulgarian battalion to enter the city. Greece accepted in exchange for allowing a Greek unit to enter the city of Serres.

The Bulgarian unit that entered Thessaloniki turned out to be a 48,000-strong division instead of the battalion, something which caused concern among the Greeks, who viewed it as a Bulgarian attempt to establish a condominium over the city. In the event, due to the urgently needed reinforcements in the Thracian front, Bulgarian Headquarters was soon forced to remove its troops from the city (while the Greeks agreed by mutual treaty to remove their units based in Serres) and transport them to Dedeaa (modern Alexandroupolis), but still it left behind a battalion that started fortifying its positions.

Greece had also allowed the Bulgarians to control the stretch of the Thessaloniki-Constantinople railroad that lay in Greek-occupied territory, since Bulgaria controlled the largest part of this railroad towards Thrace. After the end of the operations in Thraceand confirming Greek concernsBulgaria was not satisfied with the territory it controlled in Macedonia and immediately asked Greece to relinquish its control over Thessaloniki and the land north of Pieria, effectively handing over all Aegean Macedonia. These unacceptable demands together with the Bulgarian refusal to demobilize its army after the Treaty of London had ended the common war against the Ottomans and alarmed Greece, which decided also to maintain its army's mobilization.

Similarly, in northern Macedonia, the tension between Serbia and Bulgaria due to later aspirations over Vardar Macedonia generated many incidents between the nearby armies, prompting Serbia to maintain its army's mobilization. Serbia and Greece proposed that each of the three countries reduce its army by one fourth, as a first step to facilitate a peaceful solution, but Bulgaria rejected it.
Seeing the omens, Greece and Serbia started a series of negotiations and signed a treaty on 1 June(19 May) 1913. With this treaty, a mutual border was agreed between the two countries, together with an agreement for mutual military and diplomatic support in case of a Bulgarian or/and Austro-Hungarian attack. Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, being well informed, tried to stop the upcoming conflict on 8 June, by sending an identical personal message to the Kings of Bulgaria and Serbia, offering to act as arbitrator according to the provisions of the 1912 Serbo-Bulgarian treaty. But Bulgaria, by making the acceptance of Russian arbitration conditional, in effect denied any discussion and caused Russia to repudiate its alliance with Bulgaria (see Russo-Bulgarian military convention signed 31 May 1902).

The Serbs and the Greeks had a military advantage on the eve of the war because their armies confronted comparatively weak Ottoman forces in the First Balkan War and suffered relatively light casualties while the Bulgarians were involved in heavy fighting in Thrace. The Serbs and the Greeks had time to fortify their positions in Macedonia. The Bulgarians also held some advantages, controlling internal communication and supply lines. 

On 29(16) June 1913 General Savov, under direct orders of tsar Ferdinand I, issued attacking orders against both Greece and Serbia without consulting the Bulgarian government and without any official declaration of war. During the night of 30(17) June 1913 they attacked the Serbian army at Bregalnica river and then the Greek army in Nigrita. The Serbian army resisted the sudden night attack, while most of soldiers did not even know who they were fighting with, as Bulgarian camps were located next to Serbs and were considered allies. Montenegro's forces were just a few kilometers away and also rushed to the battle. The Bulgarian attack was halted.

The Greek army was also successful. It retreated according to plan for two days while Thessaloniki was cleared of the remaining Bulgarian regiment. Then the Greek army counter-attacked and defeated the Bulgarians at Kilkis-Lahanas (Kukush), after which the mostly Bulgarian town was destroyed and its population expelled. Hugh Poulton, "Who are the Macedonians?", 2000, p.75 "Balkan Forum", Volume 5, Issues 12, 1997, p.132 The Greek army destroyed altogether 161 Bulgarian villages and massacred thousands of inhabitants. Targeting civilians in war; Alexander B. Downes; 2008; [http://books.google.bg/books?id=TWEEW8SBvEAC&lpg=PT30&dq=%22second%20balkan%20war%22%20greeks%20massacres&pg=PT30#v=onepage&q=%22second%20balkan%20war%22%20greeks%20massacres&f=false p.35 Following the capture of Kilkis, the Greek army's pace was not quick enough to prevent the destruction of Nigrita, Serres, and Doxato and massacres of non-combatant Greek inhabitants at Demir Hisar and Doxato by the Bulgarian army. Report of the International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan Wars, published by the Endowment Washington, D.C. 1914, p. 97-99 pp.79-95 The Great Events by Famous Historians, Charles F. Horne, 2006, ISBN 978-1-4264-4107-3, p. 420 The Greek army then divided its forces and advanced in two directions. Part proceeded east and occupied Western Thrace. The rest of the Greek army advanced up to the Struma River valley, defeating the Bulgarian army in the battles of Doiran and Mt. Beles, and continued its advance to the north towards Sofia. In the Kresna straits the Greeks were ambushed by the Bulgarian 2nd and 1st Army newly arrived from the Serbian front that had already taken defensive positions there following the Bulgarian victory at Kalimanci.

By 30 July the Greek army was outnumbered by the counter-attacking Bulgarian army, which attempted to encircle the Greeks in a Cannae-type battle, by applying pressure on their flanks. The Greek army was exhausted and faced logistical difficulties. The battle was continued for 11 days, between 29 July and 9 August over 20 km of a maze of forests and mountains with no conclusion. The Greek King, seeing that the units he fought were from the Serbian front, tried to convince the Serbs to renew their attack, as the front ahead of them was now thinner, but the Serbs rejected it. By then, news came of the Romanian advance toward Sofia and its imminent fall. Facing the danger of encirclement, Constantine realized that his army could no longer continue hostilities, agreed to Eleftherios Venizelos' proposal and accepted the Bulgarian request for armistice as this had been communicated through Romania.

Romania had raised an army and declared war on Bulgaria on 10 July(27 June) as it had from 28(15) June officially warned Bulgaria that it would not remain neutral in a new Balkan war, due to Bulgaria's refusal to cede the fortress of Silistra as promised before the First Balkan war in exchange for Romanian neutrality. Its forces encountered little resistance and by the time the Greeks accepted the Bulgarian request for armistice they had reached Vrazhdebna, 7 miles from the center of Sofia.

Seeing the military position of the Bulgarian army the Ottomans decided to intervene. They attacked and finding no opposition, managed to recover eastern Thrace with its fortified city of Adrianople, regaining an area in Europe which was only slightly larger than the present-day European territory of the Republic of Turkey.

==Reactions among the Great Powers during the wars==
Tirana Bazaar at the turn of the 20th century.
The developments that led to the First Balkan War did not go unnoticed by the Great Powers, but although there was an official consensus between the European Powers over the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire, which led to a stern warning to the Balkan states, unofficially each of them took a different diplomatic approach due to their conflicting interests in the area. As a result, any possible preventive effect of the common official warning was cancelled by the mixed unofficial signals, and failed to prevent or to stop the war:

*Russia was a prime mover in the establishment of the Balkan League and saw it as an essential tool in case of a future war against its rival, the Austro-Hungarian Empire. But it was unaware of the Bulgarian plans over Thrace and Constantinople, territories on which it had long-held ambitions, and on which it had just secured a secret agreement of expansion from its allies France and Britain, as a reward for participating in the upcoming Great War against the Central Powers.

*France, not feeling ready for a war against Germany in 1912, took a totally negative position against the war, firmly informing its ally Russia that it would not take part in a potential conflict between Russia and Austria-Hungary if it resulted from the actions of the Balkan League. The French however failed to achieve British participation in a common intervention to stop the Balkan conflict.

*The British Empire, although officially a staunch supporter of the Ottoman Empire's integrity, took secret diplomatic steps encouraging Greek entry into the League in order to counteract Russian influence. At the same time it encouraged Bulgarian aspirations over Thrace, preferring a Bulgarian Thrace to a Russian one, despite the assurances the British had given to the Russians in regard to their expansion there.

*Austria-Hungary, struggling for a port on the Adriatic and seeking ways for expansion in the south at the expense of the Ottoman Empire, was totally opposed to any other nation's expansion in the area. At the same time, the Habsburg empire had its own internal problems with significant Slav populations that campaigned against German-Hungarian control of the multinational state. Serbia, whose aspirations in the direction of Austrian-held Bosnia were no secret, was considered an enemy and the main tool of Russian machinations that were behind the agitation of Austria's Slav subjects. But Austria-Hungary failed to secure German backup for a firm reaction. Initially, Emperor Wilhelm II told the Archduke Franz Ferdinand that Germany was ready to support Austria in all circumstanceseven at the risk of a world war, but the Austro-Hungarians hesitated. Finally, in the German Imperial War Council of 8 December 1912 the consensus was that Germany would not be ready for war until at least mid-1914 and passed notes to that effect to the Habsburgs. Consequently no actions could be taken when the Serbs acceded to the Austrian ultimatum of 18 October and withdrew from Albania.

*Germany, already heavily involved in internal Ottoman politics, officially opposed a war against the Empire. But in her effort to win Bulgaria for the Central Powers, and seeing the inevitability of Ottoman disintegration, was toying with the idea of replacing the Balkan area of the Ottomans with a friendly Greater Bulgaria in her San Stefano bordersan idea that was based on the German origin of the Bulgarian King and his anti-Russian sentiments.

The Second Balkan war was a catastrophic blow to Russian policies in the Balkans, where Russia had focused its interests for access to the "warm seas" for centuries. First, it marked the end of the Balkan League, a vital arm of the Russian system of defense against Austria-Hungary. Second, the clearly pro-Serbian position Russia had been forced to take in the conflict, mainly due to Bulgaria's uncompromising aggressiveness, caused a permanent break-up between the two countries. Accordingly, Bulgaria reverted its policy to one closer to the Central Powers' understanding over an anti-Serbian front, due to its new national aspirations, now expressed mainly against Serbia. As a result, Serbia was isolated militarily against its rival Austria-Hungary, a development that eventually doomed Serbia in the coming war a year later. But most damaging, the new situation effectively trapped Russian foreign policy: After 1913, Russia could not afford losing its last ally in this crucial area and thus had no alternatives but to unconditionally support Serbia when the crisis between Serbia and Austria broke out in 1914. This was a position that inevitably drew her, although unwillingly, into a World War with devastating results for her, since she was less prepared (both militarily and socially) for that event than any other Great Power.

Austria-Hungary took alarm at the great increase in Serbia's territory at the expense of its national aspirations in the region, as well as Serbia's rising status, especially to Austria-Hungary's Slavic populations. This concern was shared by Germany, which saw Serbia as a satellite of Russia. This contributed significantly to the two Central Powers' willingness to go to war as soon as possible.

Finally, when a Serbian backed organization assassinated the heir of the Austro-Hungarian throne, causing the 1914 July Crisis, nobody could stop the conflict and the First World War broke out.

==Aftermath==
Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated in Voini I Narodo-Nacelenie Europi (1960) that in the first and second Balkan wars there were 122,000 killed in action, 20,000 dead of wounds, and 82,000 dead of disease.

== See also ==
*International relations (18141919)

Since the area has been referred to as the Balkans, notable conflicts have included the following:
*The Ottoman wars in Europe
*The Serbo-Bulgarian War (1885)
*The Albanian Revolt of 1910
*The Albanian Revolt of 1912
*The Balkans Campaign (World War I)
*The Balkans Campaign (World War II)
*The Yugoslav wars (19911999)
*List of places burned during the Balkan Wars

== Trivia ==
* Members of Beikta J.K. fought in the war for the defense of the Ottoman Empire. The club's colors, which were originally red and white were changed to black and white following the heavy loss of the territories as a sign of mourning.

== Notes ==

== Further reading ==
* 
* Erickson, Edward J. Defeat in Detail, The Ottoman Army in the Balkans, 19121913. Praeger. (2003) ISBN 0275978885 Available as an e-book. ISBN 0313051798 
* Gerolymatos, Andr. The Balkan wars: conquest, revolution, and retribution from the Ottoman era to the twentieth century and beyond. Basic Books (2002) ISBN 0465027326 
* Hall, Richard C. The Balkan Wars, 1912-1913: Prelude to the First World War. Routledge. (2000) online ISBN 0415229472 
* Helmreich, Ernst C. The diplomacy of the Balkan wars, 1912-1913. Harvard University Press.(1938) Reprinted in 1969 by Russell. 
* Macmillan, Margaret. The War That Ended Peace: The Road to 1914 (2013) ch 16 excerpt and text search

== External links ==

*U.S. State Department. "The Formation of the Balkan Alliance of 1912" (1918)
*Project Gutenberg's The Balkan Wars: 19121913, by Jacob Gould Schurman
*US Library of Congress in the Balkan Wars
*The Balkan crises, 19031914
*Balkans
*Military uniforms and insignia of the Balkan Wars
*Balkan Wars: An Overview
*Facts and historical notes about Macedonia and Bulgaria, contemporary historians obejectivism issues, etc.
*Balkan Wars from a Turkish perspective
*Wikisource: The New Student's Reference Work/The Balkans and the Peace of Europe
*Historic films about the Balkan Wars at europeanfilmgateway.eu

 



[[Buffalo]]

Buffalo (or buffaloe) may refer to:

==Animals==
* African buffalo or Cape Buffalo (Syncerus caffer)
* Bison
** American bison (Bison bison), also commonly known as the American buffalo
** European bison (Bison bonasus)
* Bubalus, a genus of bovines including various water buffalo species
* Water buffalo
* Italian buffalo or Italian Mediterranean buffalo

==Places==

===Australia===
* Buffalo, Victoria

===Canada===
* Buffalo, Alberta, a ghost town
* Buffalo National Park, Alberta
* Buffalo No. 409, Saskatchewan, a rural municipality
* Calgary-Buffalo, Alberta, a provincial electoral district
* Province of Buffalo, a proposed Canadian province

===South Africa===
* Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality, Eastern Cape Province

===United States===
* Buffalo, New York
* Buffalo, Illinois
* Buffalo, Indiana
* Buffalo, Iowa
* Buffalo, Kansas
* Buffalo, Kentucky
* Buffalo, Minnesota
* Buffalo, Missouri
* Buffalo, Montana
* Buffalo, North Dakota
* Buffalo, Ohio
* Buffalo, Oklahoma
* Buffalo, South Carolina
* Buffalo, South Dakota
* Buffalo, Tennessee (disambiguation)
* Buffalo, Texas
* Buffalo, West Virginia
* Buffalo, Jackson County, West Virginia
* Buffalo, Buffalo County, Wisconsin
* Buffalo, Marquette County, Wisconsin
* Buffalo, Wyoming
* Buffalo City (disambiguation)
* Buffalo County (disambiguation)
* Buffalo Township (disambiguation)

==Schools==
* Buffalo State College, a public university in Buffalo, New York
* University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, a public research university with campuses in Buffalo and Amherst, New York

==Music==
* Buffalo (band), an Australian hard rock group
** Buffalo (EP), by Buffalo
* Buffalo (Frank Zappa album)
* Buffalo (The Phoenix Foundation album)

==Sport==
* Basingstoke Buffalo, an English ice hockey team
* Calgary Buffaloes, a 1966-67 Western Canada Junior Hockey League team
* Calgary Buffaloes (AJHL), a 1963-1966 Alberta Junior Hockey League team
* Colorado Buffaloes, the athletic teams of the University of Colorado Boulder
* Darwin Buffaloes, an Australian rules football team
* Green Buffaloes F.C., a Zambian football team
* Manitoba Buffalo, a Canadian rugby union team
* Orix Buffaloes, a 2004present Japanese baseball team
* Osaka Kintetsu Buffaloes, a 1950-2004 Japanese baseball team
* Vlodrome Buffalo and Stade Buffalo, cycling tracks in Paris
* Vientiane Buffalos RUFC, a Laotian rugby union team
* South Africa national Australian rules football team, nicknamed the Buffaloes

==Coins==
* American Buffalo (coin), a 24-karat bullion coin introduced 2006
* Buffalo nickel, a copper-nickel coin minted 1913-1938

==Computing technology==
* Buffalo Inc., a Japanese technology company
* Buffalo AirStation, a line of wireless LAN equipment
* Buffalo network-attached storage series
* BUFFALO, the bootloader for the Freescale 68HC11 microcontroller family

==Transport==

===Air===
* Buffalo Airways, an airline
* Avro 571 Buffalo, a 1920s prototype British biplane
* Brewster F2A Buffalo, a 1930s-1940s American fighter aircraft
* de Havilland Canada DHC-5 Buffalo, a 1965-1972 Canadian turboprop aircraft

===Land===
* Buffalo (mine protected vehicle)
* Buffalo (1901 automobile), a 1900-1902 American car
* Buffalo Electric Vehicle Company, a 1912-1915 American car company
* GM Buffalo bus
* South Devon Railway Buffalo class, a class of locomotives

===Sea and amphibious===
* , any of several Royal Navy ships
* , any of several U.S. Navy ships
* Landing Vehicle Tracked, a WWII-era amphibious vehicle

==People==
* Chief Buffalo (disambiguation)
* Norton Buffalo (19512009), American singer-songwriter and musician
* Ted Buffalo (18851969), Native American football player
* John Buffalo Mailer (born 1978), American writer and actor
* Black Buffalo (wrestler) (born 1974), Japanese professional wrestler

==Other uses==
* Buffalo (footwear), a clothing brand
* Buffalo (game), a drinking game
* Royal Antediluvian Order of Buffaloes, a fraternal organisation
* The act of pistol-whipping someone with the barrel or a side of a gun

==See also==
* American buffalo (disambiguation)
* Buffalo Exchange
* Buffalo Soldier (disambiguation)
* Buffalo Trace (disambiguation)
* New Buffalo (disambiguation)
* Operation Buffalo (disambiguation)
* White Buffalo (disambiguation)
* Wood buffalo (disambiguation)
* Buffalo buffalo Buffalo buffalo buffalo buffalo Buffalo buffalo
* Bfalo
* World's Largest Buffalo, a sculpture in North Dakota
* 
* 



[[BeBox]]

The BeBox was a short-lived dual processor personal computer, offered by Be Inc. to run the company's own operating system, BeOS. Notable aspects of the system include its CPU configuration, I/O board with "GeekPort", and "Blinkenlights" on the front bezel.

The BeBox made its debut in October 1995 (BeBox Dual603-66). The processors were upgraded to 133 MHz in August 1996 (BeBox Dual603e-133). Production was halted in January 1997, BeBox History The BeBox Zone following the port of BeOS to the Macintosh, in order for the company to concentrate on software. Be sold around 1000 66 MHz BeBoxes and 800 133 MHz BeBoxes. Be, Inc. 

== CPU configuration ==

Initial prototypes were equipped with two AT&T Hobbit processors and three AT&T 9308S DSPs.

Production models used two PowerPC 603 processors running at 66 or 133 MHz to power the BeBox. Prototypes having dual 200 MHz CPUs or four CPUs exist, but these were never publicly available. Interview with Joseph Palmer 

== I/O board ==
connectors of the I/O board
* Four serial ports (9-pin D-shell)
* One mouse port, PS/2-type
* Two joystick ports (15-pin D-shell)
* Two MIDI out ports
* Two MIDI in ports
* Three infrared (IR) I/O ports (6-pin mini DIN)
* One internal CD audio line-level input (5-pin strip)
* One internal microphone audio input (4-pin strip)
* One internal headphone audio output (4-pin strip)
* Two line-level RCA inputs (L/R)
* Two line-level outputs (L/R)
* One microphone input 3.5 mm stereo phono jack
* One headphone output 3.5 mm stereo phono jack
* A 16-bit stereo sound system @ 48 and 44.1 kHz
* One "GeekPort" (37-pin D-shell)
** An experimental-electronic-development oriented port, backed by three fuses on the mainboard.
** Digital and analog I/O and DC power connector, 37-pin connector on the ISA bus.
** Two independent, bidirectional 8-bit ports
** Four A/D pins routing to a 12-bit A/D converter
** Four D/A pins connected to an independent 8-bit D/A converter
** Two signal ground reference pins
** Eleven power and ground pins:
*** Two at +5 V, one at +12 V, one at -12 V, seven ground pins.

== "Blinkenlights" ==

Two yellow/green vertical LED arrays, dubbed the "blinkenlights", were built into the front bezel to illustrate the CPU load. The bottommost LED on the right side indicated hard disk activity.

== References ==

 

== External links ==
* The BeBox Zone
* BeBox Photo Gallery (Joseph Palmer: Be HW Engineer)
* Pinout for the GeekPort connector
* (BeBox)



[[Biomedical engineering]]

Ultrasound representation of Urinary bladder (black butterfly-like shape) a hyperplastic prostate. An example of engineering science and medical science working together.
Example of an approximately 40,000 probe spotted oligo microarray with enlarged inset to show detail.
Biomedical engineering (BME) is the application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology for healthcare purposes (e.g. diagnostic or therapeutic). This field seeks to close the gap between engineering and medicine: It combines the design and problem solving skills of engineering with medical and biological sciences to advance healthcare treatment, including diagnosis, monitoring, and therapy. Biomedical engineer prospects 

Biomedical engineering has only recently emerged as its own study, compared to many other engineering fields. Such an evolution is common as a new field transitions from being an interdisciplinary specialization among already-established fields, to being considered a field in itself. Much of the work in biomedical engineering consists of research and development, spanning a broad array of subfields (see below). Prominent biomedical engineering applications include the development of biocompatible prostheses, various diagnostic and therapeutic medical devices ranging from clinical equipment to micro-implants, common imaging equipment such as MRIs and EEGs, regenerative tissue growth, pharmaceutical drugs and therapeutic biologicals.

==Classification==
Subdisciplines of biomedical engineering can be viewed from two angles, from the medical applications side and from the engineering side. A biomedical engineer must have some view of both sides. As with many medical specialties (e.g. cardiology, neurology), some BME sub-disciplines are identified by their associations with particular systems of the human body, such as:

*Cardiovascular technology - which includes all drugs, biologics, and devices related with diagnostics and therapeutics of cardiovascular systems
*Neural technology - which includes all drugs, biologics, and devices related with diagnostics and therapeutics of the brain and nervous systems
*Orthopaedic technology - which includes all drugs, biologics, and devices related with diagnostics and therapeutics of skeletal systems

Those examples focus on particular aspects of anatomy or physiology. A variant on this approach is to identify types of technologies based on a kind of pathophysiology sought to remedy apart from any particular system of the body, for example:

*Cancer technology - which includes all drugs, biologics, and devices related with diagnostics and therapeutics of cancer

But more often, sub-disciplines within BME are classified by their association(s) with other more established engineering fields, which can include (at a broad level):

*Biochemical-BME, based on Chemical engineering - often associated with biochemical, cellular, molecular and tissue engineering, biomaterials, and biotransport.
*Bioelectrical-BME, based on Electrical engineering and Computer Science - often associated with bioelectrical and neural engineering, bioinstrumentation, biomedical imaging, and medical devices. This also tends to encompass optics and optical engineering - biomedical optics, bioinformatics, imaging and related medical devices.
*Biomechanical-BME, based on Mechanical engineering - often associated with biomechanics, biotransport, medical devices, and modeling of biological systems, like soft tissue mechanics.

One more way to sub-classify the discipline is on the basis of the products created. The therapeutic and diagnostic products used in healthcare generally fall under the following categories:

*Biologics and Biopharmaceuticals, often designed using the principles of synthetic biology (synthetic biology is an extension of genetic engineering). The design of biologic and biopharma products comes broadly under the BME-related (and overlapping) disciplines of biotechnology and bioengineering. Note that "biotechnology" can be a somewhat ambiguous term, sometimes loosely used interchangeably with BME in general; however, it more typically denotes specific products which use "biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof." Even some complex "medical devices" (see below) can reasonably be deemed "biotechnology" depending on the degree to which such elements are central to their principle of operation.
*Pharmaceutical Drugs (so-called "small-molecule" or non-biologic), which are commonly designed using the principles of synthetic chemistry and traditionally discovered using high-throughput screening methods at the beginning of the development process. Pharmaceuticals are related to biotechnology in two indirect ways: 1) certain major types (e.g. biologics) fall under both categories, and 2) together they essentially comprise the "non-medical-device" set of BME applications. (The "Device - Bio/Chemical" spectrum is an imperfect dichotomy, but one regulators often use, at least as a starting point.)
*Devices, which commonly employ mechanical and/or electrical aspects in conjunction with chemical and/or biological processing or analysis. They can range from microscopic or bench-top, and be either in vitro or in vivo. In the US, the FDA deems any medical product that is not a drug or a biologic to be a "device" by default (see "Regulation" section). Software with a medical purpose is also regarded as a device, whether stand-alone or as part of another device.
*Combination Products (not to be confused with fixed-dose combination drug products or FDCs), which involve more than one of the above categories in an integrated product (for example, a microchip implant for targeted drug delivery).

==Tissue engineering==

Tissue engineering, like genetic engineering (see below), is a major segment of Biotechnology - which overlaps significantly with BME.

One of the goals of tissue engineering is to create artificial organs (via biological material) for patients that need organ transplants. Biomedical engineers are currently researching methods of creating such organs. Researchers have grown solid jawbones and tracheas from human stem cells towards this end. Several artificial urinary bladders have been grown in laboratories and transplanted successfully into human patients. Bioartificial organs, which use both synthetic and biological components, are also a focus area in research, such as with hepatic assist devices that use liver cells within an artificial bioreactor construct. Trial begins for first artificial liver device using human cells, University of Chicago, February 25, 1999 

Micromass cultures of C3H-10T1/2 cells at varied oxygen tensions stained with Alcian blue.

==Genetic engineering==

Genetic engineering, recombinant DNA technology, genetic modification/manipulation (GM) and gene splicing are terms that apply to the direct manipulation of an organism's genes. Unlike traditional breeding, an indirect method of genetic manipulation, genetic engineering utilizes modern tools such as molecular cloning and transformation to directly alter the structure and characteristics of target genes. Genetic engineering techniques have found success in numerous applications. Some examples include the improvement of crop technology (not a medical application, but see Biological Systems Engineering), the manufacture of synthetic human insulin through the use of modified bacteria, the manufacture of erythropoietin in hamster ovary cells, and the production of new types of experimental mice such as the oncomouse (cancer mouse) for research.

==Neural engineering==

Neural engineering (also known as Neuroengineering) is a discipline that uses engineering techniques to understand, repair, replace, or enhance neural systems. Neural engineers are uniquely qualified to solve design problems at the interface of living neural tissue and non-living constructs.

==Pharmaceutical engineering==

Pharmaceutical engineering is an interdisciplinary science that includes drug engineering, novel drug delivery and targeting, pharmaceutical technology, unit operations of Chemical Engineering, and Pharmaceutical Analysis. It may be deemed as a part of Pharmacy due to its focus on the use of technology on chemical agents in providing better medicinal treatment. The ISPE is an international body that certifies this now rapidly emerging interdisciplinary science.

==Medical devices==

This is an extremely broad categoryessentially covering all health care products that do not achieve their intended results through predominantly chemical (e.g., pharmaceuticals) or biological (e.g., vaccines) means, and do not involve metabolism.

A medical device is intended for use in:
* the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or
* in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease,

Two different models of the C-Leg prosthesis
Some examples include pacemakers, infusion pumps, the heart-lung machine, dialysis machines, artificial organs, implants, artificial limbs, corrective lenses, cochlear implants, ocular prosthetics, facial prosthetics, somato prosthetics, and dental implants.
Biomedical instrumentation amplifier schematic used in monitoring low voltage biological signals, an example of a biomedical engineering application of electronic engineering to electrophysiology.

Stereolithography is a practical example of medical modeling being used to create physical objects. Beyond modeling organs and the human body, emerging engineering techniques are also currently used in the research and development of new devices for innovative therapies, treatments, patient monitoring, and early diagnosis of complex diseases.

Medical devices are regulated and classified (in the US) as follows (see also Regulation):

#Class I devices present minimal potential for harm to the user and are often simpler in design than Class II or Class III devices. Devices in this category include tongue depressors, bedpans, elastic bandages, examination gloves, and hand-held surgical instruments and other similar types of common equipment.
#Class II devices are subject to special controls in addition to the general controls of Class I devices. Special controls may include special labeling requirements, mandatory performance standards, and postmarket surveillance. Devices in this class are typically non-invasive and include x-ray machines, PACS, powered wheelchairs, infusion pumps, and surgical drapes.
#Class III devices generally require premarket approval (PMA) or premarket notification (510k), a scientific review to ensure the device's safety and effectiveness, in addition to the general controls of Class I. Examples include replacement heart valves, hip and knee joint implants, silicone gel-filled breast implants, implanted cerebellar stimulators, implantable pacemaker pulse generators and endosseous (intra-bone) implants.

===Medical imaging===

Medical/biomedical imaging is a major segment of medical devices. This area deals with enabling clinicians to directly or indirectly "view" things not visible in plain sight (such as due to their size, and/or location). This can involve utilizing ultrasound, magnetism, UV, other radiology, and other means.

Click here to view an animated sequence of slices.]]Imaging technologies are often essential to medical diagnosis, and are typically the most complex equipment found in a hospital including:
*Fluoroscopy
*Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
*Nuclear medicine
*Positron emission tomography (PET) PET scansPET-CT scans
*Projection radiography such as X-rays and CT scans
*Tomography
*Ultrasound
*Optical microscopy
*Electron microscopy

===Implants===

An implant is a kind of medical device made to replace and act as a missing biological structure (as compared with a transplant, which indicates transplanted biomedical tissue). The surface of implants that contact the body might be made of a biomedical material such as titanium, silicone or apatite depending on what is the most functional. In some cases implants contain electronics e.g. artificial pacemaker and cochlear implants. Some implants are bioactive, such as subcutaneous drug delivery devices in the form of implantable pills or drug-eluting stents.

Artificial limbs: The right arm is an example of a prosthesis, and the left arm is an example of myoelectric control.
A prosthetic eye, an example of a biomedical engineering application of mechanical engineering and biocompatible materials to ophthalmology.

===Bionics===

Artificial body part replacement is just one of the things that bionics can do. Concerned with the intricate and thorough study of the properties and function of human body systems, bionics may be applied to solve some engineering problems. Careful study of the different function and processes of the eyes, ears, and other the way for improved cameras, television, radio transmitters and receivers, and many other useful tools. These developments have indeed made our lives better, but the best contribution that bionics has made is in the field of biomedical engineering.
Biomedical Engineering is the building of useful replacements for various parts of the human body. Modern hospitals now have available spare parts to replace a part of the body that is badly damaged by injury or disease. Biomedical engineers who work hand in hand with doctors build these artificial body parts.

==Clinical engineering==

Clinical engineering is the branch of biomedical engineering dealing with the actual implementation of medical equipment and technologies in hospitals or other clinical settings. Major roles of clinical engineers include training and supervising biomedical equipment technicians (BMETs), selecting technological products/services and logistically managing their implementation, working with governmental regulators on inspections/audits, and serving as technological consultants for other hospital staff (e.g. physicians, administrators, I.T., etc.). Clinical engineers also advise and collaborate with medical device producers regarding prospective design improvements based on clinical experiences, as well as monitor the progression of the state of the art so as to redirect procurement patterns accordingly.

Their inherent focus on practical implementation of technology has tended to keep them oriented more towards incremental-level redesigns and reconfigurations, as opposed to revolutionary research & development or ideas that would be many years from clinical adoption; however, there is a growing effort to expand this time-horizon over which clinical engineers can influence the trajectory of biomedical innovation. In their various roles, they form a "bridge" between the primary designers and the end-users, by combining the perspectives of being both 1) close to the point-of-use, while 2) trained in product and process engineering. Clinical Engineering departments will sometimes hire not just biomedical engineers, but also industrial/systems engineers to help address operations research/optimization, human factors, cost analysis, etc. Also see safety engineering for a discussion of the procedures used to design safe systems.

Schematic representation of a normal ECG trace showing sinus rhythm; an example of widely used clinical medical equipment (operates by applying electronic engineering to electrophysiology and medical diagnosis).

==Regulatory issues==

Regulatory issues have been constantly increased in the last decades to respond to the many incidents caused by devices to patients. For example, from 2008 to 2011, in US, there were 119 FDA recalls of medical devices classified as class I. According to U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Class I recall is associated to a situation in which there is a reasonable probability that the use of, or exposure to, a product will cause serious adverse health consequences or death U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Medical & Radiation Emitting Device Recalls http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfres/res.cfm 

Regardless the country-specific legislation, the main regulatory objectives coincide worldwide. World Health Organization (WHO), 2003 Medical Device Regulations Global overview and guiding principles. http://www.who.int/medical_devices/publications/en/MD_Regulations.pdf (last visit Sept 2013) For example, in the medical device regulations, a product must be:

1)Safe

 and

2) Effective

3) For all the manufactured devices

A product is safe if patients, users and third parties do not run unacceptable risks of physical hazards (death, injuries, ) in its intended use. Protective measures have to be introduced on the devices to reduce residual risks at acceptable level if compared with the benefit derived from the use of it.

A product is effective if it performs as specified by the manufacturer in the intended use. Effectiveness isachieved through clinical evaluation, compliance to performance standards or demonstrations of substantial equivalence with an already marketed device.

The previous features have to be ensured for all the manufactured itemsof the medical device. This requires that a quality system shall be in place for all the relevant entities and processes that may impacts safety and effectiveness over the whole medical device lifecyle.

The medical device engineering area is among the most heavily regulated fields of engineering, and practicing biomedical engineers must routinely consult and cooperate with regulatory law attorneys and other experts. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is the principal healthcare regulatory authority in the United States, having jurisdiction over medical devices, drugs, biologics, and combination products. The paramount objectives driving policy decisions by the FDA are safety and effectiveness of healthcare products that have to be assured through a quality system in place as specified under 21 CFR 829 regulation. In addition, because biomedical engineers often develop devices and technologies for "consumer" use, such as physical therapy devices (which are also "medical" devices), these may also be governed in some respects by the Consumer Product Safety Commission. The greatest hurdles tend to be 510K "clearance" (typically for Class 2 devices) or pre-market "approval" (typically for drugs and class 3 devices).

In the European context, safety effectiveness and quality is ensured through the "Conformity Assessment" that is defined as "the method by which a manufacturer demonstrates that its device complies with the requirements of the European Medical Device Directive". The directive specifies different procedures according to the class of the device ranging from the simple Declaration of Conformity (Annex VII) for Class I devices to EC verification (Annex IV), Production quality assurance (Annex V), Product quality assurance (Annex VI) and Full quality assurance (Annex II). The Medical Device Directive specifies detailed procedures for Certification. In general terms, these procedures include tests and verifications that are to be contained in specific deliveries such as the risk management file, the technical file and the quality system deliveries. The risk management file is the first deliverable that conditions the following design and manufacturing steps. Risk management stage shall drive the product so that product risks are reduced at an acceptable level with respect to the benefits expected for the patients for the use of the device. The technical file contains all the documentation data and records supporting medical device certification. FDA technical file has similar content although organized in different structure. The Quality System deliverables usually includes procedures that ensure quality throughout all product life cycle. The same standard (ISO EN 13485) is usually applied for quality management systems in US and worldwide.

Implants, such as artificial hip joints, are generally extensively regulated due to the invasive nature of such devices.

In European Union, there are certifying entities named "Notified Bodies", accredited by European Member States. The Notified Bodies must ensure the effectiveness of the certification process for all medical devices apart from the class I devices where a declaration of conformity produced by the manufacturer is sufficient for marketing. Once a product has passed all the steps required by the Medical Device Directive, the device is entitled to bear a CE marking, indicating that the device is believed to be safe and effective when used as intended, and, therefore, it can be marketed within the European Union area.

The different regulatory arrangements sometimes result in particular technologies being developed first for either the U.S. or in Europe depending on the more favorable form of regulation. While nations often strive for substantive harmony to facilitate cross-national distribution, philosophical differences about the optimal extent of regulation can be a hindrance; more restrictive regulations seem appealing on an intuitive level, but critics decry the tradeoff cost in terms of slowing access to life-saving developments.

===RoHS II===
Directive 2011/65/EU, better known as RoHS 2 is a recast of legislation originally introduced in 2002. The original EU legislation Restrictions of Certain Hazardous Substances in Electrical and Electronics Devices (RoHS Directive 2002/95/EC) was replaced and superseded by 2011/65/EU published in July 2011 and commonly known as RoHS 2.
RoHS seeks to limit the dangerous substances in circulation in electronics products, in particular toxins and heavy metals, which are subsequently released into the environment when such devices are recycled.

The scope of RoHS 2 is widened to include products previously excluded, such as medical devices and industrial equipment. In addition, manufacturers are now obliged to provide conformity risk assessments and test reports  or explain why they are lacking. For the first time, not only manufacturers, but also importers and distributors share a responsibility to ensure Electrical and Electronic Equipment within the scope of RoHS comply with the hazardous substances limits and have a CE mark on their products.

The Directive has to be transposed by the Member States by January 2, 2013. SGS, SafeGuardS Bulletin, Retrieved 08/20/2012 

===IEC 60601===

The new International Standard IEC 60601 for home healthcare electro-medical devices defining the requirements for devices used in the home healthcare environment. IEC 60601-1-11 (2010) must now be incorporated into the design and verification of a wide range of home use and point of care medical devices along with other applicable standards in the IEC 60601 3rd edition series.

The mandatory date for implementation of the EN European version of the standard is June 1, 2013. The US FDA requires the use of the standard on June 30, 2013, while Health Canada recently extended the required date from June 2012 to April 2013. The North American agencies will only require these standards for new device submissions, while the EU will take the more severe approach of requiring all applicable devices being placed on the market to consider the home healthcare standard.

==Training and certification==

===Education===

Biomedical engineers require considerable knowledge of both engineering and biology, and typically have a Master's (M.S.,M.Tech, M.S.E., or M.Eng.) or a Doctoral (Ph.D.) degree in BME (Biomedical Engineering) or another branch of engineering with considerable potential for BME overlap. As interest in BME increases, many engineering colleges now have a Biomedical Engineering Department or Program, with offerings ranging from the undergraduate (B.Tech,B.S., B.Eng or B.S.E.) to doctoral levels. As noted above, biomedical engineering has only recently been emerging as its own discipline rather than a cross-disciplinary hybrid specialization of other disciplines; and BME programs at all levels are becoming more widespread, including the Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering which actually includes so much biological science content that many students use it as a "pre-med" major in preparation for medical school. The number of biomedical engineers is expected to rise as both a cause and effect of improvements in medical technology. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics - Profile for Engineers 

In the U.S., an increasing number of undergraduate programs are also becoming recognized by ABET as accredited bioengineering/biomedical engineering programs. Over 65 programs are currently accredited by ABET. ABET List of Accredited Engineering Programs 

In Canada and Australia, accredited graduate programs in Biomedical Engineering are common, for example in Universities such as McMaster University, and the first Canadian undergraduate BME program at Ryerson University offering a four-year B.Eng program. The Polytechnique in Montreal is also offering a bachelors's degree in biomedical engineering.

As with many degrees, the reputation and ranking of a program may factor into the desirability of a degree holder for either employment or graduate admission. The reputation of many undergraduate degrees are also linked to the institution's graduate or research programs, which have some tangible factors for rating, such as research funding and volume, publications and citations. With BME specifically, the ranking of a university's hospital and medical school can also be a significant factor in the perceived prestige of its BME department/program.

Graduate education is a particularly important aspect in BME. While many engineering fields (such as mechanical or electrical engineering) do not need graduate-level training to obtain an entry-level job in their field, the majority of BME positions do prefer or even require them. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics - Job Outlook for Engineers Since most BME-related professions involve scientific research, such as in pharmaceutical and medical device development, graduate education is almost a requirement (as undergraduate degrees typically do not involve sufficient research training and experience). This can be either a Masters or Doctoral level degree; while in certain specialties a Ph.D. is notably more common than in others, it is hardly ever the majority (except in academia). In fact, the perceived need for some kind of graduate credential is so strong that some undergraduate BME programs will actively discourage students from majoring in BME without an expressed intention to also obtain a masters degree or apply to medical school afterwards.

Graduate programs in BME, like in other scientific fields, are highly varied, and particular programs may emphasize certain aspects within the field. They may also feature extensive collaborative efforts with programs in other fields (such as the University's Medical School or other engineering divisions), owing again to the interdisciplinary nature of BME. M.S. and Ph.D. programs will typically require applicants to have an undergraduate degree in BME, or another engineering discipline (plus certain life science coursework), or life science (plus certain engineering coursework).

Education in BME also varies greatly around the world. By virtue of its extensive biotechnology sector, its numerous major universities, and relatively few internal barriers, the U.S. has progressed a great deal in its development of BME education and training opportunities. Europe, which also has a large biotechnology sector and an impressive education system, has encountered trouble in creating uniform standards as the European community attempts to supplant some of the national jurisdictional barriers that still exist. Recently, initiatives such as BIOMEDEA have sprung up to develop BME-related education and professional standards. BIOMEDEA Other countries, such as Australia, are recognizing and moving to correct deficiencies in their BME education. Biomedical Engineering Curriculum: A Comparison Between the USA, Europe and Australia Also, as high technology endeavors are usually marks of developed nations, some areas of the world are prone to slower development in education, including in BME.

===Licensure/certification===

Engineering licensure in the US is largely optional, and rarely specified by branch/discipline. As with other learned professions, each state has certain (fairly similar) requirements for becoming licensed as a registered Professional Engineer (PE), but in practice such a license is not required to practice in the majority of situations (due to an exception known as the private industry exemption, which effectively applies to the vast majority of American engineers). This is notably not the case in many other countries, where a license is as legally necessary to practice engineering as it is for law or medicine.

Biomedical engineering is regulated in some countries, such as Australia, but registration is typically only recommended and not required. National Engineering Registration Board - Areas Of Practice - NPER Areas 

In the UK, mechanical engineers working in the areas of Medical Engineering, Bioengineering or Biomedical engineering can gain Chartered Engineer status through the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. The Institution also runs the Engineering in Medicine and Health Division. [http://www.imeche.org/industries/medical/ ] 

The Fundamentals of Engineering exam - the first (and more general) of two licensure examinations for most U.S. jurisdictionsdoes now cover biology (although technically not BME). For the second exam, called the Principles and Practices, Part 2, or the Professional Engineering exam, candidates may select a particular engineering discipline's content to be tested on; there is currently not an option for BME with this, meaning that any biomedical engineers seeking a license must prepare to take this examination in another category (which does not affect the actual license, since most jurisdictions do not recognize discipline specialties anyway). However, the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) is, as of 2009, exploring the possibility of seeking to implement a BME-specific version of this exam to facilitate biomedical engineers pursuing licensure.

Beyond governmental registration, certain private-sector professional/industrial organizations also offer certifications with varying degrees of prominence. One such example is the Certified Clinical Engineer (CCE) certification for Clinical engineers.

==Career Prospects==
Biomedical Engineers are expected to have excellent job prospects and earning potential in the near future, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. A 2006 report stated:

===Employment===
In 2008, biomedical engineers held about 16,000 jobs. Thirty-six percent of all biomedical engineers are employed by manufacturing industries, most often in the pharmaceutical and medicine manufacturing and medical instruments and supplies industries. Some biomedical engineers work for hospitals and government agencies, or as independent consultants. 

===Job Outlook===
The job outlook for biomedical engineers is expected to grow much faster than average through 2018. Because the population is aging, the demand for better medical devices and equipment designed by biomedical engineers is rising. Along with the demand for more sophisticated medical equipment and procedures is an increased concern for cost efficiency and effectiveness that also will boost demand for biomedical engineers. 

===Earnings===
The middle annual salary for biomedical engineers were $77,400 in 2008. The middle fifty percent earned between $59,420 and $98,830. The lowest ten percent earned less than $47,650 and the highest ten percent earned more than $121,970.

==Important Advances==
Biomedical Engineers have developed many important techniques and equipment such as: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010-11 Edition, Biomedical Engineers, on the Internet at http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos027.htm. 
* Hip joint replacement,
* Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
* Heart pacemakers,
* Arthroscopic instrumentation for diagnostic and surgical purposes,
* Heart-lung machines,
* Angioplasty,
* Bioengineered skin,
* Time-release drug delivery,
* Artificial articulated joints and
* Kidney dialysis.

==Founding figures==
* Forrest Bird - aviator and pioneer in the invention of mechanical ventilators
* Kenneth R. Diller - Chaired and Endowed Professor in Engineering, University of Texas at Austin. Founded the BME department at UT Austin. Pioneer in bioheat transfer, mass transfer, and biotransport
* Y. C. Fung - professor emeritus at the University of California, San Diego, considered by many to be the founder of modern Biomechanics YC Bert Fung: The Father of Modern Biomechanics (pdf) 
* Leslie Geddes (deceased)- Professor Emeritus at Purdue University, electrical engineer, inventor, and educator of over 2000 biomedical engineers, received a National Medal of Technology in 2006 from President George Bush for his more than 50 years of contributions that have spawned innovations ranging from burn treatments to miniature defibrillators, ligament repair to tiny blood pressure monitors for premature infants, as well as a new method for performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
* Willem Johan Kolff (deceased) - pioneer of hemodialysis as well as in the field of artificial organs
* Robert Langer - Institute Professor at MIT, runs the largest BME laboratory in the world, pioneer in drug delivery and tissue engineering Colleagues honor Langer for 30 years of innovation, MIT News Office 
* Herbert Lissner (deceased) - Professor of Engineering Mechanics at Wayne State University. Initiated studies on blunt head trauma and injury thresholds beginning in 1939 in collaboration with Dr. E.S. Gurdjian, a neurosurgeon at Wayne State's School of Medicine. Individual for whom the American Society of Mechanical Engineers' top award in Biomedical Engineering, the Herbert R. Lissner Medal, is named.
* John James Rickard Macleod(deceased) - one of the co-discoverers of insulin at Case Western Reserve University.
* Alfred E. Mann - Physicist, entrepreneur and philanthropist. A pioneer in the field of Biomedical Engineering. 
*Nicholas A. Peppas - Chaired Professor in Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, pioneer in drug delivery, biomaterials, hydrogels and nanobiotechnology.
* Robert Plonsey - Professor Emeritus at Duke University, pioneer of electrophysiology 
* Otto Schmitt (deceased) - biophysicist with significant contributions to BME, working with biomimetics
* Ascher Shapiro (deceased) - Institute Professor at MIT, contributed to the development of the BME field, medical devices (e.g. intra-aortic balloons)
* Frederick Thurstone (deceased) - Professor Emeritus at Duke University, pioneer of diagnostic ultrasound 
* John G. Webster - Professor Emeritus at the University of WisconsinMadison, a pioneer in the field of instrumentation amplifiers for the recording of electrophysiological signals
* U. A. Whitaker (deceased) - provider of The Whitaker Foundation, which supported research and education in BME by providing over $700 million to various universities, helping to create 30 BME programs and helping finance the construction of 13 buildings 

== See also ==
* Biomedicine
* Cardiophysics
* Medical biophysics
* Physiome

== References ==

==Further reading==
*
*
*Medical engineering stories in the news 

==External links==

* Bioengineering Society
*

*


[[Balkans]]

The Balkan Peninsula, popularly referred to as the Balkans, is a geographical region of Southeast Europe. The region takes its name from the Balkan Mountains that stretch from the east of Bulgaria to the very east of Serbia.

The region is predominantly inhabited by Bulgarians, Croats, Bosniaks, Gorani, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Serbs, Slovenes, Romanians, Aromanians, Greeks, Albanians, Turks and other ethnic groups which present minorities in certain countries like the Romani and Ashkali. Encyclopdia Britannica, Balkans The largest religion on the Balkans is Orthodox Christianity, followed by Catholic Christianity and Islam. 

The total area of the Balkans is 257,400 square miles (666,700 square km) and the population is 59,297,000 (est. 2002). The Balkans meet the Adriatic Sea on the northwest, Ionian Sea on the southwest, the Mediterranean and Aegean Sea on the south and southeast, and the Black Sea on the east and northeast. The highest point of the Balkans is mount Musala 2925 m on the Rila mountain range in Bulgaria.

The Balkans have been inhabited since the Paleolithic and are the route by which farming from the Middle East spread to Europe during the Neolithic (7th millennium BC). The Balkans are also the location of Europe's first advanced civilizations, beginning with the Bronze Age in Greece around 3200 BC. http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/cultures/europe/ancient_greece.aspx 

== Name ==

=== Etymology ===
The Balkan Mountains The region takes its name from the Balkan Mountains in Bulgaria and Serbia. It is believed the name was brought to the region in the 7th century by the Bulgars who applied it to the area, as a part of the First Bulgarian Empire. In Bulgarian language the word balkan () means "mountain". It may have derived from the Persian blkneh or blkhna, meaning "high, above, or proud house." The name is still preserved in Central Asia with the Balkan Daglary (Balkan Mountains) and the Balkan Province of Turkmenistan. In Turkish means "a chain of wooded mountains" 

In classical antiquity (and until the Ottoman conquest), the region was referred to in Greek and Roman sources as the "Peninsula of Haemus". The mountain range itself was known as the "Haemus Mountains", the name being of possibly Thracian etymology. 

On a larger scale, the mountains are only one part of a long continuous chain crossing the region in the form of a reversed letter S, from the Carpathians south to the Balkan range proper, before marching away east into Anatolian Turkey. The Balkan Mountains include the Stara Planina (Old Mountain) mountain range in Bulgaria and part of Serbia. On the west coast, an offshoot of the Dinaric Alps follows the coast south through Dalmatia and Albania, crosses Greece, and continues into the sea in the form of islands.

In the languages of the region, the peninsula is known as:
* Slavic languages:
** , transliterated: 
** 
** 
** , transliterated: 
** 
** 
* Latin languages:
** 
** 
** 
* and 
* , transliterated: 
* (or alternatively: Balkanlar)

The Balkans are also referred to as Southeast Europe.

=== Evolution of meaning ===
The first attested time the name "Balkan" was used in the West for the mountain range in Bulgaria was in a letter sent in 1490 to Pope Innocent VIII by Buonaccorsi Callimaco, an Italian humanist, writer and diplomat. English traveler John Morritt introduced this term into the English literature at the end of the 18th century, and other authors started applying the name to the wider area between the Adriatic and the Black Sea. The concept of the "Balkans" was created by the German geographer August Zeune in 1808. During the 1820s, "Balkan became the preferred although not yet exclusive term alongside Haemus among British travelers... Among Russian travelers not so burdened by classical toponymy, Balkan was the preferred term." Maria Todorova Gutgsell, Imagining the Balkans (Oxford University Press, 2009; ISBN 0199728380), p. 24. 

As time passed, the term gradually acquired political connotations far from its initial geographic meaning, arising from political changes from the late 19th century to the creation of postWorld War I Yugoslavia (initially the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes). Zeune's goal was to have a geographical parallel term to the Italic and Iberian Peninsula, and seemingly nothing more. The gradually acquired political connotations are newer and, to a large extent, due to oscillating political circumstances.

After the dissolution of Yugoslavia beginning in June 1991, the term "Balkans" again received a negative meaning, even in casual usage (see Balkanization). Over the last decade, in the wake of the former Yugoslav split, many Slovenians and Croatians, as well as Serbs of Vojvodina (also Belgraders, western Serbs "Preani" and Serbs from other regions) have attempted to reject their label as Balkan nations. 

=== Southeast Europe ===

In part due to the historical and political connotations of the term "Balkans", especially since the military conflicts of the 1990s, the term "Southeast Europe" is becoming increasingly popular even though it literally refers to a much larger area and thus isn't as precise. A European Union initiative of 1999 is called the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, and the online newspaper Balkan Times renamed itself Southeast European Times in 2003.

In the case of Slovenia and Croatia, "Central Europe" is often used. Greece is also referred to as a Southern European country.

== Definitions and boundaries ==

=== The Balkan Peninsula ===
The Balkan Peninsula, as defined by the Danube-Sava-Kupa line
The Balkan Peninsula is an area of southeastern Europe surrounded by water on three sides: the Adriatic Sea to the west, the Mediterranean Sea (including the Ionian and Aegean seas) and the Marmara Sea to the south and the Black Sea to the east. Its northern boundary is often given as the Danube, Sava and Kupa Rivers. britannica.com; encarta.msn.com (Archived 31 October 2009); The Columbia Encyclopedia. The Balkan Peninsula has a combined area of about 490000 km2.

Countries whose borders lie entirely within the Balkan peninsula:
* 
* 
* 
* Kosovo
* 
* 

Countries whose borders lie partially within the Balkans:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

As of 1920 until World War II Italy included Istria and some Dalmatian areas (like Zara, known as Zadar) that are within the general definition of the Balkan peninsula. The current territory of Italy includes only the small area around Trieste and Gorizia inside the Balkan Peninsula. However, the regions of Trieste and Istria are not usually considered part of the Balkans by Italian geographers, due to a definition of the Balkans that limits its western border to the Kupa River. Istituto Geografico De Agostini, L'Enciclopedia Geografica  Vol.I  Italia, 2004, Ed. De Agostini p.78 

=== The Balkans ===

The abstracted term "The Balkans" covers those countries which lie within the boundaries of the Balkan Peninsula. Before 1991, the whole of Yugoslavia was considered to be part of the Balkans. The term "The Balkans" is sometimes used to describe only the areas in the Balkan peninsula: Moesia, Macedonia, Thrace, Kosovo, umadija, Bosnia, Herzegovina, Dalmatia, Thessaly, Epirus, Peloponnese and others, but more often it includes the rest of former Yugoslavia (Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia) and Romania, namely the provinces of Vojvodina, Slavonia, Banat, Wallachia, Moldavia, Transylvania, and others. Italy as a totality is generally accepted as part of Western Europe and the Apennines. The term "the Balkans" was coined by August Zeune in 1808.

Broadly interpreted, the term Balkans comprise the following territories: 
* (28,748 km2)
* (51,197 km2)
* (110,993 km2)
* (56,594 km2)
* (131,990 km2)
* (25,713 km2)
* (13,812 km2)
* (238,391 km2)
* (20,273 km2)
* (88,361 km2)
* (783,562 km2)

=== Western Balkans ===
 Western Balkans countries
European Union institutions and member states defined the "Western Balkans" as the Southeast European area that includes countries that are not members of the European Union (Croatia, which is a member, Zoltn Hajd, Ivn Ills, Zoltn Raffay (publisher), Zoltan Pamer: "Southeast-Europe: State Borders, Cross-border Relations, Spatial Structures", 2007, page 141 Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Kosovo, Macedonia and Albania  or Albania plus the former Yugoslavia, minus Slovenia). European Economic and Social Committee  Western Balkans European Union External Action  EU relations with the Western Balkans Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany  Western Balkan Countries Austrian Foreign Miniistry  The Western Balkans  A Priority of Austrian Foreign Policy WBIF  Western Balkans Investment Framework  Stakeholders European Commission  Trade  Countries and regions  Western Balkans Today, the Western Balkans is more of a political than a geographic designation for the region of Southeast Europe that is not in the European Union. Each country has as its aim to join the EU and reach democracy and transmission scores (except those to have already done so, i.e. Croatia since 2013 and Slovenia since 2004), but until then they will be strongly connected with the pre-EU waiting program CEFTA. 

== Nature and natural resources ==
Panorama of Stara Planina (the Balkan Mountains) from the region of Berkovitsa. Its highest peak is Botev at a height of 2376 m.
View toward Rila, the highest mountain in the Balkans which reaches 2925 m
Golubac Fortress in Serbia, guarding the Danubian frontier of the Balkans
Most of the area is covered by mountain ranges running from north-west to south-east. The main ranges are the Balkan mountains, running from the Black Sea Coast in Bulgaria to its border with Serbia, the Rhodope mountains in southern Bulgaria and northern Greece, the Dinaric Alps in Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, the ar massif which spreads from Albania to Macedonia, and the Pindus range, spanning from southern Albania into central Greece and the Albanian Alps. The highest mountain of the region is Rila in Bulgaria, with Musala at 2925 m, Mount Olympus in Greece, the throne of Zeus, being second at 2917 m and Vihren in Bulgaria being the third at 2914 m. The karst field or polje is a common feature of the landscape.

On the Adriatic and Aegean coasts the climate is Mediterranean, on the Black Sea coast the climate is humid subtropical and oceanic, and inland it is humid continental. In the northern part of the peninsula and on the mountains, winters are frosty and snowy, while summers are hot and dry. In the southern part winters are milder. The humid continental climate is predominant in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, northern Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, northern Montenegro, the interior of Albania, Romania, Serbia and most of Slovenia, while the other, less common climates, the humid subtropical and oceanic climates, are seen on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria and Turkey; and the Mediterranean climate is seen on the coast of Albania, southern Croatia, Greece, southern Montenegro, the coast of Slovenia and the Aegean coast of Turkey.

During the centuries many woods have been cut down and replaced with bush. In the southern part and on the coast there is evergreen vegetation. Inland there are woods typical of Central Europe (oak and beech, and in the mountains, spruce, fir and pine). The tree line in the mountains lies at the height of 18002300 m. The landscape provides habitats for numerous endemic species, including extraordinarily abundant insects and reptiles that serve as food for a variety of birds of prey and rare vultures.

The soils are generally poor, except on the plains where areas with natural grass, fertile soils and warm summers provide an opportunity for tillage. Elsewhere, land cultivation is mostly unsuccessful because of the mountains, hot summers and poor soils, although certain cultures such as olives and grapes flourish.

Resources of energy are scarce, except in the territory of Kosovo, where considerable coal, lead, zinc, chromium, silver deposits are located. Other deposits of coal, especially in Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Bosnia also exist. Lignite deposits are widespread in Greece. Petroleum is most notably present in Romania, although scarce reserves exist in Greece, Serbia, Albania and Croatia. Natural gas deposits are scarce. Hydropower is in wide use, with over 1,000 dams. The often relentless bora wind is also being harnessed for power generation.

Metal ores are more usual than other raw materials. Iron ore is rare but in some countries there is a considerable amount of copper, zinc, tin, chromite, manganese, magnesite and bauxite. Some metals are exported.

The time zones are situated as follows:
* Territories in the time zone of : Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia
* Territories in the time zone of : Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and Turkey

== History and geopolitical significance ==
The Jireek Line
Apollonia ruins near Fier, Albania.
Ruins of the Roman-era palace Felix Romuliana, UNESCO, Serbia.

=== Antiquity ===
The Balkan region was the first area of Europe to experience the arrival of farming cultures in the Neolithic era. The practices of growing grain and raising livestock arrived in the Balkans from the Fertile Crescent by way of Anatolia and spread west and north into Pannonia and Central Europe.

The identity of the Balkans is dominated by its geographical position; historically the area was known as a crossroads of cultures. It has been a juncture between the Latin and Greek bodies of the Roman Empire, the destination of a massive influx of pagan Bulgars and Slavs, an area where Orthodox and Catholic Christianity met, as well as the meeting point between Islam and Christianity.

In pre-classical and classical antiquity, this region was home to Greeks, Illyrians, Paeonians, Thracians, Dacians, and other ancient groups. Later the Roman Empire conquered most of the region and spread Roman culture and the Latin language, but significant parts still remained under classical Greek influence. The Romans considered the Rhodope Mountains to be the northern limit of the Peninsula of Haemus and the same limit applied approximately to the border between Greek and Latin use in the region (later called the Jireek Line). Boundary between Greek and Latin The Bulgars and Slavs arrived in the 6th century and began assimilating and displacing already-assimilated (through Romanization and Hellenization) older inhabitants of the northern and central Balkans, forming the Bulgarian Empire. Twenty Years of Balkan Tangle. Mary Edith Durham (2007). p.125. ISBN 1-4346-3426-4 During the Middle Ages, the Balkans became the stage for a series of wars between the Byzantine Roman and the Bulgarian and Serbian Empires.

=== Early modern period ===
By the end of the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire had become the controlling force in the region after expanding from Anatolia through Thrace to the Balkans. Many people in the Balkans place their greatest folk heroes in the era of either the onslaught or the retreat of the Ottoman Empire. As examples, for Croats, Nikola ubi Zrinski and Petar Krui; for Greeks, Constantine XI Palaiologos and Kolokotronis; and for Serbs, Milo Obili and Tzar Lazar; for Montenegrins, ura I Bali and Ivan Crnojevi; for Albanians, George Kastrioti Skanderbeg; for ethnic Macedonians, Nikola Karev Considered a Bulgarian in Bulgaria and Goce Delev; and for Bulgarians, Vasil Levski, Georgi Sava Rakovski and Hristo Botev.

Modern political history of the Balkans from 1800 onwards.
Hagia Sophia, a former Eastern Orthodox cathedral built in the 4th century in Constantinople (present-day Istanbul, Turkey).
In the past several centuries, because of the frequent Ottoman wars in Europe fought in and around the Balkans and the comparative Ottoman isolation from the mainstream of economic advance (reflecting the shift of Europe's commercial and political centre of gravity towards the Atlantic), the Balkans has been the least developed part of Europe. According to Suraiya Faroqhi and Donald Quataert, "The population of the Balkans, according to one estimate, fell from a high of 8 million in the late 16th century to only 3 million by the mid-eighteenth. This estimate is in harmony with the first findings based on Ottoman documentary evidence." An economic and social history of the Ottoman Empire. Suraiya Faroqhi, Donald Quataert (1997). Cambridge University Press. p.652. ISBN 0-521-57455-2 

Most of the Balkan nation-states emerged during the 19th and early 20th centuries as they gained independence from the Ottoman Empire or the Austro-Hungarian empire (Greece in 1821, Serbia, Montenegro and Romania in 1878, Bulgaria in 1908, Albania in 1912).

=== 20th century ===
Tsarevets, a medieval stronghold in the former capital of the Bulgarian Empire  Veliko Tarnovo.
The 13th-century church of St. John at Kaneo and the Ohrid Lake in Macedonia. The lake and town were declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1980.

==== World wars ====
In 19121913 the First Balkan War broke out when the nation-states of Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece and Montenegro united in an alliance against the Ottoman Empire. As a result of the war, almost all remaining European territories of the Ottoman Empire were captured and partitioned among the allies. Ensuing events also led to the creation of an independent Albanian state. Bulgaria insisted on its status quo territorial integrity, divided and shared by the Great Powers next to the Russo-Turkish War (187778) in other boundaries and on the pre-war Bulgarian-Serbian agreement. Provoked by the backstage deals between its former allies Serbia and Greece on allocation the spoils at the end of the First Balkan War, while it fights at the main Thracian Front, Bulgaria marks the beginning of Second Balkan War when attacked them. The Serbs and the Greeks repulse single attacks, but when the Greek army invaded Bulgaria together with an unprovoked Romanian intervention in the back, regardless of the single won battles, Bulgaria collapsed. The Ottoman Empire also used the opportunity to recapture Eastern Thrace, establishing its new western borders that still stand today.

The First World War was sparked in the Balkans in 1914 when Mlada Bosna, a revolutionary organization with predominately Serbian and pro-Yugoslav members, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Bosnia and Herzegovina's capital, Sarajevo. That caused a war between the two countries whichthrough the existing chains of alliancesled to the First World War. The Ottoman empire soon joined the Central Powers becoming one of the three empires participating in that alliance. The next year Bulgaria joined the Central Powers attacking Serbia, which was successfully fighting Austro-Hungary to the north for a year. That led to Serbia's defeat and the intervention of the Entente in the Balkans which sent an expeditionary force to establish a new front, the third one of that war, which soon also became static. The participation of Greece in the war three years later, in 1918, on the part of the Entente finally altered the balance between the opponents leading to the collapse of the common German-Bulgarian front there, which caused the exit of Bulgaria from the war, and in turn the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, ending the First World War. Encyclopedia of World War I, Spencer Tucker, Priscilla Mary Roberts, p.242 

With the start of the Second World War all Balkan countries, with the exception of Greece, were allies of Nazi Germany, having bilateral military agreements or being part of the Axis Pact. Fascist Italy expanded the war in the Balkans by using its protectorate Albania to invade Greece. After repelling the attack, the Greeks counterattacked, invading Italy-held Albania and causing Nazi Germany's intervention in the Balkans to help its ally. Europe in Flames, J. Klam, 2002, p.41 Days before the German invasion a successful coup d'tat in Belgrade by neutral military personnel seized power. Russia's life-saver, Albert Loren Weeks, 2004, p.98 

Although the new government reaffirmed Serbia's intentions to fulfill its obligations as member of the Axis, Germany and the 2nd World War Volume III:The Mediterranean, south-east Europe, and north Africa, 19391941, Gerhard Schreiber, Bernd Stegemann, Detlef Vogel, 1995, p.484 Germany, using its other two allied countries in the region, Bulgaria and Hungary, invaded both Greece and Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia immediately disintegrated when those loyal to the Serbian King and the Croatian units mutinied. Germany and the 2nd World War Volume III:The Mediterranean, south-east Europe, and north Africa, 19391941, Gerhard Schreiber, Bernd Stegemann, Detlef Vogel, 1995, p.521 Greece resisted, but, after two months of fighting, collapsed and was occupied. The two countries were partitioned between the three Axis allies, Bulgaria, Germany and Italy, and the Independent State of Croatia, a puppet state of Italy and Germany was created.

During the occupation the population suffered considerable hardship due to repression and starvation, to which the population reacted by creating a mass resistance movement. Inside Hitler's Greece:The Experience of Occupation, Mark Mazower, 1993 Together with the early and extremely heavy winter of that year (which caused hundreds of thousands deaths among the poorly fed population), the German invasion had disastrous effects in the timetable of the planned invasion in Russia causing a significant delay, Hermann Goring: Hitler's Second-In-Command, Fred Ramen, 2002, p.61 which had major consequences during the course of the war. The encyclopedia of codenames of World War II#Marita, Christopher Chant, 1986, p.125-6 

Finally, at the end of 1944, the Soviets entered Romania and Bulgaria forcing the Germans out of the Balkans. They left behind a region largely ruined as a result of wartime exploitation, but by making use of the post-war separation of Germany into two independent entities, the German states successfully and legally avoided paying any reparations or repaying the forced loans given by the occupied countries.

==== Cold War ====
The Old Harbour at Dubrovnik, Croatia. Between 1358 and 1808 the Republic of Dubrovnik ruled itself as a free state.
During the Cold War, most of the countries on the Balkans were governed by communist governments. Greece became the first battleground of the emerging Cold War. The Truman Doctrine was the US response to the civil war, which raged from 1944 to 1949. This civil war, unleashed by the Communist Party of Greece, backed by communist volunteers from neighboring countries (Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia), led to massive American assistance for the non-communist Greek government. With this backing, Greece managed to defeat the partisans and, ultimately, remained the only non-communist country in the region.

However, despite being under communist governments, Yugoslavia (1948) and Albania (1961) fell out with the Soviet Union. Yugoslavia, led by Marshal Josip Broz Tito (18921980), first propped up then rejected the idea of merging with Bulgaria and instead sought closer relations with the West, later even spearheaded, together with India and Egypt the Non-Aligned Movement. Albania on the other hand gravitated toward Communist China, later adopting an isolationist position.
The Mes Bridge near Shkodr, Albania, built by the Ottomans in the 18th century
As the only non-communist countries, Greece and Turkey were (and still are) part of NATO composing the southeastern wing of the alliance.

==== PostCold War ====
In the 1990s, the transition of the regions' ex-soviet block coutries towards democratic free-market societies went peacefully with the exception of Yugoslavia. Wars between the former Yugoslav republics broke out after Slovenia and Croatia held free elections and their people voted for independence on their respective countries' referendums. Serbia in turn declared the dissolution of the union as unconstitutional and the Yugoslavian army unsuccessfully tried to maintain status quo. Slovenia and Croatia declared independence on 25 June 1991, followed by the Ten-Day War in Slovenia. Till October 1991, the Army withdrew from Slovenia, and in Croatia, the Croatian War of Independence would continue until 1995. In the ensuing 10 years armed confrontation, gradually all the other Republics declared independence, with Bosnia being the most affected by the fighting. The long lasting wars resulted in a United Nations intervention and NATO ground and air forces took action against Serb forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia.

From the dissolution of Yugoslavia six republics achieved international recognition as sovereign republics: Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia. In 2008, while under UN administration, Kosovo declared independence (according to the official Serbian policy, Kosovo is still an internal autonomous region). In July 2010, the International Court of Justice, ruled that the declaration of independence was legal. Most UN member states recognise Kosovo. After the end of the wars a revolution broke in Serbia and Slobodan Miloevi, the Serbian communist leader (elected president between 1989 and 2000), was overthrown and handed for trial to the International Criminal Tribunal for crimes against the International Humanitarian Law during the Yugoslav wars. Miloevi died of a heart attack in 2006 before a verdict could have been released. n 2001 an Albanian uprising in Macedonia forced the country to give local autonomy to the ethnic Albanians in the areas where they predominate.

With the dissolution of Yugoslavia an issue emerged over the name under which the former (federated) republic of Macedonia would internationally be recognized, between the new country and Greece. Being the Macedonian part of Yugoslavia (see Vardar Macedonia), the federated Republic under the Yugoslav identity had the name Republic of Macedonia on which it declared its sovereignty in 1991. Greece, having a large region (see Macedonia) also under the same name opposed to the usage of this name as an indication of a nationality. The issue is currently under negotiations after a UN initiation.

Balkan countries control the direct land routes between Western Europe and South West Asia (Asia Minor and the Middle East). Since 2000, all Balkan countries are friendly towards the EU and the USA.

Greece has been a member of the European Union since 1981; Slovenia since 2004, Bulgaria and Romania since 2007 and Croatia joined in 2013. In 2005, the European Union decided to start accession negotiations with candidate countries; Turkey, and Macedonia were accepted as candidates for European Union membership. In March 2004, Bulgaria, Romania and Slovenia have become members of NATO. As of April 2009, Ceremony marks the accession of Albania and Croatia to NATO, NATO  News, 7 April 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2009. Albania and Croatia are members of NATO. Bosnia and Herzegovina and what was then Serbia and Montenegro started negotiations with the EU over the Stabilization and Accession Agreements, although shortly after they started, negotiations with Serbia and Montenegro were suspended for lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. During the 2008 Bucharest summit Greece vetoed Macedonia's NATO membership bid over the Macedonia naming dispute between the two countries.

All other countries have expressed a desire to join the EU at some point in the future.

== Politics and economy ==
View from Santorini in Greece. Tourism is an important part of the Greek economy.
Drvengrad (also known as Meavnik or Kstendorf), an ethno village in Serbia and home to the annual Kusturica film festival
Currently all of the states are republics, but until World War II all except Turkey were monarchies. Most of the republics are parliamentary, excluding Romania and Bosnia which are semi-presidential. All the states have open market economies, most of which are in the upper-middle income range ($4,000  $12,000 p.c.), the remaining  Greece, Slovenia and Croatia have high income economies (over $12,000 p.c.), which are also classified with very high HDI in contrast to the remaining states which are classified with high HDI. The states from the former Eastern Bloc that formerly had planned economy system and Turkey mark gradual economic growth each year, only the economy of Greece drops for 2012 and meanwhile it was expected to grow in 2013. The Gross domestic product (Purchasing power parity) per capita is highest in Slovenia and Greece (over $25), followed by Croatia (up to $20), Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Montenegro, Serbia, Macedonia ($10  $15), Bosnia, Albania and Kosovo (below $10). The Gini coefficient, which indicates the level of difference by monetary welfare of the layers, is on the second level at the highest monetary equality in Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia, on the third level in Greece, Montenegro and Romania, on the fourth level in Macedonia, on the fifth level in Turkey, and the most unequal by Gini coefficient is Bosnia at the eighth level which is the penultimate level and one of the highest in the world. The unemployment is lowest in Romania and Slovenia (below 10%), followed by Bulgaria, Turkey, Albania (10  15%), Croatia, Greece (15  20%), Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia (20  30%), Macedonia (over 30%) and Kosovo (over 40%).
* On political, social and economic criteria the divisions are as follows:
** Territories members of the European Union: Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Romania and Slovenia
** Territories candidates for EU membership disapproved with deposited date for joining: Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey
** Territories which submitted application for candidate status for EU membership: Albania
** Territories considered as potential candidates for EU membership: Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo
* On border control and trade criteria the divisions are as follows:
** Territories members of the Schengen Area: Greece and Slovenia
** Territories candidates for the Schengen Area: Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania
** Territories in a customs union with the EU: Turkey
** Territories members of the Central European Free Trade Agreement: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia
* On currency criteria the divisions are as follows:
** Territories members of the Eurozone: Greece and Slovenia
** Territories using the Euro without authorization by the EU: Kosovo and Montenegro
** Territories using the national currencies and candidates for the Eurozone: Croatia (kuna), Bulgaria (lev) and Romania (leu)
** Territories using the national currencies: Albania (lek), Bosnia and Herzegovina (convertible mark), Macedonia (denar) and Serbia (dinar)
* On military criteria the divisions are as follows:
** Territories members of NATO: Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Romania, Slovenia and Turkey
** Territories members of the Partnership for Peace with Individual Partnership Action Plan and Membership Action Plan for joining NATO: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Montenegro
** Territories members of the Partnership for Peace: Serbia
* On the recent political, social and economic criteria there are two groups of countries:
** Territories with communist past: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia
** Territories with capitalist past: Greece and Turkey

=== Regional organizations ===

 Southeast European Cooperation Process (SEECP) member states Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe 
 Southeast European Cooperative Initiative (SECI) Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) 

See also the Black Sea Regional organizations

== Demographics ==

Map showing religious denominations
Distribution of races in the Balkan Peninsula and Asia Minor in 1922, Racial Map of Europe by Hammond & Co.
Distribution of races in the southern Balkan Peninsula in 1918.
Ethnic composition of the southern part of the region in 1898 by the French geographer Paul Vidal de la Blache
Ethnic composition of the northern part of the region in 1880 by the English-German cartograge E.G. Ravenstein
Distribution of races in the southern Balkan Peninsula and Asia Minor in 1918 (National Geographic)

The Balkans have a population of 6071 million and a population density of 80-91/km2, depending on whether the Turkish and Italian parts are counted within the peninsula. Without those, the peninsula has a population of about 48 million and a density of 99/km2.

Population by territories:

 Territory Total population In the peninsula * Density Life expectancy 
 2,831,741 2,831,741 98.5/km2 77.4 years 
 3,839,737 Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Estimate for 2011. 3,839,737 75.0/km2 74.9 years 
 7,364,570 7,814,570 Ref. 66.4/km2 73.0 years 
 4,290,612 Croatian Bureau of Statistics. 2011 Census Results. 2,700,000 ~ 75.8/km2 77.3 years 
 10,815,197 National Statistical Service of Greece. 2011 Census Results. 10,815,197 81.7/km2 81 years 
 Not a part of the region (see ) ~330,000 National Institute of Statistics of Italy. Estimate for 2009. 236,520 people in Province of Trieste and about 90,000 in the Balkan part of Province of Gorizia.   
 1,733,872 1,733,872 178.7/km2  
 2,057,284 2,057,284 80.0/km2 74.2 years 
 625,266 625,266 45.3/km2  
 19,042,936 832,141 90.2/km2 72.5 years 
 7,186,862 Since the Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia cannot provide data of Kosovo's population due to the situation in the terrain, the total population data excludes Kosovo which Serbia claims as part of its own sovereign territory. ~3,500,000 92.8/km2 74.2 years 
 Not a part of the region (see ) ~360,000   
 Not a part of the region (see ) 10,620,739   
 Balkans ** 59,764,374 (excl. Turkey, Slovenia and Italy's parts)70,610,355 (incl. Turkey, Slovenia and Italy's parts) 44,888,282 (excl. northern Croatia and Serbia)   

 The islands are not taken into account.
 Both census figures of Serbia and Kosovo in the table do not include North Kosovo, therefore in the population of the Balkans, made up of sum of the populations in the table, is added separately an additional number of 70,000 to include the missing population of North Kosovo.

=== Religion ===
The region's principal religions are Christianity (Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic) and Islam (Sunni). Eastern Orthodoxy is the majority religion in both the Balkan peninsula and the Balkan region. A variety of different traditions of each faith are practiced, with each of the Eastern Orthodox countries having its own national church.
* Territories in which the principal religion is Eastern Orthodoxy:
** Bulgaria (Bulgarian Orthodoxy)
** Greece (Greek Orthodoxy)
** Macedonia (Macedonian Orthodoxy)
** Montenegro (Serbian Orthodox Church and Montenegrin Orthodoxy)
** Romania (Romanian Orthodoxy)
** Serbia (Serbian Orthodoxy)
* Territories in which the principal religion is Roman Catholicism:
** Croatia (87.83% Catholics (3 897 332); according to 2001 census official data)
** Slovenia (57.80% Catholics (1 135 626); according to 2002 census official data)
* Territories in which the principal religion is Sunni Islam:
** Albania
** Bosnia and Herzegovina
** Kosovo
** Turkey
* Territories in which religious minorities encompass over 10% of the population:
** Albania: Albanian and Eastern Orthodoxy, and Roman Catholicism
** Bosnia and Herzegovina: Serbian Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism
** Kosovo: Serbian Orthodoxy
** Macedonia: Islam
** Montenegro: Islam
** Serbia: Catholicism, Protestantism (Vojvodina, Belgrade), Islam (mainly in Sandak)

The Jewish communities of the Balkans were some of the oldest in Europe and date back to ancient times. These communities were Sephardi Jews, except in Slovenia, Croatia and Romania where the Jewish communities were Ashkenazi Jews. In Slovenia, there were Jewish immigrants dating back to Roman times pre-dating the 6th century settlement of the region by the Slavic peoples. Jews of Yugoslavia 19411945 Victims of Genocide and Freedom Fighters, Jasa Romano In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the small and close-knit Jewish community is 90% Sephardic, and Ladino is still spoken among the elderly. The Sephardi Jewish cemetery in Sarajevo has tombstones of a unique shape and inscribed in ancient Ladino. European Jewish Congress  Bosnia-Herzegovina, Accessed 15 July 2008. Sephardi Jews used to have a large presence in the city of Thessaloniki, and by 1900, some 80,000, or more than half of the population, were Jews. "Greece". Jewish Virtual Library. The Jewish communities in the Balkans suffered immensely during World War II, and the vast majority were killed during the Holocaust. An exception were the Bulgarian Jews, most of whom were saved by Boris III of Bulgaria, who resisted Adolf Hitler, opposing their deportation to concentration camps. Almost all of the few survivors have emigrated to the (then) newly founded state of Israel and elsewhere. No Balkan country today has a significant Jewish minority.

=== Languages ===

The Balkan region today is a very diverse ethno-linguistic region, being home to multiple Slavic, Romance, and Turkic languages, as well as Greek, Albanian, and others. Romani is spoken by a large portion of the Romanis living throughout the Balkan countries. Throughout history many other ethnic groups with their own languages lived in the area, among them Thracians, Illyrians, Romans, Celts and various Germanic tribes. All of the aforementioned languages from the present and from the past belong to the wider Indo-European language family, with the exception of the Turkic languages (e.g., Turkish and Gagauz).
* Territories where the predominant language is from the Albanian language family:
** Albania and Kosovo
* Territories where the predominant language is from the Hellenic language family:
** Greece
* Territories where the predominant language is from the Latin language family:
** Romania
* Territories where the predominant language is from the Slavic language family:
** Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia
* Territories where the predominant language is from the Turkic language family:
** Turkey
* Territories in which there are minority language families encompassing over 10% of the population:
** Macedonia: Albanian language family

=== Urbanization ===
Most of the states in the Balkans are predominantly urbanized; the countries in which the rural population is the majority are Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Slovenia, each being about 50% rural and 50% urban. 

View of Istanbul and the Bosphorus which separates Europe and the Balkans from Asia
View of Athens and the Acropolis
Panorama of Constana
View of Sofia from the parliamentary square
View of Belgrade and the Sava river which defines the border of the Balkan peninsula

A list of cities with population of over 200,000 inhabitants:

== Culture ==

== See also ==

* Balkan Insight
* Balkan languages
** Balkan sprachbund
* Balkanization
* Balkan Universities Network
* History of the Balkans
** Balkan wars
** Historical regions of the Balkan Peninsula
* Music of Southeastern Europe
* Orient Express

== Notes and references ==
Notes:

References:

== References ==
* 
* 
* Carter, Francis W., ed. An Historical Geography of the Balkans Academic Press, 1977.
* Dvornik, Francis. The Slavs in European History and Civilization Rutgers University Press, 1962.
* Fine, John V. A., Jr. The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century ; The Late Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Late Twelfth Century to the Ottoman Conquest. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, .
* 
* 
* 
* Lampe, John R., and Marvin R. Jackson; Balkan Economic History, 15501950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations Indiana University Press, 1982
* Kirly, Bla K., ed. East Central European Society in the Era of Revolutions, 17751856. 1984
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* SEEurope.netnews coverage on Southeastern Europe
* Southeast European Times
* Analysis from Balkans
* Photo impression
* Balkan Business News
* Balkanalysis.com- Objective Analysis, Research and News on the Balkans

01
.01



[[Bohr model]]

: 'RutherfordBohr model' and 'Bohr-Rutherford diagram' redirect to this page. 'Bohr model' is not to be confused with Bohr equation.

The RutherfordBohr model of the hydrogen atom (Z 1) or a hydrogen-like ion (Z > 1), where the negatively charged electron confined to an atomic shell encircles a small, positively charged atomic nucleus and where an electron jump between orbits is accompanied by an emitted or absorbed amount of electromagnetic energy (h&nu;). The orbits in which the electron may travel are shown as grey circles; their radius increases as n2, where n is the principal quantum number. The 3  2 transition depicted here produces the first line of the Balmer series, and for hydrogen (Z 1) it results in a photon of wavelength 656 nm (red light).

In atomic physics, the RutherfordBohr model or Bohr model, introduced by Niels Bohr in 1913, depicts the atom as a small, positively charged nucleus surrounded by electrons that travel in circular orbits around the nucleus&mdash;similar in structure to the solar system, but with attraction provided by electrostatic forces rather than gravity. After the cubic model (1902), the plum-pudding model (1904), the Saturnian model (1904), and the Rutherford model (1911) came the RutherfordBohr model or just Bohr model for short (1913). The improvement to the Rutherford model is mostly a quantum physical interpretation of it. The Bohr model has been superseded, but the quantum theory remains sound.

The model's key success lay in explaining the Rydberg formula for the spectral emission lines of atomic hydrogen. While the Rydberg formula had been known experimentally, it did not gain a theoretical underpinning until the Bohr model was introduced. Not only did the Bohr model explain the reason for the structure of the Rydberg formula, it also provided a justification for its empirical results in terms of fundamental physical constants.

The Bohr model is a relatively primitive model of the hydrogen atom, compared to the valence shell atom. As a theory, it can be derived as a first-order approximation of the hydrogen atom using the broader and much more accurate quantum mechanics, and thus may be considered to be an obsolete scientific theory. However, because of its simplicity, and its correct results for selected systems (see below for application), the Bohr model is still commonly taught to introduce students to quantum mechanics or energy level diagrams, before moving on to the more accurate, but more complex, valence shell atom. A related model was originally proposed by Arthur Erich Haas in 1910, but was rejected. The quantum theory of the period between Planck's discovery of the quantum (1900) and the advent of a full-blown quantum mechanics (1925) is often referred to as the old quantum theory.

== Origin ==

In the early 20th century, experiments by Ernest Rutherford established that atoms consisted of a diffuse cloud of negatively charged electrons surrounding a small, dense, positively charged nucleus. Given this experimental data, Rutherford naturally considered a planetary-model atom, the Rutherford model of 1911  electrons orbiting a solar nucleus  however, said planetary-model atom has a technical difficulty. The laws of classical mechanics (i.e. the Larmor formula), predict that the electron will release electromagnetic radiation while orbiting a nucleus. Because the electron would lose energy, it would rapidly spiral inwards, collapsing into the nucleus on a timescale of around 16 picoseconds Olsen and McDonald 2005 . This atom model is disastrous, because it predicts that all atoms are unstable. CK12  Chemistry Flexbook Second Edition  The Bohr Model of the Atom 

Also, as the electron spirals inward, the emission would rapidly increase in frequency as the orbit got smaller and faster. This would produce a continuous smear, in frequency, of electromagnetic radiation. However, late 19th century experiments with electric discharges have shown that atoms will only emit light (that is, electromagnetic radiation) at certain discrete frequencies.

To overcome this difficulty, Niels Bohr proposed, in 1913, what is now called the Bohr model of the atom. He suggested that electrons could only have certain classical motions:
# Electrons in atoms orbit the nucleus.
# The electrons can only orbit stably, without radiating, in certain orbits (called by Bohr the "stationary orbits" ) at a certain discrete set of distances from the nucleus. These orbits are associated with definite energies and are also called energy shells or energy levels. In these orbits, the electron's acceleration does not result in radiation and energy loss as required by classical electromagnetics. 
# Electrons can only gain and lose energy by jumping from one allowed orbit to another, absorbing or emitting electromagnetic radiation with a frequency  determined by the energy difference of the levels according to the Planck relation: where h is Planck's constant. The frequency of the radiation emitted at an orbit of period T is as it would be in classical mechanics; it is the reciprocal of the classical orbit period:

The significance of the Bohr model is that the laws of classical mechanics apply to the motion of the electron about the nucleus only when restricted by a quantum rule. Although rule 3 is not completely well defined for small orbits, because the emission process involves two orbits with two different periods, Bohr could determine the energy spacing between levels using rule 3 and come to an exactly correct quantum rule: the angular momentum L is restricted to be an integer multiple of a fixed unit:
:

where n = 1, 2, 3, ... is called the principal quantum number, and  = h/2. The lowest value of n is 1; this gives a smallest possible orbital radius of 0.0529 nm known as the Bohr radius. Once an electron is in this lowest orbit, it can get no closer to the proton. Starting from the angular momentum quantum rule, Bohr 

 was able to calculate the energies of the allowed orbits of the hydrogen atom and other hydrogen-like atoms and ions.

Other points are:
# Like Einstein's theory of the Photoelectric effect, Bohr's formula assumes that during a quantum jump a discrete amount of energy is radiated. However, unlike Einstein, Bohr stuck to the classical Maxwell theory of the electromagnetic field. Quantization of the electromagnetic field was explained by the discreteness of the atomic energy levels; Bohr did not believe in the existence of photons.
# According to the Maxwell theory the frequency  of classical radiation is equal to the rotation frequency rot of the electron in its orbit, with harmonics at integer multiples of this frequency. This result is obtained from the Bohr model for jumps between energy levels E'n and E'nk when k is much smaller than n. These jumps reproduce the frequency of the k-th harmonic of orbit n. For sufficiently large values of n (so-called Rydberg states), the two orbits involved in the emission process have nearly the same rotation frequency, so that the classical orbital frequency is not ambiguous. But for small n (or large k), the radiation frequency has no unambiguous classical interpretation. This marks the birth of the correspondence principle, requiring quantum theory to agree with the classical theory only in the limit of large quantum numbers.
# The Bohr-Kramers-Slater theory (BKS theory) is a failed attempt to extend the Bohr model which violates the conservation of energy and momentum in quantum jumps, with the conservation laws only holding on average.

Bohr's condition, that the angular momentum is an integer multiple of  was later reinterpreted in 1924 by de Broglie as a standing wave condition: the electron is described by a wave and a whole number of wavelengths must fit along the circumference of the electron's orbit:
:

Substituting de Broglie's wavelength of h/p reproduces Bohr's rule. In 1913, however, Bohr justified his rule by appealing to the correspondence principle, without providing any sort of wave interpretation. In 1913, the wave behavior of matter particles such as the electron (i.e., matter waves) was not suspected.

In 1925 a new kind of mechanics was proposed, quantum mechanics, in which Bohr's model of electrons traveling in quantized orbits was extended into a more accurate model of electron motion. The new theory was proposed by Werner Heisenberg. Another form of the same theory, wave mechanics, was discovered by the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrdinger independently, and by different reasoning. Schrdinger employed de Broglie's matter waves, but sought wave solutions of a three-dimensional wave equation describing electrons that were constrained to move about the nucleus of a hydrogen-like atom, by being trapped by the potential of the positive nuclear charge.

== Electron energy levels ==
Models depicting electron energy levels in hydrogen, helium, lithium, and neon
The Bohr model gives almost exact results only for a system where two charged points orbit each other at speeds much less than that of light. This not only includes one-electron systems such as the hydrogen atom, singly ionized helium, doubly ionized lithium, but it includes positronium and Rydberg states of any atom where one electron is far away from everything else. It can be used for K-line X-ray transition calculations if other assumptions are added (see Moseley's law below). In high energy physics,
it can be used to calculate the masses of heavy quark mesons.

Calculation of the orbits requires two assumptions.

*Classical mechanics
:The electron is held in a circular orbit by electrostatic attraction. The centripetal force is equal to the Coulomb force.
::
:where me is the electron's mass, e is the charge of the electron, ke is Coulomb's constant and Z is the atom's atomic number. It is assumed here that the mass of the nucleus is much larger than the electron mass (which is a good assumption). This equation determines the electron's speed at any radius:
:: 

: It also determines the electron's total energy at any radius:
:: 

:The total energy is negative and inversely proportional to r. This means that it takes energy to pull the orbiting electron away from the proton. For infinite values of r, the energy is zero, corresponding to a motionless electron infinitely far from the proton. The total energy is half the potential energy, which is also true for noncircular orbits by the virial theorem.

*A quantum rule

:The angular momentum L mevr is an integer multiple of :
::

:Substituting the expression for the velocity gives an equation for r in terms of n:
::
:so that the allowed orbit radius at any n is:
::

:The smallest possible value of r in the hydrogen atom (Z=1) is called the Bohr radius and is equal to:
:: 

:The energy of the n-th level for any atom is determined by the radius and quantum number:
::

An electron in the lowest energy level of hydrogen (n 1) therefore has about 13.6 eV less energy than a motionless electron infinitely far from the nucleus. The next energy level (n 2) is 3.4 eV. The third (n = 3) is 1.51 eV, and so on. For larger values of n, these are also the binding energies of a highly excited atom with one electron in a large circular orbit around the rest of the atom.

The combination of natural constants in the energy formula is called the Rydberg energy (RE):
:

This expression is clarified by interpreting it in combinations which form more natural units:
: is the rest mass energy of the electron (511 keV)
: is the fine structure constant
: 

Since this derivation is with the assumption that the nucleus is orbited by one electron, we can generalize this result by letting the nucleus have a charge q = Z e where Z is the atomic number. This will now give us energy levels for hydrogenic atoms, which can serve as a rough order-of-magnitude approximation of the actual energy levels. So, for nuclei with Z protons, the energy levels are (to a rough approximation):
:

The actual energy levels cannot be solved analytically for more than one electron (see n-body problem) because the electrons are not only affected by the nucleus but also interact with each other via the Coulomb Force.

When Z = 1/ (Z  137), the motion becomes highly relativistic, and Z2 cancels the 2 in R; the orbit energy begins to be comparable to rest energy. Sufficiently large nuclei, if they were stable, would reduce their charge by creating a bound electron from the vacuum, ejecting the positron to infinity. This is the theoretical phenomenon of electromagnetic charge screening which predicts a maximum nuclear charge. Emission of such positrons has been observed in the collisions of heavy ions to create temporary super-heavy nuclei.

The Bohr formula properly uses the reduced mass of electron and proton in all situations, instead of the mass of the electron: . However, these numbers are very nearly the same, due to the much larger mass of the proton, about 1836.1 times the mass of the electron, so that the reduced mass in the system is the mass of the electron multiplied by the constant 1836.1/(1+1836.1) = 0.99946. This fact was historically important in convincing Rutherford of the importance of Bohr's model, for it explained the fact that the frequencies of lines in the spectra for singly ionized helium do not differ from those of hydrogen by a factor of exactly 4, but rather by 4 times the ratio of the reduced mass for the hydrogen vs. the helium systems, which was much closer to the experimental ratio than exactly 4.0.

For positronium, the formula uses the reduced mass also, but in this case, it is exactly the electron mass divided by 2. For any value of the radius, the electron and the positron are each moving at half the speed around their common center of mass, and each has only one fourth the kinetic energy. The total kinetic energy is half what it would be for a single electron moving around a heavy nucleus.
: (positronium)

== Rydberg formula ==

The Rydberg formula, which was known empirically before Bohr's formula, is seen in Bohr's theory as describing the energies of transitions or quantum jumps between one orbital energy levels. Bohr's formula gives the numerical value of the already-known and measured Rydberg's constant, but in terms of more fundamental constants of nature, including the electron's charge and Planck's constant.

When the electron gets moved from its original energy level to a higher one, it then jumps back each level till it comes to the original position, which results in a photon being emitted. Using the derived formula for the different energy levels of hydrogen one may determine the wavelengths of light that a hydrogen atom can emit.

The energy of a photon emitted by a hydrogen atom is given by the difference of two hydrogen energy levels:
::
where n'f is the final energy level, and n'i is the initial energy level.

Since the energy of a photon is

::

the wavelength of the photon given off is given by

::

This is known as the Rydberg formula, and the Rydberg constant R is , or in natural units. This formula was known in the nineteenth century to scientists studying spectroscopy, but there was no theoretical explanation for this form or a theoretical prediction for the value of R, until Bohr. In fact, Bohr's derivation of the Rydberg constant, as well as the concomitant agreement of Bohr's formula with experimentally observed spectral lines of the Lyman (), Balmer (), and Paschen () series, and successful theoretical prediction of other lines not yet observed, was one reason that his model was immediately accepted.

To apply to atoms with more than one electron, the Rydberg formula can be modified by replacing "Z" with "Z  b" or "n" with "n  b" where b is constant representing a screening effect due to the inner-shell and other electrons (see Electron shell and the later discussion of the "Shell Model of the Atom" below). This was established empirically before Bohr presented his model.

== Shell model of heavier atoms ==
Bohr extended the model of Hydrogen to give an approximate model for heavier atoms. This gave a physical picture which reproduced many known atomic properties for the first time.

Heavier atoms have more protons in the nucleus, and more electrons to cancel the charge. Bohr's idea was that each discrete orbit could only hold a certain number of electrons. After that orbit is full, the next level would have to be used. This gives the atom a shell structure, in which each shell corresponds to a Bohr orbit.

This model is even more approximate than the model of hydrogen, because it treats the electrons in each shell as non-interacting. But the repulsions of electrons are taken into account somewhat by the phenomenon of screening. The electrons in outer orbits do not only orbit the nucleus, but they also move around the inner electrons, so the effective charge Z that they feel is reduced by the number of the electrons in the inner orbit.

For example, the lithium atom has two electrons in the lowest 1s orbit, and these orbit at Z=2. Each one sees the nuclear charge of Z=3 minus the screening effect of the other, which crudely reduces the nuclear charge by 1 unit. This means that the innermost electrons orbit at approximately 1/4 the Bohr radius. The outermost electron in lithium orbits at roughly Z=1, since the two inner electrons reduce the nuclear charge by 2. This outer electron should be at nearly one Bohr radius from the nucleus. Because the electrons strongly repel each other, the effective charge description is very approximate; the effective charge Z doesn't usually come out to be an integer. But Moseley's law experimentally probes the innermost pair of electrons, and shows that they do see a nuclear charge of approximately Z1, while the outermost electron in an atom or ion with only one electron in the outermost shell orbits a core with effective charge Zk where k is the total number of electrons in the inner shells.

The shell model was able to qualitatively explain many of the mysterious properties of atoms which became codified in the late 19th century in the periodic table of the elements. One property was the size of atoms, which could be determined approximately by measuring the viscosity of gases and density of pure crystalline solids. Atoms tend to get smaller toward the right in the periodic table, and become much larger at the next line of the table. Atoms to the right of the table tend to gain electrons, while atoms to the left tend to lose them. Every element on the last column of the table is chemically inert (noble gas).

In the shell model, this phenomenon is explained by shell-filling. Successive atoms become smaller because they are filling orbits of the same size, until the orbit is full, at which point the next atom in the table has a loosely bound outer electron, causing it to expand. The first Bohr orbit is filled when it has two electrons, and this explains why helium is inert. The second orbit allows eight electrons, and when it is full the atom is neon, again inert. The third orbital contains eight again, except that in the more correct Sommerfeld treatment (reproduced in modern quantum mechanics) there are extra "d" electrons. The third orbit may hold an extra 10 d electrons, but these positions are not filled until a few more orbitals from the next level are filled (filling the n=3 d orbitals produces the 10 transition elements). The irregular filling pattern is an effect of interactions between electrons, which are not taken into account in either the Bohr or Sommerfeld models, and which are difficult to calculate even in the modern treatment.

== Moseley's law and calculation of K-alpha X-ray emission lines ==
Niels Bohr said in 1962, "You see actually the Rutherford work nuclear atom was not taken seriously. We cannot understand today, but it was not taken seriously at all. There was no mention of it any place. The great change came from Moseley."

In 1913 Henry Moseley found an empirical relationship between the strongest X-ray line emitted by atoms under electron bombardment (then known as the K-alpha line), and their atomic number Z. Moseley's empiric formula was found to be derivable from Rydberg and Bohr's formula (Moseley actually mentions only Ernest Rutherford and Antonius Van den Broek in terms of models). The two additional assumptions that this X-ray line came from a transition between energy levels with quantum numbers 1 and 2, and , that the atomic number Z when used in the formula for atoms heavier than hydrogen, should be diminished by 1, to (Z1)2.

Moseley wrote to Bohr, puzzled about his results, but Bohr was not able to help. At that time, he thought that the postulated innermost "K" shell of electrons should have at least four electrons, not the two which would have neatly explained the result. So Moseley published his results without a theoretical explanation.

Later, people realized that the effect was caused by charge screening, with an inner shell containing only 2 electrons. In the experiment, one of the innermost electrons in the atom is knocked out, leaving a vacancy in the lowest Bohr orbit, which contains a single remaining electron. This vacancy is then filled by an electron from the next orbit, which has n=2. But the n=2 electrons see an effective charge of Z1, which is the value appropriate for the charge of the nucleus, when a single electron remains in the lowest Bohr orbit to screen the nuclear charge +Z, and lower it by 1 (due to the electron's negative charge screening the nuclear positive charge). The energy gained by an electron dropping from the second shell to the first gives Moseley's law for K-alpha lines:

::

or

::

Here, Rv = RE/h is the Rydberg constant, in terms of frequency equal to 3.28 x 1015 Hz. For values of Z between 11 and 31 this latter relationship had been empirically derived by Moseley, in a simple (linear) plot of the square root of X-ray frequency against atomic number (however, for silver, Z = 47, the experimentally obtained screening term should be replaced by 0.4). Notwithstanding its restricted validity, 
 Moseley's law not only established the objective meaning of atomic number (see Henry Moseley for detail) but, as Bohr noted, it also did more than the Rydberg derivation to establish the validity of the Rutherford/Van den Broek/Bohr nuclear model of the atom, with atomic number (place on the periodic table) standing for whole units of nuclear charge.

The K-alpha line of Moseley's time is now known to be a pair of close lines, written as (K1 and K2) in Siegbahn notation.

== Shortcomings ==

The Bohr model gives an incorrect value for the ground state orbital angular momentum. The angular momentum in the true ground state is known to be zero. Although mental pictures fail somewhat at these levels of scale, an electron in the lowest modern "orbital" with no orbital momentum, may be thought of as not to rotate "around" the nucleus at all, but merely to go tightly around it in an ellipse with zero area (this may be pictured as "back and forth", without striking or interacting with the nucleus). This is only reproduced in a more sophisticated semiclassical treatment like Sommerfeld's. Still, even the most sophisticated semiclassical model fails to explain the fact that the lowest energy state is spherically symmetric--- it doesn't point in any particular direction. Nevertheless, in the modern fully quantum treatment in phase space, Weyl quantization, the proper deformation (full extension) of the semi-classical result adjusts the angular momentum value to the correct effective one. As a consequence, the physical ground state expression is obtained through a shift of the vanishing quantum angular momentum expression, which corresponds to spherical symmetry.

In modern quantum mechanics, the electron in hydrogen is a spherical cloud of probability which grows denser near the nucleus. The rate-constant of probability-decay in hydrogen is equal to the inverse of the Bohr radius, but since Bohr worked with circular orbits, not zero area ellipses, the fact that these two numbers exactly agree, is considered a "coincidence." (Though many such coincidental agreements are found between the semi-classical vs. full quantum mechanical treatment of the atom; these include identical energy levels in the hydrogen atom, and the derivation of a fine structure constant, which arises from the relativistic BohrSommerfeld model (see below), and which happens to be equal to an entirely different concept, in full modern quantum mechanics).

The Bohr model also has difficulty with, or else fails to explain:

* Much of the spectra of larger atoms. At best, it can make predictions about the K-alpha and some L-alpha X-ray emission spectra for larger atoms, if two additional ad hoc assumptions are made (see Moseley's law above). Emission spectra for atoms with a single outer-shell electron (atoms in the lithium group) can also be approximately predicted. Also, if the empiric electronnuclear screening factors for many atoms are known, many other spectral lines can be deduced from the information, in similar atoms of differing elements, via the RitzRydberg combination principles (see Rydberg formula). All these techniques essentially make use of Bohr's Newtonian energy-potential picture of the atom.
* the relative intensities of spectral lines; although in some simple cases, Bohr's formula or modifications of it, was able to provide reasonable estimates (for example, calculations by Kramers for the Stark effect).
* The existence of fine structure and hyperfine structure in spectral lines, which are known to be due to a variety of relativistic and subtle effects, as well as complications from electron spin.
* The Zeeman effect  changes in spectral lines due to external magnetic fields; these are also due to more complicated quantum principles interacting with electron spin and orbital magnetic fields.
* The model also violates the uncertainty principle in that it considers electrons to have known orbits and locations, two things which can not be measured simultaneously.
* Doublets and Triplets: Appear in the spectra of some atoms: Very close pairs of lines. Bohrs model cannot say why some energy levels should be very close together.
* Multi-electron Atoms: dont have energy levels predicted by the model. It doesnt work for (neutral) helium.
* A rotating charge such as the electron classically orbiting around the nucleus, would constantly lose energy in form of electromagnetic radiation (via various mechanisms: dipole radiation, Bremsstrahlung,...). But such radiation is not observed.

== Refinements ==
Elliptical orbits with the same energy and quantized angular momentum

Several enhancements to the Bohr model were proposed; most notably the Sommerfeld model or BohrSommerfeld model, which suggested that electrons travel in elliptical orbits around a nucleus instead of the Bohr model's circular orbits. This model supplemented the quantized angular momentum condition of the Bohr model with an additional radial quantization condition, the SommerfeldWilson quantization condition 
 
 

:

where pr is the radial momentum canonically conjugate to the coordinate q which is the radial position and T is one full orbital period. The integral is the action of action-angle coordinates. This condition, suggested by the correspondence principle, is the only one possible, since the quantum numbers are adiabatic invariants.

The BohrSommerfeld model was fundamentally inconsistent and led to many paradoxes. The magnetic quantum number measured the tilt of the orbital plane relative to the xy-plane, and it could only take a few discrete values. This contradicted the obvious fact that an atom could be turned this way and that relative to the coordinates without restriction. The Sommerfeld quantization can be performed in different canonical coordinates, and sometimes gives answers which are different. The incorporation of radiation corrections was difficult, because it required finding action-angle coordinates for a combined radiation/atom system, which is difficult when the radiation is allowed to escape. The whole theory did not extend to non-integrable motions, which meant that many systems could not be treated even in principle. In the end, the model was replaced by the modern quantum mechanical treatment of the hydrogen atom, which was first given by Wolfgang Pauli in 1925, using Heisenberg's matrix mechanics. The current picture of the hydrogen atom is based on the atomic orbitals of wave mechanics which Erwin Schrdinger developed in 1926.

However, this is not to say that the Bohr model was without its successes. Calculations based on the BohrSommerfeld model were able to accurately explain a number of more complex atomic spectral effects. For example, up to first-order perturbations, the Bohr model and quantum mechanics make the same predictions for the spectral line splitting in the Stark effect. At higher-order perturbations, however, the Bohr model and quantum mechanics differ, and measurements of the Stark effect under high field strengths helped confirm the correctness of quantum mechanics over the Bohr model. The prevailing theory behind this difference lies in the shapes of the orbitals of the electrons, which vary according to the energy state of the electron.

The BohrSommerfeld quantization conditions lead to questions in modern mathematics. Consistent semiclassical quantization condition requires a certain type of structure on the phase space, which places topological limitations on the types of symplectic manifolds which can be quantized. In particular, the symplectic form should be the curvature form of a connection of a Hermitian line bundle, which is called a prequantization.

== See also ==

 *1913 in science *Balmer's Constant *Basic concepts of quantum mechanics *FranckHertz experiment provided early support for the Bohr model. *Free-fall atomic model *Inert pair effect is adequately explained by means of the Bohr model. *Introduction to quantum mechanics *Theoretical and experimental justification for the Schrdinger equation 

== References ==

=== Footnotes ===

=== Primary sources ===

*
*
*
*
*
* Reprinted in The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, A. Engel translator, (1997) Princeton University Press, Princeton. 6 p. 434. (provides an elegant reformulation of the BohrSommerfeld quantization conditions, as well as an important insight into the quantization of non-integrable (chaotic) dynamical systems.)

== Further reading ==

*
** Reprint: 
*
*
*
*Klaus Hentschel: Elektronenbahnen, Quantensprnge und Spektren, in: Charlotte Bigg & Jochen Hennig (eds.) Atombilder. Ikonografien des Atoms in Wissenschaft und ffentlichkeit des 20. Jahrhunderts, Gttingen: Wallstein-Verlag 2009, pp. 5161
*
*



[[Bombay Sapphire]]

Bombay Sapphire is a brand of gin owned by Bacardi that was first launched in 1987 by IDV. In 1997 Diageo sold the brand to Bacardi. http://www.grovesandwhitnall.co.uk/gj-distillers-warrington/ Its name originates from gin's popularity in India during the British Raj and the sapphire in question is the Star of Bombay on display at the Smithsonian Institution. Bombay Sapphire Bombay Sapphire is marketed in a flat-sided, sapphire-coloured bottle that bears a picture of Queen Victoria on the label. 

The flavouring of the drink comes from a recipe of ten ingredients (which the bottle's label boasts as "10 exotic botanicals"): almond, lemon peel, liquorice, juniper berries, orris root, angelica, coriander, cassia, cubeb, and grains of paradise. The spirit is triple distilled using a carterhead still, and the alcohol vapours are passed through a mesh/basket containing the ten botanicals, in order to gain flavour and aroma. This gives a lighter, more floral gin rather than the more-common 'punchy' gins that are distilled using a copper pot still. Water from Lake Vyrnwy is added to bring the strength of Bombay Sapphire down to 40.0% (UK, Australia).

In 2011 it was announced that the company is planning to move the distillation process to a new facility in Laverstoke, Hampshire. The plans include the restoration of the former Portal's paper mill, and the construction of a visitor centre. In February 2012, they received planning permission for the site and the centre is scheduled to be opened in Spring 2014. 
Production and bottling of the drink is contracted out by Bacardi to G&J Greenall. 

==Varieties==
Bacardi also markets Bombay Original London Dry Gin (or Bombay Original Dry). Made with eight botanical ingredients rather than ten, Bombay is less common than Bombay Sapphire, though Wine Enthusiast has called it better. Bombay Original London Dry Gin listing on Proof66: http://www.proof66.com/gin/bombay-original-gin.html 

In September 2011, Bombay Sapphire East was launched in test markets in New York and Las Vegas. This variety has another two botanicals, lemongrass and black peppercorns, in addition to the original ten. It is bottled at 42% and was designed to counteract the sweetness of American tonic water.

==Design connection==
The brand started a series of design collaborations. Their first step into the design world was a series of advertisements featuring work from currently popular designers. Their works, varying from martini glasses to tiles and cloth patterns, are labelled as Inspired by Bombay Sapphire. The campaign featured designers such as Marcel Wanders, Yves Behar, Karim Rashid, Ulla Darni, and Dror Benshetrit and performance artist Jurgen Hahn.

From the success of this campaign, the company started a series of events and sponsored locations. The best known is the Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition, held each year, where design students from all over the world can participate by designing their own inspired martini cocktail glass. The finalists (one from each participating country) are then invited to the yearly Salone del Mobile, an international design fair in Milano, where the winner is chosen.

Bombay Sapphire also endorses glass artists and designers with the Bombay Sapphire Prize, which is awarded every year to an outstanding design which features glass. Bombay Sapphire also showcases the designers' work in the Bombay Sapphire endorsed blue room, which is actually a design exhibition touring the world each year.

From 2008 the Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition final will be held at 100% Design in London, UK and the Bombay Sapphire Prize will take place in Milan at the Salone Del Mobile.

==Evaluation==
Bombay Sapphire has been reviewed by several outside spirit ratings organizations to mixed success. Recently, it was awarded a score of 92 (on a 100 point scale) from the Beverage Testing Institute. Ratings aggregator Proof66.com categorizes the Sapphire as a Tier 2 spirit, indicating highly favorable "expert" reviews. Bombay Sapphire listing on Proof66: http://www.proof66.com/gin/bombay-sapphire.html 

==References==

== External links ==
*Bombay Sapphire Homepage
*BoozeBasher review of Bombay Sapphire
*Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition
*Bombay Sapphire Prize
*Bombay Sapphire sparkles in latest collaboration



[[Bob Wills]]

BobWillsBlueYodelNo1

James Robert Wills (March 6, 1905 &ndash; May 13, 1975), better known as Bob Wills, was an American Western swing musician, songwriter, and bandleader. Considered by music authorities as the co-founder of Western swing, Wolff, Country Music, "Big Balls In Cowtown: Western Swing From Fort Worth To Fresno", p. 29: If any single person deserves to be considered the 'father' of western swing, it must be Bob Wills." West, "Trails And Footprints", p. 39: "Snyder hosts the West Texas Western Swing Festival ('Come Fiddle Around in Snyder'), recognizing the regional origins of the father of western swing, Bob Wills, from Turkey (a bit more than a hundred miles due north in Hall County) ..." he was universally known as the King of Western Swing (after the death of Spade Cooley who used the moniker "King Of Western Swing" from 1942-1969.)

Wills formed several bands and played radio stations around the South and West until he formed the Texas Playboys in 1934 with Wills on fiddle, Tommy Duncan on piano and vocals, rhythm guitarist June Whalin, tenor banjoist Johnnie Lee Wills, and Kermit Whalin, who played steel guitar and bass. The band played regularly on a Tulsa, Oklahoma radio station and added Leon McAuliffe on steel guitar, pianist Al Stricklin, drummer Smokey Dacus, and a horn section that expanded the band's sound. Wills favored jazz-like arrangements and the band found national popularity into the 1940s with such hits as "Steel Guitar Rag", "New San Antonio Rose", "Smoke On The Water", "Stars And Stripes On Iwo Jima", and "New Spanish Two Step".

Wills and the Texas Playboys recorded with several publishers and companies, including Vocalion, Okeh, Columbia, and MGM, frequently moving. In 1950, he had two Top 10 hits, "Ida Red Likes The Boogie" and "Faded Love", which were his last hits for a decade. Throughout the 1950s, he struggled with poor health and tenuous finances, but continued to perform frequently despite the decline in popularity of his earlier music as rock and roll took over. Wills had a heart attack in 1962 and a second one the next year, which forced him to disband the Playboys although Wills continued to perform solo. 
 
The Country Music Hall of Fame inducted Wills in 1968 and the Texas State Legislature honored him for his contribution to American music. resolution In 1972, Wills accepted a citation from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers in Nashville. He was recording an album with fan Merle Haggard in 1973 when a stroke left him comatose until his death in 1975. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducted Wills and the Texas Playboys in 1999.

==Biography==

===Early years===
He was born on a farm near Kosse, Texas, San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 1. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. in Limestone County near Groesbeck, to Emma Lee Foley and John Tompkins Wills. His father was a statewide champion fiddle player Milton Brown and the Founding of Western Swing. Cary Ginell. 1994. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02041-3. and the Wills family was either playing music, or someone was "always wanting us to play for them", in addition to raising cotton on their farm.

In addition to picking cotton, the young Jim Bob learned to play the fiddle and the mandolin. Both a sister and several brothers played musical instruments, while another sister played piano. The Wills family frequently held country dances in their home, and there was dancing in all four rooms. While living in Hall County, Texas, they also played at 'ranch dances' which were popular in both North Texas and eastern New Mexico. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 17. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

Wills not only learned traditional music from his family, he learned some Negro songs directly from African Americans in the cotton fields near Lakeview, Texas and said that he did not play with many white children other than his siblings, until he was seven or eight years old. African Americans were his playmates, and his father enjoyed watching him jig dance with black children. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 4. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

"I don't know whether they made them up as they moved down the cotton rows or not," Wills once told Charles Townsend, author of San Antonio Rose: The Life And Times Of Bob Wills, "but they sang blues you never heard before." 
 

===New Mexico and Texas===
The family moved to Hall County in the Texas Panhandle in 1913, San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 3. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. and in 1919 they bought a farm between the towns of Lakeview and Turkey. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 16. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. At the age of 16, Wills left the family and hopped a freight train. "Jim Rob", as he became known, drifted for several years, traveling from town to town to try to earn a living, at one point almost losing his life when he nearly fell from a moving train, and later being chased by railroad police. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. pages 14, 21, 22. ISBN 0-252-00470-1 In his 20s he attended barber school, got married, and moved first to Roy, New Mexico, then returned to Turkey in Hall County (now considered his home town) to work as a barber at Hamm's Barber Shop. He alternated barbering and fiddling even when he moved to Fort Worth after leaving Hall County in 1929. There he played in minstrel and medicine shows, and, as with other Texas musicians such as Ocie Stockard, continued to earn money as a barber. He wore blackface makeup to appear in comedy routines, something that was common at the time. "He was playing his violin and singing." There were two guitars and a banjo player with him. "Bob was in blackface and was the comic; he cracked jokes, sang, and did an amazing jig dance." San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 45. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. Since there was already a "Jim" on the show, the manager began calling him "Bob". However, it was as "Jim Rob Wills", paired with Herman Arnspiger, that he made his first commercial (though unissued) recordings in November 1929 for Brunswick/Vocalion. Country Music Records - A Discography, 1921-1942. Tony Russell. 2008. Oxford University Press. p. 960. ISBN 978-0-19-536621-1 

Wills was known for his hollering and wisecracking. One source for this was when, as a very young boy, he would hear his father, grandfather, and cowboys give out loud cries when the music moved them. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 107. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. When asked if his wisecracking and talking on the bandstand came from his medicine show experience, he said it did not. Rather, he said that it came directly from playing and living close to Negroes, and that he never did it necessarily as show, but more as a way to express his feelings. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 46. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

While in Fort Worth, Wills added the "rowdy city blues" of Bessie Smith and Emmett Miller to a repertoire of mainly waltzes and breakdowns he had learned from his father, and patterned his vocal style after that of Miller and other performers such as Al Bernard. Milton Brown and the Founding of Western Swing. Cary Ginell. 1994. University of Illinois Press. pp. 32,33. ISBN 0-252-02041-3. Wills acknowledged that he idolized Miller. Furthermore, his 1935 version of "St. Louis Blues" is nearly a word-for-word copy of Al Bernard's patter on his 1928 recording of the same song. Milton Brown and the Founding of Western Swing. Cary Ginell. 1994. University of Illinois Press. pp. 245, 246. ISBN 0-252-02041-3. 

The fact that Wills made his professional debut in blackface was commented on by Wills' daughter, Rosetta: "He had a lot of respect for the musicians and music of his black friends," Rosetta is quoted as saying on the Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys Web site. She remembers that her father was such a fan of Bessie Smith stating, "He once rode fifty miles on horseback just to see her perform live." (Wills is quoted as saying, "I rode horeseback from the place between the rivers to Childress to see Bessie Smith...She was about the greatest thing I had ever heard. In fact, there was no doubt about it. She was the greatest thing I ever heard." San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 40. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

In Fort Worth, Wills met Herman Arnspinger and formed The Wills Fiddle Band. In 1930 Milton Brown joined the group as lead vocalist and brought a sense of innovation and experimentation to the band, now called the Light Crust Doughboys due to radio sponsorship by the makers of Light Crust Flour. Brown left the band in 1932 to form the Musical Brownies, the first true Western swing band. Brown added twin fiddles, tenor banjo and slap bass, pointing the music in the direction of swing, which they played on local radio and at dancehalls. 

Wills remained with the Doughboys and replaced Brown with new singer Tommy Duncan in 1932. He found himself unable to get along with future Texas Governor W. Lee "Pappy" O'Daniel, the authoritarian host of the Light Crust Doughboy radio show. O'Daniel had parlayed the show's popularity into growing power within Light Crust Flour's parent company, Burrus Mill and Elevator Company, and wound up as General Manager, though he despised what he considered "hillbilly music". Wills and Duncan left the Doughboys in 1933 after Wills had missed one show too many due to his sporadic drinking.

Wills recalled the early days of what became known as Western swing music in a 1949 interview. "Here's the way I figure it. We sure not tryin' to take credit for swingin' it." Speaking of Milt Brown and himself working with songs done by Jimmie Davis, the Skillet Lickers, Jimmie Rodgers, and others, and songs he'd learned from his father, he said that "We'd pull these tunes down an set 'em in a dance category. It wouldn't be a runaway, and just lay a real nice beat behind it an the people would get to really like it. It was nobody intended to start anything in the world. We was just tryin' to find enough tunes to keep 'em dancin' to not have to repeat so much."

Wills is also quoted as saying, "You can change the name of an old song, rearrange it and make it a swing." "One Star Rag," "Rat Cheese Under The Hill," "Take Me Back To Tulsa," "Basin Street Blues," "Steel Guitar Rag," and "Trouble In Mind" were some of the songs in his extensive repertory. Dance Across Texas. by Betty Casey. 1985. University of Texas Press. p. 43. ISBN 0-292-71551-X. 

===The Texas Playboys===
300px
After forming a new band, The Playboys, and relocating to Waco, Wills found enough popularity there to decide on a bigger market. They left Waco in January of 1934 for Oklahoma City. Wills soon settled the renamed Texas Playboys in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and began broadcasting noontime shows over the 50,000 watt KVOO radio station. Their 12:30-1:15 p.m. Monday&ndash;Friday broadcasts became a veritable institution in the region.
Nearly all of the daily (except Sunday) shows originated from the stage of Cain's Ballroom. In addition, they played dances in the evenings, including regular ones at the ballroom on Thursdays and Saturdays.

Wills added a trumpet to the band inadvertently when he hired Everet Stover as an announcer, not knowing that he had played with the New Orleans symphony and had directed the governor's band in Austin. Stover, thinking he had been hired as a trumpeter, began playing with the band with no comment from Wills. Young sax player Zeb McNally was allowed to play with the band, although Wills initially discouraged it. With two horns in the band, Wills realized he would have to add a drummer to balance things and create a fuller sound. He hired the young, "modern style musician" Smokey Ducas. Hubbin' It. Ruth Sheldon. 1995. Country Music Foundation Press. first published 1938. pages 76, 80, 81. ISBN 0-915608-18-9. 
By 1935, Wills had added horn and reed players as well as drums to the Playboys. The addition of steel guitar whiz Leon McAuliffe in March 1935 added not only a formidable instrumentalist but a second engaging vocalist. Wills himself largely sang blues and sentimental ballads. Wills and the Texas Playboys did their first recordings on September 2325, 1935 in Dallas, Texas, being produced by Don Law and Art Satherley of the American Record Corporation. There is strong evidence that the 1935 sessions took place at 508 Park Avenue along with sessions in 1937 and 1938.

With its jazz sophistication, pop music and blues influence, plus improvised scat and wisecrack commentary by Wills, the band became the first superstars of the genre. Milton Brown's death in 1936 had cleared the way for the Playboys.

Session rosters from 1938 show both "lead guitar" and "electric guitar" in addition to guitar and steel guitar in the Texas Playboys recordings. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. page 342, 343. ISBN 0-252-00470-1 Wills' 1938 recording of "Ida Red" served as a model for Chuck Berry's decades later version of the same song - "Maybellene". 

About this time, Wills purchased and performed with an old Guadagnini violin that had once fetched $7,600 for $1,600, the equivalent of about $24,000 in 2009. 
 http://www.westegg.com/inflation/infl.cgi The Inflation Calculator retrieved 7.13.2010 

In 1940, "New San Antonio Rose" sold a million records and became the signature song of The Texas Playboys. The song's title referred to the fact that Wills had recorded it as a fiddle instrumental in 1938 as "San Antonio Rose". By then, the Texas Playboys were virtually two bands: one a fiddle-guitar-steel band with rhythm section and the second a first-rate big band able to play the day's swing and pop hits as well as Dixieland.

The "front line" of Wills' orchestra consisted of either fiddles or guitars after 1944. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. page 237. ISBN 0-252-00470-1 

===Film career===
In 1940, Wills, along with the Texas Playboys, co-starred with Tex Ritter in Take Me Back To Oklahoma. * Other films would follow. In December 1942, after several band members had left the group, and as World War II raged, Wills joined the Army at the age of 37, but he received a medical discharge in 1943. 

Wills also appeared in The Lone Prairie (1942), Riders Of The Northwest Mounted (1943), Saddles And Sagebrush (1943), The Vigilantes Ride (1943), The Last Horseman (1944), Rhythm Round-Up (1945), Blazing The Western Trail (1945), and Lawless Empire (1945). According to one source, he appeared in a total of 19 films. 

===Swing era===

After leaving the Army in 1943, Wills moved to Hollywood, moving into a rented house in September, San Antonio Rose. page 229 and began to reorganize the Texas Playboys. He became an enormous draw in Los Angeles, where many of his Texas, Oklahoma and regional fans had also relocated during the Great Depression and World War II in search of jobs. Monday through Friday, the band broadcast from 12:01 to 1:00 p.m. PT over KMTR-AM (now KLAC) in Los Angeles. They also played regularly every Friday, Saturday, and Sunday night at the Mission Beach Ballroom in San Diego. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 241. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

He commanded enormous fees playing dances there, and began to make more creative use of electric guitars to replace the big horn sections the Tulsa band had boasted. For a very brief period in 1944, the Wills band included 23 members, and around mid-year he toured Northern California and the Pacific Northwest with 21 pieces in the orchestra. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 350. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. Billboard reported that Wills out-grossed Harry James, Benny Goodman, "both Dorsies, et al." at Civic Auditorium in Oakland, California, in January 1944. Billboard February 5, 1944. Vol. 56, No. 6. p. 62. 

Wills and His Texas Playboys began their first cross-country tour in November 1944, and appeared at the Grand Ole Opry on December 30, 1944. According to the Opry, drums and horns were not considered to be part of country music. Wills' band at the time consisted of two fiddlers, two bass fiddles, two electric guitars, an amplified electric steel guitar, and a trumpet, as well as the noted drums, which belonged to Wills' then drummer, who played in the Dixieland style. Southwest Shuffle: Pioneers Of Honky Tonk, Western Swing, And Country Jazz by Rich Kienzle p 255 

In 1945, Wills' dances were outdrawing those of Tommy Dorsey and Benny Goodman, and he moved to Fresno, California. Then in 1947 he opened the Wills Point nightclub in Sacramento and continued touring the Southwest and Pacific Northwest from Texas to Washington State. While based in Sacramento, his radio broadcasts over 50,000-watt KFBK were heard all over the West. Workin' Man Blues: Country Music In California. Gerald W. Haslam. University of California Press. 1999. p. 82. ISBN 0-520-21800-0. 

Famous swing orchestras in California realized that many of their followers were leaving to dance to Bob Will's Western swing. Because he was in such demand, some places booked Wills any time he had an opening, regardless of how undesirable the date. The manager of a popular auditorium in the LA Basin town of Wilmington, California: "Although Monday night dancing is frankly an experiment it was the only night of the week on which this outstanding band could be secured." 

During the postwar period, KGO radio in San Francisco syndicated a Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys show recorded at the Fairmont Hotel. Many of these recordings survive today as the Tiffany Transcriptions and are available on CD. They show off the band's strengths significantly, in part because the group was not confined to the three-minute limits of 78 RPM discs. They featured superb instrumental work from fiddlers Joe Holley and Louis Tierney, steel guitarists Noel Boggs and Herb Remington, guitarists Eldon Shamblin and Junior Barnard and electric mandolinist-fiddler Tiny Moore. The original recorded version of Wills' "Faded Love" appeared on the Tiffanys as a fairly swinging instrumental unlike the ballad it became when lyrics were added in 1950.

On April 3, 1948, Wills and the Texas Playboys appeared for the inaugural broadcast of the Louisiana Hayride on KWKH, broadcasting from the Municipal Auditorium in Shreveport, Louisiana.

Wills and the Texas Playboys played dances throughout the West to more than 10,000 people every week. They held dance attendance records at Jantzen Beach in Portland, Oregon; in Santa Monica, California, and at the Oakland (California) Auditorium, where they drew 19,000 people in two nights. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 252. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. Wills also broke an attendance record of 2,100 previously held by Jan Garber at the Armory in Klamath Falls, Oregon, by attracting 2,514 dancers. Wills and the Playboys also played small towns on the West Coast. Actor Clint Eastwood recalled seeing Wills when he was 18 or 19 (1948 or 1949) and working at a pulp mill in Springfield, Oregon. The King of Western Swing - Bob Wills Remembered. Rosetta Wills. 1998. p. 165. ISBN 0-8230-7744-6. The author has a magazine clipping, but doesn't specify the magazine or date. 

Appearances at the Bostonia Ballroom in San Diego continued throughout the 1950s. http://www.sandiegoconcertarchive.com bob wills San Diego Concert Archive accessed March 19, 2009. 

Still a binge drinker, Wills became increasingly unreliable in the late 1940s, causing a rift with Tommy Duncan (who bore the brunt of audience anger when Wills's binges prevented him from appearing). It ended when he fired Duncan in the fall of 1948.

===Later years===
Having lived a lavish lifestyle in California, Wills moved back to Oklahoma City in 1949, then went back on the road to maintain his payroll and Wills Point. He opened a second club, the Bob Wills Ranch House in Dallas, Texas. Turning the club over to managers later revealed to be dishonest left Wills in desperate financial straits with heavy debts to the IRS for back taxes that caused him to sell many assets including, mistakenly, the rights to "New San Antonio Rose". It wrecked him financially.

In 1950, Wills had two Top 10 hits, "Ida Red Likes The Boogie" and "Faded Love". After 1950, radio stations began to increasingly specialize in one form or another of commercially popular music. Wills did not fit into the popular Nashville country and western stations, although he was usually labeled "country and western". Neither did he fit into the pop or middle of the road stations, although he played a good deal of pop music, and was not accepted in the pop music world. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 281. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

He continued to tour and record through the 1950s into the early 1960s, despite the fact that Western swing's popularity, even in the Southwest, had greatly diminished. Bob could draw "a thousand people on Monday night between 1950 and 1952, but he could not do that by 1956. Entertainment habits had changed." San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 267. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

On Wills' return to Tulsa late in 1957, Jim Downing of the Tulsa Tribune wrote an article headlined "Wills Brothers Together Again: Bob Back With Heavy Beat". The article quotes Wills as saying, "Rock and Roll? Why, man, that's the same kind of music we've been playin' since 1928!...We didn't call it rock and roll back when we introduced it as our style back in 1928, and we don't call it rock and roll the way we play it now. But it's just basic rhythm and has gone by a lot of different names in my time. It's the same, whether you just follow a drum beat like in Africa or surround it with a lot of instruments. The rhythm's what's important." San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. pp. 268, 269. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. The use of amplified guitars accentuates Wills's claim; some Bob Wills recordings from the 1930s and 1940s sound similar to rock and roll records of the 1950s.

Even a 1958 return to KVOO, where his younger brother Johnnie Lee Wills had maintained the family's presence, did not produce the success he hoped for. He appeared twice on ABC-TV's Jubilee USA and kept the band on the road into the 1960s. After two heart attacks, in 1965 he dissolved the Texas Playboys (who briefly continued as an independent unit) to perform solo with house bands. While he did well in Las Vegas and other areas, and made records for the Kapp Records label, he was largely a forgotten figureeven though inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1968. A 1969 stroke left his right side paralyzed, ending his active career.

The 26 May 1975 issue of TIME (Milestones section) read: "Died. Bob Wills, 70, "Western Swing" bandleader-composer; of pneumonia; in Fort Worth. Wills turned out dance tunes that are now called country rock, introducing with his Texas Playboys such C & W classics as Take Me Back to Tulsa and New San Antonio Rose". "Milestones". - TIME. - May 26, 1975. 

==Legacy==
Wills' style influenced performers Buck Owens and Merle Haggard and helped to spawn a style of music now known as the Bakersfield Sound. (Bakersfield, California was one of Wills' regular stops in his heyday). A 1970 tribute album by Haggard directed a wider audience to Wills' music, as did the appearance of younger "revival" bands like Asleep at the Wheel and the growing popularity of longtime Wills disciple and fan Willie Nelson. By 1971, Wills recovered sufficiently to travel occasionally and appear at tribute concerts. In 1973 he participated in a final reunion session with members of some the Texas Playboys from the 1930s to the 1960s. Merle Haggard was invited to play at this reunion. The session, scheduled for two days, took place in December 1973, with the album to be titled For The Last Time. Wills, speaking or attempting to holler, appeared on a couple tracks from the first day's session but suffered a stroke overnight. He had a more severe one a few days later. The musicians completed the album without him. Wills by then was comatose. He lingered until his death on May 13, 1975.

In addition to being inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1968, Wills was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1970, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in the Early Influence category along with the Texas Playboys in 1999, and received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2007.

From the 1970s until his 2002 death, Waylon Jennings performed a song called "Bob Wills Is Still The King". In addition, The Rolling Stones performed this song live in Austin, Texas at Zilker Park for their DVD The Biggest Bang. In a 1968 issue of Guitar Player, rock guitarist Jimi Hendrix said of Wills and the Playboys: "I dig them. The Grand Ole Opry used to come on, and I used to watch that. They used to have some pretty heavy cats, some heavy guitar players."

Wills ranked #27 in CMT's 40 Greatest Men In Country Music in 2003.

Fats Domino once remarked that he patterned his 1960 rhythm section after that of Bob Wills. San Antonio Rose: The Life And Music Of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. p. 293. ISBN 0-252-00470-1. 

During the 49th Grammy Awards, Carrie Underwood performed his song "San Antonio Rose". Today, George Strait performs Wills' music on concert tours and also records songs influenced by Wills and his Texas-style swing. 

The Austin-based Western swing band Asleep at the Wheel have honored Wills' music since the band's inception, mostly notably with their continuing performances of the musical drama A Ride With Bob, which debuted in Austin in March 2005 to coincide with celebrations of Wills' 100th birthday.

The Bob Wills Birthday Celebration is held every year in March at the Cain's Ballroom in Tulsa, Oklahoma with a Western swing concert and dance.

In 2004, a documentary film about his life and music, entitled Fiddlin' Man: The Life And Times Of Bob Wills, was released by VIEW Inc.

In 2011, Proper Records released an album by Hot Club of Cowtown titled What Makes Bob Holler: A Tribute To Bob Wills And His Texas Playboys.

In 2011, the Texas Legislature adopted a resolution designating western swing as the official "State Music Of Texas". John P. Meyer, "Texas legislates an official state music: Western swing", Pegasus News, May 24, 2011. Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 35 (2011). 

On February 9, 2014, the 80th Anniversary of Bob Wills' first performance at the Cain's Ballroom in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the Oklahoma Historical Society and the Oklahoma Museum of Popular Culture (OKPOP) announced plans to create a feature-length documentary about the life and music of Bob Wills. The documentary will be titled Still the King. Bob Wills: The Man. The Music. Jerry Woofard, "OKPOP museum starts fundraising for Bob Wills documentary", Tulsa World, February 9, 2014. 

==Select discography==

===Albums===

 Year Album US Country Label 
 1960 Together Again (w/ Tommy Duncan) Liberty 
 1961 A Living Legend 
 1961 Mr. Words & Mr. Music (w/ Tommy Duncan) 
 1963 Bob Wills Sings And Plays 
 1965 Bob Wills Keepsake Album No. 1 Longhorn 
 1966 From The Heart Of Texas 33 Kapp 
 1967 King Of Western Swing 43 
 1968 Here's That Man Again 24 
 1974 For The Last Time 28 United Artists 
 1975 The Best Of Bob Wills Vol. II 36 MCA 
 1976 Remembering...The Greatest Hits Of Bob Wills 46 Columbia 
 Bob Wills And His Texas Playboys In Concert 44 Capitol 
 1977 24 Great Hits By Bob Wills And His Texas Playboys 39 MGM 

===Singles===

 Year Single US Country Label 
 1935 \"Osage Stomp (Rukus Juice Shuffle)\" Vocalion 03096 
 \"Good Old Oklahoma\" Vocalion 3086 
 \"Spanish Two Step\" Vocalion 03230 
 \"I'm Sitting On Top Of The World\" Vocalation 20473 
 \" Maiden's Prayer\" Vocalion 3139 
 1936 \"Wang Wang Blues\" Vocalion 03173 
 \"Steel Guitar Rag\" Vocalion 03394 
 \"Right Or Wrong\" Vocalion 03451 
 1937 \"Playboy Stomp\" Vocalion 03763 
 \"I'm A Ding Dong Daddy From Dumas\" Vocalion 03659 
 1938 \"Maiden's Prayer\" Vocalion 03924 
 \"Ida Red\" Vocalion 05079 
 \"San Antonio Rose\" Vocalion 04755 
 \"Beaumont Rag\" Vocalion 04999 
 1940 \"Corrine, Corrina\" OKeh 06530 
 \"New San Antonio Rose\" OKeh 6894 
 \"Time Changes Everything\" OKeh 05753 
 1941 \"Maiden's Prayer\" OKeh 06205 
 \"Take Me Back To Tulsa\" OKeh 06101 
 \"My Life's Been A Pleasure\" OKeh 06676 
 \"Cherokee Maiden\" OKeh 06568 
 \"Dusty Skies\" OKeh 06598 
 1942 \"If You're From Texas\" OKeh 6722 
 \"Let's Ride With Bob\" OKeh 6692 
 1943 \"Home In San Antone\" OKeh 6710 
 1944 \"New San Antonio Rose\" 3 OKeh 5694 
 \"We Might As Well Forget It\" 2 OKeh 6722 
 \"You're From Texas\" 2 
 1945 \"Smoke On The Water\" 1 OKeh 6736 
 \"Hang Your Head In Shame\" 3 
 \"Stars And Stripes On Iwo Jima\" 1 OKeh 6742 
 \"You Don't Care What Happens To Me\" 5 
 \"Texas Playboy Rag\" 2 Columbia 36841 
 \"Silver Dew On The Blue Grass Tonight\" 1 
 1946 \"White Cross On Okinawa\" 1 Columbia 36881 
 \"New Spanish Two Step\" 1 Columbia 16966 
 \"Roly Poly\" 3 
 \"Stay A Little Longer\" 2 Columbia 37097 
 \"I Can't Go On This Way\" 4 
 1947 \"I'm Gonna Be Boss From Now On\" 5 Columbia 37205 
 \"Sugar Moon\" 1 Columbia 37313 
 \"Bob Wills Boogie\" 4 Columbia 37357 
 1948 \"Bubbles In My Beer\" 4 MGM 10116 
 \"Keeper Of My Heart\" 8 MGM 10175 
 \"Texarkana Baby\" 15 Columbia 38179 
 \"Thorn In My Heart\" 10 MGM 10236 
 1950 \"Ida Red Likes The Boogie\" 10 MGM K10570 
 \"Faded Love\" 8 MGM K10786 
 \"'Tater Pie\" MGM 10836 
 1960 \"Heart To Heart Talk\" (w/ Tommy Duncan) 5 Liberty 55260 
 1961 \"The Image Of Me\" (w/ Tommy Duncan) 26 Liberty 55264 
 1976 \"Ida Red\" (re-release) 99 Vocalion 05079 

==See also==
* Aragon Ballroom (Ocean Park)

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Townsend, Charles R. (1998). "Bob Wills". In The Encyclopedia Of Country Music. Paul Kinsbury, Editor. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 5945.
* West, Elliot. "Trails And Footprints: The Past Of The Future Southern Plains". The Future Of The Southern Plains (pp. 1737) edited by Sherry L. Smith. University of Oklahoma Press, 2005. ISBN 0-861-3735-5
* Whitburn, Joel. The Billboard Book Of Top 40 Country Hits. Billboard Books, 2006. ISBN 0-8230-8291-1
* Wolff, Kurt; Orla Duane. Country Music: The Rough Guide. Rough Guides, 2000. ISBN 1-85828-534-8

==External links==

* Official Web site and virtual museum
* 
* Texas Playboys Web site
* Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum
* The Bob Wills Tiffany Transcriptions
* Western Swing
* Famous Texans
* 



[[Badtrans]]

BadTrans is a malicious Microsoft Windows computer worm distributed by e-mail. Because of a known vulnerability in older versions of Internet Explorer, some e-mail programs, such as Microsoft's Outlook Express and Microsoft Outlook programs, may install and execute the worm as soon as the e-mail message is viewed.

Once executed, the worm replicates by sending copies of itself to other e-mail addresses found on the host's machine, and installs a keystroke logger, which then captures everything typed on the affected computer. Badtrans then transmits the data to one of several e-mail addresses. 

Among the e-mail addresses that received the keyloggers were free addresses at Excite, Yahoo, and IJustGotFired.com. IJustGotFired is a free service of MonkeyBrains, a San Francisco-based Internet service provider.
The target address at IJustGotFired began receiving e-mails at 3:23pm on November 24, 2001. Once the account exceeded its quotas, it was automatically disabled, but the messages were still saved as they arrived. The address received over 100,000 keylogs in the first day alone. 

In mid-December, the FBI contacted Rudy Rucker, Jr., owner of MonkeyBrains, and requested a copy of the keylogged data. All of that data was stolen from the victims of the worm; it includes no information about the creator of Badtrans.
Instead of complying with the FBI request, MonkeyBrains published a database website http://badtrans.monkeybrains.net for the public to determine if a given address has been compromised. The database does not reveal the actual passwords or keylogged data. 
==References==



[[Bar Mano]]

Mehmet Bar Mano (born Tosun Yusuf Mehmet Bar Mano; 2 January 1943 &ndash; 1 February 1999), known by his stage name Bar Mano, was a Turkish rock musician, singer, songwriter, composer, and television producer. Variety's Film Reviews 19851986 (Vol 19) by R R Bowker Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8352-2799-5 Beginning his musical career while attending Galatasaray High School, he was a pioneer of rock music in Turkey and one of the founders of the Anatolian rock genre. Mano composed around 200 songs and is among the best-selling and most awarded Turkish artists to date. Many of his songs were translated into a variety of languages including English, French, Japanese, Greek, Italian, Bulgarian, Romanian, Persian, Hebrew, Urdu, Arabic, and German, among others. Through his television program, 7'den 77'ye ("From 7 to 77"), Mano traveled the world and visited most countries on the globe. He remains one of the most popular public figures of Turkey.

== Early life and career ==
Bar Mano was born in skdar, Istanbul, Turkey on 2 January 1943. His mother, Rikkat Uyank, was a famous singer in early 1940s. His older brother, who was born during World War II, was named Sava ("war" in Turkish) while he was named Bar ("peace" in Turkish) by his parents to celebrate the end of the war. At birth, he was additionally named Tosun Yusuf after his deceased uncle Yusuf called Tosun (literally: Yusuf The Sturdy). However, this name was erased just before he attended the primary school. 

In primary school his head was shaven to prevent head lice, a serious threat back then, which he cited among reasons for his later signature long hair.

During his highschool days in Galatasaray High School (and later in ili Terakki High School) he formed his first band, Kafadarlar ("The Buddies"), allegedly upon seeing Erkin Koray's band performing, all students of Deutsche Schule Istanbul (stanbul Alman Lisesi), a nearby highschool. Asaf Sava Akat, a famous economist in Turkey, played saxophone, and guitarist Ender Enn made his own guitar because it was difficult to find a real one on the market in those years.

In 1962 and 1963, with his next band, Harmoniler ("The Harmonies"), he recorded cover versions of some of popular American twist songs and rearrangements of Turkish folk songs in rock and roll form, marking the beginning of the Anatolian rock movement, a synthesis of Turkish folk music and rock. In this period, his key visual and musical influence was Elvis Presley.

After graduating from high school in 1963, he moved to Europe, travelling around Paris and Lige, where he formed bands with local musicians and recorded some singles mainly in English and in French but also in Turkish. He toured with his band Les Mistigris (not related to Mistigris) in Germany, Belgium, France and Turkey until 1967.

In 1967, he suffered a serious car accident, after which he started to grow his signature mustache to disguise his scar.

Frustrated by the difficulties of working with musicians from different nationalities, he formed Kaygszlar (The Carefrees), featuring Mazhar Alanson and Fuat Gner, future members of the band MF. He recorded several singles and toured with the band, both domestically and internationally, until the band members revealed that they did not want to live abroad.

In 1970, he formed Bar Mano Ve ... ("Bar Mano and ...") again with foreign musicians, to record his first hit single, both in Turkey and in Belgium, Dalar Dalar (Mountains, Mountains!), selling over 700,000 copies. Today, the song remains one of his most popular works.

== 1970s ==
After the success of "Dalar Dalar", Mano recorded a couple of singles with Moollar (The Mongols), another influential Turkish Anatolian rock band. He then decided to return to Turkey where he recorded with the reformed Kaygszlar for a short period. In 1971, his early works were compiled under his first full length album Dnden Bugne, today commonly referred as Dalar Dalar.

In 1972, he formed Kurtalan Ekspres, a legend by itself, the band that would accompany him until his death. In 1975 until when he continued to release singles, he released his first non-compilation LP 2023, a concept album that includes many instrumental songs.

As a last attempt to reach international success, he released the LP titled Baris Mancho (1976), a strange transcription of his name, mostly with George Hayes Orchestra under CBS Records label, in Europe and South Africa. Although the album did not bring the fame he was expecting, it did reach the top of the charts in Romania and Morocco. Next year, the album was released in Turkey under the title Nick the Chopper.

From 1977 to 1980, he released three more albums in Turkey, partly consisting of compilations of older singles, namely Sakla Saman Gelir Zaman (1977), Yeni Bir Gn (1979) and 20. Sanat Yl Disko Mano (1980), all following a similar sound with 2023. All these albums are now rarity items, but most of the material from the era are available in later compilations Ben Bilirim and Sar izmeli Mehmet Aa.

== 1980s ==
In 1981, Mano released Szm Meclisten Dar with Kurtalan Ekspres, containing many hit songs including "Alla Beni Pulla Beni", "Arkadam Eek", "Glpembe", "Halhal" and "Dnence" among others. The album remains as one of their most popular works and launched a boost of popularity for Bar Mano during the 1980s.

"Arkadam Eek" ("My Friend Donkey"), quickly grew very popular among children (the song is about rural nostalgia and was not initially intended as a children's song). Throughout his career, he went on to write many other songs primarily for children to achieve an iconic acceptance among Turkish children of the 1980s and 1990s.

On the other hand "Glpembe", composed by Kurtalan Ekspres bassist Ahmet Gven, a requiem for Mano's grandmother, caught older audiences and probably is the artist's most popular song, competing perhaps only with "Dalar Dalar".

In 1983, Estafurullah, Ne Haddimize was released. It contained hit songs "Halil brahim Sofras" and "Kol Dmeleri", a new version of the artist's first song. "Halil brahim Sofras" exemplified Mano's signature moral themed lyrics, a rare feature in Turkish pop music.

In 1985, 24 Ayar Mano which included "Gibi Gibi" and a long conceptual song "Lahburger" was released. It also marked the beginning of the shift in Mano's sound characterized with the heavy use of synthesizers and drum machine in contrast with his older works consisting of a group oriented rock based sound. In subsequent years, Mano released Demesin Yal Boya (1986), Sahibinden htiyatan (1988) and Dars Banza (1989), all containing a couple of hit songs and demonstrating his new sound.

== 7'den 77'ye and 1990s ==
Cameraman Erkan Umut and Bar Mano in Teotihuacan, Mexico in 1998
Bar Mano Museum

In 1988, 7'den 77'ye (From 7 to 77), a TV show directed and presented by Mano, began to run on TRT 1, the Turkish state television channel. It was a combined music, talk show, and documentary program which was a major hit during the eight years it stayed on air. Mano traveled to almost 150 countries for the show. "Adam Olacak ocuk", a part of the show, strengthened Mano's acceptance among children.

Although his popularity continued mostly due to the TV show, his musical works in the 1990s were not well received. The albums Mega Mano (1992) and Msadenizle ocuklar (1995) were considered as the weakest efforts of his career, despite the limited success of 1992 children hit "Ay" (The Bear). On the other hand, in 1995 he toured in Japan with Kurtalan Ekspres, leading to Live In Japan (1996), his only live album. He released two albums in that country with some recognition as "the man who writes songs about vegetables", referring to "Domates, Biber, Patlcan" ("Tomato, Pepper, Aubergine") and "Nane, Limon Kabuu" (Mint, Lemon Rind), two of his hit songs from the 1980s.

== Death ==
On 31 January 1999, Bar Mano died of a sudden heart attack before the release of his just finished last work Manoloji (Manology or Manchology) (1999), a double album containing the new recordings of his hit songs along with an unfinished instrumental song "40. Yl" ("The 40th Anniversary"), celebrating his 40th year in music. His sudden death caused an almost unanimous shock in Turkey with millions of people mourning and tens of thousands of people attending his funeral.

== Legacy ==
Bar Mano was one of the most influential Turkish musicians. In his early career he and his bands contributed to the Turkish rock movement by combining traditional Turkish music with rock influences, which is still one of the main trends of Turkish popular music.

His visual image, characterized by his long hair, mustache and big rings, softened the reaction of the otherwise conservative Turkish public opinion.

Mano pioneered the progressive rock-influenced Anatolian rock movement in 1970s. His experimentation with electronic instruments in the late 1980s contributed to the 1990s sound of Turkish popular music.

His lyrics with diverse themes, mostly following a somewhat modernized version of the "ak" (wandering folk poets) tradition were heavily marginal in the popular music scene of the 1980s which was mostly dominated by love-themed lyrics.

In 2002, a tribute album was released under the name Yreimdeki Bar arklar ("Peace Songs In My Heart"), featuring 15 extremely popular Turkish artists of such diverse genres as arabesque, pop and rock (both Anatolian and western style) demonstrating his wide range of influence.

== Discography ==

=== Albums ===
* Dnden Bugne (1972) (Sayan)
* 2023 (1975) (Yavuz Plak)
* Sakla Saman Gelir Zaman (1976) (Yavuz)
* Baris Mancho, released as Nick The Chopper in Turkey (1976) (CBS Disques/Grammofoonplaten S.A.B.V., CBS 81784, Yavuz LP)
* Yeni Bir Gn (1979) (Yavuz ve Bur Plaklk)
* 20 Sanat Yl Disco Mano (1980) (Trkola)
* Szm Meclisten Dar (1981) (Trkola)
* Estafurullah... Ne Haddimize! (1983) (Trkola)
* 24 Ayar Mano (1985) (Emre Plaklk)
* Demesin Yal Boya (1986) (Emre Plaklk)
* 30 Sanat Yl Fulaksesuar Mano - Sahibinden htiyatan (1988) (Emre Plaklk)
* Dars Banza (1989) (Yavuz ve Bur Plaklk)
* Mega Mano (1992) (Emre Plak)
* Msaadenizle ocuklar (1995) (Emre Plak)
* Bar Mano Live In Japan (1996) (Emre Plak)
* Manoloji (1999) (Emre Plak)

=== Singles ===
With Harmoniler
* Twistin USA / The Jet (1962) (Grafson MGG 515)
* Do The Twist / Let's Twist again (1962) (Grafson MGG 516)
* Cit Cit Twist / Dream Girl (1963) (Grafson MGG 566)

With Jacques Denjean Orchestra
* Baby Sitter / Quelle Peste / Jenny Jenny / Un Autre Amour Que Toi (1964) (Rigolo 18.726)

With Les Mistigris
* Il Arrivera / Une Fille (1966) (Sahibinin Sesi 45-AX 3092)
* Bien Fait Pour Toi / Aman Avc Vurma Beni (1966) (Sahibinin Sesi 45-AX 3093)
* Bizim Gibi / Big Boss Man / Seher Vakti / Good Golly Miss Molly (1967) (Sayan)

With Kaygszlar
* Kol Dmeleri / Big Boss Man / Seher Vakti / Good Golly Miss Molly (1967) (Sayan FS-144)
* Kzlcklar / I'll Go Crazy (1968) (Sayan FS-171)
* Bebek / Keep Lookin' (1968) (Sayan FS-179)
* Karanlklar inde / Trip - To a Fair (1968) (Sayan FS-180)
* Bogazii / Flower of Love (1968) (Sayan FS-194)
* Runaway / Unutamyorum (1969) (Sayan FS-199)
* Aglama Demez Hayat / Kirpiklerin Ok Ok Eyle (1969) (Sayan FS 204)
* Kazman / Anadolu (1969) (Sayan FS 213)
* Mikail Aliyev baris manconun unutamadim parhasin okuyup ve 1 yeri kazandi
With Bar Mano Ve'
* Derule / Kk Bir Gece Mzii (1970) (Sayan FS-223)
* Dalar Dalar 1 / Dalar Dalar 2 (1970) (Sayan 229)

With Moollar
* te Hendek te Deve / Katip Arzuhalim Yaz Yare Boyle (1971) (Sayan FS-266)

With Moollar / Kaygszlar
* Bin Boann Kz / Ay Osman (1971) (Sayan FS-271)

With Kaygszlar / Les Mistigris
* Fil ile Kurbaa / Je te Retrouverais (1972) (Sayan FS 279)

With Kurtalan Ekspres
* lm Allah'n Emri / Gamzedeyim Deva Bulmam (1972) (Yavuz YA 1544)
* Lambaya Pf De / Kalk Gidelim Kheylan (1973) (Yavuz YA 1548)
* Gnl Da / Hey Koca Topcu Gen Osman (1973) (Yavuz YA 1554)
* Nazar Eyle Nazar Eyle / Glme Ha Glme (1974) (Yavuz YA 1562)
* Bir Bahar Akam / Estergon Kalesi (1974) (Yavuz YA 1569)
* Ben Bilirim /2023 (1975) (Yavuz Plak YA 1573)
* ay Elinden teye Rezil Dede / Vur Ha Vur (1976) (Yavuz Plak YA 1580)

With George Hayes Orchestra / Kurtalan Ekspres
* Nick the Chopper / Lonely Man (1977) (Yavuz YA 1584)

With Kurtalan Ekspres
* Hal Hal / Eri Eri Doru Doru Eri Br Ama Yine De Doru (1981) (Trkola 239)

== Filmography ==
* Baba beni eversene

== References ==
 

== Further reading ==

* 

== External links ==
*Official Website
*Baris Manco Fans Website
* 2011 tribute to Manco with a remake of his song performed by the popular Pakistani singing duo Zeb and Haniya at the famous Coke Studios in Karachi.



[[Blitz BASIC]]

Blitz BASIC refers to the programming language dialect that was interpreted by the first Blitz compilers, devised by New Zealand-based developer Mark Sibly. Being derived from BASIC, Blitz syntax was designed to be easy to pick up for beginners first learning to program. The languages are game-programming orientated but are often found general-purpose enough to be used for most types of application. The Blitz language evolved as new products were released, with recent incarnations offering support for more advanced programming techniques such as object-orientation and multi-threading. This led to the languages losing their BASIC moniker in later years. http://www.blitzbasic.com 

== History ==

The first iteration of the Blitz language was created for the Amiga platform and published by the Australian firm Memory and Storage Technology. Returning to New Zealand, Blitz2 was published several years later by Acid Software (a local Amiga game publisher). Since then, Blitz compilers have been released on several platforms.

=== BlitzBasic ===
Idigicon published BlitzBasic for Microsoft Windows in October 2000. The language included a built-in API for performing basic 2D-graphics and audio operations. Following the release of Blitz3D, BlitzBasic is often synonymously referred to as Blitz2D.

Recognition of BlitzBasic increased when a limited range of "free" versions were distributed on popular UK computer magazines such as PC Format. This resulted in a legal dispute between the developer and publisher which was eventually resolved amicably.

== Versions ==

=== Blitz3D ===
Blitz3D was released for Microsoft Windows in September 2001, competing with other similar PC game-development languages of the time (such as Dark Basic). Blitz3D extended BlitzBasic's command-set with the inclusion of an API for a DirectX 7-based 3D engine.

Although originally Blitz3D's distribution rights were owned by Idigicon, Blitz Research Ltd. later signed a deal with the firm so as to allow Blitz Research Ltd. to distribute Blitz3D themselves. In return, Idigicon were granted full rights to distribute BlitzBasic and to clear any outstanding stock copies of Blitz3D.

=== BlitzPlus ===
In February 2003, Blitz Research Ltd. released BlitzPlus also for Microsoft Windows. It lacked the 3D engine of Blitz3D, but did bring new features to the 2D side of the language by implementing limited Microsoft Windows control support for creating native GUIs. Backwards compatibility of the 2D engine was also extended, allowing compiled BlitzPlus games and applications to run on systems that might only have DirectX 1.

=== BlitzMax ===

The first BlitzMax compiler was released in December 2004 for Mac OS X. This made it the first Blitz dialect that could be compiled on *nix platforms. Compilers for Microsoft Windows and Linux were subsequently released in May 2005. BlitzMax brought the largest change of language structure to the modern range of Blitz products by extending the type system to include object-oriented concepts and modifying the graphics API to better suit OpenGL. BlitzMax was also the first of the Blitz languages to represent strings internally using UCS2, allowing native-support for strings literals composed of non-ASCII characters.

BlitzMax's platform-agnostic command-set allows developers to compile and run source code on multiple platforms. However the official compiler and build chain will only generate binaries for the platform that it is executing on. Unofficially, users have been able to get Linux and Mac OS X to cross-compile to the Windows platform.

BlitzMax is also the first modular version of the Blitz languages, improving the extensibility of the command-set. In addition, all of the standard modules shipped with the compiler are open-source and so can be tweaked and recompiled by the programmer if necessary. The official BlitzMax cross-platform GUI module (known as MaxGUI) allows developers to write GUI interfaces for their applications on Linux (FLTK), Mac (Cocoa) and Windows. Various user-contributed modules extend the use of the language by wrapping such libraries as wxWidgets, Cairo, Fontconfig as well as a selection of database modules. There are also a selection of third-party 3D modules available namely MiniB3D BlitzMax Modules Forums: MiniB3D - an open-source OpenGL engine which can be compiled and used on all 3 of BlitzMax's supported platforms.

In October 2007, BlitzMax 1.26 was released which included the addition of a reflection module. BlitzMax update 1.26 now available! BlitzMax 1.32 shipped new threading and Lua scripting modules and most of the standard library functions have been updated so that they are unicode friendly. BlitzMax V132 for Windows and MacIntel now up! 

=== Blitz3D SDK ===
Blitz3D SDK is a 3D graphics engine based on the engine in Blitz3D. It was marketed for use with C++, C#, BlitzMax and PureBasic, however it could also be used with other languages that follow compatible calling conventions. As of January 2011, Blitz3D SDK is no longer listed for sale on the official Blitz website.

=== Max3D module ===

In 2008, the source code to Max3D - a C++-based cross-platform 3D engine - was released under a BSD license. The engine focused on OpenGL but had an abstract backend for other graphics drivers (such as DirectX) and made use of several open-source libraries, namely Assimp, Boost and ODE.

Despite the excitement in the Blitz community of Max3D being the eagerly awaited successor to Blitz3D, interest and support died off soon after the source code was released and eventually development came to a halt. There is no indication that Blitz Research will pickup the project again.

== Monkey and Mojo ==

In 2011, BRL released a new cross-platform programming language called Monkey and its first official module called Mojo. Monkey has a similar syntax to BlitzMax, but instead of compiling direct to assembly code, it translates Monkey source files directly into source for a chosen language, framework or platform e.g. Windows, Mac OS X, iOS, Android, HTML5, Flash, and much more.

==Sample code==
The following code creates a windowed application that shows the current time in binary and decimal format. This code is written in Blitz Basic, but will compile and run in both Blitz3D and BlitzPlus. See below for the same example written in BlitzMax.

 AppTitle "Binary Clock"
 Graphics 150,80,16,3
 ;Copy, modify and redistribute this source with no limit

 ;#####################################################
 ; MAIN LOOP
 ;#####################################################

 ;create a timer that means the main loop will be
 ;executed twice a second
 secondtimer=CreateTimer(2)
 Repeat

 Hour = Left(CurrentTime$(),2)
 Minute = Mid(CurrentTime$(),4,2)
 Second = Right(CurrentTime$(),2)

 If Hour >= 12 Then PM = 1
 If Hour > 12 Then Hour = Hour - 12
 If Hour = 0 Then Hour = 12

 ;should do this otherwise the PM dot will be
 ;left up once the clock rolls past midnight!
 Cls

 Color(0,255,0) ;make the text green for the PM part
 If PM = 1 Then Text 5,5,"PM"
 ;set the text colour back to white for the rest
 Color(255,255,255)

 For bit=0 To 5
 xpos=20*(6-bit)

 binaryMask=2^bit

 ;do hours
 If (bit<4)
 If (hour And binaryMask)
 Text xpos,5,"1"
 Else
 Text xpos,5,"0"
 EndIf
 EndIf

 ;do the minutes
 If (minute And binaryMask)
 Text xpos,25,"1"
 Else
 Text xpos,25,"0"
 EndIf

 ;do the seconds
 If (second And binaryMask)
 Text xpos,45,"1"
 Else
 Text xpos,45,"0"
 EndIf
 Next

 ;make the text red for the decimal time
 Color(255,0,0)
 Text 5,65,"Decimal: " + CurrentTime$()
 ;set the text back to white for the rest
 Color(255,255,255)

 ;will wait half a second
 WaitTimer(secondTimer)
 Forever

BlitzMax version of the above clock:

 AppTitle = "Binary Clock"
 Graphics 145,85

 secondtimer = CreateTimer(2)
 Repeat

 Hour = CurrentTime()[..2].ToInt()
 Minute = CurrentTime()[4..6].ToInt()
 Second = CurrentTime()[6..].ToInt()

 If Hour >= 12 Then PM = 1
 If Hour > 12 Then Hour = Hour - 12
 If Hour = 0 Then Hour = 12

 'should do this otherwise the PM dot will be
 'Left up once the clock rolls past midnight!
 Cls

 SetColor(0,255,0) 'make the text green For the PM part
 If PM = 1 Then DrawText "PM",5,5
 'set the text colour back To white For the rest
 SetColor(255,255,255)

 For bit=0 Until 6
 xpos=20*(6-bit)
 binaryMask=2^bit
 'do hours
 If (bit<4)
 If (hour & binaryMask)
 DrawText "1",xpos,5
 Else
 DrawText "0",xpos,5
 EndIf
 EndIf

 'do the minutes
 If (minute & binaryMask)
 DrawText "1", xpos,25
 Else
 DrawText "0", xpos,25
 EndIf

 'do the seconds
 If (second & binaryMask)
 DrawText "1",xpos,45
 Else
 DrawText "0",xpos,45
 EndIf
 Next

 'make the text red For the decimal time
 SetColor(255,0,0)
 DrawText "Decimal: " + CurrentTime(),5,65
 'set the text back To white For the rest
 SetColor(255,255,255)

 Flip

 'will wait half a second
 WaitTimer(secondTimer)
 If KeyHit(KEY_ESCAPE) Then Exit
 Forever

==Notable software written using BlitzBasic ==

* - BlitzMax
* - BlitzMax
*Fairway Solitaire - BlitzMax
*Grid Wars - BlitzMax
*Platypus - Blitz2D (Mac port, BlitzMax)
* - Blitz3D 
*Worms - originally titled Total Wormage and developed in Blitz Basic on the Amiga before its commercial release IGN. Worms Blast Preview 

== See also ==

*Protean IDE - An IDE for BlitzBasic/Plus/3D
*IDEal - An advanced IDE for Blitz+ and Blitz3D.
*BLIde - A .Net IDE for BlitzMax.
*MaxIDE Community Edition - An open source branch of the default IDE maintained by some members of the BlitzMax community.
*Project Studio - A discontinued .Net IDE for Blitz3D/Basic and BlitzMax.

==References==
 

==External links==
* Blitz Research, BlitzBasic author, distributor
*wxMax for BlitzMax Brucey's wxWidgets language binding for BlitzMax
*MaxMods for BlitzMax Brucey's mods for BlitzMax
*
*BlitzBasic on WikiWikiWeb
*Modules for BlitzMax
*Blitz3DFr Official site of the French Blitz Basic community
*German BlitzBasic site
*Socoder A friendly coding community
*Russian electronic BlitzBasic-related magazine "Blitz Et Cetera"
*BlitzBasic codebase Code archive
*BlitzMonkeys.com Indie Coders Community Forums
*Grey Alien BlitzMax Game Framework (No longer for sale)
*Misc BlitzMax modules a selection of useful modules for BlitzMax including Theora movie playback
*Blitzforum.de German portal inclusive forum and German command reference
*BitBrothers Team Site Polish portal of BlitzBasic language
*Dark Bit Factory & Gravity Demoscene coding site
*T-C's Blitz Tutorials Learn making games using Blitz
* Site non officiel : http://blitz3d.serveur.free.fr/
*BlitzBullet wrapper of Bullet (software) physics library for Blitz3D
*Digital Wizard's Lab - BlitzMax framework for making 2D and isometric games

==Books on Blitz Basic==
*Learn to Program 2D Games in Blitz Basic by John "Krylar" Logsdon, (2003)
*Game Programming for Teens by Maneesh Sethi, (2003), ISBN 1-59200-068-1
*Games Programming for the Absolute Beginner with BlitzMax by Sloan Kelly, ISBN 0-9553771-0-2
*3D Game Programming for Teens by Eric Grebler, (2006) ISBN 1-59200-900-X
*3D Game Programming for Teens, 2nd edition by Maneesh Sethi, (2009) ISBN 1-59863-843-2



[[Bliss bibliographic classification]]

The Bliss bibliographic classification (BC) is a library classification system that was created by Henry E. Bliss (18701955) and published in four volumes between 1940 and 1953. Although originally devised in the United States, it was more commonly adopted by British libraries. List of libraries using Bliss Classification. http://www.blissclassification.org.uk/bclink.shtml A second edition of the system (BC2) has been developed in Britain since 1977.

==Origins of the system==
Bliss was born in New York in 1870. In 1891, he began work in the library of the College of the City of New York (now City College of the City University of New York).

Bliss had a lifelong interest in the organization, structure and philosophy of knowledge and was very critical of the library classification systems that were available to him. He believed that because the popular Library of Congress system had been designed for a specific library (the Library of Congress) it had no use as a standard system outside that library. He also greatly disliked the Dewey Decimal system.

Bliss wanted a classification system that would provide distinct rules yet still be adaptable to whatever kind of collection a library might have, as different libraries have different needs. His solution was the concept of alternative location, in which a particular subject could be put in more than one place, as long as the library made a specific choice and used it consistently.

In 1908 Bliss reclassified 60,000 of his librarys books, and in 1910 he published an article with a rough scheme of his general ideas. But as he continued to develop his system he realized that it was going to be a much larger project than he had anticipated. The first of his four volumes appeared in 1940 (the year he retired) and the last in 1953, two years before his death.

Some of the underlying policies of the BC system were:
*alternative location
*brief, concise notation
*organizing knowledge according to academic expertise
*subjects moving gradually from topic to topic as they naturally related to one another.

==Examples==
Bliss deliberately avoided the use of the decimal point because of his objection to Dewey's system. Instead he used capital and lower-case letters, numerals, and every typographical symbol available on his extensive and somewhat eccentric typewriter.

In the revised edition (BC2), only capital letters are used, with numerals occasionally used for special purposes. Here is an extract:

HJ Preventive medicine
. . .
HL Curative medicine
HLK Primary care; general practice
HLY Secondary care, aftercare

==Adoption and change==
BC was not used by many North American libraries. The system was not without its flaws (the result of being largely a one-person project), and the layout of Blisss text was difficult to read. A few library schools sometimes taught the BC system to their students, but only in a minor way. The failure of the system to catch on in North America was partly because of its internal deficiencies but also because the Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress systems were already well established.

The City College library continued to use Blisss system until 1967, when it reluctantly switched to the Library of Congress system. It had become too expensive to train new staff members to use BC, and too expensive to maintain in general. Much of the Bliss stacks remain, however, as no-one has recatalogued the books.

The case was different, however, in Britain. BC proved more popular there and also spread to other English-speaking countries. Part of the reason for its success was that libraries in teachers colleges liked the way Bliss had organized the subject areas on teaching and education. By the mid-1950s the system was being used in at least sixty British libraries and in a hundred by the 1970s.

In 1967 the Bliss Classification Association was formed. Its first publication was the Abridged Bliss Classification (ABC), intended for school libraries. In 1977 it began to publish and maintain a much-improved, revised version of Blisss system, the Bliss Bibliographic Classification (Second Edition) or BC2. This retains only the broad outlines of Bliss's scheme, replacing most of the detailed notation with a new scheme based on the principles of faceted classification. 15 of approximately 28 volumes of schedules have so far been published.

==Classifications==
The top level organisation is:

*2/9 - Generalia, Phenomena, Knowledge, Information science & technology
*A/AL - Philosophy & Logic
*AM/AX - Mathematics, Probability, Statistics
*AY/B - General science, Physics
*C - Chemistry
*D - Astronomy and earth sciences
**DG/DY - Earth sciences
*E/GQ - Biological sciences
*GR/GZ - Applied biological sciences: agriculture and ecology
*H - Physical Anthropology, Human biology, Health sciences
*I - Psychology & Psychiatry
*J - Education
*K - Society (includes Social sciences, sociology & social anthropology)
*L/O - History (including area studies, travel and topography, and biography)
**LA - Archaeology
*P - Religion, Occult, Morals and ethics
*Q - Social welfare & Criminology
*R - Politics & Public administration
*S - Law
*T - Economics & Management of economic enterprises
*U/V - Technology and useful arts (including household management and services)
*W - The Arts
**WV/WX - Music
*X/Y - Language and literature
*ZA/ZW - Museology

==See also==
*Colon classification
*Dewey Decimal Classification
*Library of Congress Classification
*Universal Decimal Classification

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Bliss, Henry E. (1910). A modern classification for libraries, with simple notation, mnemonics, and alternatives. Library Journal 35, 351358.
*Bliss, Henry E. (1935). A system of bibliographic classification. New York: H. W. Wilson.
*Bliss, Henry E. (19401953). A bibliographic classification, extended by systematic auxiliary schedules for composite specification (4 volumes). New York: H. W. Wilson.
*Maltby, Arthur & Gill, Lindy (1979). The case for Bliss. London: Clive Bingley. ISBN 0-85157-290-1.
*Thomas, Alan R. (1997). Bibliographical classification: the ideas and achievements of Henry E. Bliss. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 25 (1), 51104.

==External links==
*Bliss Classification Association



[[Blood alcohol content]]

thumb

Blood alcohol content (BAC), also called blood alcohol concentration, blood ethanol concentration, or blood alcohol level is most commonly used as a metric of alcohol intoxication for legal or medical purposes.

Blood alcohol content is usually expressed as a percentage of alcohol (generally in the sense of ethanol) in the blood in units of mass of alcohol per volume of blood or mass of alcohol per mass of blood, depending on the country. For instance, in North America a BAC of 0.10 (0.10% or one tenth of one percent) means that there are 0.10 g of alcohol for every dL of blood. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/2090019-overview 

== Blood Alcohol Level Chart==

 Progressive effects of alcohol A hybridizing of effects as described at Alcohol's Effects from Virginia Tech and Federal Aviation Regulation (CFR) 91.17: Alcohol and Flying (hosted on FlightPhysical.com) 
 BAC (% by vol.) Behavior Impairment 
 0.0100.029 * Average individual appears normal * Subtle effects that can be detected with special tests 
 0.0300.059 * Mild euphoria * Relaxation * Joyousness * Talkativeness * Decreased inhibition * Concentration 
 0.060.09 * Blunted feelings * Disinhibition * Extroversion * Reasoning * Depth perception * Peripheral vision * Glare recovery 
 0.100.19 * Over-expression * Emotional swings * Anger or sadness * Boisterousness * Decreased libido * Reflexes * Reaction time * Gross motor control * Staggering * Slurred speech * Temporary erectile dysfunction * Possibility of temporary alcohol poisoning 
 0.200.29 * Stupor * Loss of understanding * Impaired sensations * Possibility of falling unconscious * Severe motor impairment * Loss of consciousness * Memory blackout 
 0.300.39 * Severe central nervous system depression * Unconsciousness * Possibility of death * Bladder function * Breathing * Dysequilibrium * Heart rate 
 0.400.50 * General lack of behavior * Unconsciousness * Possibility of death * Breathing * Heart rate * Positional Alcohol Nystagmus 
 >0.50 * High risk of poisoning * Possibility of death 

 Standard drink chart (U.S.) Based on the CDC standard of 0.6 fl oz alcohol per drink. CDC alcohol FAQ 
 Alcohol Amount (ml) Amount (fl oz) Serving size Alcohol (% by vol.) Alcohol 
 80 proof liquor 44 1.5 One shot 40 0.6 USoz 
 Table wine 148 5 One glass 12 0.6 USoz 
 Beer 355 12 One can/bottle 5 0.6 USoz 

 MaleFemale Approximate blood alcohol percentage (by vol.) BAC Charts from Virginia Tech One drink has 0.5 USoz alcohol by volume 
 Drinks Body weight 
 40 kg 45 kg 55 kg 64 kg 73 kg 82 kg 91 kg 100 kg 109 kg 
 90 lb 100 lb 120 lb 140 lb 160 lb 180 lb 200 lb 220 lb 240 lb 
 
 1 0.05 0.040.05 0.030.04 0.030.03 0.020.03 0.020.03 0.020.02 0.020.02 0.020.02 
 2 0.10 0.080.09 0.060.08 0.050.07 0.050.06 0.040.05 0.040.05 0.030.04 0.030.04 
 3 0.15 0.110.14 0.090.11 0.080.10 0.070.09 0.060.08 0.060.07 0.050.06 0.050.06 
 4 0.20 0.150.18 0.120.15 0.110.13 0.090.11 0.080.10 0.080.09 0.070.08 0.060.08 
 5 0.25 0.190.23 0.160.19 0.130.16 0.120.14 0.110.13 0.090.11 0.090.10 0.080.09 
 6 0.30 0.230.27 0.190.23 0.160.19 0.140.17 0.130.15 0.110.14 0.100.12 0.090.11 
 7 0.35 0.260.32 0.220.27 0.190.23 0.160.20 0.150.18 0.130.16 0.120.14 0.110.13 
 8 0.40 0.300.36 0.250.30 0.210.26 0.190.23 0.170.20 0.150.18 0.140.17 0.130.15 
 9 0.45 0.340.41 0.280.34 0.240.29 0.210.26 0.190.23 0.170.20 0.150.19 0.140.17 
 10 0.51 0.380.45 0.310.38 0.270.32 0.230.28 0.210.25 0.190.23 0.170.21 0.160.19 
 
 
 Subtract approximately 0.01 every 40 minutes after drinking. 

==Estimated blood ethanol concentration (EBAC)==

To calculate estimated peak blood alcohol concentration (EBAC), a variation, including drinking period in hours, of the Widmark formula was used. The formula is: 

:

where 0.806 is a constant for body water in the blood (mean 80.6%), SD is the number of standard drinks containing 10 grams of ethanol, 1.2 is a factor to convert the amount in grams to Swedish standards set by The Swedish National Institute of Public Health, BW is a body water constant (0.58 for men and 0.49 for women), Wt is body weight (kilogram), MR is the metabolism constant (0.017) and DP is the drinking period in hours. Regarding metabolism (MR) in the formula; Females demonstrated a higher average rate of elimination (mean, 0.017; range, 0.014-0.021 g/210 L) than males (mean, 0.015; range, 0.013-0.017 g/210 L). Female subjects on average had a higher percentage of body fat (mean, 26.0; range, 16.7-36.8%) than males (mean, 18.0; range, 10.2-25.3%). Additionally, men are, on average, heavier than women but it is not strictly accurate to say that the water content of a person alone is responsible for the dissolution of alcohol within the body, because alcohol does dissolve in fatty tissue as well. When it does, a certain amount of alcohol is temporarily taken out of the blood and briefly stored in the fat. For this reason, most calculations of alcohol to body mass simply use the weight of the individual, and not specifically his water content. Finally, it is speculated that the bubbles in sparkling wine may speed up alcohol intoxication by helping the alcohol to reach the bloodstream faster. A study conducted at the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom gave subjects equal amounts of flat and sparkling Champagne which contained the same levels of alcohol. After 5 minutes following consumption, the group that had the sparkling wine had 54 milligrams of alcohol in their blood while the group that had the same sparkling wine, only flat, had 39 milligrams. G. Harding "A Wine Miscellany" pg 136137, Clarkson Potter Publishing, New York 2005 ISBN 0-307-34635-8 

Examples:
* 80 kg male drinking 3 standard drinks in two hours:
:
* 70 kg woman drinking 2.5 standard drinks in two hours:
:

==Binge drinking==

The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) define the term "binge drinking" as any time one reaches a peak BAC of 0.08% or higher as opposed to some (arguably) arbitrary number of drinks in an evening. "Quick Stats: Binge Drinking." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. April 2008.. 

== Units of measurement ==
There are several different units in use around the world for defining blood alcohol concentration. Each is defined as either a mass of alcohol per volume of blood or a mass of alcohol per mass of blood (never a volume per volume). 1 milliliter of blood is approximately equivalent to 1.06 grams of blood. Because of this, units by volume are similar but not identical to units by mass. In the U.S. the concentration unit 1% w/v (percent mass/volume, equivalent to 10g/l or 1 g per 100 ml) is in use. Research & Articles on Blood Alcohol Concentration by | BookRags.com This is not to be confused with the amount of alcohol measured on the breath, as with a breathalyzer. The amount of alcohol measured on the breath is generally accepted as proportional to the amount of alcohol present in the blood at a rate of 1:2100. Therefore, a breathalyzer measurement of 0.10 mg/L of breath alcohol converts to 0.021 g/210L of breath alcohol, or 0.021 g/dL of blood alcohol (the units of the BAC in the United States). While a variety of units (or sometimes lack thereof) is used throughout the world, many countries use the g/L unit, which do not create confusion as percentages do. Usual units are highlighted in the table below.

 Reference Unit Dimensions Equivalent to Used in 
 BAC by volume 1 percent (%) 1/100 g/mL = 1 g/dL 9.43 mg/g, 217.4 mmol/L United States, Australia, Canada 
 1 permille () 1/1000 g/mL = 1 g/L 0.943 mg/g, 21.7 mmol/L Austria, Bulgaria, France, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey 
 1 basis point () 1/10,000 g/mL = 10 mg/100 mL 94.3 ppm, 2.17 mmol/L Great Britain 
 BAC by mass 1 percent (%) 1/100 g/g = 1 cg/g 1.06 cg/mL, 230 mmol/L 
 1 permille () 1/1000 g/g = 1 mg/g 1.06 mg/mL, 23 mmol/L Finland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Russian Federation 
 1 part per million (ppm) 1/1,000,000 g/g = 1 g/g 1.06 g/mL, 23 mol/L 

==Legal limits==

Map of Europe showing countries' blood alcohol limits as defined in g/dl for the general population.
For purposes of law enforcement, blood alcohol content is used to define intoxication and provides a rough measure of impairment. Although the degree of impairment may vary among individuals with the same blood alcohol content, it can be measured objectively and is therefore legally useful and difficult to contest in court. Most countries disallow operation of motor vehicles and heavy machinery above prescribed levels of blood alcohol content. Operation of boats and aircraft are also regulated.

The alcohol level at which a person is considered legally impaired varies by country. The list below gives limits by country. These are typically blood alcohol content limits for the operation of a vehicle.

; Zero effective tolerance
It is illegal to have any measurable alcohol in the blood while driving in these countries. Most jurisdictions have a tolerance slightly higher than zero to account for false positives and naturally occurring alcohol in the body. Some of the following jurisdictions have a general prohibition of alcohol.

:
* Australia- Learner drivers or those drivers with a Provisional/Probationary Licence
* Bangladesh
* Brazil
* Brunei
* Canadanew drivers undergoing graduated licensing in Ontario or British Columbia, Impaired Driving - The Various Suspensions and Prohibitions drivers under the age of 22 in Alberta, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Northwest Territories, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Keeping Drivers Safe Saskatchewan and Quebec. Tolrance zro pour les conducteurs de moins de 21 ans | Patrice Bergeron | National 
* Croatiaprofessional drivers, driving instructors and drivers of the vehicle categories C1, C1+E, C, C+E, D, D+E and H; the limit for other drivers is 0.50 mg/g, but they do get an additional separate fine if they cause an accident while having a blood alcohol level between 0 and 0,50 mg/g Driving law (hr) 
* Czech Republic
* Estonia
* Fiji
* Hungary
* Israel 24 mg per 100 ml (0.024%) of breath (penalties only apply above 26 mg per 100 ml (0.026%) of breath due to lawsuits about sensitivity of devices used). New drivers, drivers under 24 years of age and commercial drivers 5 mg per 100 ml of breath.(0,005%) 
* New Zealanddrivers under the age of 20
* Nepal
* Oman
* Pakistan
* Paraguay
* Romania (beyond 0.08% drivers will not only receive a fine and have their license suspended, the offense will also be added to their criminal records.)
* Russia (0 permille introduced in 2010, cancelled in September 2013 )
* Saudi Arabia
* Slovakia
* United Arab Emirates
* United Statesdrivers under the age of 21

; 0.02%

:
* China
* Israel 24 mg per 100 ml (0.024%) of breath (penalties only apply above 26 mg per 100 ml (0.026%) of breath due to lawsuits about sensitivity of devices used). New drivers, drivers under 24 years of age and commercial drivers 5 mg per 100 ml of breath.(0,005%) 
* Netherlands (for drivers in their first five years after gaining a driving license) Alcohol | Onderwerp | Rijksoverheid.nl 
* Norway (road vehicles and sea vessels over 15 m) /d: LOV-1965-06-18-4 :d/ Lov om vegtrafikk (vegtrafikkloven) 
* Poland
* Puerto Rico 
* Sweden
* Ukraine

; 0.03%

:
* Belarus
* Chile
* India (note: In the state of Kerala, a policy of zero tolerance has developed.) according to Section 185 of Motor Vehicles Act 1988. On first offence, the punishment is imprisonment of 6 months and/or fine of 2000 Indian Rupees (INR). If the second offence is committed within three years, the punishment is 2 years and/or fine of 3000 Indian Rupees (INR). The clause of 30 mg/dL was added by an amendment in 1994. It came into effect beginning 14 November 1994. 
* Serbia
* Japan http://www.npa.go.jp/annai/license_renewal/english.pdf The breath alcohol concentration limit for driving in Japan is 0.15 mg/l, which, assuming a breath alcohol to blood alcohol ratio of 1:2,100, is roughly equivalent to a BAC of 0.0315%. The penalties become even more severe at 0.25 mg/l, which is roughly equivalent to a BAC of 0.0525%. 
* Uruguay http://www.presidencia.gub.uy/unasev/news/2009/2009030401.htm Desde el 16 de marzo, la concentracin de alcohol en sangre permitida ser de 0,3 gr/l (0.00% for truck/taxi/bus drivers) http://www.presidencia.gub.uy/_web/leyes/2007/11/TO393_19%2010%202007_00001.PDF Ley 18.191, art. 47 
* Russia (since September 2013 )

; 0.04%

:
* Lithuania (0.02% for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license)
* Mexico

; 0.05%

:
* Argentina (0.02% for motorbikes, 0.00% for truck/taxi/bus drivers)
* Australia (0.00% for Australian Capital Territory learner, provisional and convicted DUI drivers (changed down from 0.02% on December 1, 2010), 0.02% for truck/bus/taxi, 0.00% for learner drivers, provisional/probationary drivers (regardless of age), truck and bus drivers, driving instructors and DUI drivers in all other states)
* Austria - no limit for pedestrians; 0.08% for cycling; 0.05% generally for cars 7,5 t), bus (D), drivers of taxi and public transport https://www.help.gv.at/Portal.Node/hlpd/public/content/4/Seite.042000.html Alkohol am Steuer, HELP.gv.at, of 19. January 2013, retr. 22. April 2013 http://www.verkehrspsychologie.at/gesetzliche_grundlagen_fuehrerscheinentzug.htm Gesetzliche Grundlagen fr den Fhrerscheinentzug (Alkohol), verkehrspsychologie.at, AAP - Angewandte Psychologie und Forschung GmbH, Wien, retr. 22. April 2013 
* Belgium
* Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Bulgaria
* Canada: Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Manitoba, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswickprovincial offence
* Costa Rica Carros de ebrios 'saturan' los planteles del MOPT (in Spanish). http://www.nacion.com/ln_ee/2009/enero/01/pais1826383.html La Nacion] 
* Croatiaprofessional drivers, driving instructors and drivers of the vehicle categories C1, C1+E, C, C+E, D, D+E and H; the limit for other drivers is 0.50 mg/g, but they do get an additional separate fine if they cause an accident while having a blood alcohol level between 0 and 0,50 mg/g 
* Denmark
* Finland
* France (0.025% for bus drivers) Between 0.05% and 0.08%, drivers can be fined 135 and have six points removed from their licence. Above 0.08%, the punishment is more severe with possible imprisonment of up to two years, heavy fines and licence suspension. http://www2.securiteroutiere.gouv.fr/ressources/conseils/l-alcool-au-volant.html (in French) 
* Germany (0.0 for learner drivers, all drivers 1821 and newly licensed drivers of any age for first two years of licence; also, if the BAC exceeds 0.3, driving is illegal if the driver is showing changes in behavior ("Relative Fahruntchtigkeit"))
* Greece
* Hong Kong
* Iceland
* Ireland (0.02% for learner drivers and professional drivers) 
* Italy (0.00% for drivers in their first three years after gaining a driving license)
* Latvia (0.02% for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license)
* Luxembourg
* Macedonia (0.00% for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license)
* Netherlands (0.02% for drivers in their first five years after gaining a driving license) 
* New Zealand (for drivers over 20, from 2014.)
* Peru
* Philippines Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) Limits Worldwide 
* Portugal (0.02% for drivers holding a driver's licence for less than three years, professional drivers, and drivers of taxis, heavy vehicles, emergency vehicles, public transport of children and carrying dangerous goods).
* Slovenia (0.00% for drivers in their first two years after gaining a drivers licence, drivers under 21 and common drivers, such as buses, trucks...)
* South Africa
* Spain (0.03% for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license and common carriers, such as buses, trucks...)
* Switzerland (0.01% for drivers in their first three years after gaining a drivers licence and for driving instructors) http://www.tcs.ch/fr/voyages-camping/infos-touristiques/news/nouveautes.php 
* Thailand
* Taiwan (breath alcohol limit decreased from 0.25 to 0.15 from 13 June 2013)
* Turkey

; 0.06%

* The Bahamas Driving Under the Influence Unit 

; 0.08%

* Canada Criminal Code of Canada criminal offence
* England and Wales Directgov (0.02% for operators of fixed-wing aircraft; both countries share the same law regarding motoring alcohol limits.)
* Malaysia (0.00 for Probationary Driving Licence holders)
* Malta
* New Zealand (0.00% for drivers under 20) Alcohol and drugs limits 
* Norway (legal limit for sea vessels under 15 m) /d: LOV-1998-06-26-47 :d/ Lov om fritids- og smbter 
* Northern Ireland (The government of Northern Ireland intends to reduce the general limit to 0.05%. DOE - Biggest shake up in drink driving laws for forty years - Attwood )
* Puerto Rico (for drivers 21 years and older) 
* Scotland (The Scottish Government intends to reduce the limit to 0.05%. - Consultation launched on reducing Scotland's drink-drive limit )
* Singapore Driving In Singapore - Home 
* United Statesall states impose penalties for driving with a BAC of 0.08% or greater. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. http://alcoholpolicy.niaaa.nih.gov/Blood_Alcohol_Concentration_Limits_Adult_Operators_of_Noncommercial_Motor_Vehicles.html. Accessed on February 01, 2013. Even below those levels drivers can have civil liability and other criminal guilt (e.g., in Arizona driving impairment to any degree caused by alcohol consumption can be a civil or criminal offense in addition to other offenses at higher blood alcohol content levels). Drivers under 21 (the most common U.S. legal drinking age) are held to stricter standards under zero tolerance laws adopted in varying forms in all states: commonly 0.01% to 0.05%. See Alcohol laws of the United States by state. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration: 0.04% for drivers of a commercial vehicle requiring a commercial driver's license Commercial Driver's License Program (CDL/CDLIS) - Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and 0.01% for operators of common carriers, such as buses. FindLaw for Legal Professionals - Case Law, Federal and State Resources, Forms, and Code 

; 0.1%
* Cayman Islands Legally drunk in some jurisdictions

===Limits by country (BrAC: Breath Alcohol Content)===
In certain countries, alcohol limits are determined by the Breath Alcohol Content (BrAC), not to be confused with blood alcohol content (BAC).

*In Greece, the BrAC limit is 250 microgrammes of alcohol per litre of breath. The limit in blood is 0.50 g/l. The BrAC limit for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license and common carriers is 100 microgrammes per litre of breath.
** BrAC 250400 = 200 fine.
** BrAC 400600 = 700 fine, plus suspension of driving license for 90 days (introduced in 2007) http://www.sefeaa.gr/downloads/2009/KOK.pdf 
** BrAC >600 = 2 months imprisonment, plus suspension of driving license for 180 days, plus 1,200 fine
*In Hong Kong, the BrAC limit is 220 microgrammes per litre of breath (as well as other defined limits)
*In The Netherlands and Finland, the BrAC limit is 220 microgrammes of alcohol per litre of breath (g/l, colloquially known as "Ugl").
*In New Zealand, the BrAC limit is 400 micrograms of alcohol per litre of breath for those aged 20 years or over, and zero for those aged under 20 years.
*In Singapore, the BrAC limit is 350 microgrammes of alcohol per litre of breath. 
*In Spain the BrAC limit is 250 microgrammes of alcohol per litre of breath and 150 microgrammes per litre of breath for drivers in their first two years after gaining a driving license and common carriers.
*In the United Kingdom the BrAC limit is 350 microgrammes of alcohol per litre of breath (as well as the above defined blood alcohol content).

===Other limitation schemes===
*For South Korea, the penalties for different blood alcohol content levels include
**0.010.049 = No Penalty
**0.050.09 = 100 days license suspension
**>0.10 = Cancellation of car license.
**

== Scientific definitions ==

"0.01" Blood alcohol content is the hundredth decimal part of the one thousandth part of a liter. (Please note that this "0.01" is measured in permille and not percentage as the "0.1" example in introduction and numbers in 1 Effects at different levels.)

In digesting these numbers it must be remembered that one milliliter is the thousandth part of a liter.
Therefore 1% of a milliliter is 0.00001-Liter.
Expressing blood-alcohol concentration as "0.01" is naming the hundredth part of a thousandth part.

As final example, a blood-alcohol concentration of 0.08, being the 0.08 "part" of a milliliter (ITSELF the thousandth part of a Liter) therefore names an absolute blood-alcohol volume of 0.00008-Liter (within every liter of blood).

Each country or state may define BAC differently. For example, the state of California in the United States legally defines BAC as a ratio of grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, California's legal definition of BAC which is equal to grams of alcohol per deciliter of blood.

Since measurement must be accurate and inexpensive, several measurement techniques are used as proxies to approximate the true parts per million measure. Some of the most common are listed here: (1) Mass of alcohol per volume of exhaled breath (for example, 0.38 mg/L; see also breath gas analysis), (2) Mass per volume of blood in the body (for example, 0.08 g/dL), and (3) Mass of alcohol per mass of the body (for example, 0.0013 g/Kg).

The number of alcoholic beverages (drinks) consumed is often a poor measure of blood alcohol content because of variations in sex, body weight, and body fat.

An ethanol level of 0.10% is equal to 22 mmol/l or 100 mg/dl of blood alcohol. This same 0.10% BAC also equates to 0.10 g/dL of blood alcohol or 0.10 g/210L of exhaled breath alcohol or 0.476 mg/L of exhaled breath alcohol. Likewise, 0.10 mg/L of exhaled breath alcohol converts to 0.02% BAC, 0.022 g/dL of blood alcohol or 0.022 g/210L of exhaled breath alcohol.

==Test assumptions==

Blood alcohol tests assume the individual being tested is average in various ways. For example, on average the ratio of blood alcohol content to breath alcohol content (the partition ratio) is 2100 to 1. In other words, there are 2100 parts of alcohol in the blood for every part in the breath. However, the actual ratio in any given individual can vary from 1300:1 to 3100:1, or even more widely. http://www.denverdui.com/drunk_driving_defense/blood_partition_ratio.html http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1689868/ This ratio varies not only from person to person, but within one person from moment to moment. Thus a person with a true blood alcohol level of .08% but a partition ratio of 1700:1 at the time of testing would have a .10 reading on a Breathalyzer calibrated for the average 2100:1 ratio.

A similar assumption is made in urinalysis. When urine is analyzed for alcohol, the assumption is that there are 1.3 parts of alcohol in the urine for every 1 part in the blood, even though the actual ratio can vary greatly.

Breath alcohol testing further assumes that the test is post-absorptivethat is, that the absorption of alcohol in the subject's body is complete. http://www.duiblog.com/2005/03/22/breathalyzer-inaccuracy-testing-during-the-absorptive-state/ If the subject is still actively absorbing alcohol, their body has not reached a state of equilibrium where the concentration of alcohol is uniform throughout the body. Most forensic alcohol experts reject test results during this period as the amounts of alcohol in the breath will not accurately reflect a true concentration in the blood.

Auto-brewery syndrome is a rare medical condition where the stomach produces brewers yeast that breaks down starches into ethanol; which enters the blood stream. 

==Metabolism and excretion==

Alcohol is absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract, but more slowly in the stomach than in the small or large intestine. For this reason, alcohol consumed with food is absorbed more slowly, because it spends a longer time in the stomach. Furthermore, alcohol dehydrogenase is present in the stomach lining. After absorption, the alcohol passes to the liver through the hepatic portal vein, where it undergoes a first pass of metabolism before entering the general bloodstream. 

Alcohol is removed from the bloodstream by a combination of metabolism, excretion, and evaporation. The relative proportion disposed of in each way varies from person to person, but typically about 95% is metabolized by the liver. The remainder of the alcohol is eliminated through excretion in breath, urine, sweat, feces, milk and saliva. Alcohol and the Human Body Excretion into urine typically begins after about 40 minutes, whereas metabolisation commences as soon as the alcohol is absorbed, and even before alcohol levels have risen in the brain.

Alcohol is metabolized mainly by the group of six enzymes collectively called alcohol dehydrogenase. These convert the ethanol into acetaldehyde (an intermediate that is actually more toxic than ethanol). The enzyme acetaldehyde dehydrogenase then converts the acetaldehyde into non-toxic Acetic acid.

Many physiologically active materials are removed from the bloodstream (whether by metabolism or excretion) at a rate proportional to the current concentration, so that they exhibit exponential decay with a characteristic halflife (see pharmacokinetics). This is not true for alcohol, however. Typical doses of alcohol actually saturate the enzymes' capacity, so that alcohol is removed from the bloodstream at an approximately constant rate. This rate varies considerably between individuals; Another sex based difference is in the elimination of alcohol. Persons below the age of 25, women and persons with liver disease may process alcohol more slowly. False High (BAC) readings are related to patients with proteinuria and hematuria, due to kidney-liver metabolism and failure (for example, Hematuria 1+ protenuria 1+ )
Such persons have impaired acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, which causes acetaldehyde levels to peak higher, producing more severe hangovers and other effects such as flushing and tachycardia. Conversely, members of certain ethnicities that traditionally did not use alcoholic beverages have lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenases and thus "sober up" very slowly, but reach lower aldehyde concentrations and have milder hangovers. Rate of detoxification of alcohol can also be slowed by certain drugs which interfere with the action of alcohol dehydrogenases, notably aspirin, furfural (which may be found in fusel alcohol), fumes of certain solvents, many heavy metals, and some pyrazole compounds. Also suspected of having this effect are cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac), and acetaminophen (Tylenol) (paracetamol).

Currently, the only known substance that can increase the rate of metabolism of alcohol is fructose. The effect can vary significantly from person to person, but a 100g dose of fructose has been shown to increase alcohol metabolism by an average of 80%. Fructose also increases false positives of high BAC ratio readings in anyone with proteinuria and hematuria, due to kidney-liver metabolism. 

Alcohol absorption can be slowed by ingesting alcohol on a full stomach. Spreading the total absorption of alcohol over a greater period of time decreases the maximum alcohol level, decreasing the hangover effect. Thus, drinking on a full stomach or drinking while ingesting drugs which slow the breakdown of ethanol into acetaldehyde will reduce the maximum blood levels of this substance and thus decrease the hangover.

===Carbonated beverages===

Alcohol in non-carbonated beverages is absorbed more slowly than alcohol in carbonated drinks. Another study also confirmed this, conducted at the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom gave subjects equal amounts of flat and sparkling Champagne which contained the same levels of alcohol. After 5 minutes following consumption, the group that had the sparkling wine had 54 milligrams of alcohol in their blood while the group that had the same sparkling wine, only flat, had 39 milligrams. G. Harding "A Wine Miscellany" pg 136137, Clarkson Potter Publishing, New York 2005 ISBN 0-307-34635-8 

===Retrograde extrapolation===
Retrograde extrapolation is the mathematical process by which someone's blood alcohol concentration at the time of driving is estimated by projecting backwards from a later chemical test. This involves estimating the absorption and elimination of alcohol in the interim between driving and testing. The rate of elimination in the average person is commonly estimated at .015 to .020 grams per deciliter per hour (g/dl/h), although again this can vary from person to person and in a given person from one moment to another. Metabolism can be affected by numerous factors, including such things as body temperature, the type of alcoholic beverage consumed, and the amount and type of food consumed.

In an increasing number of states, laws have been enacted to facilitate this speculative task: the blood alcohol content at the time of driving is legally presumed to be the same as when later tested. There are usually time limits put on this presumption, commonly two or three hours, and the defendant is permitted to offer evidence to rebut this presumption.

Forward extrapolation can also be attempted. If the amount of alcohol consumed is known, along with such variables as the weight and sex of the subject and period and rate of consumption, the blood alcohol level can be estimated by extrapolating forward. Although subject to the same infirmities as retrograde extrapolationguessing based upon averages and unknown variablesthis can be relevant in estimating BAC when driving and/or corroborating or contradicting the results of a later chemical test.

==Cases of high blood alcohol levels==
On Monday March 26, 2012, a man was found in a ditch in the U.S. state of Indiana with a BAC of 0.552%. Report: Center Township man's alcohol level nearly 7 times legal limit : Valparaiso News 

In November 2007, a driver was found passed out in her car in Oregon in the United States. A blood test showed her blood alcohol level was 0.550%. She was charged with several offenses, including two counts of driving under the influence of an intoxicant, reckless endangerment of a person, criminal mischief and driving with a suspended license. Her bail was later set at US$50,000, since she had several previous convictions for similar offenses. DUI Suspect's 'Lethal Dose' Earns $50K Bail by David Schoetz, ABC News, December 28, 2007. Deputies: Woman Had 0.55% Blood Alcohol Level, KPTV News, December 27, 2007. 

In December 2007, a driver was arrested in Klamath County, Oregon, after she was found unconscious in her car which was stuck in a snow bank with its engine running. Police were forced to break a car window to remove her. After realizing she was in an alcohol-induced coma, they rushed her to the hospital where a blood test showed her blood alcohol level was 0.720%. She reportedly was released from the hospital the next day. Drunkest Driver Ever?, The Smoking Gun, January 10, 2008. She was subsequently charged with drunk driving. Oregon Woman's Blood Alcohol Level Nine Times Legal Limit, Associated Press (reprinted by Fox News), January 10, 2008. 

In July 2008, a driver was arrested after he ran into a highway message board on Interstate 95 in Providence, Rhode Island. A breath test showed his blood alcohol level was at 0.491% and he was raced to the hospital where he was sedated and placed in a detoxification unit. He was subsequently charged with driving while intoxicated and resisting arrest. R.I. Police Arrest Man With Record .491 Blood Alcohol Level, Associated Press (reprinted by Fox News), July 23, 2008. DUI suspect had highest alcohol level recorded By Richard C. Dujardin, The Providence Journal, July 23, 2008. He was later sentenced to one year probation, a $500 fine, 40 hours of community service and a one-year loss of his driver's license. The police later stated that his blood alcohol level was the highest they had ever seen for someone who hadn't died of alcohol poisoning. Police: Driver's Blood Alcohol Level Highest Registered for Someone Not Dead, Fox News, October 07, 2008. It was later estimated that the driver had consumed 1014 drinks over the course of 12 hours, Extreme Drunk Driving by Russell Goldman, ABC News, July 24, 2008. based on the standard levels of elimination which as documented previously can vary by up to 300%.

In December 2009, a South Dakota woman was found behind the wheel of a stolen car with a measured blood alcohol content of .708%, almost nine times the state's limit of .08%, thus becoming the highest recorded level of alcohol toxicity for the state. After she was hospitalized, she was released on bond and subsequently found in another stolen automobile while under the influence. , Rapid City Journal, December 29, 2009 

In August 2012, an Iowa man was arrested for driving under the influence. Breathalyzers and subsequent lab tests confirmed a BAC of .627%, about 8 times the legal limit for driving. At that blood alcohol level, he was conscious, yet incoherent and unable to answer simple questions. http://thegazette.com/2012/08/13/twice-lethal-dose-of-alcohol-recorded-in-north-liberty-arrest/ 

===Highest recorded blood alcohol level/content===
There have been reported cases of blood alcohol content higher than 1.00%. In March 2009, a 45-year-old man was admitted to the hospital in Skierniewice, Poland, after being struck by a car. The blood test showed blood alcohol content at 1.23%. The man survived but did not remember either the accident or the circumstances of his alcohol consumption. One such case was reported by O'Neil, and others in 1984. They report on a 30-year-old man who survived a blood alcohol concentration of 1,500 mg/100 ml (1.5%) blood after vigorous medical intervention. 

In South Africa, a man driving a Mercedes-Benz Vito light van containing 15 sheep, allegedly stolen from nearby farms, was arrested on December 22, 2010, near Queenstown in Eastern Cape. His blood had an alcohol content of 1.6 g/100 ml (1.6%). Also in the vehicle were five boys and a woman who were also arrested. Drunkest driver in SA arrested Sowetan 

In 2004, an unidentified Taiwanese woman died of alcohol intoxication after immersion for twelve hours in a bathtub filled with 40% ethanol. Her blood alcohol content was 1.35%. It was believed that she had immersed herself as a response to the SARS epidemic. 

In Poland, a homeless man was found sleeping half-naked on January 28, 2011, in Cieszyn. His blood had an alcohol level of 1.024%. Despite the temperature of 10 C and extremely high blood alcohol content, the man survived. Sowetan 

In December 2004, a man was admitted to the hospital in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, after being struck by a car. After detecting a strong alcohol odor, doctors at a hospital conducted a breath test which displayed the man's blood alcohol content at 0.914%. Bulgarian's blood-alcohol level astounds doctors, CBC News, January 4, 2005 (retrieved on March 16, 2009). The man was treated for serious injuries sustained in the crash and survived. Bulgarian Sets World Record for Highest Blood Alcohol Level, Sofia News Agency (Novinte.com), January 4, 2005 (retrieved on March 31, 2009). 

In February 2005, French gendarmes from Bourg-en-Bresse, France, conducted a breath test on a man who had lost control of his car. He had an alcohol content of 0.976%. Absolute record for a breath test (fr) He was not injured in the accident but was charged with a 150 fine and his driving license was canceled.

In 1982, a 24-year-old woman was admitted to the UCLA emergency room with a serum alcohol concentration of 1.5% (1,510 mg/dL), corresponding to a BAC of 1.33%. She was alert and oriented to person and place. Serum alcohol concentration is not equal to nor calculated in the same way as blood alcohol content. 

In 2012, on Oct 26th a man from Olszewo-Borki community, Poland, who died in a car accident, had 2.23%; however, the blood sample was collected from a wound and thus possibly contaminated. http://www.eostroleka.pl/smiertelny-rekord-kierowca-z-powiatu-ostroleckiego-mial-22-promile-alkoholu-zginal-w-wypadku-zdjecia,art31892.html 

In 2013, on July 26 a 30-year-old man from Alfredwka, Poland, was found by Municipal Police Patrol from Nowa Dba lying in the ditch along the road in Tarnowska Wola. At the hospital there was recorded that the man had 13.74 permille of alcohol in the blood (1.374%). The man survived. http://wiadomosci.gazeta.pl/wiadomosci/1,114871,14402847,Mial_13_74_promila_alkoholu_we_krwi__I_przezyl__Rekord.html http://www.nowadeba.pl/mieszkaniec/bezpieczenstwo/straz-miejska/informacje/art,864,straznicy-miejscy-uratowali-zycie-mieszkanca-alfredowki-.html 

==References==

=== Notes ===

=== Bibliography ===
* Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. Science and Technology Department. The Handy Science Answer Book. Pittsburgh: The Carnegie Library, 1997. ISBN 978-0-7876-1013-5.
* 
* Taylor, L., and S. Oberman. Drunk Driving Defense, 6th edition. New York: Aspen Law and Business, 2006. ISBN 978-0-7355-5429-0.

==External links==

*International Blood Alcohol Limits
*Blood Alcohol levels with practical exercises
*Comprehensive International BAC (Blood Alcohol Content) Limits Prescribed legal driving limits for over 250 jurisdictions



[[Barrister]]

A barrister (also known as barrister-at-law or Bar-at-law) is a member of one of the two classes of lawyer found in many common law jurisdictions with split legal professions. Barristers specialize in courtroom advocacy, drafting legal pleadings, and giving expert legal opinions. They can be contrasted with solicitors  the other class of lawyer in split professions  who have more direct access to clients, and may do transactional-type legal work. Barristers are rarely hired by clients directly but instead are retained (or instructed) by solicitors to act on behalf of clients. In some legal systems, including those of Scotland, Belgium, South Africa, India, Pakistan, Scandinavian jurisdictions, Israel, Brazil, and the British Crown dependencies of Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man, a professional with similar responsibilities is called an advocate.

The historical difference between the two professions  and the only essential difference in England and Wales today  is that solicitors are attorneys, which means that they can act in the place of their client for legal purposes (as in signing contracts) and may conduct litigation on their behalf by making applications to the court, writing letters in litigation to the client's opponent, and so on. A barrister is not an attorney and is usually forbidden, either by law or professional rules or both, from "conducting" litigation. This means that, while the barrister speaks on the client's behalf in court, he or she can do so only when instructed by a solicitor or certain other qualified professional clients, such as patent agents.

Many countries with common law legal systems, like New Zealand (though it is possible there to practice as a barrister sole), have abandoned the separate systems of legal representation, and an attorney can perform all the functions of each.

==Differences between barristers and solicitors==

===Differences===
Artist's rendition of an early 20th-century English barrister
A barrister is a lawyer who represents a litigant as advocate before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. A barrister speaks in court and presents the case before a judge or jury. In some jurisdictions, a barrister receives additional training in evidence law, ethics, and court practice and procedure. In contrast, a solicitor generally meets with clients, does preparatory and administrative work and provides legal advice. In this role, he or she may draft and review legal documents, interact with the client as necessary, prepare evidence, and generally manage the day-to-day administration of a lawsuit. A solicitor can provide a crucial support role to a barrister when in court, such as managing large volumes of documents in the case or even negotiating a settlement outside the courtroom while the trial continues inside.

There are other essential differences. A barrister will usually have rights of audience in the higher courts, whereas other legal professionals will often have more limited access, or will need to acquire additional qualifications to have such access. In countries where there is a split between the roles of barrister and solicitor, the barrister, in civil law jurisdictions is responsible for appearing in trials or pleading cases before the courts.

Barristers usually have particular knowledge of case law, precedent, and the skills to "build" a case. When a solicitor in general practice is confronted with an unusual point of law, they may seek the "opinion of counsel" on the issue. In insurance contracts there is often the requirement to seek the expert opinion of counsel where the policy contains what is known as "a QC clause". 

In most countries, barristers operate as sole practitioners, and are prohibited from forming partnerships or from working as a barrister as part of a corporation. (In 2009, the Clementi Report recommended the abolition of this restriction in England and Wales. ) However, barristers normally band together into "chambers" to share clerks (administrators) and operating expenses. Some chambers grow to be large and sophisticated, and have a distinctly corporate feel. In some jurisdictions, barristers may be employed by firms of solicitors, banks, or corporations as in-house legal advisers.

In contrast, solicitors work directly with the clients and are responsible for engaging a barrister with the appropriate expertise for the case. Barristers generally have little or no direct contact with their 'lay clients', particularly without the presence or involvement of the solicitor. All correspondence, inquiries, invoices, and so on, will be addressed to the solicitor, who is primarily responsible for the barrister's fees.

In court, barristers are often visibly distinguished from solicitors by their apparel. For example, in Ireland, England, and Wales, a barrister usually wears a horsehair wig, stiff collar, bands, and a gown. Since January 2008, solicitor advocates have also been entitled to wear wigs, but wear different gowns. 

In many countries the traditional divisions between barristers and solicitors are breaking down. Barristers once enjoyed a monopoly on appearances before the higher courts, but in England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland this has now been abolished, and solicitor advocates can generally appear for clients at trial. Increasingly, firms of solicitors are keeping even the most advanced advisory and litigation work in-house for economic and client relationship reasons. Similarly, the prohibition on barristers taking instructions directly from the public has also been widely abolished. But in practice, direct instruction is still a rarity in most jurisdictions, partly because barristers with narrow specialisations or who are only really trained for advocacy are not prepared to provide general advice to members of the public.

Historically barristers have had a major role in trial preparation, including drafting pleadings and reviewing evidence. In some areas of law, that is still the case. In other areas, it is relatively common for the barrister to receive the brief from the instructing solicitor to represent a client at trial only a day or two before the proceeding. Part of the reason for this is cost. A barrister is entitled to a 'brief fee' when a brief is delivered, and this represents the bulk of his fee in relation to any trial. They are then usually entitled to a 'refresher' for each day of the trial after the first. But if a case is settled before the trial, the barrister is not needed and the brief fee would be wasted. Some solicitors avoid this by delaying delivery of the brief until it is certain the case will go to trial.

===Justification for a split profession===
Some benefits of maintaining the split include:
* Having an independent barrister reviewing a course of action gives the client a fresh and independent opinion from an expert in the field distinct from solicitors who may maintain ongoing and long-term relationships with the client. This view was expressed by Sir Owen Dixon, Chief Justice of Australia, on his swearing in as Chief Justice 
* In many jurisdictions, judges are appointed from the bar. Since barristers do not have long-term client relationships, and are further removed from clients than solicitors, judicial appointees are more independent. 
* Having recourse to all of the specialist barristers at the bar can enable smaller firms, who could not maintain large specialist departments, to compete with larger firms.
* A barrister acts as a check on the solicitor conducting the trial; if it becomes apparent that the claim or defence has not been properly conducted by the solicitor prior to trial, the barrister can (and usually has a duty to) advise the client of a separate possible claim against the solicitor.
* Expertise in conducting trials, owing to the fact that barristers are specialist advocates. 
* In many jurisdictions, barristers must follow the cab-rank rule, which obliges them to accept a brief if it is in their area of expertise and if they are available, facilitating access to justice for the unpopular.

Some disadvantages of the split include:
* A multiplicity of legal advisers can lead to less efficiency and higher costs, a concern to Sir David Clementi in his review of the English legal profession. Review of the Regulatory Framework for Legal Services in England and Wales, Sir Davuid Clementi, December 2004 
* Because they are further removed from the client, barristers can be less familiar with the client's needs.

A detailed examination of the justifications for a split legal profession and of the arguments in favour of a fused profession can be found in English solicitor Peter Reeves 1986 book, Are Two Legal Professions Necessary? London: Waterlow Publishers Limited, 1986 (foreword by Sir David Napley) 

==Regulation==
Barristers are regulated by the Bar for the jurisdiction where they practise, and in some countries, by the Inn of Court to which they belong. In some countries, there is external regulation.

Inns of Court, where they exist, regulate admission to the profession. Inns of Court are independent societies that are titularly responsible for the training, admission (calling), and discipline of barristers. Where they exist, a person may only be called to the Bar by an Inn, of which they must first be a member. In fact, historically, call to and success at the Bar, to a large degree, depended upon social connections made early in life. Daniel Duman, The English and Colonial Bars in the 19th Century (Routledge: London, 1983) ISBN 0-85664-468-4, ISBN 978-0-85664-468-9 

A Bar collectively describes all members of the profession of barrister within a given jurisdiction. While as a minimum the Bar is an association embracing all its members, it is usually the case, either de facto or de jure, that the Bar is invested with regulatory powers over the manner in which barristers practice.

==Barristers around the world==
In the common law tradition, the respective roles of a lawyer  that is as legal adviser and advocate  were formally split into two separate, regulated sub-professions, the other being the office of solicitor. Historically, the distinction was absolute, but in the modern legal age, some countries that had a split legal profession now have a fused profession  anyone entitled to practise as a barrister may also practise as a solicitor, and vice versa. In practice, the distinction may be non-existent, minor, or marked, depending on the jurisdiction. In some jurisdictions, such Australia, Scotland and Ireland, there is little overlap.

===Australia===
In the Australian states of New South Wales and Queensland, there is a split profession. Nevertheless, subject to conditions, barristers can accept direct access work from clients. Each state Bar Association regulates the profession and essentially has the functions of the English Inns of Court. In the states of South Australia, Victoria, and Western Australia, as well as the Australian Capital Territory, the professions of barrister and solicitor are fused, but an independent bar nonetheless exists, regulated by the Legal Practice Board of the state or territory. In Tasmania and the Northern Territory, the profession is fused, although a very small number of practitioners operate as an independent bar.

Generally counsel dress in the traditional English manner (wig, gown, and jabot) before superior courts, although they no longer robe for appearances in lower jurisdictions. Wigs are no longer worn in the highest civil court in New South Wales, the Court of Appeal. Wigs are still worn in the Supreme Court, while only robes without wigs are worn in the District Courts in civil matters. Robes and wigs are worn in all criminal cases. In Western Australia, wigs are no longer worn in any court.

Each year, the Bar Association appoints certain barristers of seniority and eminence to the rank of "Senior Counsel" (in most States and Territories) or "Queen's Counsel" (in Queensland). Such barristers carry the title "SC" or "QC" after their name. The appointments are made after a process of consultation with members of the profession and the judiciary. Senior Counsel appear in particularly complex or difficult cases. They make up about 14 per cent of the bar in New South Wales.

===Canada===

In Canada (except Quebec), the professions of barrister and solicitor are fused, and many lawyers refer to themselves with both names, even if they do not practice in both areas. Stephen Waddams, Introduction to the Study of Law, 7th ed (Toronto: Carswell, 2010) at 128. In colloquial parlance within the Canadian legal profession, lawyers often term themselves as "litigators" (or "barristers"), or as "solicitors", depending on the nature of their law practice though some may in effect practise as both litigators and solicitors. However, "litigators" would generally perform all litigation functions traditionally performed by barristers and solicitors; in contrast, those terming themselves "solicitors" would generally limit themselves to legal work not involving practice before the courts (not even in a preparatory manner as performed by solicitors in England), though some might practise before chambers judges. As is the practice in many other Commonwealth jurisdictions such as Australia, Canadian litigators are "gowned", but without a wig, when appearing before courts of "superior jurisdiction".

The situation is somewhat different in Quebec as a result of its civil law tradition. The profession of solicitor, or avou, never took hold in colonial Quebec, so attorneys Here the term attorney may be preferable as an avocat is very much like an American attorney in that he/she may be both a trial and case lawyer. (avocats) have traditionally been a fused profession, arguing and preparing cases in contentious matters, whereas Quebec's other type of lawyer, civil-law notaries (notaires), handle out-of-court non-contentious matters. However, a number of areas of non-contentious private law are not monopolized by notaries so that attorneys often specialise in handling either trials, cases, advising, or non-trial matters. The only disadvantage is that attorneys cannot draw up public instruments that have the same force of law as notarial acts. Most large law firms in Quebec offer the full range of legal services of law firms in common-law provinces. Intending Quebec attorneys must earn a Bachelor's degree in civil law, pass the provincial bar examination, and successfully complete a legal internship to be admitted to practise. Attorneys are regulated by the Quebec Law Society (Barreau du Qubec).

===France===
In France, avocats, or attorneys, were, until the 20th century, the equivalent of barristers. The profession included several grades ranked by seniority: stagiaire (pupil, student-at-law), plaignant (junior barrister), and consultant (senior barrister). Since the 14th century and during the course of the 19th in particular, French barristers competed in territorial battles over respective areas of legal practice against the conseil juridique (chamber-counselor) and avou (solicitor), and expanded to become the generalist legal practitioner. After the 1971 and 1990 legal reforms, the avocat was fused with the solicitor and chamber-counselor, making the avocat (or, if female, avocate) an all-purpose lawyer for matters of contentious jurisdiction, analogous to an American attorney. French attorneys may specialize as litigators (trial lawyers) and legal consultants (advising lawyers), known respectively as avocat plaidant and avocat-conseil. All intending attorneys must pass a legal practice examination and two-year traineeship to be admitted to general practice and enrolled, but to have rights of audience at a given court, an attorney must join that court's bar (barreau) by passing its specific bar examination. Each bar is regulated by a Bar Council (Ordre du barreau).

===Germany===
In Germany, no distinction is made and lawyers may plead at all courts with the exception of the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof) to which fewer than fifty lawyers are admitted  78 of the Zivilprozessordnung. as of 25 September 2007. See the list of lawyers admitted to the Bundesgerichtshof. Those lawyers may not plead at other courts, almost only deal with litigation, and are usually instructed by a lawyer who represented the client in the lower courts. However, these restrictions do not apply to criminal cases, nor to pleadings at courts of the other court systems (labour, administrative, taxation, and social courts, as well as the EU court system).

===Hong Kong===

The legal profession in Hong Kong is also divided into two branches: barristers and solicitors.

In the High Court and the Court of Final Appeal, only barristers and solicitor-advocates are allowed to speak on behalf of any party, which means that solicitors are restricted from doing so. In these two courts, barristers dress in the traditional English manner, as do the judges and other lawyers.

In Hong Kong, the rank of Queen's Counsel was granted prior to the transfer of the sovereignty of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to China in 1997. After the handover, the rank has been replaced by Senior Counsel post-nominal letters: SC). Senior Counsels may still, however, style themselves as silks, like their British counterparts.

===Ireland===
In the Republic of Ireland, admission to the Bar by the Chief Justice of Ireland is restricted to those on whom a Barrister-at-Law degree (B.L.) has first been conferred. The Honorable Society of King's Inns Note: the historical spelling variant Honorable, not the contemporary Honourable is the only educational establishment which runs vocational courses for barristers in the Republic and degrees of Barrister-at-Law can only be conferred by King's Inns. King's Inns are also the only body with the capacity to call individuals to the bar and to disbar them.

Most Irish barristers choose to be governed thereafter by the Bar Council of Ireland, a quasi-private entity. Senior members of the profession may be selected for elevation to the Inner Bar, when they may describe themselves as Senior Counsel ("S.C."). Admission to the Inner Bar is made by declaration before the Supreme Court, patents of precedence having been granted by the Government. Irish barristers are sole practitioners and may not form chambers or partnerships if they wish to remain members of the Bar Council's Law Library.

To practise under the Bar Council of Ireland's rules, a newly qualified barrister is apprenticed to an experienced barrister of at least seven years' experience. This apprenticeship is known as pupillage or devilling. Devilling is compulsory for those barristers who wish to be members of the Law Library and lasts for one legal year. It is common to devil for a second year in a less formal arrangement but this is not compulsory.

===Israel===
In Israel there is no distinction between barristers and solicitors, even though the judicial system is based mostly on English common law, from when Britain administered what was then Mandatory Palestine from 1920 to 1948.

===Japan===
Legal professionals in Japan are mainly divided into two branches. The term "lawyer" usually refers to barristers, while scrivener means solicitor. There are also two kinds of scriveners: administrative scriveners and judicial scriveners.

===Netherlands===
The Netherlands used to have a semi-separated legal profession comprising the lawyer and the procureur, the latter resembling, to some extent, the profession of barrister. Under that system, lawyers were entitled to represent their clients in law, but were only able to file cases before the court at which they were registered. Cases falling under the jurisdiction of another court had to be filed by a procureur registered at that court, in practice often another lawyer exercising both functions. Questions were raised on the necessity of the separation, given the fact that its main purpose  the preservation of the quality of the legal profession and observance of local court rules and customs  had become obsolete. For that reason, the procureur as a separate profession was abolished and its functions merged with the legal profession in 2008. Currently, lawyers can file cases before any court, regardless of where they are registered. The only notable exception concerns cases brought before the Supreme Court, which have to be handled by lawyers registered in the district of South Holland, mainly for qualitative reasons.

===New Zealand===
In New Zealand, the professions are formally fused. Practitioners are enrolled in the High Court as "Barristers and Solicitors", although their annual practising certificate may (by choice) nominate them as either or both. A significant proportion however practice solely as barristers, usually in "chambers" (following the British terminology), and receive "instructions" from other practitioners, at least nominally. They usually conduct the proceedings in their entirety.

A person practising as a Barrister Sole may be invited to become a Queen's Counsel (QC) to recognize long standing contribution to the legal profession. This step, referred to as "being called to the inner bar" or "taking silk", is considered highly prestigious and has been a step in the career of many New Zealand judges.

===Nigeria===
In Nigeria, there is no formal distinction between barristers and solicitors. All students who pass the bar examinations  offered exclusively by the Nigerian Law School  are called to the Nigerian bar, by the Body of Benchers. Lawyers may argue in any Federal trial or appellate court as well as any of the courts in Nigeria's 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory. The Legal Practitioner's Act, refers to Nigerian lawyers as Legal Practitioners, and following their call to the Bar, Nigerian lawyers enter their names in the register or Roll of Legal Practitioners kept at the Supreme Court. Perhaps for this reason, a Nigerian lawyer is also often referred to as a Barrister and Solicitor of the Supreme Court of Nigeria, and many Nigerian lawyers term themselves Barrister-at-Law complete with the postnominal initials "B.L.".

The vast majority of Nigerian lawyers combine contentious and non-contentious work, although there is a growing tendency for practitioners in the bigger practices to specialise in one or the other. In colloquial parlance within the Nigerian legal profession, lawyers may for this reason be referred to as "litigators" or as "solicitors".

Consistent with the practice in England and elsewhere in the Commonwealth, senior members of the profession may be selected for elevation to the Inner Bar by conferment of the rank of Senior Advocate of Nigeria (SAN).

===South Africa===

Dr. Willem Eduard Bok (18801956), South African lawyer, dressed in barrister's robes and wig
In South Africa the employment and practice of advocates (as barristers are known in South Africa) is consistent with the rest of the Commonwealth. Advocates carry the rank of Junior or Senior Counsel (SC), and are mostly briefed and paid by solicitors (known as attorneys). They are usually employed in the higher courts, particularly in the Appeal Courts where they often appear as specialist counsel. South African solicitors (attorneys) follow a practice of referring cases to Counsel for an opinion before proceeding with a case, when Counsel in question practices as a specialist in the case law at stake. Aspiring advocates currently spend one year in pupillage (formerly only six months) before being admitted to the bar in their respective provincial or judicial jurisdictions. The term 'Advocate' is sometimes used in South Africa as a title, e. g. 'Advocate John Doe, SC' ('Advokaat' in Afrikaans) in the same fashion as 'Dr. John Doe' for a medical doctor.

===South Korea===
There is no distinction between two branches. A person who passed the national bar exam, after 2 years of national education, would be able to become a judge, a prosecutor or a "lawyer" in accordance of their grades upon graduation. However, Korea has accommodated Law School System either. Now, there are two(2) ways to be a lawyer, the traditional but time limited way until 2017 and the other way to take a course on a law school and passing the bar exam. Under the current legal system, to be a judge or a prosecutor, lawyers need to practice their legal knowledge. A "lawyer" does not have any limitation of practice.

===Spain===
Spain has a division that somewhat corresponds to the division in Britain between barristers/advocates and solicitors. Procuradores represent the litigant procedurally in court, generally under the authority of a power of attorney executed by a civil law notary, while abogados represent the substantive claims of the litigant through trial advocacy. Essentially, Procuradores are court agents and their practice is confined to the locality of the court to which they are admitted. Procuradores are regulated by Royal Decree 2046 of 1982, which approved the General Statute of the Procuradores, and the Organic Law no.6 of 1985. The General Statute regulates the qualifications and conduct of the procuradores. Thus, obligations to act pro bono are laid down by Article 13.

===United States===

The United States does not draw a distinction between lawyers as pleaders (barristers) and lawyers as agents (or solicitors). All lawyers who have passed a bar examination and have been admitted to practice may prosecute or defend in the courts of the state where they are admitted. Historically, a distinction was made, and a separate label for barristers (called "counselors") existed in certain states, though both professions have long since been fused into the all-purpose attorney. Attorneys specializing in court procedure, combining advocacy and case preparation, are called trial attorneys or litigators.

South Carolina still requires attorneys to be licensed separately to plead in a courtroom. Additionally, some state appellate courts require attorneys to obtain a separate certificate of admission to plead and practice in the appellate court. Federal courts require specific admission to that court's bar to practice before it. At the state appellate level and in Federal courts, there is generally no separate examination process, although some U.S. district courts require an examination on practices and procedures in their specific courts. Unless an examination is required, admission is usually granted as a matter of course to any licensed attorney in the state where the court is located. Some federal courts will grant admission to any attorney licensed in any U.S. jurisdiction.

===United Kingdom===

====England and Wales====

Gray's Inn, London
Although with somewhat different laws, England and Wales are considered within the United Kingdom a single united and unified legal jurisdiction for the purposes of both civil and criminal law, alongside Scotland and Northern Ireland, the other two legal jurisdictions within the United Kingdom. England and Wales are covered by a common bar (an organisation of barristers) and a single law society (an organisation of solicitors).

The profession of barrister in England and Wales is a separate profession from that of solicitor. It is, however, possible to hold the qualification of both barrister and solicitor at the same time. It is not necessary to leave the bar to qualify as a solicitor.

Barristers are regulated by the Bar Standards Board, a division of the General Council of the Bar. A barrister must be a member of one of the Inns of Court, which traditionally educated and regulated barristers. There are four Inns of Court: The Honourable Society of Gray's Inn, The Honourable Society of Lincoln's Inn, The Honourable Society of the Middle Temple, and The Honourable Society of the Inner Temple. All are situated in central London, near the Royal Courts of Justice. They perform scholastic and social roles, and in all cases, provide financial aid to student barristers (subject to merit) through scholarships. It is the Inns that actually "call" the student to the Bar at a ceremony similar to a graduation. Social functions include dining with other members and guests and hosting other events.

Student barristers must take a law degree and the Bar Professional Training Course (BPTC - previously Bar Vocational Course or BVC) (usually one year full-time) at one of the institutions authorised by the Bar Council to offer the BPTC. Qualification details of English Bar, thepupillagepages.com On successful completion of the BPTC student barristers are "called" to the bar by their respective inns and are elevated to the degree of "Barrister". However, before they can practise independently they must first undertake 12 months of pupillage. The first six months of this period is spent shadowing more senior practitioners, after which pupil barristers may begin to undertake some court work of their own. Following successful completion of this stage, most barristers then join a set of Chambers, a group of counsel who share the costs of premises and support staff whilst remaining individually self-employed.

In December 2004 there were just over 11,500 barristers in independent practice, of whom about ten percent are Queen's Counsel and the remainder are junior barristers. Many barristers (about 2,800) are employed in companies as 'in-house' counsel, or by local or national government or in academic institutions.

Certain barristers in England and Wales are now instructed directly by members of the public. Public Access Directory of The Bar Council Members of the public may engage the services of the barrister directly; a solicitor is not involved at any stage. Barristers undertaking public access work can provide legal advice and representation in court in almost all areas of law (see the Public Access Information on the Bar Council website) Barcouncil.org.uk and are entitled to represent clients in any court or tribunal in England and Wales. Once instructions from a client are accepted, it is the barrister (rather than the solicitor) who advises and guides the client through the relevant legal procedure or litigation.

Before a barrister can undertake Public Access work, he must have completed a special course. At present, about one in 20 barristers has so qualified. There is also a separate scheme called 'Licensed Access', available to certain nominated classes of professional client; it is not open to the general public. Public access work is experiencing a huge surge at the bar, with barristers taking advantage of the new opportunity for the bar to make profit in the face of legal aid cuts elsewhere in the profession.

The ability of barristers to accept such instructions is a recent development; it results from a change in the rules set down by the General Council of the Bar in July 2004. The Public Access Scheme has been introduced as part of the drive to open up the legal system to the public and to make it easier and cheaper to obtain access to legal advice. It further reduces the distinction between solicitors and barristers. The distinction remains however because there are certain aspects of a solicitor's role that a barrister is not able to undertake.

Although the term "barrister-at-law" is sometimes seen, and was once very common, it has never been formally correct in England and Wales. "Barrister" is the only correct nomenclature. This was confirmed by the Professional Conduct Committee of the Bar Council when it changed its rules on the usage of the description by individuals in 1970, Annual Statement of the Bar Council, 1969/70. 

====Northern Ireland====
In April 2003 there were 554 barristers in independent practice in Northern Ireland. 66 were Queen's Counsel (QCs), barristers who have earned a high reputation and are appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Lord Chancellor as senior advocates and advisers.

Those barristers who are not QCs are called Junior Counsel and are styled "BL" or "Barrister-at-Law". The term "junior" is often misleading since many members of the Junior Bar are experienced barristers with considerable expertise.

Benchers are, and have been for centuries, the governing bodies of the four Inns of Court in London and King's Inns, Dublin. The Benchers of the Inn of Court of Northern Ireland governed the Inn until the enactment of the Constitution of the Inn in 1983, which provides that the government of the Inn is shared between the Benchers, the Executive Council of the Inn and members of the Inn assembled in General Meeting.

The Executive Council (through its Education Committee) is responsible for considering Memorials submitted by applicants for admission as students of the Inn and by Bar students of the Inn for admission to the degree of Barrister-at-Law and making recommendations to the Benchers. The final decisions on these Memorials are taken by the Benchers. The Benchers also have the exclusive power of expelling or suspending a Bar student and of disbarring a barrister or suspending a barrister from practice.

The Executive Council is also involved with: education; fees of students; calling counsel to the Bar, although call to the Bar is performed by the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland on the invitation of the Benchers; administration of the Bar Library (to which all practising members of the Bar belong); and liaising with corresponding bodies in other countries.

The Bar Council is responsible for the maintenance of the standards, honour and independence of the Bar and, through its Professional Conduct Committee, receives and investigates complaints against members of the Bar in their professional capacity.

====Scotland====

In Scotland, an advocate is, in all respects except name, a barrister, but there are significant differences in professional practice.

In Scotland, admission to and the conduct of the profession is regulated by the Faculty of Advocates (as opposed to an Inn).

====Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey====
In the Bailiwick of Jersey, there are solicitors (called ecrivains) and advocates (French avocat). In the Bailiwicks of Jersey and Guernsey and on the Isle of Man, Advocates perform the combined functions of both solicitors and barristers.

==Popular culture==
* Kavanagh Q.C. (TV series 19952001) (UK)* 
*North Square The Channel 4 (HK) court drama series contains interactions between barristers and solicitors.
*Rake, Australian TV series based on the story of a colourful barrister. (2010- )
* Rumpole of the Bailey (UK) - The classic court room series
* Silk (TV series 2011) (UK)

==See also==
* Legal professions in England and Wales
* Serjeant-at-law

==References==

==Further reading==
* Abel, Richard L. The Making of the English Legal Profession: 1800-1988 (1998), 576pp 
* Lemmings, David. Gentlemen and Barristers: The Inns of Court and the English Bar, 1680-1730 (Oxford 1990)
* Levack, Brian. The civil lawyers (Oxford 1973)
* Prest, Wilfrid. The Inns of Court (1972)
* Prest, Wilfrid. The Rise of the Barristers (1986)

==External links==

* Hong Kong Bar Association (barristers in Hong Kong)
* Law Society of Hong Kong (solicitors in Hong Kong)
* Canadian Bar Association

===Australia===
* Australian Bar Association (barristers in the Commonwealth of Australia)
* Bar Association of New South Wales (Australia)
* The Victorian Bar (Australia)
* Queensland Bar Association (Australia)
* South Australian Bar Association (Australia)
* Western Australian Bar Association (Australia)
* The Northern Territory Bar Association (Australia)

===UK and Ireland===
* The Barrister magazine
* The Inner Temple
* Bar Council (barristers in England and Wales)
* Bar Library of Northern Ireland
* Faculty of Advocates in Scotland
* Irish Bar Council (barristers in the Republic of Ireland)
* The difference between barristers and solicitors
* Open source legal search tool free access
* Advice on structure and training for the Bar
* Barrister vs QC

 



[[Battle of Gettysburg]]

The Battle of Gettysburg (, with an sound) Robert D. Quigley, Civil War Spoken Here: A Dictionary of Mispronounced People, Places and Things of the 1860's (Collingswood, NJ: C. W. Historicals, 1993), p. 68. ISBN 0-9637745-0-6. was fought July 1&ndash;3, 1863, in and around the town of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania between Union and Confederate forces during the American Civil War. The battle involved the largest number of casualties of the entire war The Battle of Antietam, the culmination of Lee's first invasion of the North, had the largest number of casualties in a single day, about 23,000. and is often described as the war's turning point. Rawley, p. 147; Sauers, p. 827; Gallagher, Lee and His Army, p. 83; McPherson, p. 665; Eicher, p. 550. Gallagher and McPherson cite the combination of Gettysburg and Vicksburg as the turning point. Eicher uses the arguably related expression, "High-water mark of the Confederacy". Union Maj. Gen. George Meade's Army of the Potomac defeated attacks by Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia, ending Lee's attempt to invade the North.

After his success at Chancellorsville in Virginia in May 1863, Lee led his army through the Shenandoah Valley to begin his second invasion of the North&mdash;the Gettysburg Campaign. With his army in high spirits, Lee intended to shift the focus of the summer campaign from war-ravaged northern Virginia and hoped to influence Northern politicians to give up their prosecution of the war by penetrating as far as Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, or even Philadelphia. Prodded by President Abraham Lincoln, Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker moved his army in pursuit, but was relieved just three days before the battle and replaced by Meade.

Elements of the two armies initially collided at Gettysburg on July 1, 1863, as Lee urgently concentrated his forces there, his objective being to engage the Union army and destroy it. Low ridges to the northwest of town were defended initially by a Union cavalry division under Brig. Gen. John Buford, and soon reinforced with two corps of Union infantry. However, two large Confederate corps assaulted them from the northwest and north, collapsing the hastily developed Union lines, sending the defenders retreating through the streets of town to the hills just to the south.

On the second day of battle, most of both armies had assembled. The Union line was laid out in a defensive formation resembling a fishhook. In the late afternoon of July 2, Lee launched a heavy assault on the Union left flank, and fierce fighting raged at Little Round Top, the Wheatfield, Devil's Den, and the Peach Orchard. On the Union right, Confederate demonstrations escalated into full-scale assaults on Culp's Hill and Cemetery Hill. All across the battlefield, despite significant losses, the Union defenders held their lines.

On the third day of battle, July 3, fighting resumed on Culp's Hill, and cavalry battles raged to the east and south, but the main event was a dramatic infantry assault by 12,500 Confederates against the center of the Union line on Cemetery Ridge, known as Pickett's Charge. The charge was repulsed by Union rifle and artillery fire, at great losses to the Confederate army.

Lee led his army on a torturous retreat back to Virginia. Between 46,000 and 51,000 soldiers from both armies were casualties in the three-day battle.

On November 19, President Lincoln used the dedication ceremony for the Gettysburg National Cemetery to honor the fallen Union soldiers and redefine the purpose of the war in his historic Gettysburg Address.

==Background and movement to battle==
Gettysburg Campaign (through July 3); cavalry movements shown with dashed lines. 

Shortly after the Army of Northern Virginia won a major victory over the Army of the Potomac at the Battle of Chancellorsville (April 30 &ndash; May 6, 1863), Robert E. Lee decided upon a second invasion of the North (the first was the unsuccessful Maryland Campaign of September 1862, which ended in the bloody Battle of Antietam). Such a move would upset Federal plans for the summer campaigning season and possibly reduce the pressure on the besieged Confederate garrison at Vicksburg. The invasion would allow the Confederates to live off the bounty of the rich Northern farms while giving war-ravaged Virginia a much-needed rest. In addition, Lee's 72,000-man army could threaten Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, and possibly strengthen the growing peace movement in the North. Coddington, pp. 8&ndash;9; Eicher, p. 490. 

Thus, on June 3, Lee's army began to shift northward from Fredericksburg, Virginia. Following the death of Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson, Lee reorganized his two large corps into three new corps, commanded by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet (First Corps), Lt. Gen. Richard S. Ewell (Second), and Lt. Gen. A.P. Hill (Third); both Ewell and Hill, who had formerly reported to Jackson as division commanders, were new to this level of responsibility. The Cavalry Division remained under the command of Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart. Eicher, pp. 489&ndash;91. 

The Union Army of the Potomac, under Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, consisted of seven infantry corps, a cavalry corps, and an Artillery Reserve, for a combined strength of about 94,000 men. 

The first major action of the campaign took place on June 9 between cavalry forces at Brandy Station, near Culpeper, Virginia. The 9,500 Confederate cavalrymen under Stuart were surprised by Maj. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton's combined arms force of two cavalry divisions (8,000 troopers) and 3,000 infantry, but Stuart eventually repulsed the Union attack. The inconclusive battle, the largest predominantly cavalry engagement of the war, proved for the first time that the Union horse soldier was equal to his Southern counterpart. Symonds, p. 36. 

By mid-June, the Army of Northern Virginia was poised to cross the Potomac River and enter Maryland. After defeating the Federal garrisons at Winchester and Martinsburg, Ewell's Second Corps began crossing the river on June 15. Hill's and Longstreet's corps followed on June 24 and 25. Hooker's army pursued, keeping between the U.S. capital and Lee's army. The Federals crossed the Potomac from June 25 to 27. Trudeau, pp. 45, 66. 

This 1863 oval-shaped map depicts Gettysburg Battlefield during July 1&ndash;3, 1863, showing troop and artillery positions and movements, relief hachures, drainage, roads, railroads, and houses with the names of residents at the time of the Battle of Gettysburg.

Lee gave strict orders for his army to minimize any negative impacts on the civilian population. Lee's orders from Chambersburg, June 27, 1863 Food, horses, and other supplies were generally not seized outright, although quartermasters reimbursing Northern farmers and merchants with Confederate money were not well received. Various towns, most notably York, Pennsylvania, were required to pay indemnities in lieu of supplies, under threat of destruction. During the invasion, the Confederates seized some 40 northern African Americans. A few of them were escaped fugitive slaves, but most were freemen; all were sent south into slavery under guard. Symonds, pp. 49&ndash;54. 

On June 26, elements of Maj. Gen. Jubal Early's division of Ewell's Corps occupied the town of Gettysburg after chasing off newly raised Pennsylvania militia in a series of minor skirmishes. Early laid the borough under tribute but did not collect any significant supplies. Soldiers burned several railroad cars and a covered bridge, and destroyed nearby rails and telegraph lines. The following morning, Early departed for adjacent York County. Nye, pp. 272&ndash;78. 

Meanwhile, in a controversial move, Lee allowed Jeb Stuart to take a portion of the army's cavalry and ride around the east flank of the Union army. Lee's orders gave Stuart much latitude, and both generals share the blame for the long absence of Stuart's cavalry, as well as for the failure to assign a more active role to the cavalry left with the army. Stuart and his three best brigades were absent from the army during the crucial phase of the approach to Gettysburg and the first two days of battle. By June 29, Lee's army was strung out in an arc from Chambersburg (28 miles (45 km) northwest of Gettysburg) to Carlisle (30 miles (48 km) north of Gettysburg) to near Harrisburg and Wrightsville on the Susquehanna River. Symonds, pp. 41&ndash;43; Sears, pp. 103&ndash;106; Esposito, text for Map 94 (Map 34b in the online version); Eicher, pp. 504&ndash;507; McPherson, p. 649. 

In a dispute over the use of the forces defending the Harpers Ferry garrison, Hooker offered his resignation, and Abraham Lincoln and General-in-Chief Henry W. Halleck, who were looking for an excuse to get rid of him, immediately accepted. They replaced Hooker early on the morning of June 28 with Maj. Gen. George Gordon Meade, then commander of the V Corps. Sears, p. 123; Trudeau, p. 128. 

On June 29, when Lee learned that the Army of the Potomac had crossed the Potomac River, he ordered a concentration of his forces around Cashtown, located at the eastern base of South Mountain and eight miles (13 km) west of Gettysburg. Coddington, pp. 181, 189. On June 30, while part of Hill's Corps was in Cashtown, one of Hill's brigades, North Carolinians under Brig. Gen. J. Johnston Pettigrew, ventured toward Gettysburg. In his memoirs, Maj. Gen. Henry Heth, Pettigrew's division commander, claimed that he sent Pettigrew to search for supplies in town&mdash;especially shoes. Eicher, pp. 508&ndash;509, discounts Heth's claim because the previous visit by Early to Gettysburg would have made the lack of shoe factories or stores obvious. However, many mainstream historians accept Heth's account: Sears, p. 136; Foote, p. 465; Clark, p. 35; Tucker, pp. 97&ndash;98; Martin, p. 25; Pfanz, First Day, p. 25. 

When Pettigrew's troops approached Gettysburg on June 30, they noticed Union cavalry under Brig. Gen. John Buford arriving south of town, and Pettigrew returned to Cashtown without engaging them. When Pettigrew told Hill and Heth what he had seen, neither general believed that there was a substantial Federal force in or near the town, suspecting that it had been only Pennsylvania militia. Despite General Lee's order to avoid a general engagement until his entire army was concentrated, Hill decided to mount a significant reconnaissance in force the following morning to determine the size and strength of the enemy force in his front. Around 5 a.m. on Wednesday, July 1, two brigades of Heth's division advanced to Gettysburg. Eicher, p. 508; Tucker, pp. 99&ndash;102. 

==First day of battle==

Overview map of the first day of the Battle of Gettysburg, July 1, 1863

Anticipating that the Confederates would march on Gettysburg from the west on the morning of July 1, Buford laid out his defenses on three ridges west of the town: Herr Ridge, McPherson Ridge, and Seminary Ridge. These were appropriate terrain for a delaying action by his small cavalry division against superior Confederate infantry forces, meant to buy time awaiting the arrival of Union infantrymen who could occupy the strong defensive positions south of town at Cemetery Hill, Cemetery Ridge, and Culp's Hill. Buford understood that if the Confederates could gain control of these heights, Meade's army would have difficulty dislodging them. Sears, pp. 155&ndash;58. 

First shot monument
Heth's division advanced with two brigades forward, commanded by Brig. Gens. James J. Archer and Joseph R. Davis. They proceeded easterly in columns along the Chambersburg Pike. Three miles (5 km) west of town, about 7:30 a.m. on July 1, the two brigades met light resistance from vedettes of Union cavalry, and deployed into line. According to lore, the Union soldier to fire the first shot of the battle was Lt. Marcellus Jones. Battle of Gettysburg: "Who Really Fired the First Shot?" In 1886 Lt. Jones returned to Gettysburg to mark the spot where he fired the first shot with a monument. Marcellus Jones Monument at Gettysburg Eventually, Heth's men reached dismounted troopers of Col. William Gamble's cavalry brigade, who raised determined resistance and delaying tactics from behind fence posts with fire from their breechloading carbines. Martin, pp. 80&ndash;81. The troopers carried single-shot, breechloading carbines manufactured by Sharps, Burnside, and others. It is a modern myth that they were armed with multi-shot repeating carbines. Nevertheless, they were able to fire two or three times faster than a muzzle-loaded carbine or rifle. Still, by 10:20 a.m., the Confederates had pushed the Union cavalrymen east to McPherson Ridge, when the vanguard of the I Corps (Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds) finally arrived. Symonds, p. 71; Coddington, p. 266; Eicher, pp. 510&ndash;11. 

North of the pike, Davis gained a temporary success against Brig. Gen. Lysander Cutler's brigade but was repulsed with heavy losses in an action around an unfinished railroad bed cut in the ridge. South of the pike, Archer's brigade assaulted through Herbst (also known as McPherson's) Woods. The Federal Iron Brigade under Brig. Gen. Solomon Meredith enjoyed initial success against Archer, capturing several hundred men, including Archer himself. Tucker, pp. 112&ndash;17. 

General Reynolds was shot and killed early in the fighting while directing troop and artillery placements just to the east of the woods. Shelby Foote wrote that the Union cause lost a man considered by many to be "the best general in the army." Foote, p. 468 Maj. Gen. Abner Doubleday assumed command. Fighting in the Chambersburg Pike area lasted until about 12:30 p.m. It resumed around 2:30 p.m., when Heth's entire division engaged, adding the brigades of Pettigrew and Col. John M. Brockenbrough. Tucker, p. 184; Symonds, p. 74; Pfanz, First Day, pp. 269&ndash;75. 

As Pettigrew's North Carolina Brigade came on line, they flanked the 19th Indiana and drove the Iron Brigade back. The 26th North Carolina (the largest regiment in the army with 839 men) lost heavily, leaving the first day's fight with around 212 men. By the end of the three-day battle, they had about 152 men standing, the highest casualty percentage for one battle of any regiment, North or South. Busey and Martin, pp. 298, 501. Slowly the Iron Brigade was pushed out of the woods toward Seminary Ridge. Hill added Maj. Gen. William Dorsey Pender's division to the assault, and the I Corps was driven back through the grounds of the Lutheran Seminary and Gettysburg streets. Pfanz, First Day, pp. 275&ndash;93. 

As the fighting to the west proceeded, two divisions of Ewell's Second Corps, marching west toward Cashtown in accordance with Lee's order for the army to concentrate in that vicinity, turned south on the Carlisle and Harrisburg roads toward Gettysburg, while the Union XI Corps (Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard) raced north on the Baltimore Pike and Taneytown Road. By early afternoon, the Federal line ran in a semicircle west, north, and northeast of Gettysburg. Clark, p. 53. 

However, the Federals did not have enough troops; Cutler, who was deployed north of the Chambersburg Pike, had his right flank in the air. The leftmost division of the XI Corps was unable to deploy in time to strengthen the line, so Doubleday was forced to throw in reserve brigades to salvage his line. Pfanz, First Day, p. 158. 

Around 2 p.m., the Confederate Second Corps divisions of Maj. Gens. Robert E. Rodes and Jubal Early assaulted and out-flanked the Union I and XI Corps positions north and northwest of town. The Confederate brigades of Col. Edward A. O'Neal and Brig. Gen. Alfred Iverson suffered severe losses assaulting the I Corps division of Brig. Gen. John C. Robinson south of Oak Hill. Early's division profited from a blunder by Brig. Gen. Francis C. Barlow, when he advanced his XI Corps division to Blocher's Knoll (directly north of town and now known as Barlow's Knoll); this represented a salient Pfanz, First Day, p. 230. in the corps line, susceptible to attack from multiple sides, and Early's troops overran Barlow's division, which constituted the right flank of the Union Army's position. Barlow was wounded and captured in the attack. Pfanz, First Day, pp. 156&ndash;238. 

As Federal positions collapsed both north and west of town, Gen. Howard ordered a retreat to the high ground south of town at Cemetery Hill, where he had left the division of Brig. Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr in reserve. Pfanz, First Day, p. 294. Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock assumed command of the battlefield, sent by Meade when he heard that Reynolds had been killed. Hancock, commander of the II Corps and Meade's most trusted subordinate, was ordered to take command of the field and to determine whether Gettysburg was an appropriate place for a major battle. Pfanz, First Day, pp. 337&ndash;38; Sears, pp. 223&ndash;25. Hancock told Howard, "I think this the strongest position by nature upon which to fight a battle that I ever saw." When Howard agreed, Hancock concluded the discussion: "Very well, sir, I select this as the battle-field." Hancock's determination had a morale-boosting effect on the retreating Union soldiers, but he played no direct tactical role on the first day. Martin, pp. 482&ndash;88. 

General Lee understood the defensive potential to the Union if they held this high ground. He sent orders to Ewell that Cemetery Hill be taken "if practicable." Ewell, who had previously served under Stonewall Jackson, a general well known for issuing peremptory orders, determined such an assault was not practicable and, thus, did not attempt it; this decision is considered by historians to be a great missed opportunity. Pfanz, First Day, p. 344; Eicher, p. 517; Sears, p. 228; Trudeau, p. 253. Both Sears and Trudeau record "if possible." 

The first day at Gettysburg, more significant than simply a prelude to the bloody second and third days, ranks as the 23rd biggest battle of the war by number of troops engaged. About one quarter of Meade's army (22,000 men) and one third of Lee's army (27,000) were engaged. Martin, p. 9, citing Thomas L. Livermore's Numbers & Losses in the Civil War in America (Houghton Mifflin, 1900). 

==Second day of battle==
Robert E. Lee's plan for July 2, 1863

===Plans and movement to battle===
Throughout the evening of July 1 and morning of July 2, most of the remaining infantry of both armies arrived on the field, including the Union II, III, V, VI, and XII Corps. Longstreet's third division, commanded by Maj. Gen. George Pickett, had begun the march from Chambersburg early in the morning; it did not arrive until late on July 2. Coddington, p. 333; Tucker, p. 327. 

The Union line ran from Culp's Hill southeast of the town, northwest to Cemetery Hill just south of town, then south for nearly two miles (3 km) along Cemetery Ridge, terminating just north of Little Round Top. Most of the XII Corps was on Culp's Hill; the remnants of I and XI Corps defended Cemetery Hill; II Corps covered most of the northern half of Cemetery Ridge; and III Corps was ordered to take up a position to its flank. The shape of the Union line is popularly described as a "fishhook" formation. The Confederate line paralleled the Union line about a mile (1,600 m) to the west on Seminary Ridge, ran east through the town, then curved southeast to a point opposite Culp's Hill. Thus, the Federal army had interior lines, while the Confederate line was nearly five miles (8 km) long. Clark, p. 74; Eicher, p. 521. 

Lee's battle plan for July 2 called for Longstreet's First Corps to position itself stealthily to attack the Union left flank, facing northeast astraddle the Emmitsburg Road, and to roll up the Federal line. The attack sequence was to begin with Maj. Gens. John Bell Hood's and Lafayette McLaws's divisions, followed by Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson's division of Hill's Third Corps. The progressive en echelon sequence of this attack would prevent Meade from shifting troops from his center to bolster his left. At the same time, Maj. Gen. Edward "Allegheny" Johnson's and Jubal Early's Second Corps divisions were to make a demonstration against Culp's and Cemetery Hills (again, to prevent the shifting of Federal troops), and to turn the demonstration into a full-scale attack if a favorable opportunity presented itself. Sears, p. 255; Clark, p. 69. 

Lee's plan, however, was based on faulty intelligence, exacerbated by Stuart's continued absence from the battlefield. Instead of moving beyond the Federals' left and attacking their flank, Longstreet's left division, under McLaws, would face Maj. Gen. Daniel Sickles's III Corps directly in their path. Sickles had been dissatisfied with the position assigned him on the southern end of Cemetery Ridge. Seeing higher ground more favorable to artillery positions a half mile (800 m) to the west, he advanced his corps&mdash;without orders&mdash;to the slightly higher ground along the Emmitsburg Road. The new line ran from Devil's Den, northwest to the Sherfy farm's Peach Orchard, then northeast along the Emmitsburg Road to south of the Codori farm. This created an untenable salient at the Peach Orchard; Brig. Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys's division (in position along the Emmitsburg Road) and Maj. Gen. David B. Birney's division (to the south) were subject to attacks from two sides and were spread out over a longer front than their small corps could defend effectively. Pfanz, Second Day, pp. 93&ndash;97; Eicher, pp. 523&ndash;24. 

Longstreet's attack was to be made as early as practicable; however, Longstreet got permission from Lee to await the arrival of one of his brigades, and while marching to the assigned position, his men came within sight of a Union signal station on Little Round Top. Countermarching to avoid detection wasted much time, and Hood's and McLaws's divisions did not launch their attacks until just after 4 p.m. and 5 p.m., respectively. Pfanz, Second Day, pp. 119&ndash;23. 

===Attacks on the Union left flank===
Overview map of the second day of the Battle of Gettysburg, July 2, 1863
As Longstreet's divisions slammed into the Union III Corps, Meade was forced to send 20,000 reinforcements Harman, p. 59. in the form of the entire V Corps, Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell's division of the II Corps, most of the XII Corps, and small portions of the newly arrived VI Corps. The Confederate assault deviated from Lee's plan since Hood's division moved more easterly than intended, losing its alignment with the Emmitsburg Road, Harman, p. 57. attacking Devil's Den and Little Round Top. McLaws, coming in on Hood's left, drove multiple attacks into the thinly stretched III Corps in the Wheatfield and overwhelmed them in Sherfy's Peach Orchard. McLaws's attack eventually reached Plum Run Valley (the "Valley of Death") before being beaten back by the Pennsylvania Reserves division of the V Corps, moving down from Little Round Top. The III Corps was virtually destroyed as a combat unit in this battle, and Sickles's leg was amputated after it was shattered by a cannonball. Caldwell's division was destroyed piecemeal in the Wheatfield. Anderson's division, coming from McLaws's left and starting forward around 6 p.m., reached the crest of Cemetery Ridge, but it could not hold the position in the face of counterattacks from the II Corps, including an almost suicidal bayonet charge by the small 1st Minnesota regiment against a Confederate brigade, ordered in desperation by Hancock to buy time for reinforcements to arrive. Sears, pp. 312&ndash;24; Eicher, pp. 530&ndash;35; Coddington, p. 423. 

As fighting raged in the Wheatfield and Devil's Den, Col. Strong Vincent of V Corps had a precarious hold on Little Round Top, an important hill at the extreme left of the Union line. His brigade of four relatively small regiments was able to resist repeated assaults by Brig. Gen. Evander M. Law's brigade of Hood's division. Meade's chief engineer, Brig. Gen. Gouverneur K. Warren, had realized the importance of this position, and dispatched Vincent's brigade, an artillery battery, and the 140th New York to occupy Little Round Top mere minutes before Hood's troops arrived. The defense of Little Round Top with a bayonet charge by the 20th Maine was one of the most fabled episodes in the Civil War and propelled Col. Joshua L. Chamberlain into prominence after the war. Eicher, pp. 527&ndash;30; Clark, pp. 81&ndash;85. 

===Attacks on the Union right flank===
Union breastworks on Culp's Hill
About 7:00 p.m., the Second Corps' attack by Johnson's division on Culp's Hill got off to a late start. Most of the hill's defenders, the Union XII Corps, had been sent to the left to defend against Longstreet's attacks, and the only portion of the corps remaining on the hill was a brigade of New Yorkers under Brig. Gen. George S. Greene. Because of Greene's insistence on constructing strong defensive works, and with reinforcements from the I and XI Corps, Greene's men held off the Confederate attackers, although the Southerners did capture a portion of the abandoned Federal works on the lower part of Culp's Hill. Eicher, pp. 537&ndash;38; Sauers, p. 835; Pfanz, Culp's Hill, pp. 205&ndash;34; Clark, pp. 115&ndash;16. 

Just at dark, two of Jubal Early's brigades attacked the Union XI Corps positions on East Cemetery Hill where Col. Andrew L. Harris of the 2nd Brigade, 1st Division, came under a withering attack, losing half his men; however, Early failed to support his brigades in their attack, and Ewell's remaining division, that of Maj. Gen. Robert E. Rodes, failed to aid Early's attack by moving against Cemetery Hill from the west. The Union army's interior lines enabled its commanders to shift troops quickly to critical areas, and with reinforcements from II Corps, the Federal troops retained possession of East Cemetery Hill, and Early's brigades were forced to withdraw. Pfanz, Culp's Hill, pp. 235&ndash;83; Clark, pp. 116&ndash;18; Eicher, pp. 538&ndash;39. 

Jeb Stuart and his three cavalry brigades arrived in Gettysburg around noon but had no role in the second day's battle. Brig. Gen. Wade Hampton's brigade fought a minor engagement with newly promoted 23-year-old Brig. Gen. George Armstrong Custer's Michigan cavalry near Hunterstown to the northeast of Gettysburg. Sears, p. 257; Longacre, pp. 198&ndash;99. 

==Third day of battle==

Overview map of the third day of the Battle of Gettysburg, July 3, 1863

General Lee wished to renew the attack on Friday, July 3, using the same basic plan as the previous day: Longstreet would attack the Federal left, while Ewell attacked Culp's Hill. Harman, p. 63. However, before Longstreet was ready, Union XII Corps troops started a dawn artillery bombardment against the Confederates on Culp's Hill in an effort to regain a portion of their lost works. The Confederates attacked, and the second fight for Culp's Hill ended around 11 a.m. Harry Pfanz judged that, after some seven hours of bitter combat, "the Union line was intact and held more strongly than before." Pfanz, Culp's Hill, pp. 284&ndash;352; Eicher, pp. 540&ndash;41; Coddington, pp. 465&ndash;75. 

Lee was forced to change his plans. Longstreet would command Pickett's Virginia division of his own First Corps, plus six brigades from Hill's Corps, in an attack on the Federal II Corps position at the right center of the Union line on Cemetery Ridge. Prior to the attack, all the artillery the Confederacy could bring to bear on the Federal positions would bombard and weaken the enemy's line. Eicher, p. 542; Coddington, pp. 485&ndash;86. 

The "High Water Mark" on Cemetery Ridge as it appears today. The monument to the 72nd Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry Regiment ("Baxter's Philadelphia Fire Zouaves") appears at right, the Copse of Trees to the left.
Around 1 p.m., from 150 to 170 Confederate guns See discussion of varying gun estimates in Pickett's Charge article footnote. began an artillery bombardment that was probably the largest of the war. In order to save valuable ammunition for the infantry attack that they knew would follow, the Army of the Potomac's artillery, under the command of Brig. Gen. Henry Jackson Hunt, at first did not return the enemy's fire. After waiting about 15 minutes, about 80 Federal cannons added to the din. The Army of Northern Virginia was critically low on artillery ammunition, and the cannonade did not significantly affect the Union position. Around 3 p.m., the cannon fire subsided, and 12,500 Southern soldiers stepped from the ridgeline and advanced the three-quarters of a mile (1,200 m) to Cemetery Ridge in what is known to history as "Pickett's Charge". As the Confederates approached, there was fierce flanking artillery fire from Union positions on Cemetery Hill and north of Little Round Top, and musket and canister fire from Hancock's II Corps. In the Union center, the commander of artillery had held fire during the Confederate bombardment (in order to save it for the infantry assault, which Meade had correctly predicted the day before), leading Southern commanders to believe the Northern cannon batteries had been knocked out. However, they opened fire on the Confederate infantry during their approach with devastating results. Nearly one half of the attackers did not return to their own lines. Although the Federal line wavered and broke temporarily at a jog called the "Angle" in a low stone fence, just north of a patch of vegetation called the Copse of Trees, reinforcements rushed into the breach, and the Confederate attack was repulsed. The farthest advance of Brig. Gen. Lewis A. Armistead's brigade of Maj. Gen. George Pickett's division at the Angle is referred to as the "High-water mark of the Confederacy", arguably representing the closest the South ever came to its goal of achieving independence from the Union via military victory. McPherson, pp. 661&ndash;63; Clark, pp. 133&ndash;44; Symonds, pp. 214&ndash;41; Eicher, pp. 543&ndash;49. 

There were two significant cavalry engagements on July 3. Stuart was sent to guard the Confederate left flank and was to be prepared to exploit any success the infantry might achieve on Cemetery Hill by flanking the Federal right and hitting their trains and lines of communications. Three miles (5 km) east of Gettysburg, in what is now called "East Cavalry Field" (not shown on the accompanying map, but between the York and Hanover Roads), Stuart's forces collided with Federal cavalry: Brig. Gen. David McMurtrie Gregg's division and Brig. Gen. Custer's brigade. A lengthy mounted battle, including hand-to-hand sabre combat, ensued. Custer's charge, leading the 1st Michigan Cavalry, blunted the attack by Wade Hampton's brigade, blocking Stuart from achieving his objectives in the Federal rear. Meanwhile, after hearing news of the day's victory, Brig. Gen. Judson Kilpatrick launched a cavalry attack against the infantry positions of Longstreet's Corps southwest of Big Round Top. Brig. Gen. Elon J. Farnsworth protested against the futility of such a move but obeyed orders. Farnsworth was killed in the attack, and his brigade suffered significant losses. Eicher, pp. 549&ndash;50; Longacre, pp. 226&ndash;31, 240-44; Sauers, p. 836; Wert, pp. 272&ndash;80. 

==Aftermath==

===Casualties===
"The Harvest of Death": Union dead on the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, photographed July 5 or July 6, 1863, by Timothy H. O'Sullivan.
The two armies suffered between 46,000 and 51,000 casualties. Union casualties were 23,055 (3,155 killed, 14,531 wounded, 5,369 captured or missing), while Confederate casualties are more difficult to estimate. Many authors have referred to as many as 28,000 Confederate casualties, Examples of the varying Confederate casualties for July 1&ndash;3 are Sears, p. 498 (22,625); Coddington, p. 536 (20,451, "and very likely more"); Trudeau, p. 529 (22,874); Eicher, p. 550 (22,874, "but probably actually totaled 28,000 or more"); McPherson, p. 664 (28,000); Esposito, map 99 ("near 28,000"); Clark, p. 150 (20,448, "but probably closer to 28,000," which he inaccurately cites as a nearly 40% loss); Woodworth, p. 209 ("at least equal to Meade's and possibly as high as 28,000"); NPS (28,000) and Busey and Martin's more recent 2005 work, Regimental Strengths and Losses at Gettysburg, documents 23,231 (4,708 killed, 12,693 wounded, 5,830 captured or missing). Nearly a third of Lee's general officers were killed, wounded, or captured. Glatthaar, p. 282. The casualties for both sides during the entire campaign were 57,225. Sears, p. 513. 

The following tables summarize casualties by corps for the Union and Confederate forces during the three-day battle. Busey and Martin, pp. 125&ndash;47, 260&ndash;315. Headquarters element casualties account for the minor differences in army totals stated previously. 

 Union Corps Casualties (k/w/m) 
 I Corps 6059 (666/3231/2162) 
 II Corps 4369 (797/3194/378) 
 III Corps 4211 (593/3029/589) 
 V Corps 2187 (365/1611/211) 
 VI Corps 242 (27/185/30) 
 XI Corps 3807 (369/1924/1514) 
 XII Corps 1082 (204/812/66) 
 Cavalry Corps 852 (91/354/407) 
 Artillery Reserve 242 (43/187/12) 

 Confederate Corps Casualties (k/w/m) 
 First Corps 7665 (1617/4205/1843) 
 Second Corps 6686 (1301/3629/1756) 
 Third Corps 8495 (1724/4683/2088) 
 Cavalry Corps 380 (66/174/140) 

Bruce Catton wrote, "The town of Gettysburg looked as if some universal moving day had been interrupted by catastrophe." Catton, p. 325. But there was only one documented civilian death during the battle: Ginnie Wade (also widely known as Jennie), 20 years old, was hit by a stray bullet that passed through her kitchen in town while she was making bread. Sears, p. 391. Nearly 8,000 had been killed outright; these bodies, lying in the hot summer sun, needed to be buried quickly. Over 3,000 horse carcasses Sears, p. 511. were burned in a series of piles south of town; townsfolk became violently ill from the stench. Woodworth, p. 216. 

===Confederate retreat===

Gettysburg Campaign (July 5 &ndash; July 14, 1863).
The armies stared at one another in a heavy rain across the bloody fields on July 4, the same day that the Vicksburg garrison surrendered to Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant. Lee had reformed his lines into a defensive position on Seminary Ridge the night of July 3, evacuating the town of Gettysburg. The Confederates remained on the battlefield, hoping that Meade would attack, but the cautious Union commander decided against the risk, a decision for which he would later be criticized. Both armies began to collect their remaining wounded and bury some of the dead. A proposal by Lee for a prisoner exchange was rejected by Meade. Eicher, p. 550; Coddington, pp. 539&ndash;44; Clark, pp. 146&ndash;47; Sears, p. 469; Wert, p. 300. 

Lee started his Army of Northern Virginia in motion late the evening of July 4 towards Fairfield and Chambersburg. Cavalry under Brig. Gen. John D. Imboden was entrusted to escort the miles-long wagon train of supplies and wounded men that Lee wanted to take back to Virginia with him, using the route through Cashtown and Hagerstown to Williamsport, Maryland. Meade's army followed, although the pursuit was half-spirited. The recently rain-swollen Potomac trapped Lee's army on the north bank of the river for a time, but when the Federals finally caught up, the Confederates had forded the river. The rear-guard action at Falling Waters on July 14 added some more names to the long casualty lists, including General Pettigrew, who was mortally wounded. Clark, pp. 147&ndash;57; Longacre, pp. 268&ndash;69. 

In a brief letter to Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck written on July 7, Lincoln remarked on the two major Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg. He continued:

Halleck then relayed the contents of Lincoln's letter to Meade in a telegram. Despite repeated pleas from Lincoln and Halleck, which continued over the next week, Meade did not pursue Lee's army aggressively enough to destroy it before it crossed back over the Potomac River to safety in the South. The campaign continued into Virginia with light engagements until July 23, in the minor Battle of Manassas Gap, after which Meade abandoned any attempts at pursuit and the two armies took up positions across from each other on the Rappahannock River. Coddington, pp. 535&ndash;74; Sears, pp. 496&ndash;97; Eicher, p. 596; Wittenberg et al., One Continuous Fight, pp. 345&ndash;46.. 

===Union reaction to the news of the victory===
The news of the Union victory electrified the North. A headline in The Philadelphia Inquirer proclaimed "VICTORY! WATERLOO ECLIPSED!" New York diarist George Templeton Strong wrote: McPherson, p. 664. 

However, the Union enthusiasm soon dissipated as the public realized that Lee's army had escaped destruction and the war would continue. Lincoln complained to Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles that "Our army held the war in the hollow of their hand and they would not close it!" Donald, p. 446; Woodworth, p. 217. Brig. Gen. Alexander S. Webb wrote to his father on July 17, stating that such Washington politicians as "Chase, Seward and others," disgusted with Meade, "write to me that Lee really won that Battle!" Coddington, p. 573. 

===Effect on the Confederacy===
The Confederates had lost politically as well as militarily. During the final hours of the battle, Confederate Vice President Alexander Stephens was approaching the Union lines at Norfolk, Virginia, under a flag of truce. Although his formal instructions from Confederate President Jefferson Davis had limited his powers to negotiate on prisoner exchanges and other procedural matters, historian James M. McPherson speculates that he had informal goals of presenting peace overtures. Davis had hoped that Stephens would reach Washington from the south while Lee's victorious army was marching toward it from the north. President Lincoln, upon hearing of the Gettysburg results, refused Stephens's request to pass through the lines. Furthermore, when the news reached London, any lingering hopes of European recognition of the Confederacy were finally abandoned. Henry Adams wrote, "The disasters of the rebels are unredeemed by even any hope of success. It is now conceded that all idea of intervention is at an end." McPherson, pp. 650, 664. 

The immediate reaction of the Southern military and public sectors was that Gettysburg was a setback, not a disaster. The sentiment was that Lee had been successful on July 1 and had fought a valiant battle on July 2&ndash;3, but could not dislodge the Union Army from the strong defensive position to which it fled. The Confederates successfully stood their ground on July 4 and withdrew only after they realized Meade would not attack them. The withdrawal to the Potomac that could have been a disaster was handled masterfully. Furthermore, the Army of the Potomac had been kept away from Virginia farmlands for the summer and all predicted that Meade would be too timid to threaten them for the rest of the year. Lee himself had a positive view of the campaign, writing to his wife that the army had returned "rather sooner than I had originally contemplated, but having accomplished what I proposed on leaving the Rappahannock, viz., relieving the Valley of the presence of the enemy and drawing his Army north of the Potomac." He was quoted as saying to Maj. John Seddon, brother of the Confederate secretary of war, "Sir, we did whip them at Gettysburg, and it will be seen for the next six months that that army will be as quiet as a sucking dove." Some Southern publications, such as the Charleston Mercury, criticized Lee's actions in the campaign and on August 8 he offered his resignation to President Davis, who quickly rejected it. Gallagher, Lee and His Army, pp. 86, 93, 102-05; Sears, pp. 501&ndash;502; McPherson, p. 665, in contrast to Gallagher, depicts Lee as "profoundly depressed" about the battle. 

Gettysburg became a postbellum focus of the "Lost Cause", a movement by writers such as Edward A. Pollard and Jubal Early to explain the reasons for the Confederate defeat in the war. A fundamental premise of their argument was that the South was doomed because of the overwhelming advantage in manpower and industrial might possessed by the North. However, they claim it also suffered because Robert E. Lee, who up until this time had been almost invincible, was betrayed by the failures of some of his key subordinates at Gettysburg: Ewell, for failing to seize Cemetery Hill on July 1; Stuart, for depriving the army of cavalry intelligence for a key part of the campaign; and especially Longstreet, for failing to attack on July 2 as early and as forcefully as Lee had originally intended. In this view, Gettysburg was seen as a great lost opportunity, in which a decisive victory by Lee could have meant the end of the war in the Confederacy's favor. Gallagher, Lee and His Generals, pp. 207&ndash;208; Sears, p. 503; Woodworth, p. 221. Gallagher's essay "Jubal A. Early, The Lost Cause, and Civil War History: A Persistent Legacy" in Lee and His Generals is a good overview of the Lost Cause movement. 

===Gettysburg Address===
Gettysburg National Cemetery
The ravages of war were still evident in Gettysburg more than four months later when, on November 19, the Soldiers' National Cemetery was dedicated. During this ceremony, President Abraham Lincoln honored the fallen and redefined the purpose of the war in his historic Gettysburg Address. White, p. 251. White refers to Lincoln's use of the term "new birth of freedom" and writes, "The new birth that slowly emerged in Lincoln's politics meant that on November 19 at Gettysburg he was no longer, as in his inaugural address, defending an old Union but proclaiming a new Union. The old Union contained and attempted to restrain slavery. The new Union would fulfill the promise of liberty, the crucial step into the future that the Founders had failed to take." 

==Historical assessment==

===Decisive victory controversies ===

The nature of the result of the Battle of Gettysburg has been the subject of controversy for years. Although not seen as overwhelmingly significant at the time, particularly since the war continued for almost two years, in retrospect it has often been cited as the "turning point", usually in combination with the fall of Vicksburg the following day. This is based on the hindsight that, after Gettysburg, Lee's army conducted no more strategic offensives&mdash;his army merely reacted to the initiative of Ulysses S. Grant in 1864 and 1865&mdash;and by the speculative viewpoint of the Lost Cause writers that a Confederate victory at Gettysburg might have resulted in the end of the war. McPherson, p. 665; Gallagher, Lee and His Generals, pp. 207&ndash;208. 

It is currently a widely held view that Gettysburg was a decisive victory for the Union, but the term is considered imprecise. It is inarguable that Lee's offensive on July 3 was turned back decisively and his campaign in Pennsylvania was terminated prematurely (although the Confederates at the time argued that this was a temporary setback and that the goals of the campaign were largely met). However, when the more common definition of "decisive victory" is intended&mdash;an indisputable military victory of a battle that determines or significantly influences the ultimate result of a conflict&mdash;historians are divided. For example, David J. Eicher called Gettysburg a "strategic loss for the Confederacy" and James M. McPherson wrote that "Lee and his men would go on to earn further laurels. But they never again possessed the power and reputation they carried into Pennsylvania those palmy summer days of 1863." However, Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones wrote that the "strategic impact of the Battle of Gettysburg was ... fairly limited." Steven E. Woodworth wrote that "Gettysburg proved only the near impossibility of decisive action in the Eastern theater." Edwin Coddington pointed out the heavy toll on the Army of the Potomac and that "after the battle Meade no longer possessed a truly effective instrument for the accomplishments of his task. The army needed a thorough reorganization with new commanders and fresh troops, but these changes were not made until Grant appeared on the scene in March 1864." Joseph T. Glatthaar wrote that "Lost opportunities and near successes plagued the Army of Northern Virginia during its Northern invasion," yet after Gettysburg, "without the distractions of duty as an invading force, without the breakdown of discipline, the Army of Northern Virginia an extremely formidable force." Ed Bearss wrote, "Lee's invasion of the North had been a costly failure. Nevertheless, at best the Army of the Potomac had simply preserved the strategic stalemate in the Eastern Theater ..." Peter Carmichael refers to the "horrendous losses at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg, which effectively destroyed Lee's offensive capacity," implying that these cumulative losses were not the result of a single battle. Thomas Goss, writing in the U.S. Army's Military Review journal on the definition of "decisive" and the application of that description to Gettysburg, concludes: "For all that was decided and accomplished, the Battle of Gettysburg fails to earn the label 'decisive battle'." Eicher, p. 550; McPherson, p. 665; Hattaway and Jones, p. 415; Woodworth, p. xiii; Coddington, p. 573; Glatthaar, p. 288; Bearss, p. 202; Carmichael, p. xvii; 

===Lee vs. Meade===
George G. Meade
Prior to Gettysburg, Robert E. Lee had established a reputation as an almost invincible general, achieving stunning victories against superior numbers&mdash;although usually at the cost of high casualties to his army&mdash;during the Seven Days, the Northern Virginia Campaign (including the Second Battle of Bull Run), Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville. Only the Maryland Campaign, with its tactically inconclusive Battle of Antietam, had been less than successful. Therefore, historians have attempted to explain how Lee's winning streak was interrupted so dramatically at Gettysburg. Although the issue is tainted by attempts to portray history and Lee's reputation in a manner supporting different partisan goals, the major factors in Lee's loss arguably can be attributed to: (1) Lee's overconfidence in the invincibility of his men; (2) the performance of his subordinates, and his management thereof; (3) health issues, and; (4) the performance of his opponent, George G. Meade, and the Army of the Potomac.

Robert E. Lee
Throughout the campaign, Lee was influenced by the belief that his men were invincible; most of Lee's experiences with the Army of Northern Virginia had convinced him of this, including the great victory at Chancellorsville in early May and the rout of the Union troops at Gettysburg on July 1. Since morale plays an important role in military victory when other factors are equal, Lee did not want to dampen his army's desire to fight and resisted suggestions, principally by Longstreet, to withdraw from the recently captured Gettysburg to select a ground more favorable to his army. War correspondent Peter W. Alexander wrote that Lee "acted, probably, under the impression that his troops were able to carry any position however formidable. If such was the case, he committed an error, such however as the ablest commanders will sometimes fall into." Lee himself concurred with this judgment, writing to President Davis, "No blame can be attached to the army for its failure to accomplish what was projected by me, nor should it be censured for the unreasonable expectations of the public&mdash;I am alone to blame, in perhaps expecting too much of its prowess and valor." Sears, pp. 499&ndash;500; Glatthaar, p. 287; Fuller, p. 198, states that Lee's "overweening confidence in the superiority of his soldiers over his enemy possessed him." 

The most controversial assessments of the battle involve the performance of Lee's subordinates. The dominant theme of the Lost Cause writers and many other historians is that Lee's senior generals failed him in crucial ways, directly causing the loss of the battle; the alternative viewpoint is that Lee did not manage his subordinates adequately, and did not thereby compensate for their shortcomings. For example, Sears, p. 504: "In the final analysis, it was Robert E. Lee's inability to manage his generals that went to the heart of the failed campaign." Glatthaar, pp. 285&ndash;86, criticizes the inability of the generals to coordinate their actions as a whole. Fuller, p. 198, states that Lee "maintained no grip over the operations" of his army. Two of his corps commanders&mdash;Richard S. Ewell and A.P. Hill&mdash;had only recently been promoted and were not fully accustomed to Lee's style of command, in which he provided only general objectives and guidance to their former commander, Stonewall Jackson; Jackson translated these into detailed, specific orders to his division commanders. Fuller, p. 195, for example, refers to orders to Stuart that "were as usual vague." Fuller, p. 197, wrote "As was custom, he relied on verbal instructions, and left all details to his subordinates." All four of Lee's principal commanders received criticism during the campaign and battle: Woodworth, pp. 209&ndash;10. 
* James Longstreet suffered most severely from the wrath of the Lost Cause authors, not the least because he directly criticized Lee in postbellum writings and became a Republican after the war. His critics accuse him of attacking much later than Lee intended on July 2, squandering a chance to hit the Union Army before its defensive positions had firmed up. They also question his lack of motivation to attack strongly on July 2 and 3 because he had argued that the army should have maneuvered to a place where it would force Meade to attack them. The alternative view is that Lee was in close contact with Longstreet during the battle, agreed to delays on the morning of July 2, and never criticized Longstreet's performance. (There is also considerable speculation about what an attack might have looked like before Dan Sickles moved the III Corps toward the Peach Orchard.) Sears, pp. 501&ndash;502; McPherson, pp. 656&ndash;57; Coddington, pp. 375&ndash;80; A more detailed collection of historical assessments of Longstreet at Gettysburg may be found in James Longstreet#Gettysburg. 
* J.E.B. Stuart deprived Lee of cavalry intelligence during a good part of the campaign by taking his three best brigades on a path away from the army's. This arguably led to Lee's surprise at Hooker's vigorous pursuit; the meeting engagement on July 1 that escalated into the full battle prematurely; and it also prevented Lee from understanding the full disposition of the enemy on July 2. The disagreements regarding Stuart's culpability for the situation center around the relatively vague orders issued by Lee, but most modern historians agree that both generals were responsible to some extent for the failure of the cavalry's mission early in the campaign. Sears, p. 502; A more detailed collection of historical assessments of Stuart in the Gettysburg Campaign may be found in J.E.B. Stuart#Gettysburg. 
* Richard S. Ewell has been universally criticized for failing to seize the high ground on the afternoon of July 1. Once again the disagreement centers on Lee's orders, which provided general guidance for Ewell to act "if practicable." Many historians speculate that Stonewall Jackson, if he had survived Chancellorsville, would have aggressively seized Culp's Hill, rendering Cemetery Hill indefensible, and changing the entire complexion of the battle. A differently worded order from Lee might have made the difference with this subordinate. McPherson, p. 654; Coddington, pp. 317&ndash;19; Eicher, pp. 517&ndash;18; Sears, p. 503. 
* A.P. Hill has received some criticism for his ineffective performance. His actions caused the battle to begin and then escalate on July 1, despite Lee's orders not to bring on a general engagement (although historians point out that Hill kept Lee well informed of his actions during the day). However, Hill's illness minimized his personal involvement in the remainder of the battle, and Lee took the explicit step of removing troops from Hill's corps and giving them to Longstreet for Pickett's Charge. Sears, pp. 502&ndash;503. 

Winfield S. Hancock
In addition to Hill's illness, Lee's performance was affected by his own illness, which has been speculated as chest pains due to angina. He wrote to Jefferson Davis that his physical condition prevented him from offering full supervision in the field, and said, "I am so dull that in making use of the eyes of others I am frequently misled." Sears, p. 500. 

As a final factor, Lee faced a new and formidable opponent in George G. Meade, and the Army of the Potomac fought well on its home territory. Although new to his army command, Meade deployed his forces relatively effectively; relied on strong subordinates such as Winfield S. Hancock to make decisions where and when they were needed; took great advantage of defensive positions; nimbly shifted defensive resources on interior lines to parry strong threats; and, unlike some of his predecessors, stood his ground throughout the battle in the face of fierce Confederate attacks. Lee was quoted before the battle as saying Meade "would commit no blunders on my front and if I make one ... will make haste to take advantage of it." That prediction proved to be correct at Gettysburg. Stephen Sears wrote, "The fact of the matter is that George G. Meade, unexpectedly and against all odds, thoroughly outgeneraled Robert E. Lee at Gettysburg." Edwin B. Coddington wrote that the soldiers of the Army of the Potomac received a "sense of triumph which grew into an imperishable faith in . The men knew what they could do under an extremely competent general; one of lesser ability and courage could well have lost the battle." Sears, p. 506; Coddington, p. 573. 

Meade had his own detractors as well. Similar to the situation with Lee, Meade suffered partisan attacks about his performance at Gettysburg, but he had the misfortune of experiencing them in person. Supporters of his predecessor, Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, lambasted Meade before the U.S. Congress's Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War, where Radical Republicans suspected that Meade was a Copperhead and tried in vain to relieve him from command. Daniel E. Sickles and Daniel Butterfield accused Meade of planning to retreat from Gettysburg during the battle. Most politicians, including Lincoln, criticized Meade for what they considered to be his half-hearted pursuit of Lee after the battle. A number of Meade's most competent subordinates&mdash;Winfield S. Hancock, John Gibbon, Gouverneur K. Warren, and Henry J. Hunt, all heroes of the battle&mdash;defended Meade in print, but Meade was embittered by the overall experience. Sears, pp. 505&ndash;507. 

==Battlefield preservation==
Today, the Gettysburg National Cemetery and Gettysburg National Military Park are maintained by the U.S. National Park Service as two of the nation's most revered historical landmarks. Although Gettysburg is one of the best known of all Civil War battlefields, it too faces threats to its preservation and interpretation. Many historically significant locations on the battlefield lie outside the boundaries of Gettysburg National Military Park and are vulnerable to residential or commercial development.

On July 20, 2009, a Comfort Inn and Suites opened on Cemetery Hill, adjacent to Evergreen Cemetery, just one of many modern edifices infringing on the historic field. The Baltimore Pike corridor attracts development that concerns preservationists. Preservation Trust Helps Secure Key Piece of Ground in Gettysburg, Baltimore Civil War Roundtable Newsletter, August 2004 

Some preservation successes have emerged in recent years. Two proposals to open a casino at Gettysburg were defeated in 2006 and most recently in 2011, when public pressure forced the Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board to reject the proposed gambling hub at the intersection of Routes 15 and 30, near East Cavalry Field. Gettysburg casino plan defeated, Penn State Civil War History Center, April 15, 2011 The Civil War Trust also successfully purchased and transferred 95 acres at the former site of the Gettysburg Country Club to the control of the U.S. Department of the Interior in 2011. Country club site acquisition ends 25-year Park Service effort, Gettysburg Times, September 2, 2011 

Less than half of the over 11,500 acres on the old Gettysburg Battlefield have been preserved for posterity thus far. The Civil War Trust has preserved 815 acres around the site, some of which is now part of the 4,998 acres of Gettysburg National Military Park. Gettysburg, Civil War Trust website 

==Commemoration in U.S. postage and coinage==
Gettysburg Centennial Commemorative issue of 1963
Gettysburg National Military Park Quarter, issued 2011

During the Civil War Centennial, the U.S. Post Office issued five postage stamps commemorating the 100th anniversaries of famous battles, as they occurred over a four-year period, beginning with the Battle of Fort Sumter Centennial issue of 1961. The Battle of Shiloh commemorative stamp was issued in 1962, the Battle of Gettysburg in 1963, the Battle of the Wilderness in 1964, and the Appomattox Centennial commemorative stamp in 1965. Smithsonian National Postal Museum 

A commemorative half dollar for the battle was produced in 1936. As was typical for the period, mintage was very low, just 26,928. On January 24, 2011, the America the Beautiful quarters released a 25-cent coin commemorating Gettysburg National Military Park and the Battle of Gettysburg. The reverse side of the coin depicts the monument on Cemetery Ridge to the 72nd Pennsylvania Infantry. U.S. Mint America the Beautiful Quarters Program website 

==In popular media==
Film records survive of two Gettysburg reunions, held on the battlefield. At the 50th anniversary (1913), veterans re-enacted Pickett's Charge in a spirit of reconciliation, a meeting that carried great emotional force for both sides. At the 75th anniversary (1938), 2500 veterans attended, and there was a ceremonial mass hand-shake across a stone wall. This was recorded on sound film, and some Confederates can be heard giving the Rebel Yell.

Iced Earth's three-part song cycle Gettysburg (1863), published in 2004, dramatizes the battle.

The Battle of Gettysburg was depicted in the 1993 film Gettysburg, based on Michael Shaara's 1974 novel The Killer Angels. The film and novel focused primarily on the actions of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain, John Buford, Robert E. Lee, and James Longstreet during the battle. The first day focused on Buford's cavalry defense, the second day on Chamberlain's defense at Little Round Top, and the third day on Pickett's Charge.

In the 2004 mockumentary , the Battle of Gettysburg is won by the Confederate forces as a result of politician Judah P. Benjamin successfully convincing the United Kingdom and France to aid the Confederacy. This causes a butterfly effect that sees the Confederacy win the Civil War and subsequently conquer all of North and South America except Canada. Confederate Legacy Presents C.S.A.: A Historical Timeline 

==See also==

*Timeline of events leading to the American Civil War
*List of American Civil War battles
*Eastern Theater of the American Civil War
*Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps

==Notes==

==References==
* Bearss, Edwin C. Fields of Honor: Pivotal Battles of the Civil War. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society, 2006. ISBN 0-7922-7568-3.
* Busey, John W., and David G. Martin. Regimental Strengths and Losses at Gettysburg, 4th ed. Hightstown, NJ: Longstreet House, 2005. ISBN 0-944413-67-6.
* Carmichael, Peter S., ed. Audacity Personified: The Generalship of Robert E. Lee. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-8071-2929-1.
* Catton, Bruce. Glory Road. Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company, 1952. ISBN 0-385-04167-5.
* Clark, Champ, and the Editors of Time-Life Books. Gettysburg: The Confederate High Tide. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1985. ISBN 0-8094-4758-4.
* Coddington, Edwin B. The Gettysburg Campaign; a study in command. New York: Scribner's, 1968. ISBN 0-684-84569-5.
* Donald, David Herbert. Lincoln. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. ISBN 0-684-80846-3.
* Eicher, David J. The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001. ISBN 0-684-84944-5.
* Esposito, Vincent J. West Point Atlas of American Wars. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1959. . The collection of maps (without explanatory text) is available online at the West Point website.
* Foote, Shelby. . Vol. 2, Fredericksburg to Meridian. New York: Random House, 1958. ISBN 0-394-49517-9.
* Fuller, Maj. Gen. J. F. C. Grant and Lee: A Study in Personality and Generalship. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1957. ISBN 0-253-13400-5.
* Gallagher, Gary W. Lee and His Army in Confederate History. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001. ISBN 978-0-8078-2631-7.
* Gallagher, Gary W. Lee and His Generals in War and Memory. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-8071-2958-5.
* Glatthaar, Joseph T. General Lee's Army: From Victory to Collapse. New York: Free Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-684-82787-2.
* Harman, Troy D. Lee's Real Plan at Gettysburg. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2003. ISBN 0-8117-0054-2.
* Hattaway, Herman, and Archer Jones. How the North Won: A Military History of the Civil War. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1983. ISBN 0-252-00918-5.
* Longacre, Edward G. The Cavalry at Gettysburg. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1986. ISBN 0-8032-7941-8.
* McPherson, James M. . Oxford History of the United States. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988. ISBN 0-19-503863-0.
* Martin, David G. Gettysburg July 1. rev. ed. Conshohocken, PA: Combined Publishing, 1996. ISBN 0-938289-81-0.
* Nye, Wilbur S. Here Come the Rebels! Dayton, OH: Morningside House, 1984. ISBN 0-89029-080-6. First published in 1965 by Louisiana State University Press.
* Pfanz, Harry W. Gettysburg &ndash; The First Day. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001. ISBN 0-8078-2624-3.
* Pfanz, Harry W. Gettysburg &ndash; The Second Day. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987. ISBN 0-8078-1749-X.
* Pfanz, Harry W. Gettysburg: Culp's Hill and Cemetery Hill. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1993. ISBN 0-8078-2118-7.
* Rawley, James A. Turning Points of the Civil War. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1966. ISBN 0-8032-8935-9.
* Sauers, Richard A. "Battle of Gettysburg." In Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History, edited by David S. Heidler and Jeanne T. Heidler. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2000. ISBN 0-393-04758-X.
* Sears, Stephen W. Gettysburg. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003. ISBN 0-395-86761-4.
* Symonds, Craig L. American Heritage History of the Battle of Gettysburg. New York: HarperCollins, 2001. ISBN 0-06-019474-X.
* Tagg, Larry. The Generals of Gettysburg. Campbell, CA: Savas Publishing, 1998. ISBN 1-882810-30-9.
* Trudeau, Noah Andre. Gettysburg: A Testing of Courage. New York: HarperCollins, 2002. ISBN 0-06-019363-8.
* Tucker, Glenn. High Tide at Gettysburg. Dayton, OH: Morningside House, 1983. ISBN 978-0-914427-82-7. First published 1958 by Bobbs-Merrill Co.
* Wert, Jeffry D. Gettysburg: Day Three. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001. ISBN 0-684-85914-9.
* White, Ronald C., Jr. The Eloquent President: A Portrait of Lincoln Through His Words. New York: Random House, 2005. ISBN 1-4000-6119-9.
* Wittenberg, Eric J., J. David Petruzzi, and Michael F. Nugent. One Continuous Fight: The Retreat from Gettysburg and the Pursuit of Lee's Army of Northern Virginia, July 4&ndash;14, 1863. New York: Savas Beatie, 2008. ISBN 978-1-932714-43-2.
* Woodworth, Steven E. Beneath a Northern Sky: A Short History of the Gettysburg Campaign. Wilmington, DE: SR Books (scholarly Resources, Inc.), 2003. ISBN 0-8420-2933-8.
* National Park Service battle description

==Further reading==
* Adkin, Mark. The Gettysburg Companion: The Complete Guide to America's Most Famous Battle. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2008. ISBN 978-0-8117-0439-7.
* Bachelder, John B. The Bachelder Papers: Gettysburg in Their Own Words. Edited by David L. Ladd and Audrey J. Ladd. 3 vols. Dayton, OH: Morningside Press, 1994. ISBN 0-89029-320-1.
* Bachelder, John B. Gettysburg: What to See, and How to See It: Embodying Full Information for Visiting the Field. Boston: Bachelder, 1873. .
* Ballard, Ted, and Billy Arthur. Gettysburg Staff Ride Briefing Book. Carlisle, PA: United States Army Center of Military History, 1999. .
* Bearss, Edwin C. Receding Tide: Vicksburg and Gettysburg: The Campaigns That Changed the Civil War. Washington DC: National Geographic Society, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4262-0510-1.
* Boritt, Gabor S., ed. The Gettysburg Nobody Knows. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-510223-1.
* Desjardin, Thomas A. These Honored Dead: How the Story of Gettysburg Shaped American Memory. New York: Da Capo Press, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81267-3.
* Frassanito, William A. Early Photography at Gettysburg. Gettysburg, PA: Thomas Publications, 1995. ISBN 1-57747-032-X.
* Fremantle, Arthur J. L. The Fremantle Diary: A Journal of the Confederacy. Edited by Walter Lord. Short Hills, NJ: Burford Books, 2002. ISBN 1-58080-085-8. First published 1954 by Capicorn Books.
* Gallagher, Gary W., ed. Three Days at Gettysburg: Essays on Confederate and Union Leadership. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-87338-629-9.
* Gottfried, Bradley M. Brigades of Gettysburg. New York: Da Capo Press, 2002. ISBN 0-306-81175-8.
* Gottfried, Bradley M. The Maps of Gettysburg: An Atlas of the Gettysburg Campaign, June 3 &ndash; 13, 1863. New York: Savas Beatie, 2007. ISBN 978-1-932714-30-2.
* Grimsley, Mark, and Brooks D. Simpson. Gettysburg: A Battlefield Guide. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8032-7077-1.
* Hall, Jeffrey C. The Stand of the U.S. Army at Gettysburg. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-253-34258-9.
* Haskell, Frank Aretas. The Battle of Gettysburg. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2006. ISBN 978-1-4286-6012-0.
* Hawthorne, Frederick W. Gettysburg: Stories of Men and Monuments. Gettysburg, PA: Association of Licensed Battlefield Guides, 1988. ISBN 0-9657444-0-X.
* Hoptak, John David. Confrontation at Gettysburg: A Nation Saved, a Cause Lost. Charleston, SC: The History Press, 2012. ISBN 978-1-60949-426-1.
* Huntington, Tom. Pennsylvania Civil War Trails: The Guide to Battle Sites, Monuments, Museums and Towns. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2007. ISBN 978-0-8117-3379-3.
* Laino, Philip, Gettysburg Campaign Atlas, 2nd ed. Dayton, OH: Gatehouse Press 2009. ISBN 978-1-934900-45-1.
* McMurry, Richard M. "The Pennsylvania Gambit and the Gettysburg Splash." In The Gettysburg Nobody Knows, edited by Gabor Boritt. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-510223-1.
* McPherson, James M. Hallowed Ground: A Walk at Gettysburg. New York: Crown Publishers, 2003. ISBN 0-609-61023-6.
* New York (State), William F. Fox, and Daniel Edgar Sickles. New York at Gettysburg: Final Report on the Battlefield of Gettysburg. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyon Company, Printers, 1900. .
* Paris, Louis-Philippe-Albert d'Orlans. The Battle of Gettysburg: A History of the Civil War in America. Digital Scanning, Inc., 1999. ISBN 1-58218-066-0. First published 1869 by Germer Baillire.
* Petruzzi, J. David, and Steven Stanley. The Complete Gettysburg Guide. New York: Savas Beatie, 2009. ISBN 978-1-932714-63-0.
* Shaara, Michael. The Killer Angels: A Novel. New York: Ballantine Books, 2001. ISBN 978-0-345-44412-7. First published 1974 by David McKay Co.
* Stackpole, Gen. Edward J. They Met at Gettysburg. Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1956, .

==External links==

* Gettysburg National Military Park (National Park Service)
* Papers of the Gettysburg National Military Park seminars
* U.S. Army's Interactive Battle of Gettysburg with Narratives
* Military History Online: The Battle of Gettysburg
* The Brothers War: The Battle of Gettysburg
* Gettysburg Discussion Group archives
* List of 53 Confederate generals at Gettysburg
* List of 67 US generals at Gettysburg
* 

 01



[[Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)]]

Budweiser is a pale lager produced by AnheuserBusch InBev. Introduced in 1876 by Adolphus Busch it has grown to become one of the highest selling beers in the United States, and is available in over 80 markets worldwide. It is made with up to 30% rice in addition to hops and barley malt. Protz, R., The Complete Guide to World Beer (2004), ISBN 1-84442-865-6 Budweiser is produced in various breweries located around the world. It is a filtered beer available in draught and packaged forms.

==History==
Budweiser Brewery is a landmark seen from Newark Airport
Adolphus Busch left Germany for the United States in 1857. He settled in St. Louis, Missouri, where he eventually established his own brewing supply house. In St. Louis, Busch also met and married a woman named Lilly Anheuser. Lillys father, Eberhard Anheuser, owned a small brewery that had been yielding lager beer for some time. In 1864, Busch partnered with his father in-law to form what would eventually become the Anheuser-Busch Company. 

Busch traveled extensively throughout Europe in order to observe and study the latest brewing techniques. In the 1870s, Anheuser-Busch became the first American brewery to implement pasteurization, which greatly improved the shelf-life and transportability of its beers. In the mid-1800s, most Americans preferred robust, dark ales. Busch had encountered lighter lager beers during his travels and began brewing a light Bohemian lager. Anheuser-Busch introduced this lager in 1876 under the brand name Budweiser. 

Budweiser and Anheuser-Busch enjoyed two decades of growth before the onset of prohibition in 1920. Anheuser-Busch had to suspend brewing of Budweiser during prohibition and launched a range of non-alcoholic products. 

When prohibition came to an end in 1933, Anheuser-Busch began brewing Budweiser again. During prohibition the palate of the beer consumer had changed due to the popularization of sweeter homemade and bootlegged brews. The company dared consumers to drink Budweiser for five days, and if on the sixth day, they still preferred the taste of other beers, they could go back. 

Growth was limited by economic conditions caused by the Great Depression, but thanks in part to the introduction of the metal can in 1936, Budweisers sales began to climb again. 

During World War II, the company diverted several resources to support the war effort and relinquished its West Coast markets to conserve rail car space. After the war, Budweiser and Anheuser-Busch entered into an era of rapid growth. 

August A. Busch Jr. became president of Anheuser-Busch in 1946 and began the creation of a national network of breweries. The first new brewery was opened in Newark, New Jersey in 1951, and was the first of nine to open over the course of the next 25 years. 

Budweiser is available in over 80 markets. 

After the 18 November 2008 InBev takeover, several cost-cutting measures that were implemented have, according to some sources, negatively affected the flavor of the beer. Whole rice grains have now been replaced by broken ones, and the high quality Hallertauer Mittelfrh hop has been phased out. A former top AB InBev executive says the company saved about $55 million a year substituting cheaper hops in Budweiser and other U.S. beers for more expensive ones like Hallertauer Mittelfrh. 

==Name origin and dispute==
American Budweiser is in most of the European Union sold as "Bud" (left)

Budweiser trademark dispute is a dispute between American and European beer companies claiming trademark rights to the name "Budweiser".

Beer has been brewed in Budweis since it was founded by king Ottokar II of Bohemia in 1245. The name Budweiser is genitive, meaning "of Budweis." In 1876, Adolphus Busch and his friend Carl Conrad, a liquor importer, developed a "Bohemian-style" lager, inspired after a trip to the region. Brewers in Bohemia (today's Czech Republic) generally named a beer after their town with the suffix "er." Beers produced in the town of Pilsen (today's Plze), for example, were called Pilsners. Busch and Conrad had visited another town, only 104 km south of Pilsen, also known for its breweries: Budweis (or Bhmisch Budweis, today's esk Budjovice).

In most European countries American Budweiser is now not labelled as Budweiser but as Bud, and the name Budweiser refers to the original Czech beer, Budweiser Budvar, except for Sweden, Ireland and the United Kingdom, where both beers are sold as Budweiser.

Anheuser-Busch has a market share in the United States of 50.9% for all beers sold. This is primarily composed of Budweiser brands. In 2008 the Belgian-Brazilian beer giant InBev bought the majority of Anheuser-Busch stocks at $70 per share in an all-cash agreement, to create the largest brewing company in the world.

==Marketing==
One of the Budweiser Clydesdales
Anheuser-Busch uses what is in many jurisdictions a legally-protected mark-of-origin indicating Czech provenance and humorous advertising campaigns to promote Budweiser, such as the "Real Men of Genius" radio and television commercials for Bud Light.

The Budweiser from Budjovice has been called "The Beer of Kings" since the 16th century. Adolphus Busch changed this slogan to "The King of the Beers". The Czech Budweiser is sold in some countries as Budejovicky Budvar but is known as Budweiser in many other countries throughout the world.

Anheuser-Busch is known for its sport sponsorship, videogame sponsorship (Tapper, 1983), and humorous advertisements, some of which have entered the popular culture in the United States. They include a long line of TV advertisements in the 1990s featuring three frogs named "Bud", "Weis", and "Er"; lizards impersonating the "Bud-weis-er" frogs, the Budweiser Ants;, a campaign built around the phrase "Whassup?", and a team of Clydesdale horses commonly known as the Budweiser Clydesdales.

The Budweiser Clydesdale has become an iconic horse. In the Clydesdale Donkey commercial the donkey dreams of becoming a Clydesdale horse. The donkey does everything he can think of to try and become one of these horses, and finally when the day comes for his audition, he makes the cut and becomes what he has always dreamed. This commercial ended up being in the top five for the most memorable Budweiser commercials. 

Dale Earnhardt, Jr.'s Budweiser car in 2007

The Budweiser brand is promoted in motorsports, from Bernie Little's Miss Budweiser hydroplane boat to sponsorship of the Budweiser King Top Fuel Dragster driven by Brandon Bernstein. Anheuser-Busch has sponsored the CART championship. It is the official beer of NHRA and was the official beer of NASCAR from 1998 until 2007. It has sponsored motorsport events such as the NASCAR Busch Series, Budweiser Speedweeks, Budweiser Shootout, Budweiser Duel, Budweiser Pole Award, Budweiser 500, Budweiser 400, Budweiser 300, Budweiser 250, Budweiser 200 and Carolina Pride / Budweiser 200.

Budweiser has been sponsor of NASCAR teams such as Junior Johnson, Hendrick Motorsports, DEI and Stewart-Haas Racing. Budweiser-sponsored drivers include Terry Labonte (1983, 1987-89), Neil Bonnett (1984-1985), Darrell Waltrip (1984-1986), Geoffrey Bodine (1990-1991), Bill Elliott (1992-1994), Ken Schrader (1995-1996), Dale Earnhardt Jr. (1999-2007), Kasey Kahne (2008-2010) and Kevin Harvick (2011-present).

In 2008, Anheuser-Busch became Kasey Kahne's primary sponsor, and has also sponsored many races, including the Budweiser Shootout, and previously The Bud at the Glen, Budweiser 500, and Budweiser 400. In 2011, Budweiser became the sponsor for Kevin Harvick.

Anheuser-Busch has placed Budweiser as an official partner and sponsor of Major League Soccer and Los Angeles Galaxy and was the headline sponsor of the British Basketball League in the 1990s, taking over from rival company Carlsberg. Anheuser-Busch has also placed Budweiser as an official sponsor of the Premier League and the presenting sponsor of the FA Cup. Budweiser was a proud sponsor and avid advertiser during the celebration of the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games. For the Centennial Summer Olympics, Budweiser produced many commemorative collectibles and souvenirs that were very popular among crowds at the Games. A primary Budweiser collectible was a 28-ounce Budweiser Atlanta Olympic Games Beer Stein, which featured the Olympic Flame as a decoration on the stein's handle. 

In the early 20th century, the company commissioned a play-on-words song called "Under the Anheuser Bush", which was recorded by several early phonograph companies. Popular music continues to be used in advertisements for Budweiser. Some commercials feature the song "Galvanize" (2005), by The Chemical Brothers.

In August 2009, Anheuser-Busch partnered with popular Chinese video-sharing site, Tudou.com for a user-generated online video contest. The contest encourages users to suggest ideas that include ants for a Bud TV spot set to run in February 2010 during the Chinese New Year. 

In 2010, Budweiser launched an international entertainment property called Bud United. Bud Uniteds first efforts were centered around the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. The brand launched an online reality TV series, called Bud House, that followed the lives of 32 international football fans (one representing each nation in the World Cup) living together in a house in South Africa. Bud Uniteds next project is another reality series called The Big Time; each episode focuses on a different vertical market (baseball, soccer, cooking, etc.) and features contestants competing for a chance to live their dreams. The show was cast through the Bud United Facebook page and aired in Q1 2012. 

On November 5, 2012, Anheuser-Busch asked Paramount Pictures to obscure or remove the Budweiser logo from the film Flight (2012), directed by Robert Zemeckis and starring Denzel Washington. 

==Containers and packaging==
===Containers===
Over the years, Budweiser has been distributed in many sizes and containers. Until the early 1950s Budweiser was primarily distributed in three packages: kegs, 12-ounce bottles and quart bottles. Cans were first introduced in 1936, which helped sales to climb. In 1955 August Busch Jr. made a strategic move to expand Budweiser's national brand and distributor presence. Along with this expansion came advances in bottling automation, new bottling materials and more efficient distribution methods. These advances brought to market many new containers and package designs. Budweiser is distributed in four large container volumes: half-barrel (15.5 US gallons), quarter-barrel, 1/6 barrel and beer balls (5.2 gallons); and in smaller 7, 8, 10, 12, 16, 18, 22, 24, 32 and 40 US ounce containers. Smaller containers may be made of glass, aluminum or plastic. On August 3, 2011, Budweiser announced its twelfth can design since 1936, one which emphasizes the bowtie. 

Packages are sometimes tailored to local customs and traditions. In St. Mary's County, Maryland, ten ounce cans are the preferred package. Budweiser drinkers in the western stretches of Ottawa County, Michigan prefer the eight ounce can. This Ottawa County preference for the eight ounce can may stem from a long-standing blue law held in many Western Michigan cities that prohibit sale of beer and wine on Sundays. In response to this blue law, brewers and distributors presented the eight ounce can as a smaller alternative.

Anheuser-Busch has introduced many can designs with co-branding and sports marketing promotional packaging. Today, most of these promotional programs are represented only on the 16 ounce aluminum bottle container. However, many MLB and NFL teams in the United States also promote 24 ounce cans marked with team logos.

Due to a dispute with the European Budweiser, American Budweiser is sold in most of European Union under the brand "Bud".

===Bottle===
The Budweiser bottle has remained relatively unchanged since its introduction in 1876. The top label is red and currently reads "Budweiser". The top of the main label is red with a white banner with a pledge on it, which has changed three times. Below the banner is a coat of arms of sorts, which features an Anheuser-Busch stylization. Below that is a large white box.

 Era Pledge Logo Beer title Top label 
 1870s 1 C. Conrad and Co. Budweiser Lager Beer Original Budweiser 
 Early 1900s 2 C. Conrad and Co. Budweiser Lager Beer Budweiser Reg U.S. Pat Off 
 1920s 3 Anheuser-Busch Budweiser Anheuser-Busch 'Budweiser St. Louis 
 1940s 2 Anheuser-Busch Budweiser Lager Beer Budweiser Beer 
 1950s 4 Anheuser-Busch Budweiser Lager Beer Budweiser Lager Beer 
 1970s 4 Anheuser-Busch 'Budweiser' Lager Beer Budweiser 
 1980s 4 Anheuser-Busch 'Budweiser' Lager Beer Budweiser 
 Today 4 Anheuser-Busch 'Budweiser' Lager Beer Budweiser 

===Cans===
The packaging plant at the Anheuser-Busch headquarters in St. Louis, Missouri
During the Prohibition Era, Budweiser encountered its first major obstacle to profit and growth. As alcohol became illegal to sell and produce, all alcohol companies, including Budweiser, struggled to remain profitable. Budweiser began producing non-alcoholic beverages during Prohibition to counter its ill effects. Prohibition began in 1920, and lasted into the middle of the Great Depression in 1933. These are two major setbacks that this company experienced. Just as laws regarding prohibition were repealed, Budweiser was faced with more serious economic struggles, which made their success (like all other companies) very unlikely. In attempt to re-stimulate interest in their beer, Budweiser executed a hugely successful marketing strategy of introducing beer cans for the first time in 1936. This new packaging led to an increase in sales which lasted until the start of World War II in 1939. 

Over the years, Budweiser has undergone various design changes to its can which are discussed in the table below. Many of these changes are in response to market conditions and consumer tastes. Since 1936, 12 major can design changes have occurred, not including the temporary special edition designs. The table below describes each of the 12 major can designs.

 Era Beer title Description 
 19361942 Budweiser Lager Beer Gold colored can made of steel with American image of an eagle 
 19421945 Budweiser Lager Beer Same design as previous can, except in an olive drab color to provide camouflage for troops in World War II 
 19501956 Budweiser Lager Beer Gold colored split label can with list of breweries at the bottom of the can 
 19561958 Budweiser Lager Beer Red, white, and blue split label can with same design as previous can 
 1963 Budweiser Lager Beer First all-aluminum beer can; red, white, and blue color scheme 
 19641972 Budweiser Lager Beer Introduction of the tab top can, still with the same color scheme as previous design 
 1970s Budweiser Lager Beer Similar design as last five cans, with Budweiser creed, Anheuser-Busch logo, and eagle images 
 1980s1990s King of Beers Same design as previous, with slightly different can shape 
 19961999 King of Beers Horizontal label rather than classic vertical label, and introduction of 'Born on' dating which tells exactly when the beer was brewed 
 19992000 Millennium Limited-edition can with vertical label for the beginning of a new millennium 
 20012011 King of Beers Horizontal can design with red, white, and blue color scheme 
 2011 King of Beers Red, white, and gold color scheme; new bow-tie design with much more modern appearance 

====2011 can design marketing strategy====
Traditional Budweiser cans embodied a strong sense of American patriotism. They were red, white, and blue in color, and had images of eagles near the label. These cans also had a very classic appearance due to the cursive font and the Anheuser-Busch logo surrounded by wheat and barley. Red, white, and blue, being the colors of the American flag, identified the cans strongly with the American market for this product. Moreover, the eagles remind viewers of the Bald Eagle, America's national bird. These facts strongly suggest that Budweiser was targeting a primarily American market. In contrast to this previous design, the newest can takes on a much more modern appearance and eliminates blue as a main color in the design. Red, white, and gold are the predominant colors on this new can, which makes the can look much less traditionally American, and much more modern. On this new can, there are aspects that continue to resonate with an American market, such as the red and white colors, as these are two of the nation's primary colors. The presence of the yellowish-gold color is not typically American, though, and is surprising to see in the can design of the self-proclaimed "Great American Lager."

This change in can design was very shocking for a brand that had remained relatively static since its beginning. The new design was largely in response to the huge sales decline in recent years that is threatening to lose Budweiser its title as the best-selling beer in America. One cause of this sales decline is the unemployment struggles that many Americans have been facing recently. A large group of individuals affected by unemployment are young men, who are the main demographic of Budweiser's target market. In order to regain the domestic market share that Budweiser has lost, the company is trying to update its appearance by giving the can a more contemporary look that is more appealing to this demographic. The company hopes that the new design will offset the effects that unemployment had on its sales. 

Although the more modern design is intended for young male Americans, the new design, according to the vice president of Anheuser-Busch Frank Abernante, "is one of many steps in our quest to reinforce Budweiser's role as a truly global beer brand." This statement means that the new design was intended for foreign markets as well. In fact, Budweiser began selling its beer in Russia in 2010, and is currently expanding its operations in China. 

Statistics show that China is the world's leading consumer of beer in terms of volume, which suggests that Budweiser is trying to capitalize on this market's potential in order to recover from these losses. Currently, of the 15 Anheuser-Busch breweries outside of the United States, 14 of them are positioned in China, which shows how interested the company is in this growing market. Budweiser is already the fourth leading brand in the Chinese beer market, and the company hopes that this new design change will push them further up the list as one of China's most dominant brands. Budweiser's attempt to target China is not sudden, though. There have actually been several advertising campaigns geared toward Chinese consumers. One such campaign was in 2009 when Budweiser sponsored a competition for the creation of a Budweiser commercial involving the Budweiser ants. Here, Chinese consumers were prompted to compete in this process of submitting their ideas online for the chance to have their idea become the newest Budweiser commercial. 

The company hoped that the new design would appeal to a younger crowd in the American market, while simultaneously gaining the interest of Chinese consumers. Americans can continue to identify with the brand because the can is primarily red and white, which are dominant colors on the American flag. In addition, Chinese consumers can identify with the brand because the red and gold colors in the new design are reminiscent of the Chinese flag. This demonstrates how Budweiser is using the can to break into new markets with hopes to improve the company's overall revenue.

==Beer==

Budweiser is brewed using barley malt, rice, water, hops and yeast. It is lagered with beechwood chips in the ageing vessel which, according to Anheuser-Busch, creates a smoother taste. While beechwood chips are used in the maturation tank, there is little to no flavor contribution from the wood, mainly because they are boiled in sodium bicarbonate soda for seven hours for the very purpose of removing any flavor from the wood. The maturation tanks that Anheuser-Busch uses are horizontal and, as such, flocculation of the yeast occurs much more quickly. Anheuser-Busch refers to this process as a secondary fermentation, with the idea being that the chips give the yeast more surface area to rest on. This is also combined with a krausening procedure that re-introduces wort into the chip tank therefore activating the fermentation process again. By placing chips at the bottom of the tank, the yeast remains in suspension longer, giving it more time to reabsorb and process green beer flavors, such as acetaldehyde and diacetyl, that Anheuser-Busch believes are off-flavors which detract from overall drinkability.
Budweiser beverage delivery truck, Romulus, Michigan

Budweiser remains one of the world's lowest rated beers on notable rating sites such as BeerAdvocate.com and RateBeer.com. Some drinkers prefer the lightness of beers like Budweiser and consume it as a refreshment or for its inebriating effects. Several beer writers consider it to be bland. Hops to lighten your step beerhunter.com A Bud by any other name realbeer.com The beer is light-bodied with faint sweet notes and negligible bitterness, leading to reviews characterizing it as a "...beer of underwhelming blandness". Even Adolphus Busch didn't like it. Edward McClelland, "The rise and fall of an American beer" Salon (magazine) July 17, 2008 Based upon sales, it is the second most popular American brewed pale lager among North American beer consumers.

Budweiser and Bud Light are sometimes advertised as vegan beers, in that their ingredients and conditioning do not use animal by-products. Some might object to the inclusion of genetically engineered rice and animal products used in the brewing process. In July 2006, Anheuser-Busch brewed a version of Budweiser with organic rice, for sale in Mexico. They have yet to extend this practice to any other countries.

Anheuser-Busch was one of the few breweries during Prohibition that had the resources and wherewithal to convert to "cereal beer" productionmalt beverage made with non-fermentables such as rice and unmalted barley and rye, and able to stay under the 0.5% limit established by the Volstead Act. Following the repeal of Prohibition in 1933, the major breweries continued to use unmalted cereal grains to provide the full body and mouthfeel of a "real" beer while keeping the alcohol content low.

==Budweiser brands==

In addition to the regular Budweiser, Anheuser-Busch brews several different beers under the Budweiser brand, including Bud Light and Bud Ice.

In July 2010 Anheuser-Busch launched Budweiser 66 in the United Kingdom. Budweiser Brew No.66 has 4% alcohol by volume, and is brewed and distributed in the UK by Inbev UK Limited.

==See also==

*Beer Wars (2009), documentary film about the American beer industry
*Budweiser trademark dispute between Anheuser Busch and breweries from Budweis in the Czech republic.
*Ulterior Emotions (2002)  an album released by Anheuser Busch as part of their "Bud Light Institute" campaign

==References==

==External links==

* Budweiser official website
* Belgian official Budweiser website



[[Bermuda Triangle]]

The Bermuda Triangle, also known as the Devil's Triangle, is a loosely defined region in the western part of the North Atlantic Ocean, where a number of aircraft and ships are said to have disappeared under mysterious circumstances. According to the US Navy, the triangle does not exist, and the name is not recognized by the US Board on Geographic Names. Popular culture has attributed various disappearances to the paranormal or activity by extraterrestrial beings. Documented evidence indicates that a significant percentage of the incidents were spurious, inaccurately reported, or embellished by later authors. In a 2013 study, the World Wide Fund for Nature identified the worlds 10 most dangerous waters for shipping, but the Bermuda Triangle was not among them. 

==Triangle area==
The first written boundaries date from an article by Vincent Gaddis in a 1964 issue of the pulp magazine Argosy, where the triangle's three vertices are in Miami, Florida peninsula; in San Juan, Puerto Rico; and in the mid-Atlantic island of Bermuda. But subsequent writers did not follow this definition. Some writers give different boundaries and vertices to the triangle, with the total area varying from 1300000 to. Consequently, the determination of which accidents have occurred inside the triangle depends on which writer reports them. The United States Board on Geographic Names does not recognize this name, and it is not delimited in any map drawn by US government agencies. 

The area is one of the most heavily traveled shipping lanes in the world, with ships crossing through it daily for ports in the Americas, Europe, and the Caribbean Islands. Cruise ships are also plentiful, and pleasure craft regularly go back and forth between Florida and the islands. It is also a heavily flown route for commercial and private aircraft heading towards Florida, the Caribbean, and South America from points north.

==History==

===Origins===
The earliest allegation of unusual disappearances in the Bermuda area appeared in a September 17, 1950 article published in The Miami Herald (Associated Press) by Edward Van Winkle Jones. Two years later, Fate magazine published "Sea Mystery at Our Back Door", a short article by George X. Sand covering the loss of several planes and ships, including the loss of Flight 19, a group of five U.S. Navy TBM Avenger bombers on a training mission. Sand's article was the first to lay out the now-familiar triangular area where the losses took place. Flight 19 alone would be covered again in the April 1962 issue of American Legion magazine. Cited in James R. Lewis (editor), Satanism Today: An Encyclopedia of Religion, Folklore, and Popular Culture, page 72, segment by Jerome Clark (ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2001). ISBN 1-57607-292-4 In it, author Allan W. Eckert wrote that the flight leader had been heard saying, "We are entering white water, nothing seems right. We don't know where we are, the water is green, no white." He also wrote that officials at the Navy board of inquiry stated that the planes "flew off to Mars." Diana Formisano Willett, Paranormal Fright, page 9 (AuthorHouse, 2013), ISBN 978-1-4817-3268-0 Sand's article was the first to suggest a supernatural element to the Flight 19 incident. In the February 1964 issue of Argosy, Vincent Gaddis' article "The Deadly Bermuda Triangle" argued that Flight 19 and other disappearances were part of a pattern of strange events in the region. The next year, Gaddis expanded this article into a book, Invisible Horizons. 

Others would follow with their own works, elaborating on Gaddis' ideas: John Wallace Spencer (Limbo of the Lost, 1969, repr. 1973); Spencer, 1969. Charles Berlitz (The Bermuda Triangle, 1974); Berlitz, 1974. Richard Winer (The Devil's Triangle, 1974), and many others, all keeping to some of the same supernatural elements outlined by Eckert. 

===Larry Kusche ===
Lawrence David Kusche, a research librarian from Arizona State University and author of The Bermuda Triangle Mystery: Solved (1975) Kusche, 1975. argued that many claims of Gaddis and subsequent writers were often exaggerated, dubious or unverifiable. Kusche's research revealed a number of inaccuracies and inconsistencies between Berlitz's accounts and statements from eyewitnesses, participants, and others involved in the initial incidents. Kusche noted cases where pertinent information went unreported, such as the disappearance of round-the-world yachtsman Donald Crowhurst, which Berlitz had presented as a mystery, despite clear evidence to the contrary. Another example was the ore-carrier recounted by Berlitz as lost without trace three days out of an Atlantic port when it had been lost three days out of a port with the same name in the Pacific Ocean. Kusche also argued that a large percentage of the incidents that sparked allegations of the Triangle's mysterious influence actually occurred well outside it. Often his research was simple: he would review period newspapers of the dates of reported incidents and find reports on possibly relevant events like unusual weather, that were never mentioned in the disappearance stories.

Kusche concluded that:
* The number of ships and aircraft reported missing in the area was not significantly greater, proportionally speaking, than in any other part of the ocean.
* In an area frequented by tropical storms, the number of disappearances that did occur were, for the most part, neither disproportionate, unlikely, nor mysterious;
* Furthermore, Berlitz and other writers would often fail to mention such storms or even represent the disappearance as having happened in calm conditions when meteorological records clearly contradict this.
* The numbers themselves had been exaggerated by sloppy research. A boat's disappearance, for example, would be reported, but its eventual (if belated) return to port may not have been.
* Some disappearances had, in fact, never happened. One plane crash was said to have taken place in 1937 off Daytona Beach, Florida, in front of hundreds of witnesses; a check of the local papers revealed nothing.
* The legend of the Bermuda Triangle is a manufactured mystery, perpetuated by writers who either purposely or unknowingly made use of misconceptions, faulty reasoning, and sensationalism. 

===Further responses===
When the UK Channel 4 television program The Bermuda Triangle (1992) was being produced by John Simmons of Geofilms for the Equinox series, the marine insurance market Lloyd's of London was asked if an unusually large number of ships had sunk in the Bermuda Triangle area. Lloyd's determined that large numbers of ships had not sunk there. Lloyd's does not charge higher rates for passing through this area. United States Coast Guard records confirm their conclusion. In fact, the number of supposed disappearances is relatively insignificant considering the number of ships and aircraft that pass through on a regular basis. 

The Coast Guard is also officially skeptical of the Triangle, noting that they collect and publish, through their inquiries, much documentation contradicting many of the incidents written about by the Triangle authors. In one such incident involving the 1972 explosion and sinking of the tanker , the Coast Guard photographed the wreck and recovered several bodies, in contrast with one Triangle author's claim that all the bodies had vanished, with the exception of the captain, who was found sitting in his cabin at his desk, clutching a coffee cup. In addition, V. A. Fogg sank off the coast of Texas, nowhere near the commonly accepted boundaries of the Triangle.

The NOVA/Horizon episode The Case of the Bermuda Triangle, aired on June 27, 1976, was highly critical, stating that "When we've gone back to the original sources or the people involved, the mystery evaporates. Science does not have to answer questions about the Triangle because those questions are not valid in the first place ... Ships and planes behave in the Triangle the same way they behave everywhere else in the world." 

David Kusche pointed out a common problem with many of the Bermuda Triangle stories and theories: "Say I claim that a parrot has been kidnapped to teach aliens human language and I challenge you to prove that is not true. You can even use Einstein's Theory of Relativity if you like. There is simply no way to prove such a claim untrue. The burden of proof should be on the people who make these statements, to show where they got their information from, to see if their conclusions and interpretations are valid, and if they have left anything out." Skeptical researchers, such as Ernest Taves and Barry Singer, have noted how mysteries and the paranormal are very popular and profitable. This has led to the production of vast amounts of material on topics such as the Bermuda Triangle. They were able to show that some of the pro-paranormal material is often misleading or inaccurate, but its producers continue to market it. Accordingly, they have claimed that the market is biased in favor of books, TV specials, and other media that support the Triangle mystery, and against well-researched material if it espouses a skeptical viewpoint. Finally, if the Triangle is assumed to cross land, such as parts of Puerto Rico, the Bahamas, or Bermuda itself, there is no evidence for the disappearance of any land-based vehicles or persons. The city of Freeport, located inside the Triangle, operates a major shipyard and an airport that handles 50,000 flights annually and is visited by over a million tourists a year. 

==Supernatural explanations==
Triangle writers have used a number of supernatural concepts to explain the events. One explanation pins the blame on leftover technology from the mythical lost continent of Atlantis. Sometimes connected to the Atlantis story is the submerged rock formation known as the Bimini Road off the island of Bimini in the Bahamas, which is in the Triangle by some definitions. Followers of the purported psychic Edgar Cayce take his prediction that evidence of Atlantis would be found in 1968 as referring to the discovery of the Bimini Road. Believers describe the formation as a road, wall, or other structure, though geologists consider it to be of natural origin. 

Other writers attribute the events to UFOs. This idea was used by Steven Spielberg for his science fiction film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, which features the lost Flight 19 aircrews as alien abductees.

Charles Berlitz, author of various books on anomalous phenomena, lists several theories attributing the losses in the Triangle to anomalous or unexplained forces. 

==Natural explanations==

===Compass variations===
Compass problems are one of the cited phrases in many Triangle incidents. While some have theorized that unusual local magnetic anomalies may exist in the area, such anomalies have not been found. Compasses have natural magnetic variations in relation to the magnetic poles, a fact which navigators have known for centuries. Magnetic (compass) north and geographic (true) north are only exactly the same for a small number of places  for example, as of 2000 in the United States only those places on a line running from Wisconsin to the Gulf of Mexico. But the public may not be as informed, and think there is something mysterious about a compass "changing" across an area as large as the Triangle, which it naturally will. 

False-color image of the Gulf Stream flowing north through the western Atlantic Ocean. (NASA)

===Gulf Stream===
The Gulf Stream is a deep ocean current that originates in the Gulf of Mexico and then flows through the Straits of Florida into the North Atlantic. In essence, it is a river within an ocean, and, like a river, it can and does carry floating objects. It has a surface velocity of up to about 2.5 metres per second (5.6 mi/h). A small plane making a water landing or a boat having engine trouble can be carried away from its reported position by the current.

===Human error===
One of the most cited explanations in official inquiries as to the loss of any aircraft or vessel is human error. Human stubbornness may have caused businessman Harvey Conover to lose his sailing yacht, the Revonoc, as he sailed into the teeth of a storm south of Florida on January 1, 1958. 

===Violent weather===
Tropical cyclones are powerful storms, which form in tropical waters and have historically cost thousands of lives lost and caused billions of dollars in damage. The sinking of Francisco de Bobadilla's Spanish fleet in 1502 was the first recorded instance of a destructive hurricane. These storms have in the past caused a number of incidents related to the Triangle.

A powerful downdraft of cold air was suspected to be a cause in the sinking of the Pride of Baltimore on May 14, 1986. The crew of the sunken vessel noted the wind suddenly shifted and increased velocity from 32 km/h to 97 -. A National Hurricane Center satellite specialist, James Lushine, stated "during very unstable weather conditions the downburst of cold air from aloft can hit the surface like a bomb, exploding outward like a giant squall line of wind and water." Downdraft likely sank clipper, The Miami News, May 23, 1986, p. 6A A similar event occurred to the Concordia in 2010 off the coast of Brazil.

===Methane hydrates===

Worldwide distribution of confirmed or inferred offshore gas hydrate-bearing sediments, 1996.Source: USGS
An explanation for some of the disappearances has focused on the presence of large fields of methane hydrates (a form of natural gas) on the continental shelves. Laboratory experiments carried out in Australia have proven that bubbles can, indeed, sink a scale model ship by decreasing the density of the water; any wreckage consequently rising to the surface would be rapidly dispersed by the Gulf Stream. It has been hypothesized that periodic methane eruptions (sometimes called "mud volcanoes") may produce regions of frothy water that are no longer capable of providing adequate buoyancy for ships. If this were the case, such an area forming around a ship could cause it to sink very rapidly and without warning.

Publications by the USGS describe large stores of undersea hydrates worldwide, including the Blake Ridge area, off the southeastern United States coast. However, according to the USGS, no large releases of gas hydrates are believed to have occurred in the Bermuda Triangle for the past 15,000 years. 

==Notable incidents==

===Ellen Austin===
The Ellen Austin supposedly came across a derelict ship, placed on board a prize crew, and attempted to sail with it to New York in 1881. According to the stories, the derelict disappeared; others elaborating further that the derelict reappeared minus the prize crew, then disappeared again with a second prize crew on board. A check from Lloyd's of London records proved the existence of the Meta, built in 1854 and that in 1880 the Meta was renamed Ellen Austin. There are no casualty listings for this vessel, or any vessel at that time, that would suggest a large number of missing men were placed on board a derelict that later disappeared. 
Schooner Carroll A. Deering, as seen from the Cape Lookout lightvessel on January 29, 1921, two days before she was found deserted in North Carolina. (US Coast Guard)

===USS Cyclops===

The incident resulting in the single largest loss of life in the history of the US Navy not related to combat occurred when the collier USS Cyclops, carrying a full load of manganese ore and with one engine out of action, went missing without a trace with a crew of 309 sometime after March 4, 1918, after departing the island of Barbados. Although there is no strong evidence for any single theory, many independent theories exist, some blaming storms, some capsizing, and some suggesting that wartime enemy activity was to blame for the loss. In addition, two of Cyclopss sister ships, and were subsequently lost in the North Atlantic during World War II. Both ships were transporting heavy loads of metallic ore similar to that which was loaded on Cyclops during her fatal voyage. In all three cases structural failure due to overloading with a much denser cargo than designed is considered the most likely cause of sinking.

===Carroll A. Deering===

A five-masted schooner built in 1919, the Carroll A. Deering was found hard aground and abandoned at Diamond Shoals, near Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, on January 31, 1921. Rumors and more at the time indicated the Deering was a victim of piracy, possibly connected with the illegal rum-running trade during Prohibition, and possibly involving another ship, , which disappeared at roughly the same time. Just hours later, an unknown steamer sailed near the lightship along the track of the Deering, and ignored all signals from the lightship. It is speculated that Hewitt may have been this mystery ship, and possibly involved in the Deering crew's disappearance. 

===Flight 19===

US Navy Avengers, similar to those of Flight 19.
Flight 19 was a training flight of five TBM Avenger torpedo bombers that disappeared on December 5, 1945, while over the Atlantic. The squadron's flight plan was scheduled to take them due east from Fort Lauderdale for 141 miles, north for 73 miles, and then back over a final 140-mile leg to complete the exercise. The flight never returned to base. The disappearance is attributed by Navy investigators to navigational error leading to the aircraft running out of fuel.

One of the search and rescue aircraft deployed to look for them, a PBM Mariner with a 13-man crew, also disappeared. A tanker off the coast of Florida reported seeing an explosion and observing a widespread oil slick when fruitlessly searching for survivors. The weather was becoming stormy by the end of the incident. According to contemporaneous sources the Mariner had a history of explosions due to vapour leaks when heavily loaded with fuel, as for a potentially long search and rescue operation.

===Star Tiger and Star Ariel===

G-AHNP Star Tiger disappeared on January 30, 1948, on a flight from the Azores to Bermuda; G-AGRE Star Ariel disappeared on January 17, 1949, on a flight from Bermuda to Kingston, Jamaica. Both were Avro Tudor IV passenger aircraft operated by British South American Airways. Both planes were operating at the very limits of their range and the slightest error or fault in the equipment could keep them from reaching the small island. One plane was not heard from long before it would have entered the Triangle. 

===Douglas DC-3===

On December 28, 1948, a Douglas DC-3 aircraft, number NC16002, disappeared while on a flight from San Juan, Puerto Rico, to Miami. No trace of the aircraft or the 32 people on board was ever found. From the documentation compiled by the Civil Aeronautics Board investigation, a possible key to the plane's disappearance was found, but barely touched upon by the Triangle writers: the plane's batteries were inspected and found to be low on charge, but ordered back into the plane without a recharge by the pilot while in San Juan. Whether or not this led to complete electrical failure will never be known. However, since piston-engined aircraft rely upon magnetos to provide spark to their cylinders rather than a battery powered ignition coil system, this theory is not strongly convincing. 

===KC-135 Stratotankers===
On August 28, 1963, a pair of US Air Force KC-135 Stratotanker aircraft collided and crashed into the Atlantic. The Triangle version (Winer, Berlitz, Gaddis ) of this story specifies that they did collide and crash, but there were two distinct crash sites, separated by over 160 mi of water. However, Kusche's research showed that the unclassified version of the Air Force investigation report stated that the debris field defining the second "crash site" was examined by a search and rescue ship, and found to be a mass of seaweed and driftwood tangled in an old buoy.

===Connemara IV===
A pleasure yacht was found adrift in the Atlantic south of Bermuda on September 26, 1955; it is usually stated in the stories (Berlitz, Winer ) that the crew vanished while the yacht survived being at sea during three hurricanes. The 1955 Atlantic hurricane season shows Hurricane Ione passing nearby between the 14th and 18th of that month, with Bermuda being affected by winds of almost gale force. In his second book on the Bermuda Triangle, Winer quoted from a letter he had received from Mr J.E. Challenor of Barbados: 

On the morning of September 22 Connemara IV was lying to a heavy mooring in the open roadstead of Carlisle Bay. Because of the approaching hurricane, the owner strengthened the mooring ropes and put out two additional anchors. There was little else he could do, as the exposed mooring was the only available anchorage.

...

In Carlisle Bay, the sea in the wake of Hurricane Janet was awe-inspiring and dangerous. The owner of Connemara IV observed that she had disappeared. An investigation revealed that she had dragged her moorings and gone to sea.

==Influence on culture==
* The Sea World amusement park on the Gold Coast (Australia) operated a ride called Bermuda Triangle.
* Composer Isao Tomita released an album, Bermuda Triangle, inspired by the region.
* Fleetwood Mac released the song "Bermuda Triangle" on their 1974 album Heroes are Hard to Find.
* Singer-songwriter Barry Manilow's single, "Bermuda Triangle" (released in 1981), was taken from his album Barry (1980).
* The first film based on the Bermuda Triangle was the 1975 TV Movie Satan's Triangle. Later films include The Bermuda Triangle (1978), The Triangle (2001) and the eponymous TV miniseries (2005).

==See also==
* List of Bermuda Triangle incidents
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
* Devil's Sea (or Dragon's Triangle)
* Sargasso Sea
* SS Cotopaxi
* Vile Vortices

==Notes==

==References==
The incidents cited above, apart from the official documentation, come from the following works. Some incidents mentioned as having taken place within the Triangle are found only in these sources:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reprinted in paperback in 2005; ISBN 0-07-145217-6.
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

===Newspaper articles===
ProQuest has newspaper source material for many incidents, archived in Portable Document Format (PDF). The newspapers include The New York Times, The Washington Post, and The Atlanta Constitution. To access this website, registration is required, usually through a library connected to a college or university.

Flight 19
* "Great Hunt On For 27 Navy Fliers Missing In Five Planes Off Florida", The New York Times, December 7, 1945.
* "Wide Hunt For 27 Men In Six Navy Planes", The Washington Post, December 7, 1945.
* "Fire Signals Seen In Area Of Lost Men", The Washington Post, December 9, 1945.

SS Cotopaxi
* "Lloyd's posts Cotopaxi As 'Missing'", The New York Times, January 7, 1926.
* "Efforts To Locate Missing Ship Fail", The Washington Post, December 6, 1925.
* "Lighthouse Keepers Seek Missing Ship", The Washington Post, December 7, 1925.
* "53 On Missing Craft Are Reported Saved", The Washington Post, December 13, 1925.

USS Cyclops (AC-4)
* "Cold High Winds Do $25,000 Damage", The Washington Post, March 11, 1918.
* "Collier Overdue A Month", The New York Times, April 15, 1918.
* "More Ships Hunt For Missing Cyclops", The New York Times, April 16, 1918.
* "Haven't Given Up Hope For Cyclops", The New York Times, April 17, 1918.
* "Collier Cyclops Is Lost; 293 Persons On Board; Enemy Blow Suspected", The Washington Post, April 15, 1918.
* "U.S. Consul Gottschalk Coming To Enter The War", The Washington Post, April 15, 1918.
* "Cyclops Skipper Teuton, 'Tis Said", The Washington Post, April 16, 1918.
* "Fate Of Ship Baffles", The Washington Post, April 16, 1918.
* "Steamer Met Gale On Cyclops' Course", The Washington Post, April 19, 1918.

Carroll A. Deering
* "Piracy Suspected In Disappearance Of 3 American Ships", The New York Times, June 21, 1921.
* "Bath Owners Skeptical", The New York Times, June 22, 1921. piera antonella
* "Deering Skipper's Wife Caused Investigation", The New York Times, June 22, 1921.
* "More Ships Added To Mystery List", The New York Times, June 22, 1921.
* "Hunt On For Pirates", The Washington Post, June 21, 1921
* "Comb Seas For Ships", The Washington Post, June 22, 1921.
* "Port Of Missing Ships Claims 3000 Yearly", The Washington Post, July 10, 1921.

Wreckers
* "'Wreckreation' Was The Name Of The Game That Flourished 100 Years Ago", The New York Times, March 30, 1969.

S.S. Suduffco
* "To Search For Missing Freighter", The New York Times, April 11, 1926.
* "Abandon Hope For Ship", The New York Times, April 28, 1926.

Star Tiger and Star Ariel
* "Hope Wanes in Sea Search For 28 Aboard Lost Airliner", The New York Times, January 31, 1948.
* "72 Planes Search Sea For Airliner", The New York Times, January 19, 1949.

DC-3 Airliner NC16002 disappearance
* "30-Passenger Airliner Disappears In Flight From San Juan To Miami", The New York Times, December 29, 1948.
* "Check Cuba Report Of Missing Airliner", The New York Times, December 30, 1948.
* "Airliner Hunt Extended", The New York Times, December 31, 1948.

Harvey Conover and Revonoc
* "Search Continuing For Conover Yawl", The New York Times, January 8, 1958.
* "Yacht Search Goes On", The New York Times, January 9, 1958.
* "Yacht Search Pressed", The New York Times, January 10, 1958.
* "Conover Search Called Off", The New York Times, January 15, 1958.

KC-135 Stratotankers
* "Second Area Of Debris Found In Hunt For Jets", The New York Times, August 31, 1963.
* "Hunt For Tanker Jets Halted", The New York Times, September 3, 1963.
* "Planes Debris Found In Jet Tanker Hunt", The Washington Post, August 30, 1963.

B-52 Bomber (Pogo 22)
* "U.S.-Canada Test Of Air Defence A Success", The New York Times, October 16, 1961.
* "Hunt For Lost B-52 Bomber Pushed In New Area", The New York Times, October 17, 1961.
* "Bomber Hunt Pressed", The New York Times, October 18, 1961.
* "Bomber Search Continuing", The New York Times, October 19, 1961.
* "Hunt For Bomber Ends", The New York Times, October 20, 1961.

Charter vessel Sno'Boy
* "Plane Hunting Boat Sights Body In Sea", The New York Times, July 7, 1963.
* "Search Abandoned For 40 On Vessel Lost In Caribbean", The New York Times, July 11, 1963.
* "Search Continues For Vessel With 55 Aboard In Caribbean", The Washington Post, July 6, 1963.
* "Body Found In Search For Fishing Boat", The Washington Post, July 7, 1963.

SS Marine Sulphur Queen
* "Tanker Lost In Atlantic; 39 Aboard", The Washington Post, February 9, 1963.
* "Debris Sighted In Plane Search For Tanker Missing Off Florida", The New York Times, February 11, 1963.
* "2.5 Million Is Asked In Sea Disaster", The Washington Post, February 19, 1963.
* "Vanishing Of Ship Ruled A Mystery", The New York Times, April 14, 1964.
* "Families Of 39 Lost At Sea Begin $20-Million Suit Here", The New York Times, June 4, 1969.
* "10-Year Rift Over Lost Ship Near End", The New York Times, February 4, 1973.

SS Sylvia L. Ossa
* "Ship And 37 Vanish In Bermuda Triangle On Voyage To U.S.", The New York Times, October 18, 1976.
* "Ship Missing In Bermuda Triangle Now Presumed To Be Lost At Sea", The New York Times, October 19, 1976.
* "Distress Signal Heard From American Sailor Missing For 17 Days", The New York Times, October 31, 1976.

===Website links===
The following websites have either online material that supports the popular version of the Bermuda Triangle, or documents published from official sources as part of hearings or inquiries, such as those conducted by the United States Navy or United States Coast Guard. Copies of some inquiries are not online and may have to be ordered; for example, the losses of Flight 19 or USS Cyclops can be ordered direct from the United States Naval Historical Center.
* Text of Feb, 1964 Argosy Magazine article by Vincent Gaddis
* United States Coast Guard database of selected reports and inquiries
* Website of historian & Bermuda Triangle researcher Gian Quasar
* U.S. Navy Historical Center Bermuda Triangle FAQ
* U.S. Navy Historical C/ The Bermuda Triangle: Startling New Secrets, Sci Fi Channel documentary (November 2005)
* Navy Historical Center: The Loss Of Flight 19
* on losses of heavy ships at sea
* Bermuda Shipwrecks
* Association of Underwater Explorers shipwreck listings page
* Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships
* List of lost aircraft

===Books===
Most of the works listed here are largely out of print. Copies may be obtained at your local library, or purchased used at bookstores, or through eBay or Amazon.com. These books are often the only source material for some of the incidents that have taken place within the Triangle.
* by Gian J. Quasar, International Marine/Ragged Mountain Press (2003) ISBN 0-07-142640-X; contains list of missing craft as researched in official records. (Reprinted in paperback (2005) ISBN 0-07-145217-6).
* The Bermuda Triangle, Charles Berlitz (ISBN 0-385-04114-4): Out of print, however it's commonly available second-hand.
* The Bermuda Triangle Mystery Solved (1975). Lawrence David Kusche (ISBN 0-87975-971-2)
* Limbo Of The Lost, John Wallace Spencer (ISBN 0-686-10658-X)
* The Evidence for the Bermuda Triangle, (1984), David Group (ISBN 0-85030-413-X)
* The Final Flight, (2006), Tony Blackman (ISBN 0-9553856-0-1). This book is a work of fiction.
* Bermuda Shipwrecks, (2000), Daniel Berg(ISBN 0-9616167-4-1)
* The Devil's Triangle, (1974), Richard Winer (ISBN 0-553-10688-0); this particular book sold well over a million copies by the end of its first year; to date there have been at least 17 printings.
* The Devil's Triangle 2 (1975), Richard Winer (ISBN 0-553-02464-7)
* From the Devil's Triangle to the Devil's Jaw (1977), Richard Winer (ISBN 0-553-10860-3)
* Ghost Ships: True Stories of Nautical Nightmares, Hauntings, and Disasters (2000), Richard Winer (ISBN 0-425-17548-0)
* The Bermuda Triangle (1975) by Adi-Kent Thomas Jeffrey (ISBN 0-446-59961-1)

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Borough]]

A borough is an administrative division in various countries. In principle, the term borough designates a self-governing township although, in practice, official use of the term varies widely.

The word borough derives from common Germanic *burg, meaning fort: compare with bury (England), burgh (Scotland), Burg (Germany), borg (Scandinavia), pori (Finland), burcht (Dutch), and the Germanic borrowing present in neighbouring Indo-european languages such as borgo (Italian), bourg (French), burgo (Spanish and Portuguese), purg (Kajkavian) and durg () (Hindi) and "arg"()(Farsi). The incidence of these words as suffixes to place names (for example, Canterbury, Strasbourg, Luxembourg, Edinburgh, Hamburg, Gothenburg) usually indicates that they were once fortified settlements.

In the Middle Ages, boroughs were settlements in England that were granted some self-government; burghs were the Scottish equivalent. In medieval England, boroughs were also entitled to elect members of parliament. The use of the word borough probably derives from the burghal system of Alfred the Great. Alfred set up a system of defensive strong points (Burhs); in order to maintain these settlements, he granted them a degree of autonomy. After the Norman Conquest, when certain towns were granted self-governance, the concept of the burh/borough seems to have been reused to mean a self-governing settlement.

The concept of the borough has been used repeatedly (and often differently) throughout the world. Often, a borough is a single town with its own local government. However, in some cities it is a subdivision of the city (for example, London, New York City, Montreal, and Tokyo). In such cases, the borough will normally have either limited powers delegated to it by the city's local government, or no powers at all. At certain times, London has had no overall city government and boroughs were the main unit of local government for Londoners; in Tokyo, they are known as wards or cities, and have city status, but these still form parts of a larger municipal government which has merged with that of the prefecture. In other places, such as Alaska, borough designates a whole region; Alaska's largest borough, the North Slope Borough, is comparable in area to the entire United Kingdom, although its population is less than that of Swanage. In Australia, a borough was once a self-governing small town, but this designation has all but vanished, except for the only remaining borough in the country, which is the Borough of Queenscliffe.

Boroughs as administrative units are to be found in Ireland and the United Kingdom, more specifically in England and Northern Ireland. Boroughs also exist in the Canadian province of Quebec and formerly in Ontario, in some states of the United States, in Israel, formerly in New Zealand and only one left in Australia.

==Etymology==
The word borough derives from the Old English word burh, meaning a fortified settlement. Other English derivatives of burh include bury and brough. There are obvious cognates in other Indo-European languages. For example; burgh in Scots and Middle English; burg in German and Old English, The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: Fourth Edition (2000) borg in Scandinavian languages; parcus in Latin and pyrgos in Greek.

A number of other European languages have cognate words that were borrowed from the Germanic languages during the Middle Ages, including brog in Irish, bwr or bwrc, meaning "wall, rampart" in Welsh, bourg in French, burg in Catalan (in Catalonia there is a town named Burg), borgo in Italian, and burgo in Spanish (hence the place-name Burgos).

The 'burg' element is often confused with 'berg' meaning hill or mountain (cf. iceberg). Hence the 'berg' element in Bergen relates to a hill, rather than a fort. In some cases, the 'berg' element in place names has converged towards burg/borough; for instance Farnborough, from fernaberga (fern-hill).

==Pronunciation==
In many parts of England, "borough" is pronounced as an independent word, and as when a suffix of a place-name. As a suffix, it is sometimes spelled "-brough".

In the United States, "borough" is pronounced or . When appearing as the suffix "-burg(h)" in place-names, it is pronounced .

==Uses of borough==

===England and Wales===

====Ancient and municipal boroughs====

During the medieval period many towns were granted self-governance by the Crown, at which point they became referred to as boroughs. The formal status of borough came to be conferred by Royal Charter. These boroughs were generally governed by a self-selecting corporation (i.e., when a member died or resigned his replacement would be by co-option). Sometimes boroughs were governed by bailiffs or headboroughs.

Debates on the Reform Bill (eventually the Reform Act 1832) had highlighted the variations in systems of governance of towns, and a Royal Commission was set up to investigate the issue. This resulted in a regularisation of municipal government (Municipal Corporations Act 1835). 178 of the ancient boroughs were reformed as municipal boroughs, with all municipal corporations to be elected according to a standard franchise based on property ownership. The unreformed boroughs either lapsed in borough status, or were reformed (or abolished) at a later time. Several new municipal boroughs were formed in the new industrial cities after the bill enacted, according to the provisions of the bill.

As part of a large-scale reform of local government in England and Wales in 1974, municipal boroughs were finally abolished (having become increasingly irrelevant). However, the civic traditions of many boroughs were continued by the grant of a charter to their successor district councils. In smaller boroughs, a town council was formed for the area of the abolished borough, while charter trustees were formed in other former boroughs. In each case, the new body was allowed to use the regalia of the old corporation, and appoint ceremonial office holders such as sword and mace bearers as provided in their original charters. The council or trustees may apply for an Order in Council or Royal Licence to use the former borough coat of arms.

====Parliamentary boroughs====

From 1265, two burgesses from each borough were summoned to the Parliament of England, alongside two knights from each county. Thus parliamentary constituencies were derived from the ancient boroughs. Representation in the House of Commons was decided by the House itself, which resulted in boroughs' being established in some small settlements for the purposes of parliamentary representation, despite their possessing no actual corporation.

After the Reform Act, which disenfranchised many of the rotten boroughs (boroughs that had declined in importance, had only a small population, and had only a handful of eligible voters), parliamentary constituencies began to diverge from the ancient boroughs. While many ancient boroughs remained as municipal boroughs, they were disenfranchised by the Reform Act.

====County boroughs====

The Local Government Act 1888 established a new sort of borough  the county borough. These were designed to be 'counties-to-themselves'; administrative divisions to sit alongside the new administrative counties. They allowed urban areas to be administered separately from the more rural areas. They, therefore, often contained pre-existing municipal boroughs, which thereafter became part of the second tier of local government, below the administrative counties and county boroughs.

The county boroughs were, like the municipal boroughs, abolished in 1974, being reabsorbed into their parent counties for administrative purposes.

====Metropolitan boroughs====

In 1899, as part of a reform of local government in the County of London, the various parishes in London were reorganised as new entities, the 'metropolitan boroughs'. These were reorganised further when Greater London was formed out of Middlesex and the County of London in 1965.

When the new metropolitan counties (Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Tyne & Wear, West Midlands, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire) were created in 1974, their sub-divisions also became metropolitan boroughs; in many cases these metropolitan boroughs recapitulated abolished county boroughs (for example, Stockport). The metropolitan boroughs possessed slightly more autonomy from the metropolitan county councils than the shire county districts did from their county councils.

With the abolition of the metropolitan county councils in 1986, these metropolitan boroughs became independent, and continue to be so at present.

====Other current uses====
Elsewhere in England a number of districts and unitary authority areas are called "borough". Until 1974, this was a status that denoted towns with a certain type of local government (a municipal corporation). Since 1974, it has been a purely ceremonial style granted by royal charter to districts which may consist of a single town or may include a number of towns or rural areas. Borough status entitles the council chairman to bear the title of mayor. Districts may apply to the British Crown for the grant of borough status upon advice of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.

===Northern Ireland===
In Northern Ireland, local government was reorganised in 1973. Under the legislation that created the 26 districts of Northern Ireland, a district council whose area included an existing municipal borough could resolve to adopt the charter of the old municipality and thus continue to enjoy borough status. Districts that do not contain a former borough can apply for a charter in a similar manner to English districts.

===Scotland===

===Canada===

In Quebec, the term borough is generally used as the English translation of arrondissement, referring to an administrative division of a municipality. Only eight municipalities in Quebec are divided into boroughs. See List of boroughs in Quebec.

It was previously used in Metropolitan Toronto, Ontario, to denote suburban municipalities including Scarborough, York, North York, Etobicoke prior to their conversion into cities. The Borough of East York was the last Toronto municipality to hold this status, relinquishing it upon becoming part of the City of Toronto on January 1, 1998.

===United States===

In the United States, a borough is a unit of local government below the level of the state. The term is currently used in seven states.

The following states use, or have used, the word with the following meanings:
*Alaska, as a county-equivalent
*Connecticut, as an incorporated municipality within, or consolidated with, a town
*Minnesota, formerly applied to one municipality
*New Jersey, as a type of independent incorporated municipality - see Borough (New Jersey)
*New York, as one of the five divisions of New York City, each coextensive with a county - See Borough (New York City)
*Pennsylvania, as a type of municipality comparable to a town. Only one incorporated town is chartered in Pennsylvania. - see Borough (Pennsylvania)
*Virginia, as a division of a city under certain circumstances.

Certain names of places, such as Hillsboro, OR, Greensboro, NC, Tyngsborough, MA, and Maynesborough, NH reflect the historical use of Borough as a geographical scale in the United States. Words Ending with Boro 

===Mexico===
In Mexico as translations from English to Spanish applied to Mexico City, the word borough has resulted in a delegacin (delegation), referring to the 16 administrative areas within the Mexican Federal District. Also the municipalities of some states are administratively subdivided into boroughs, as showed in Municipality of Mexicali#Boroughs. (see: Boroughs of Mexico and Boroughs of the Mexican Federal District)

===Australia===
In Australia, the term "borough" is an occasionally used term for a local government area. Currently there is only one borough in Australia, the Borough of Queenscliffe in Victoria, although there have been more in the past. However in some cases it can be integrated into the councils name instead of used as an official title, such as the Municipality of Kingborough in Tasmania.

===Republic of Ireland===
Under the Local Government Act 2001 section 10 (3) and schedule 6 part 1 chapter 1, the following continue to be known as Boroughs (though this is largely a matter of nomenclature) Clonmel, Drogheda, Kilkenny, Sligo, Wexford. In Section 10 (7) continues the "use of the description city in relation to Kilkenny, to the extent that that description was used before (January 1, 2002) and is not otherwise inconsistent with this Act."

===New Zealand===
New Zealand formerly used the term borough to designate self-governing towns of more than 1,000 people, although 19th century census records show many boroughs with populations as low as 200. 1881 census summary A borough of more than 20,000 people could become a city by proclamation. Boroughs and cities were collectively known as municipalities, and were enclaves separate from their surrounding counties. Boroughs proliferated in the suburban areas of the larger cities: By the 1980s there were 19 boroughs and three cities in the area that is now the City of Auckland.

In the 1980s, some boroughs and cities began to be merged with their surrounding counties to form districts with a mixed urban and rural population. In 1989, a nationwide reform of local government completed the process. Counties and boroughs were abolished and all boundaries were redrawn. Under the new system, most territorial authorities cover both urban and rural land. The more populated councils are classified as cities, and the more rural councils are classified as districts. Only Kawerau District, an enclave within Whakatane District, continues to follow the tradition of a small town council that does not include surrounding rural area.

===Israel===
Under Israeli law, inherited from British Mandate municipal law, the possibility of creating a municipal borough exists. However, no borough was actually created under law until 20052006, when Neve Monosson and Maccabim-Re'ut, both communal settlements (Heb: yishuv kehilati) founded in 1953 and 1984, respectively, were declared to be autonomous municipal boroughs (Heb: vaad rova ironi), within their mergers with the towns of Yehud and Modi'in. Similar structures have been created under different types of legal status over the years in Israel, notably Kiryat Haim in Haifa, Jaffa in Tel Aviv-Yafo and Ramot and Gilo in Jerusalem. However, Neve Monosson is the first example of a full municipal borough actually declared under law by the Minister of the Interior, under a model subsequently adopted in Maccabim-Re'ut as well.

It is the declared intention of the Interior Ministry to use the borough mechanism in order to facilitate municipal mergers in Israel, after a 2003 wide-reaching merger plan, which, in general, ignored the sensitivities of the communal settlements, and largely failed.

=== Netherlands ===
In the Netherlands, the municipalities of Rotterdam and Amsterdam are divided into administrative boroughs, or deelgemeenten, which have their own borough council and a borough mayor. Other large cites are usually divided into districts, or stadsdelen, for census purposes.

==See also==
* Borough status in the United Kingdom
* Boroughs incorporated in England and Wales 18351882
* Boroughs incorporated in England and Wales 18821974
* Boroughs in New York City
* Burgh
* County borough
* Ancient borough
* History of local government in England
* List of burghs in Scotland
* Metropolitan borough
* Municipal borough

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 

 



[[Bodmin]]

Bodmin () is a civil parish and major town in Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. It is situated in the centre of the county southwest of Bodmin Moor. Ordnance Survey: Landranger map sheet 200 Newquay & Bodmin ISBN 978-0-319-22938-5 

The extent of the civil parish corresponds fairly closely to that of the town so is mostly urban in character. It is bordered to the east by Cardinham parish, to the southeast by Lanhydrock parish, to the southwest and west by Lanivet parish, and to the north by Helland parish. 

Bodmin has a population of 12,778 (2001 census). It was formerly the county town of Cornwall until the Crown Courts moved to Truro which is also the administrative centre (before 1835 the county town was Launceston). Bodmin was in the administrative North Cornwall District until local government reorganisation in 2009 abolished the District (see also Politics of Cornwall#Cornwall Council). The town is part of the North Cornwall parliamentary constituency, which is represented by Dan Rogerson MP.

Bodmin Town Council is made up of 16 councillors who are elected to serve a term of four years. Each year, the Council elects one of its number as Mayor to serve as the town's civic leader and to chair council meetings. 

==Situation and origin of the name==
Bodmin lies in the centre of Cornwall, south-west of Bodmin Moor. It has been suggested that the town's name comes from an archaic word in the Cornish "bod" (meaning a dwelling; the later word is "bos") and a contraction of "menegh" (monks). The "monks' dwelling" may refer to an early monastic settlement instituted by St. Guron, which St. Petroc took as his site. Guron is said to have departed to St Goran on the arrival of Petroc.

The hamlets of Cooksland, Dunmere and Turfdown are in the parish. 

==History==
St. Petroc founded a monastery in Bodmin in the sixth century Doble, G. H. (1965) The Saints of Cornwall: part 4. Truro: Dean and Chapter; pp. 132-166 and gave the town its alternative name of Petrockstow. The monastery was deprived of some of its lands at the Norman Conquest but at the time of Domesday still held 18 manors, including Bodmin, Padstow and Rialton. Thorn, C. et al. (eds.) (1979) Cornwall. Chichester: Phillimore; entries 4,3-4.22 Bodmin is one of the oldest towns in Cornwall, and the only large Cornish settlement recorded in the Domesday Book of the late 11th century. In the 15th century the Norman church of St Petroc was largely rebuilt and stands as one of the largest churches in Cornwall (the largest after the cathedral at Truro). Also built at that time was an abbey of canons regular, now mostly ruined. For most of Bodmin's history, the tin industry was a mainstay of the economy.

The name of the town probably derives from the Cornish "Bod-meneghy", meaning "dwelling of or by the sanctuary of monks". Variant spellings recorded include Botmenei in 1100, Bodmen in 1253, Bodman in 1377 and Bodmyn in 1522. The Bodman spelling also appears in sources and maps from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, most notably in the celebrated map of Cornwall produced by John Speed but actually engraved by the Dutch cartographer Jodocus Hondius the Elder (1563-1612) in Amsterdam in 1610 (published in London by Sudbury and Humble in 1626). It is unclear whether the Bodman spelling signifies any historical or monastic connection with the equally ancient settlement of Bodman at the western end of the Bodensee in the German province of Baden.

An inscription on a stone built into the wall of a summer house in Lancarffe furnishes proof of a settlement in Bodmin in the early Middle Ages. It is a memorial to one "Dunoatus son of Mecagnus" and has been dated from the sixth to eighth centuries. Discussion, photo and bibliography in Okasha, Elisabeth (1993). Corpus of early Christian inscribed stones of South-west Britain Leicester: University Press, pp. 126-128 

The Black Death killed half of Bodmin's population in the mid 14th century (1500 people). 

===Rebellions===
Bodmin was the centre of three Cornish uprisings. The first was the Cornish Rebellion of 1497 when a Cornish army, led by Michael An Gof, a blacksmith from St. Keverne, and Thomas Flamank, a lawyer from Bodmin, marched to Blackheath in London where they were eventually defeated by 10,000 men of the King's army under Baron Daubeny. Then, in the Autumn of 1497, Perkin Warbeck tried to usurp the throne from Henry VII. Warbeck was proclaimed King Richard IV in Bodmin but Henry had little difficulty crushing the uprising. In 1549, Cornishmen, allied with other rebels in neighboring Devon, rose once again in rebellion when the staunchly Protestant Edward VI tried to impose a new Prayer Book. The lower classes of Cornwall and Devon were still strongly attached to the Catholic religion and again a Cornish army was formed in Bodmin which marched across the border into Devon to lay siege to Exeter. This became known as the Prayer Book Rebellion. Proposals to translate the Prayer Book into Cornish were suppressed and in total 4,000 people were killed in the rebellion. Sturt, John (1987) Revolt in the West: the Western Rebellion of 1549. Exeter: Devon Books 

==Churches==

===Parish church of St Petroc===

The existing church building is dated 1469-72 and was until the building of Truro Cathedral the largest church in Cornwall. The tower which remains from the original Norman church and stands on the north side of the church (the upper part is 15th century) was, until the loss of its spire in 1699, 150 ft high. The building underwent two Victorian restorations and another in 1930. It is now listed Grade I. There are a number of interesting monuments, most notably that of Prior Vivian which was formerly in the Priory Church (Thomas Vivian's effigy lying on a chest: black Catacleuse stone and grey marble). The font of a type common in Cornwall is of the twelfth century: large and finely carved. Pevsner, N. (1970) Cornwall; second ed. Penguin Books Sedding, Edmund H. (1909) Norman Architecture in Cornwall: a handbook to old ecclesiastical architecture. London: Ward & Co.; pp. 21-36 

===Other churches===
The Chapel of St Thomas Becket is a ruin of a 14th-century building in Bodmin churchyard. The holy well of St Guron is a small stone building at the churchyard gate. The Berry Tower is all that remains of the former church of the Holy Rood and there are even fewer remains from the substantial Franciscan Friary established ca. 1240: a gateway in Fore Street and two pillars elsewhere in the town. The Roman Catholic Abbey of St Mary and St Petroc, formerly belonging to the Canons Regular of the Lateran was built in 1965 next to the already existing seminary. Pevsner, N. (1970) Cornwall, second ed. Penguin Books. The Roman Catholic parish of Bodmin includes a large area of North Cornwall and there are churches also at Wadebridge, Padstow and Tintagel. In 1881 the Roman Catholic mass was celebrated in Bodmin for the first time since 1539. A church was planned in the 1930s but delayed by World War II: the Church of St Mary and St Petroc was eventually consecrated in 1965: Dyer, Peter (2005) Tintagel: a portrait of a parish. Cambridge: Cambridge Books ISBN 978-0-9550097-0-9; p. 119 it was built next to the already existing seminary. There are also five other churches in Bodmin, including a Methodist church.

===Archdeaconry of Bodmin===

==Sites of interest==

===Institutions===
Bodmin Jail, operational for over 150 years but now a semi-ruin, was built in the late 18th century, and was the first British prison to hold prisoners in separate cells (though often up to 10 at a time) rather than communally. Over fifty prisoners condemned at the Bodmin Assize Court were hanged at the prison. It was also used for temporarily holding prisoners sentenced to transportation, awaiting transfer to the prison hulks lying in the highest navigable reaches of the River Fowey. Also, during World War I the prison held some of Britain's priceless national treasures including the Domesday Book, the ring and the Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom.

thumb
Berry Tower, all that remains of the Chapel of the Holy Rood
Other buildings of interest include the former Shire Hall, now a tourist information centre, and Victoria Barracks, formerly depot of the now defunct Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry and now the site of the regimental museum. It includes the history of the regiment from 1702, plus a military library. The original barracks house the regimental museum which was founded in 1925. There is a fine collection of small arms and machine guns, plus maps, uniforms and paintings on display.

Bodmin County Lunatic Asylum was designed by John Foulston and afterwards George Wightwick. William Robert Hicks the humorist was domestic superintendent in the mid-19th century.

==Freemasonry==
There is a sizeable single storey Masonic Hall in St Nicholas Street, which is home to no less than seven Masonic bodies. Cornwall Masonic Yearbook 2012/13 
* One & All Lodge No. 330 was consecrated on 8 March 1810, it currently meets on the second Monday in each month
* Beacon Lodge No. 9425 was consecrated on 15 February 1991, it currently meets on the third Tuesday in February, April, October & December, and the 4th Tuesday in May
* Saint Petrock Royal Arch Chapter No. 330 was consecrated on 11 April 1878, it currently meets on the third Wednesday in January, March, May, July, September & November
* St Nicholas Lodge of Mark Master Masons No. 1188 was consecrated on 30 March 1955, it currently meets on the third Thursday in February, April, June, August & October
* St Nicholas Lodge of Royal Ark Mariners No. 1188 was consecrated on 2 June 1979, it currently meets on the second Thursday in March, May, September & November
* Conclave of Light of the Masonic & Military Order of the Red Cross of Constantine No. 498 was consecrated on 23 April 2009, it currently meets on the second Tuesday in January, July & November
* Bodiniel Quarry Assemblage of the Worshipful Society of Free Masons was constituted on 15 October 1988, it currently meets the fourth Thursday in March and July, and the fourth Friday in November

==Other sites==
The Bodmin Beacon Local Nature Reserve is the hill overlooking the town. The reserve has 83 acres (33.6 ha) of public land and at its highest point it reaches 162 metres with the distinctive landmark at the summit. The 44-metre tall monument to Sir Walter Raleigh Gilbert Chichester, H. M. (2004) Gilbert, Sir Walter Raleigh, first baronet (17851853), rev. Roger T. Stearn, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 accessed 1 Jan 2008 was built in 1857 by the townspeople of Bodmin to honour the soldier's life and work in India.

In 1966, the "Finn VC Estate" was named in honour of Victoria Cross winner James Henry Finn who once lived in the town. Langdon (1896) records six crosses in the parish of which the finest is at Carminow. An ornate granite drinking bowl which serves the needs of thirsty dogs at the entrance to Bodmins Priory car park was donated by Prince Chula Chakrabongse of Thailand who lived at Tredethy. 

==Education==
There are no independent schools in the area.

===Primary schools===
St. Petroc's Voluntary Aided Church of England Primary School Athelstan Park, Bodmin, Cornwall was given this title in September 1990 after the amalgamation of St. Petroc's Infant School and St. Petroc's Junior School. St. Petroc's is a large school with some 440 pupils between the ages of four and 11. Eight of its 14 governors are nominated by the Diocese of Truro or the Parochial Church Council of St. Petroc's, Bodmin.

There are a further three primary (or elementary) schools within Bodmin; Berrycoombe School in the north west corner of the town, St. Mary's Catholic Primary School and Robartes Primary Junior School, both situated west of the town centre.

===Bodmin College===
Bodmin College is a large state comprehensive school for ages 1118 on the outskirts of the town and on the edge of Bodmin Moor. Its headmaster is Mr Brett Elliott. The College is home to the nationally acclaimed "Bodmin College Jazz Orchestra", founded and run by the previous Director of Music, Adrian Evans, until 2007 and more recently, by the current Director, Ben Vincent.Bodmin College

In 1997, Systems & Control students at Bodmin College constructed Roadblock, a robot which entered and won the first series of Robot Wars and was succeeded by "The Beast of Bodmin" (presumably named after the phantom cat purported to roam Bodmin Moor).

The School also has one of the largest sixth forms in the county.

==Transport==
Bodmin General railway station 
Bodmin Parkway railway station is served by main line trains and is situated on the Cornish Main Line about 3 miles (5 km) south-east from the town centre. A heritage railway, the Bodmin and Wenford Railway, runs from Bodmin Parkway station via Bodmin General railway station to Boscarne Junction where there is access to the Camel Trail. The bus link to Bodmin, Wadebridge and Padstow starts from outside the main entrance of Bodmin Parkway.

Bus and coach services connect Bodmin with other districts of Cornwall and Devon.

==Sport and leisure==
Bodmin has a Non-League football club Bodmin Town F.C. who play at Priory Park.

==Media==
;Newspapers
The Cornish Guardian is a weekly newspaper: it is published, on a Friday in 7 separate editions, including the Bodmin edition.

;Radio
Bodmin is the home of NCB Radio, an Internet radio station which aims to bring a dedicated station to North Cornwall.

==Notable people==
See also from Bodmin]
* John Arnold (1736-1799), watchmaker, of London
* John Thomas Blight, artist
* Nicholas Boyer, the mayor of Bodmin, hanged for rebellion, 1549
* Chula Chakrabongse, philanthropist, Prince of Siam
* James Henry Finn, soldier
* Thomas Flamank, lawyer, co-leader of the Cornish Rebellion, 1497
* John Gale, Australian journalist
* Alice Hext, garden developer
* William Robert Hicks, superintendent of the Asylum
* Alan Hodge former guitarist with the Cornish band The Onyx
* Herman Cyril McNeile, "Sapper", novelist
* Saint Petroc
* Dan Rogerson, MP
* Henry Southwell, vicar of Bodmin, afterwards Bishop of Lewes
* Thomas Vivian, Prior of Bodmin, titular Bishop of Megara
* Rory Simmons, musician http://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/10/fringe-magnetic-live-review 

==Town twinning==
Bodmin is twinned with Bederkesa in Germany; Grass Valley, in California, United States; and Le Relecq-Kerhuon (Ar Releg-Kerhuon in Brittany, France.

==Official heraldry==
W. H. Pascoes 1979 A Cornish Armory gives the arms of the priory and the monastery and the seal of the borough.
* Seal - a king enthroned; legend: Sigill comune burgensium bodmine
* Priory - Azure three salmon naiant in pale Argent
* Monastery - Or on a chevron Azure between three lion's heads Purpure three annulets Or

==Official events==
On Halgaver Moor (Goats' Moor) near Bodmin there was once an annual carnival in July which was on one occasion attended by King Charles II. Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable 

Bodmin Riding, a horseback procession trough the town, is a traditional annual ceremony.

==='Beating the bounds' and 'hurling'===
In 186566 William Robert Hicks was mayor of Bodmin, when he revived the custom of Beating the bounds of the town. He was  according to the Dictionary of National Biography  a very good man of business. This still takes place more or less every five years and concludes with a game of Cornish hurling. Hurling survives as a traditional part of beating the bounds at Bodmin, commencing at the close of the 'Beat'. The game is organised by the Rotary club of Bodmin and was last played in 2010. The game is started by the Mayor of Bodmin by throwing a silver ball into a body of water known as the "Salting Pool". There are no teams and the hurl follows a set route. The aim is to carry the ball from the "Salting Pool" via the old A30, along Callywith Road, then through Castle Street, Church Square and Honey Street to finish at the Turret Clock in Fore Street. The participant carrying the ball when it reaches the turret clock will receive a 10 reward from the mayor. The next occurrence of the Bodmin Hurl will be following the next beating of the bounds, which is unlikely to take place until 2015.

==See also==
* List of topics related to Cornwall
* List of Bodmin MPs
* Bodmin NHS Treatment Centre (Bodmin Hospital)
* Bodmin manumissions
* Beast of Bodmin

==References==

==Further reading==
* Henderson, Charles (1935) "Some Notes on Bodmin Priory", in: Essays in Cornish History. Oxford: Clarendon Press; pp. 21928

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* North Cornwall's BC Radio

 



[[Bodmin Moor]]

Geological sketch showing Bodmin Moor in relation to Cornwall's granite intrusions
Rough Tor
Bodmin Moor () Place-names in the Standard Written Form (SWF) : List of place-names agreed by the MAGA Signage Panel. Cornish Language Partnership. is a granite moorland in northeastern Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. It is 208 km2 in size, and dates from the Carboniferous period of geological history. 

Bodmin Moor is one of five granite plutons in Cornwall that make up part of the Cornubian batholith Charoy, B. (1986) Genesis of the Cornubian Batholith (South West England): the example of the Carnmenellis Pluton in: Journal of Petrology; 1986 Oxford: OUP (see also Geology of Cornwall).

The name 'Bodmin Moor' is relatively recent, being an Ordnance Survey invention of 1813. It was formerly known as Fowey Moor after the River Fowey which rises within it. ; p. 72 

==Geography==
Dramatic granite tors rise from the rolling moorland: the best known are Brown Willy, the highest point in Cornwall at 417 m, GENUKI: Cornwall and Rough Tor at 400 m. To the south-east Kilmar Tor and Caradon Hill are the most prominent hills. Considerable areas of the moor are poorly drained and form marshes (in hot summers these can dry out). The rest of the moor is mostly rough pasture or overgrown with heather and other low vegetation.

The moor contains about 500 holdings with around 10,000 beef cows, 55,000 breeding ewes and 1,000 horses and ponies. The Bodmin Moor Pages ~ The History Most of the moor is a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Bodmin Moor, North, and has been officially designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), as part of Cornwall AONB. http://www.cornwall-aonb.gov.uk/documents/12_bodmin_character.pdf Almost a third of Cornwall has AONB designation, with the same status and protection as a National Park. The moor has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA) because it supports about 260 breeding pairs of European Stonechats as well as a wintering population of 10,000 Eurasian Golden Plovers. The moor has also be recognized as a separate natural region and designated as National Character Area 153 by Natural England. 153 Bodmin Moor at www.naturalengland.org.uk. Accessed on 8 Sep 2013 

===Rivers and inland waters===
Siblyback Lake
The De Lank River at Garrow Tor
Bodmin Moor is the source of several of Cornwall's rivers: they are mentioned here anti-clockwise from the south. 

The River Fowey rises at a height of 290 m and flows through Lostwithiel and into the Fowey estuary. Cornwall Rivers Project|Geography | Fowey and Lerryn 

The River Tiddy rises near Pensilva and flows southeast to its confluence with the River Lynher (the Lynher flows generally south-east until it joins the Hamoaze near Plymouth). The River Inny rises near Davidstow and flows southeast to its confluence with the River Tamar. 

The River Camel rises on Hendraburnick Down and flows for approximately 40 km before joining the sea at Padstow. Cornwall Rivers Project | Geography | Camel and Allen The River Camel and its tributary the De Lank River are an important habitat for the otter and both have been proposed as Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) The Rivers of Bodmin Moor - The Bodmin Moor Pages The De Lank River rises near Roughtor and flows along an irregular course before joining the Camel south of Wenford. 

The River Warleggan rises near Temple and flows south to join the Fowey.

On the southern slopes of the moor lies Dozmary Pool. It is Cornwall's only natural inland lake and is glacial in origin. In the 20th century three reservoirs have been constructed on the moor; these are Colliford Lake, Siblyback Lake and Crowdy reservoirs which supply water for a large part of the county's population. Various species of waterfowl are resident around these waters. Bere, Rennie (1982) The Nature of Cornwall. Buckingham: Barracuda Books, pp. 63-67 

File:FoweyLooeRiversMapCornwallUK.gif|Rivers south of Bodmin Moor
File:MapRiversSoutheastCornwallUK.gif|Rivers southeast of Bodmin moor
File:MapOfRiverCamelCornwallUK.jpg|Rivers northwest of Bodmin Moor

==Parishes==
Church in St Neot
The parishes on the moor are as follows:

 * Advent * Altarnun * Blisland * Bolventor * Camelford * Davidstow * Lewannick * Linkinhorne * North Hill * St Breward * St Cleer * St Clether * St Ive * St Neot * Warleggan 

==History and antiquities==
=== Prehistoric times ===
King Arthur's Hall
thumb
10,000 years ago, in the Mesolithic period, hunter-gatherers wandered the moor when it was wooded and had a temperate climate. There are several documented cases of flint scatters being discovered by archaeologists, indicating that these hunter gatherers practised flint knapping in the region. Tilley, C. (1996) "The Power of Rocks: landscape and topography on Bodmin Moor", in: World Archaeology; 28, p. 165 

During the Neolithic era, from about 4,500 to 2,300 BC, people began clearing trees and farming the land. It was also in this era that the production of various megalithic monuments began, predominantly long cairns (three of which have currently been identified, at Louden, Catshole and Bearah) and stone circles (sixteen of which have been identified). It was also likely that the naturally forming tors were also viewed in a similar manner to the manmade ceremonial sites. Tilley, C. (1996) "The Power of Rocks: landscape and topography on Bodmin Moor", in: World Archaeology; 28, pp. 151-176 

In the following Bronze Age, the creation of monuments increased dramatically, with the production of over 300 further cairns, and more stone circles and stone rows. More than 200 Bronze Age settlements with enclosures and field patterns have been recorded. channel4.com - Time Team - Bodmin Moor, Cornwall - text only and many prehistoric stone barrows and circles lie scattered across the moor. In a programme shown in 2007 Channel 4's Time Team investigated a 500 metre cairn and the site of a Bronze Age village on the slopes of Rough Tor. 

King Arthur's Hall thought to be a late Neolithic or early Bronze Age ceremonial site can be found to the east of St Breward on the moor. Secret Cornwall; Bodmin Moor and its environs 

=== Medieval and modern times ===
Hawk's Tor, north of Temple
Where practicable areas of the moor were used for pasture by herdsmen from the parishes surrounding the moor. Granite boulders were also taken from the moor and used for stone posts and to a certain extent for building (such material is known as moorstone). Clifton-Taylor, A. "Building materials" in: Pevsner, N. (1970) Cornwall. 2nd ed. Penguin Books, p. 29-34 Granite quarrying only became reasonably productive when gunpowder became available.

The moor gave its name (Foweymore) to one of the medieval districts called stannaries which administered tin mining: the boundaries of these were never defined precisely. Until the establishment of a turnpike road through the moor (the present A30) in the 1770s the size of the moorland area made travel within Cornwall very difficult.

Its Cornish name, Goen Bren, is first recorded in the 12th century. Weatherhill, Craig (2009) A Concise Dictionary of Cornish Place-names. Westport, co. Mayo: Evertype; p. 6 

===Monuments and ruins===
Roughtor was the site of a medieval chapel of St Michael and is now designated as a memorial to the 43rd Wessex Division of the British Army. In 1844 on Bodmin Moor the body of 18 year old Charlotte Dymond was discovered. Local labourer Matthew Weeks was accused of the murder and at noon on 12 August 1844 he was led from Bodmin Gaol and hanged. The murder site now has a monument erected from public money and the grave is at Davidstow churchyard. The Murder of Charlotte Dymond 

==Legends and traditions==
Dozmary Pool is identified by some people with the lake in which, according to Arthurian legend, Sir Bedivere threw Excalibur to The Lady of the Lake. Cornish Archaeology; No 34, 1995 Another legend relating to the pool concerns Jan Tregeagle.

The Beast of Bodmin has been reported many times but never identified with certainty. 

==See also==

*List of topics related to Cornwall
*Brown Willy effect

==References==
thumb
thumb

* Weatherhill, Craig (1995) Cornish Place Names & Language. Wilmslow: Sigma Leisure ISBN 1-85058-462-1

==External links==

* Cornwall AONB

 



[[Berkeley, California]]

Berkeley ( ) is a city on the east shore of San Francisco Bay in northern Alameda County, California that is named after the eighteenth-century bishop and philosopher George Berkeley. It is bordered by the cities of Oakland and Emeryville to the south and by the city of Albany and unincorporated community of Kensington to the north, while its eastern limit is the border with Contra Costa County that generally follows the ridge of the Berkeley Hills. Its population at the 2010 census was determined to be 112,580 and it is one of the most politically liberal cities in the United States.

Berkeley is the site of the oldest campus in the University of California systemthe University of California, Berkeleyand of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory that the university manages and operates. It is also home to the Graduate Theological Union.

==History==

===Early history===

The site of today's City of Berkeley was the territory of the Chochenyo/Huchiun band of the Ohlone people when the first Europeans arrived. Evidence of their existence in the area include pits in rock formations, which they used to grind acorns, and a shellmound, now mostly leveled and covered up, along the shoreline of San Francisco Bay at the mouth of Strawberry Creek. Other artifacts were discovered in the 1950s in the downtown area during remodeling of a commercial building, near the upper course of the creek.

This pit in the surface of a rock at Indian Rock Park is typical of those used by Ohlone Indians to grind acorns.
The first people of European descent (most of whom were born in America, and many of whom were of mixed ancestry) arrived with the De Anza Expedition in 1776. Today, this is noted by signage on Interstate 80, which runs along the San Francisco Bay shoreline of Berkeley. The De Anza Expedition led to establishment of the Spanish Presidio of San Francisco at the entrance to San Francisco Bay (the Golden Gate), which is due west of Berkeley. Luis Peralta was among the soldiers at the Presidio. For his services to the King of Spain, he was granted a vast stretch of land on the east shore of San Francisco Bay (the contra costa, "opposite shore") for a ranch, including that portion that now comprises the City of Berkeley.

Luis Peralta named his holding "Rancho San Antonio." The primary activity of the ranch was raising cattle for meat and hides, but hunting and farming were also pursued. Eventually, Peralta gave portions of the ranch to each of his four sons. What is now Berkeley lies mostly in the portion that went to Peralta's son Domingo, with a little in the portion that went to another son, Vicente. No artifact survives of the Domingo or Vicente ranches, but their names survive in Berkeley street names (Vicente, Domingo, and Peralta). However, legal title to all land in the City of Berkeley remains based on the original Peralta land grant.

The Peraltas' Rancho San Antonio continued after Alta California passed from Spanish to Mexican sovereignty after the Mexican War of Independence. However, the advent of U.S. sovereignty after the MexicanAmerican War, and especially, the Gold Rush, saw the Peraltas' lands quickly encroached on by squatters and diminished by dubious legal proceedings. The lands of the brothers Domingo and Vicente were quickly reduced to reservations close to their respective ranch homes. The rest of the land was surveyed and parceled out to various American claimants (See Kellersberger's Map).

Politically, the area that became Berkeley was initially part of a vast Contra Costa County. On March 25, 1853, Alameda County was created by division of Contra Costa County, as well as from a small portion of Santa Clara County.

The area of Berkeley was at this period mostly a mix of open land, farms and ranches, with a small though busy wharf by the bay. It was not yet "Berkeley," but merely the northern part of the "Oakland Township" subdivision of Alameda County.

As seen from Indian Rock Park in the North Berkeley hills. Berkeley is in the foreground, with the Berkeley Marina and Csar Chvez Park just beyond.

===Late 19th century===

In 1866, Oakland's private College of California looked for a new site. It settled on a location north of Oakland along the foot of the Contra Costa Range (later called the Berkeley Hills) astride Strawberry Creek, at an elevation about 500 ft above the bay, commanding a view of the Bay Area and the Pacific Ocean through the Golden Gate.

According to the Centennial Record of the University of California, "In 1866at Founders' Rock, a group of College of California men watched two ships standing out to sea through the Golden Gate. One of them, Frederick Billings, thought of the lines of the Anglo-Irish Anglican Bishop George Berkeley, 'westward the course of empire takes its way,' and suggested that the town and college site be named for the eighteenth-century Anglo-Irish philosopher." Although the philosopher's name is pronounced "bark-lee," the pronunciation of the city's name has evolved to suit American English as "burk-lee." 

The College of California's College Homestead Association planned to raise funds for the new campus by selling off adjacent parcels of land. To this end, they laid out a plat and street grid that became the basis of Berkeley's modern street plan. Their plans fell far short of their desires, and they began a collaboration with the State of California that culminated in 1868 with the creation of the public University of California.

As construction began on the new site, more residences were constructed in the vicinity of the new campus. At the same time, a settlement of residences, saloons, and various industries grew around the wharf area called "Ocean View." A horsecar ran from Temescal in Oakland to the university campus along what is now Telegraph Avenue. The first post office opened in 1872. 

By the 1870s, the Transcontinental Railroad reached its terminus in Oakland. In 1876, a branch line of the Central Pacific Railroad, the Berkeley Branch Railroad, was laid from a junction with the mainline called Shellmound (now a part of Emeryville) into what is now downtown Berkeley. That same year, the mainline of the transcontinental railroad into Oakland was re-routed, putting the right-of-way along the bay shore through Ocean View.

There was a strong prohibition movement in Berkeley at this time. In 1876, the city passed the "mile limit law," which forbade sale or public consumption of alcohol within one mile (1.6 km) of the new University of California. Berkeley Gazette. 1900 April 9 Then, in 1899 Berkeley residents voted to make their city an alcohol-free zone. Scientists, scholars and religious leaders spoke vehemently of the dangers of alcohol. Berkeley 1900: Daily Life at the Turn of the Century, by Richard Schwartz. 2000. page 187 

In 1878, the people of Ocean View and the area around the University campus, together with local farmers, incorporated as the Town of Berkeley. The first elected trustees of the town were the slate of Denis Kearney's Workingman's Party, who were particularly favored in the working class area of the former Ocean View, now called "West Berkeley." The area near the university became known for a time as "East Berkeley."

The modern age came quickly to Berkeley, no doubt due to the influence of the university. Electric lights were in use by 1888. The telephone had already come to town. Electric streetcars soon replaced the horsecar. A silent film of one of these early streetcars in Berkeley can be seen at the Library of Congress website: "A Trip To Berkeley, California"

===Early 20th century===

The University of California in 1940

Berkeley's slow growth ended abruptly with the Great San Francisco Earthquake of 1906. The town and other parts of the East Bay escaped serious damage from the massive temblor, and thousands of refugees flowed across the Bay.

In 1908, a statewide referendum that proposed moving the California state capital to Berkeley was defeated by a margin of about 33,000 votes. Exactly Opposite the Golden Gate, edited by Phil McCardle, published 1983 by the Berkeley Historical Society, p.251 The city named streets around the proposed capitol grounds for California counties. They bear those names today, a legacy of the failed referendum.

In 1909, the citizens of Berkeley adopted a new charter, and the Town of Berkeley became the City of Berkeley. Rapid growth continued up to the Crash of 1929. The Great Depression hit Berkeley hard, but not as hard as many other places in the U.S., thanks in part to the University.

On September 17, 1923, a major fire swept down the hills toward the University campus and the downtown section. Around 640 structures burned before a late afternoon sea breeze stopped its progress, allowing firefighters to put it out.

The next big growth occurred with the advent of World War II, when large numbers of people moved to the Bay Area to work in the many war industries, such as the immense Kaiser Shipyards in nearby Richmond. One who moved out, but played a big role in the outcome of the War was U.C. Professor and Berkeley resident J. Robert Oppenheimer. During the war, an Army base, Camp Ashby, was temporarily sited in Berkeley.

The element berkelium was synthesized and named in 1949, recognizing the University, thus also placing the city's name in the list of elements.

===1950s and 1960s===

During the 1940s, many African Americans migrated to Berkeley. "Berkeley, A City in History". Berkeley Public Library. In 1950, the Census Bureau reported Berkeley's population as 11.7% black and 84.6% white. 

The postwar years brought moderate growth to the city, as events on the U.C. campus began to build up to the recognizable activism of the sixties. In the 1950s, McCarthyism induced the University to demand a loyalty oath from its professors, many of whom refused to sign the oath on the principle of freedom of thought. In 1960, a U.S. House committee (HUAC) came to San Francisco to investigate the influence of communists in the Bay Area. Their presence was met by protesters, including many from the University. Meanwhile, a number of U.C. students became active in the Civil Rights Movement. Finally, in 1964, the University provoked a massive student protest by banning distribution of political literature on campus. This protest became the Free Speech Movement. As the Vietnam War rapidly escalated in the ensuing years, so did student activism at the University, particularly that organized by the Vietnam Day Committee.

Berkeley is strongly identified with the rapid social changes, civic unrest, and political upheaval that characterized the late 1960s. In that period, Berkeleyespecially Telegraph Avenuebecame a focal point for the hippie movement, which spilled over the Bay from San Francisco. Many hippies were apolitical drop-outs, rather than students, but in the heady atmosphere of Berkeley in 19671969 there was considerable overlap between the hippie movement and the radical left. An iconic event in the Berkeley Sixties scene was a conflict over a parcel of University property south of the contiguous campus site that came to be called "People's Park."

People's Park with Unit 2 in the background

The battle over the disposition of People's Park resulted in a month-long occupation of Berkeley by the National Guard on orders of then-Governor Ronald Reagan. In the end, the park remained undeveloped, and remains so today. A spin-off, "People's Park Annex," was established at the same time by activist citizens of Berkeley on a strip of land above the Bay Area Rapid Transit subway construction along Hearst Avenue northwest of the U.C. campus. The land had also been intended for development, but was turned over to the city by BART and is now Ohlone Park.

The era of large public protest in Berkeley waned considerably with the end of the Vietnam War in 1974. While the 1960s were the heyday of liberal activism in Berkeley, it remains one of the most overwhelmingly Democratic cities in the United States.

===1970s to present===

Shattuck Avenue at Center Street in downtown Berkeley as seen in 1973

The Berkeley population declined in the 1970s, partly due to an exodus to the suburbs. Some moved because of the rising cost of living throughout the Bay Area, and others because of the decline and disappearance of many industries in West Berkeley.

From the 1980s to the present, Berkeley housing costs have risen, especially since the mid-1990s. In 20052007, sales of homes began to slow, but average home prices, as of 2012, remain among the highest in the nation.

In 1983, Berkeley's Domestic Partner Task Force was established, which in 1984 made policy recommendation to the School Board, which passed Domestic Partner legislation. The legislation became a model for similar measures nationwide. 

In 2006, the Berkeley Oak Grove Protest began protesting construction of a new sports center annex to Memorial Stadium at the expense of a grove of oak trees on the UC campus. The protest ended in September 2008 after a lengthy court process.

In 200708, Berkeley received media attention due to demonstrations against a Marine Corps recruiting office in downtown Berkeley and a series of controversial motions by Berkeley's city council regarding opposition to Marine recruiting. (See Berkeley Marine Corps Recruiting Center controversy.)

During the fall of 2010, the Berkeley Student Food Collective opened after many protests on the UC Berkeley campus due to the proposed opening of the fast food chain Panda Express. Students and community members worked together to open a collectively run grocery store right off of the UC Berkeley campus, where the community can buy local, seasonal, humane, and organic foods. The Berkeley Student Food Collective still operates at 2440 Bancroft Way.

In the Fall of 2011, the nationwide Occupy Wall Street movement came to two Berkeley locations: on the campus of the University of California and as an encampment in Civic Center Park.

On September 18, 2012, Berkeley became what may be the first city in the U.S. to officially proclaim a day recognizing bisexuals September 23, which is known as Celebrate Bisexuality Day. 

==Geography==

Berkeley is located at (37.871775, 122.274603).
Satellite map of the San Francisco Bay Area from the U.S. Geological Survey.

According to the United States Census Bureau the city's 17.7 sqmi area includes 10.5 sqmi of land and 7.2 sqmi (40.83%) water, most of it part of San Francisco Bay.

Berkeley borders the cities of Albany, Oakland, and Emeryville and Contra Costa County including unincorporated Kensington as well as San Francisco Bay.

Berkeley lies within telephone area code 510 (until September 2, 1991, Berkeley was part of the 415 telephone code that now covers only San Francisco and Marin Counties ), and the postal ZIP codes are 94701 through 94710, 94712, and 94720 for the University of California campus.

===Geology===

Most of Berkeley lies on a rolling sedimentary plain that rises gently from sea level to the base of the Berkeley Hills. East of the Hayward Fault along the base of the hills, elevation increases more rapidly. The highest peak along the ridge line above Berkeley is Grizzly Peak, elevation 1754 ft. A number of small creeks run from the hills to the Bay through Berkeley: Cerrito, Codornices, Schoolhouse and Strawberry Creeks are the principal streams. Most of these are largely culverted once they reach the plain west of the hills.

The Berkeley Hills are part of the Pacific Coast Ranges, and run in a northwestsoutheast alignment. Exposed in the Berkeley Hills are cherts and shales of the Claremont Formation (equivalent to the Monterey Formation), conglomerate and sandstone of the Orinda Formation and lava flows of the Moraga Volcanics. Of similar age to the Moraga Volcanics, within the Northbrae neighborhood of Berkeley, are outcroppings of erosional resistant rhyolite. These rhyolite formations can be seen in several city parks and in the yards of a number of private residences. Indian Rock Park in the northeastern part of Berkeley near the Arlington/Marin Circle features a large example.

====Earthquakes====

Berkeley is traversed by the Hayward Fault, a major branch of the San Andreas Fault to the west. No large earthquake has occurred on the Hayward Fault near Berkeley in historic times (except possibly in 1836), but seismologists warn about the geologic record of large temblors several times in the deeper past, and their current assessment is that a quake of 6.5 or greater is imminent, sometime within the next 30 years. Bay Area Earthquake Probabilities, UC Berkeley Seismological Laboratory 

The 1868 Hayward earthquake did occur on the southern segment of the Hayward Fault in the vicinity of today's city of Hayward (hence, how the fault got its name). This quake destroyed the county seat of Alameda County then located in San Leandro and it subsequently moved to Oakland. It was strongly felt in San Francisco, causing major damage, and experienced by Samuel Clemens (Mark Twain). It was regarded as the "Great San Francisco Quake" prior to 1906. The quake produced a furrow in the ground along the fault line in Berkeley, across the grounds of the new State Asylum for the Deaf, Dumb and Blind then under construction, which was noted by one early University of California professor. Though no significant damage was reported to most of the few Berkeley buildings of the time, the 1868 quake did destroy the vulnerable adobe home of Domingo Peralta in north Berkeley. Lawson, A. C. (ed.), The California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 1908, Reprinted 1969 by the Carnegie Institution of Washington. This is a comprehensive report on the 1906 earthquake, published by the State Earthquake Investigation Commission, and comprises two volumes and an atlas. It contains a discussion of the 1868 Hayward Fault earthquake and its effects, and includes a number of photos taken by Lawson himself of damage in Berkeley caused by the 1906 quake. The report is available from the USGS. 

Today, evidence of the Hayward Fault's "creeping" is visible at various locations in Berkeley. Cracked roadways, sharp jogs in streams, and springs mark the fault's path. However, since it cuts across the base of the hills, the creep is often concealed by or confused with slide activity. Some of the slide activity itself, however, results from movement on the Hayward Fault.

A notorious segment of the Hayward Fault runs lengthwise down the middle of Memorial Stadium at the mouth of Strawberry Canyon on the University of California campus. Photos and measurements [http://seismo.berkeley.edu/hayward/ucb_campus.htm ] show the movement of the fault through the stadium.

===Climate===

Berkeley has a cool summer Mediterranean climate (Kppen climate classification Csb), with dry summers and wet winters. The summers are cooler than a typical Mediterranean climate thanks to upwelling ocean currents along the California coast. These help produce cool and foggy nights and mornings. Berkeley's location directly opposite the Golden Gate ensures that typical eastward fog flow blankets the city more often than its neighbors. 

Winter is punctuated with rainstorms of varying ferocity and duration, but also produces stretches of bright sunny days and clear cold nights. It does not normally snow, though occasionally the hilltops get a dusting. Spring and fall are transitional and intermediate, with some rainfall and variable temperature. Summer typically brings night and morning low clouds or fog, followed by sunny, warm days. The warmest and driest months are typically June through September, with the highest temperatures occurring in September. Mid-summer (JulyAugust) is often a bit cooler due to the sea breezes and fog common then.

Average January temperatures are a maximum of 56.4 F and a minimum of 43.6 F. Average September (the warmest month) temperatures are a maximum of 71.7 F and a minimum of 55.9 F. In a year, there are an average of 2.9 days with highs of 90.0 F or higher, and an average of 0.8 days with lows of 32 F or lower. The highest recorded temperature was 107 F on June 15, 2000, and the lowest recorded temperature was 24 F on December 22, 1990.

January is normally the wettest month, averaging 5.13 in of precipitation. Average annual precipitation is 25.40 in, falling on an average of 63.7 days each year. The most rainfall in one month was 14.49 in in February 1998. The most rainfall in 24 hours was 6.98 in on January 4, 1982. http://cdo.ncdc.noaa.gov/climatenormals/clim20/ca/040693.pdf Light snow has fallen on rare occasions. Snow has generally fallen every several years on the higher peaks of the Berkeley Hills. Western Regional Climate Center Web site 

In the late spring and early fall, strong offshore winds of sinking air typically develop, bringing heat and dryness to the area. In the spring, this is not usually a problem as vegetation is still moist from winter rains, but extreme dryness prevails by the fall, creating a danger of wildfires. In September 1923 a major fire swept through the neighborhoods north of the University campus, stopping just short of downtown. (See 1923 Berkeley fire). On October 20, 1991, gusty, hot winds fanned a conflagration along the BerkeleyOakland border, killing 25 people and injuring 150, as well as destroying 2,449 single-family dwellings and 437 apartment and condominium units. (See 1991 Oakland firestorm)

==Demographics==

Street fair on Telegraph Avenue

The 2010 United States Census reported that Berkeley had a population of 112,580. The population density was 10,752 people per square mile of land area (4,104/km). The racial makeup of Berkeley was 66,996 (59.5%) White, 11,241 (10.0%) Black or African American, 479 (0.4%) Native American, 21,690 (19.3%) Asian (8.4% Chinese, 2.4% Indian, 2.1% Korean, 1.6% Japanese, 1.5% Filipino, 1.0% Vietnamese, 0.3% Pakistani, 0.3% Thai, 0.2% Nepalese), 186 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 4,994 (4.4%) from other races, and 6,994 (6.2%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12,209 persons (10.8%). 6.8% of the city's population was of Mexican ancestry, while 0.5% was of Puerto Rican, 0.4% Salvadoran, 0.3% Peruvian, 0.3% Guatemalan descent.

The Census reported that 99,731 people (88.6% of the population) lived in households, 12,430 (11.0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 419 (0.4%) were institutionalized.

There were 46,029 households, out of which 8,467 (18.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 13,569 (29.5%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 3,855 (8.4%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,368 (3.0%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 2,931 (6.4%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 961 (2.1%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 16,904 households (36.7%) were made up of individuals and 4,578 (9.9%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17. There were 18,792 families (40.8% of all households); the average family size was 2.81. There were 49,454 housing units at an average density of 2,794.6 per square mile (1,079.0/km), of which 18,846 (40.9%) were owner-occupied, and 27,183 (59.1%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.0%; the rental vacancy rate was 4.5%. 45,096 people (40.1% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 54,635 people (48.5%) lived in rental housing units.

The population was spread out with 13,872 people (12.3%) under the age of 18, 30,295 people (26.9%) aged 18 to 24, 30,231 people (26.9%) aged 25 to 44, 25,006 people (22.2%) aged 45 to 64, and 13,176 people (11.7%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31.0 years. For every 100 females there were 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.2 males.

According to the 2011 American Community Survey 5-Year estimate, the median income for a household in the city was $60,908, and the median income for a family was $102,976. Males had a median income of $67,476 versus $57,319 for females. The per capita income for the city was $38,896. About 7.2% of families and 18.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.2% of those under age 18 and 9.2% of those age 65 or over.

 Demographic profile 2010 Total Population 112,580  100.0% One Race 105,586  93.8% Not Hispanic or Latino 100,371  89.2% White alone 61,539  54.7% Black or African American alone 10,896  9.7% American Indian and Alaska Native alone 228  0.2% Asian alone 21,499  19.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone 170  0.2% Some other race alone 503  0.4% Two or more races alone 5,536  4.9% Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 12,209  10.8% 

==Transportation==

Berkeley is served by Amtrak (Capitol Corridor), AC Transit, BART (Ashby, Downtown Berkeley Station and North Berkeley) and bus shuttles operated by major employers including UC Berkeley and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The Eastshore Freeway (Interstate 80 and Interstate 580) runs along the bay shoreline. Each day there is an influx of thousands of cars into the city by commuting UC faculty, staff and students, making parking for more than a few hours an expensive proposition.

Berkeley has one of the highest rates of bicycle and pedestrian commuting in the nation. Berkeley is the safest city of its size in California for pedestrians and cyclists, considering the number of injuries per pedestrian and cyclist, rather than per capita. Bicycle and Pedestrian Safety in Berkeley, City of Berkeley. 

Berkeley has modified its original grid roadway structure through use of diverters and barriers, moving most traffic out of neighborhoods and onto arterial streets (visitors often find this confusing, because the diverters are not shown on all maps). Berkeley maintains a separate grid of arterial streets for bicycles, called Bicycle Boulevards, with bike lanes and lower amounts of car traffic than the major streets they often parallel.

Berkeley hosts car sharing networks run by City CarShare, Uhaul Car Share, and Zipcar. Rather than owning (and parking) their own cars, members share a group of cars parked nearby. Web- and telephone-based reservation systems keep track of hours and charges. Several "pods" (points of departure where cars are kept) exist throughout the city, in several downtown locations, at the Ashby and North Berkeley BART stations, and at various other locations in Berkeley (and other cities in the region). Using alternative transportation is encouraged.

Berkeley has had recurring problems with parking meter vandalism. In 1999, over 2,400 Berkeley meters were jammed, smashed, or sawed apart. Chicanery tops meters in Berkeley, San Francisco Chronicle. Starting in 2005 and continuing into 2006, Berkeley began to phase out mechanical meters in favor of more centralized electronic meters.

===Transportation past===

The first commuter service to San Francisco was provided by the Central Pacific's Berkeley Branch Railroad, a standard gauge steam railroad, which terminated in downtown Berkeley, and connected in Emeryville (at a locale then known as "Shellmound") with trains to the Oakland ferry pier as well as with the Central Pacific main line starting in 1876. The Berkeley Branch line was extended from Shattuck and University to Vine Street ("Berryman's Station") in 1878. Starting in 1882, Berkeley trains ran directly to the Oakland Pier. Berkeley Gazette, January 22, 1903 In the 1880s, Southern Pacific assumed operations of the Berkeley Branch. In 1911, Southern Pacific electrified this line and the several others it constructed in Berkeley, creating its East Bay Electric Lines division. The huge and heavy cars specially built for these lines were called the "Red Trains" or the "Big Red Cars." The Shattuck line was extended and connected with two other Berkeley lines (the Ninth Street Line and the California Street line) at Solano and Colusa (the "Colusa Wye"). It was at this time that the Northbrae Tunnel and the Rose Street Undercrossing were constructed, both of which still exist (the Rose Street Undercrossing is not accessible to the public, being situated between what is now two backyards). The fourth Berkeley line was the Ellsworth St. line to the university campus. The last Red Trains ran in July 1941. 

The first electric rail service in Berkeley was provided by several small streetcar companies starting in 1891. Most of these were eventually bought up by the Key System of Francis "Borax" Smith who added lines and improved equipment. The Key System's streetcars were operated by its East Bay Street Railways division. Principal lines in Berkeley ran on Euclid, The Arlington, College, Telegraph, Shattuck, San Pablo, University, and Grove (today's Martin Luther King Jr. Way). The last streetcars ran in 1948, replaced by buses.

The first electric commuter interurban-type trains to San Francisco from Berkeley were put in operation by the Key System in 1903, several years before the Southern Pacific electrified its steam commuter lines. Like the SP, Key trains ran to a pier serviced by the Key's own fleet of ferryboats, which also docked at the Ferry Building in San Francisco. After the Bay Bridge was built, the Key trains ran to the Transbay Terminal in San Francisco, sharing tracks on the lower deck of the Bay Bridge with the SP's red trains and the Sacramento Northern Railroad. It was at this time that the Key trains acquired their letter designations, which were later preserved by Key's public successor, AC Transit. Today's F bus is the successor of the F train. Likewise, the E, G and the H. Before the Bridge, these lines were simply the Shattuck Avenue Line, the Claremont Line, the Westbrae Line, and the Sacramento Street Line, respectively.

After the Southern Pacific abandoned transbay service in 1941, the Key System acquired the rights to use its tracks and catenary on Shattuck north of Dwight Way and through the Northbrae Tunnel to The Alameda for the F-train. The SP tracks along Monterey Avenue as far as Colusa had been acquired by the Key System in 1933 for the H-train, but were abandoned in 1941. The Key System trains stopped running in April 1958. In 1963, the Northbrae Tunnel was opened to auto traffic.

==Economy==

===Top employers===

Sather Tower at the University of California.
According to the city's 2011 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:

 # Employer # of Employees 
 1 University of California, Berkeley 13,778 
 2 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 4,200 
 3 Alta Bates Summit Medical Center 3,100 
 4 City of Berkeley 1,485 
 5 Bayer 1,476 
 6 Berkeley Unified School District 1,200 
 7 Kaiser Permanente 700 
 8 Pacific Steel 350 
 9 Andronico's 291 
 10 Berkeley City College 290 

*Former employers of note include the State of California Health Department (900 in 1988, 600 in 2001), now the California Department of Public Health and the California Department of Health Care Services. Berkeley Inside Out, Malcolm Margolin. Heyday Books (1989) p. 104 

===Businesses===

Berkeley is the location of a number of nationally prominent businesses, many of which have been pioneers in their areas of operation. Notable businesses include Chez Panisse, birthplace of California cuisine, Peet's Coffee's original store, the Claremont Resort, punk rock haven 924 Gilman, and Saul Zaentz's Fantasy Studios. Notable former businesses include pioneer bookseller Cody's Books, The Nature Company, and the Berkeley Co-op.

==Places==

===Major streets===

*Shattuck Avenue passes through several neighborhoods, including the downtown business district in Berkeley. It is named for Francis K. Shattuck, one of Berkeley's earliest influential citizens.
*University Avenue runs from Berkeley's bayshore and marina to the University of California campus.
*Ashby Avenue (Highway 13), which also runs from Berkeley's bayshore to the hills, connects with the Warren Freeway and Highway 24 leading to the Caldecott Tunnel, named for a former Berkeley mayor.
*San Pablo Avenue (Highway 123) runs northsouth through West Berkeley, connecting Oakland and Emeryville to the south and Albany to the north.
*Telegraph Avenue, which runs north-south from the University Campus to Oakland, historically the site of much of the hippie culture of Berkeley.
*Martin Luther King Jr. Way, which until 1984 was called Grove St, runs north-south a few blocks west of Shattuck Avenue, connecting Oakland and the freeways to the south with the neighborhoods and other communities to the north.
*Solano Avenue, a major street for shopping and restaurants, runs east-west near the north end of Berkeley, continuing into Albany.

===Freeways===

*The Eastshore Freeway (I-80 & I-580) runs along Berkeley's bayshore with exits at Ashby Avenue, University Avenue and Gilman Street.

===Bicycle and pedestrian paths===

*Ohlone Greenway
*San Francisco Bay Trail
*Berkeley I-80 bridge  opened in 2002, an arch-suspension bridge spanning Interstate 80, for bicycles and pedestrians only, giving access from the city at the foot of Addison Street to the San Francisco Bay Trail, the Eastshore State Park and the Berkeley Marina.
*Berkeley's Network of Historic Pathways  Berkeley has a network of historic pathways that link the winding neighborhoods found in the hills and offer panoramic lookouts over the East Bay. A complete guide to the pathways may be found at Berkeley Path Wanderers Association website. http://www.berkeleypaths.org/paths/stories/discover.htm 
*Maps of Berkeley's network of bicycle routes can be accessed from the City of Berkeley web site. Bicycling and Walking Maps and Guides 

===Neighborhoods===

The Claremont Resort at the heart of the Claremont neighborhood.

Berkeley has a number of distinct neighborhoods.

Surrounding the University of California campus are the most densely populated parts of the city. West of the campus is Downtown Berkeley, the city's traditional commercial core; home of the civic center, the city's only public high school, the busiest BART station in Berkeley, as well as a major transfer point for AC Transit buses. South of the campus is the Southside neighborhood, mainly a student ghetto, where much of the university's student housing is located. The busiest stretch of Telegraph Avenue is in this neighborhood. North of the campus is the quieter Northside neighborhood, the location of the Graduate Theological Union.

Further from the university campus, the influence of the University quickly becomes less visible. Most of Berkeley's neighborhoods are primarily made up of detached houses, often with separate in-law units in the rear, although larger apartment buildings are also common in many neighborhoods. Commercial activities are concentrated along the major avenues and at important intersections.

In the southeastern corner of the city is the Claremont District, home to the Claremont Hotel; and the Elmwood District, with a small shopping area on College Avenue. West of Elmwood is South Berkeley, known for its weekend flea market at the Ashby Station.

West of (and including) San Pablo Avenue, a major commercial corridor, is West Berkeley, the historic commercial center of the city, and the former unincorporated town of Ocean View. West Berkeley contains the remnants of Berkeley's industrial area, much of which has been replaced by retail and office uses, as well as residential live/work loft space, with the decline of manufacturing in the United States. The areas of South and West Berkeley are in the midst of redevelopment. Some residents have opposed redevelopment in this area. Along the shoreline of San Francisco Bay at the foot of University Avenue is the Berkeley Marina. Nearby is Berkeley's Aquatic Park, featuring an artificial linear lagoon of San Francisco Bay.

North of Downtown is the North Berkeley neighborhood, which has been nicknamed the "Gourmet Ghetto" because of the concentration of well-known restaurants and other food-related businesses. Further north are Northbrae, a master-planned subdivision from the early 20th century, and Thousand Oaks. Above these last three neighborhoods, in the northeastern part of Berkeley, are the Berkeley Hills. The neighborhoods of the Berkeley Hills such as Cragmont and La Loma Park are notable for their dramatic views, winding streets, and numerous public stairways and paths.

===Points of interest===

Doe Memorial Library, the main library of the University of California, Berkeley Libraries.
Berkeley and the San Francisco Bay at nightfall, as seen from the Lawrence Hall of Science.

*University of California, Berkeley
*Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive
*Berkeley Marina
*Berkeley History Center (1931 Center St.)
*Berkeley Public Library (Shattuck Avenue at Kittridge Street)
*Berkeley Repertory Theatre
*Berkeley Rose Garden
*Cloyne Court Hotel, a member of the Berkeley Student Cooperative
*Hearst Greek Theatre (home of the annual Berkeley Jazz Festival)
*Judah L. Magnes Museum
*Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
*Lawrence Hall of Science
*Regional Parks Botanic Garden
*Tilden Regional Park
*University of California Botanical Garden
*The Campanile (Sather Tower) in the University of California, Berkeley campus.
*Telegraph Avenue and People's Park, both known as centers of the counterculture of the 1960s.
*the Berkeley Free Clinic, a free clinic operating since 1969.
*The Edible Schoolyard is a one acre garden at Martin Luther King Middle School (Berkeley)

==Parks and recreation==

The city has many parks, and promotes greenery and the environment. The city has planted trees for years and is a leader in the nationwide effort to re-tree urban areas. Tilden Regional Park, lies east of the city, occupying the upper extent of Wildcat Canyon between the Berkeley Hills and the San Pablo Ridge. The city is also heavily involved in creek restoration and wetlands restoration, including a planned daylighting of Strawberry Creek along Center Street. The Berkeley Marina and East Shore State Park flank its shoreline at San Francisco Bay and organizations like the Urban Creeks Council and Friends of the Five Creeks the former of which is headquartered in Berkeley support the riparian areas in the town and coastlines as well. Csar Chvez Park, near the Berkeley Marina, was built at the former site of the city dump.

===Landmarks and historic districts===

165 buildings in Berkeley are designated as local landmarks or local structures of merit. Of these, 49 are listed in the National Register of Historic Places, including:
*Berkeley High School (the city's only public high school) and the Berkeley Community Theatre, which is on its campus. 
*Berkeley Women's City Club, now Berkeley City Club  Julia Morgan (192930)
*First Church of Christ, Scientist  Bernard Maybeck (1910)
*St. John's Presbyterian Church  Julia Morgan (1910), now the Berkeley Playhouse
*Studio Building  architect not recorded, built for Frederick H. Dakin (1905)
*William R. Thorsen House, now Sigma Phi Society Chapter House  Charles Sumner Greene & Henry Mather Greene (190810)
Studio Building, 2045 Shattuck Ave, Berkeley, CA.
Historic Districts listed in the National Register of Historic Places:
*George C. Edwards Stadium  Located at intersection of Bancroft Way and Fulton Street on University of California, Berkeley campus (80 acre, 3 buildings, 4 structures, 3 objects; added 1993).
*Site of the Clark Kerr Campus, UC Berkeley  until 1980, this location housed the State Asylum for the Deaf, Dumb and Blind, also known as The California Schools for the Deaf and Blind  Bounded by Dwight Way, the city line, Derby Street, and Warring Street (500 acre, 20 buildings; added 1982). The school was closed in 1980 and the Clark Kerr Campus was opened in 1986.
See List of Berkeley Landmarks, Structures of Merit, and Historic Districts
The Campanile and Sather Gate on the UC Berkeley campus.

==Arts and culture==

Berkeley is home to the Chilean-American community's La Pea Cultural Center, the largest cultural center for this community in the United States. The Freight and Salvage is the oldest established full-time folk and traditional music venue west of the Mississippi River. Addison St  Freight and Salvage Aug09  City of Berkeley, CA. Ci.berkeley.ca.us. Retrieved on 2013-07-15. 

===Annual events===

*Jewish Music Festival  March
*Cal Day University of California, Berkeley Open House  April
*Berkeley Arts Festival  April and May
*Himalayan Fair  May
*Berkeley Juggling and Unicycling Festival  July or August
*Berkeley Kite Festival  July
*How Berkeley Can You Be!? Parade and Festival  September
*The Solano Avenue Stroll  Solano Avenue, Berkeley and Albany, September

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===

University of California, Berkeley's main campus is in the city limits.

The Graduate Theological Union, a consortium of nine independent theological schools, is located a block north of the University of California Berkeley's main campus. The Graduate Theological Union has the largest number of students and faculty of any religious studies doctoral program in the United States. In addition, Berkeley City College is a community college in the Peralta Community College District.

===Primary and secondary schools===

Berkeley High School
The Berkeley Unified School District operates public schools.

The first public school in Berkeley was the Ocean View School, now the site of the Berkeley Adult School located at Virginia Street and San Pablo Avenue. The public schools today are administered by the Berkeley Unified School District. In the 1960s, Berkeley was one of the earliest US cities to voluntarily desegregate, utilizing a system of buses, still in use. The city has one public high school, Berkeley High School (BHS). Established in 1880, BHS currently has over 3,000 students. The Berkeley High campus was designated a historic district by the National Register of Historic Places on January 7, 2008. Berkeley Daily Planet, January 2224, 2008 Saint Mary's College High School, a Catholic school, has its street address in Berkeley, although most of the grounds and buildings are actually in neighboring Albany. Berkeley has 11 elementary schools and three middle schools.

There is also the Bay Area Technology School, the only school in the whole Bay Area to offer a technology- and science-based curriculum, with connections to leading universities.

===Public libraries===

Berkeley Public Library serves as the municipal library. University of California, Berkeley Libraries operates the University of California Berkeley libraries.

==Government==

Berkeley has a mayor-council government. The mayor, currently Tom Bates, is elected for a four-year term. The Berkeley City Council has eight council members who each serve four-year terms. The current councilmembers are: 
* District 1: Linda Maio
* District 2: Darryl Moore
* District 3: Maxwell Anderson
* District 4: Jesse Arreguin
* District 5: Laurie Capitelli
* District 6: Susan Wengraf
* District 7: Kriss Worthington
* District 8: Gordon Wozniak

The mayor appoints a city administrator, who is subject to confirmation by the city council.

Berkeley is also part of Alameda County, for which the Government of Alameda County is defined and authorized under the California Constitution, California law, and the Charter of the County of Alameda. California Government Code  23004 The County government provides countywide services such as elections and voter registration, law enforcement, jails, vital records, property records, tax collection, public health, and social services. The County government is primarily composed of the elected five-member Board of Supervisors, other elected offices including the Sheriff/Coroner, the District Attorney, Assessor, Auditor-Controller/County Clerk/Recorder, and Treasurer/Tax Collector, and numerous county departments and entities under the supervision of the County Administrator.

==Notable people==

*People from Berkeley
*People from Berkeley High School

==Sister cities==

Berkeley has 14 sister cities: Sister cities designated by Sister Cities International, Inc. (SCI). Retrieved on May 3, 2007. 

* Asmara, Eritrea
* Blackfeet Nation, Montana, United States
* Yurok Tribe, California, United States
* City of Djibouti, Djibouti
* Sakai, Osaka, Japan
* Gao, Mali
* Uma Bawang, Malaysia (1991) 
* Dmitrov, Russia
* Jena, Germany
* Ulan-Ude, Buryatia, Russia
* San Antonio Los Ranchos, El Salvador
* Oukasie, South Africa
* Yond, Colombia
* Palma Soriano, Cuba
* Len, Nicaragua

==References==

==Further reading==

*Exactly Opposite the Golden Gate, edited by Phil McCardle. Berkeley Historical Society, 1983
*Berkeley: The Life and Spirit of a Remarkable Town, Ellen Weis, photographs by Kiran Singh. Berkeley: Frog, Ltd. 2004 ISBN 1-58394-093-6
*Berkeley Inside/Out, Don Pitcher, history sections by Malcolm Margolin. Berkeley: Heyday Books. 1989 ISBN 0-930588-33-9
*A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius, by Dave Eggers.

==External links==

*
*
*Berkeley Historical Society website
*Finding Aid to City of Berkeley Records, The Bancroft Library
* Berkeley Daily Gazette, Google news archive. PDFs of 8,057 issues, dating from 1911 to 1946.

 



[[Bolventor]]

Bolventor () is a hamlet on Bodmin Moor in Cornwall, United Kingdom. It is situated in Altarnun civil parish between Launceston and Bodmin. Ordnance Survey: Landranger map sheet 201 Plymouth & Launceston ISBN 978-0-319-23146-3 

Bolventor is the location of the famous Jamaica Inn coaching inn. It is bypassed by a dual carriageway section of the A30 trunk road; before the bypass was built the village straddled the A30 road.

Daphne du Maurier, a former resident, chose Bolventor as the setting for her novel about Cornish smugglers titled Jamaica Inn. The inn that inspired the novel, Jamaica Inn, has stood beside the main road through the village since 1547. It is now a tourist attraction in its own right and dominates the village.

The small church (dedicated to the Holy Trinity) that lies to the east of the village closed some years ago. A mile from Bolventor there was a chapel of St Luke (from the 13th to the early 16th century): the font is now at the church of Tideford. Cornish Church Guide (1925) Truro: Blackford; p. 62 Bolventor parish was established in 1846 (before that date the village was in St Neot parish) but has now been merged with Altarnun.

The village has been said to take its name from the "Bold Venture" that it must have appeared to build a farm in this moorland, but this is probably folk etymology, as "Bol-" is a common prefix in Cornish placenames. It is much more likely that the name derives from the 'Bold Adventure' tin-working area which was in operation near Jamaica Inn during the 1840s-1850s R.D. Penhallurick Tin in Antiquity (2008) Maney; p. 207 

== References ==

Holy Trinity Church, Bolventor



[[Bengal]]

Bengal ( , Bongo or Bngg) is a geographical and ethno-linguistic region in South Asia. It lies in the north-eastern region at the apex of the Bay of Bengal, and is dominated by the fertile Bengal delta. The region was politically divided in 1947 and today comprises the nation of Bangladesh and the Indian state of West Bengal, although some regions of the previous kingdoms of Bengal are now part of the neighbouring Indian states of Assam, Tripura, Bihar, Jharkand and Odisha. The region of Bengal is natively inhabited by Bengali people ( Bangali) who speak the Bengali language ( Bangla).

The region of Bengal is one of the most densely populated regions on Earth, with an estimated population of more than 250 million people and a population density exceeding 900/km. Most of the Bengal region lies in the low-lying GangesBrahmaputra River Delta or Ganges Delta, the world's largest delta. In the southern part of the delta lies the Sundarbansthe world's largest mangrove forest and home of the Bengal tiger. In the coastal southeast lies Cox's Bazar, the world's longest beach with a length of 120 km. Though the population of the region is mostly rural and agrarian, two megacities, Kolkata (previously Calcutta) and Dhaka (previously Dacca); are located in Bengal. The Bengal region is renowned for its rich literary and cultural heritage as well as its immense political and intellectual contribution to South Asian history through the Bengal Renaissance, revolutionary activities, its central role in the Indian independence movement, the Bengali language movement, and the Bangladesh Liberation War.

==Etymology==

The exact origin of the word Bangla and Bongo or Bengal is unknown, though the word is believed to be derived from the Dravidian-speaking tribe called Bang that settled in the area around the year 1000 BC. 
It could also be derived from the word Vanga, which was a kingdom in the Bengal region during the times of Mahabharata as mentioned in Sanskrit literature. "Vanga" in the Encyclopdia Britannica 

==History==
Mahasthangarh is the oldest archaeological site in Bangladesh. It dates back to 700 BC and was the ancient capital of the Pundra Kingdom.
Remnants of Copper Age settlements in the Bengal region date back 4,300 years. After the arrival of Indo-Aryans, the kingdoms of Anga, Vanga, and Magadha were formed by the 10th century BC, located in the Bihar and Bengal regions. Magadha was one of the four main kingdoms of India at the time of Buddha and consisted of several Janapadas. One of the earliest foreign references to Bengal is the mention of a land named Gangaridai by the Greeks around 100 BC, located in an area in Bengal. From the 3rd to the 6th centuries AD, the kingdom of Magadha served as the seat of the Gupta Empire. http://www.indiavisiontravels.com/w-bengal.html 

A map of the Pala Empire
Two kingdoms  Vanga or Samatata and Gauda  are mentioned in some texts to have appeared after the end of Gupta Empire, although details of their ruling time are uncertain. The first recorded independent king of Bengal was Shashanka who reigned in the early 7th century. After a period of anarchy, the native Buddhist Pala Empire ruled the region for four hundred years, and expanded across a large part of the Indian subcontinent during the reigns of Dharmapala and Devapala. Bengal was invaded by the south Indian Emperor Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty in the 11th century. Land of Two Rivers: A History of Bengal from the Mahabharata to Mujib by Nitish K. Sengupta: p.45 The Pala dynasty was followed by the reign of the Hindu Sena dynasty. Islam started to appear in Bengal during the 12th and 13th century, in the form of Sufism. Beginning in 1202 a military commander from the Delhi Sultanate, Bakhtiar Khilji, overran Bihar and Bengal as far east as Rangpur, Bogra, and the Brahmaputra River. Although he failed to bring Bengal under his control, the expedition managed to defeat Lakshman Sen and his two sons, who moved to Vikramapur (present-day Munshiganj District), from where they ruled over a smaller area until the late 13th century. 

From the 13th century onward, several Islamic dynasties ruled parts of Bengal, often known collectively as the Sultanate of Bengal. Some rulers such as the land-lords-Baro-Bhuyans, the Deva Kingdom, and Raja Ganesha ruled parts of the region intermittently. Bengal came once more under the direct control of Delhi when the Mughals conquered it in 1576. It became a Mughal subah and was ruled by subahdars (governors). Akbar exercised progressive rule and oversaw a period of prosperity (through trade and development) in Bengal and northern India. There were several independent Hindu states established in Bengal during the Mughal period like those of Maharaja Pratap Aditya of Jessore and Raja Sitaram Ray of Burdwan.

Bengal's trade and wealth impressed the Mughals so much that emperor Aurangzeb called the region the Paradise of the Nations. Administration by governors appointed by the court of the Mughal Empire court (15751717) gave way to four decades of semi-independence under the Nawabs of Murshidabad, who respected the nominal sovereignty of the Mughals in Delhi. The Nawabs granted permission to the French East India Company to establish a trading post at Chandernagore in 1673, and the British East India Company at Calcutta in 1690. 

Around the early 1700s, the Maratha Empire led expeditions in Bengal. The leader of the expedition was Maratha Maharaja Raghuji of Nagpur. Raghoji was able to annexe Odisha and parts of Bengal permanently as he successfully exploited the chaotic conditions prevailing in the region after the death of their Governor Murshid Quli Khan in 1727. SNHM. Vol. II, pp. 209, 224. Portuguese traders arrived late in the fifteenth century, once Vasco da Gama reached India by sea in 1498. European influence grew until the British East India Company gained taxation rights in Bengal subah, or province, following the Battle of Plassey in 1757, when Siraj ud-Daulah, the last independent Nawab, was defeated by the British. The Bengal Presidency was established by 1766, eventually including all British territories north of the Central Provinces (now Madhya Pradesh), from the mouths of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra to the Himalayas and the Punjab. The Bengal famine of 1770 claimed millions of lives. Calcutta was named the capital of British India in 1772. The Bengal Renaissance and Brahmo Samaj socio-cultural reform movements had great impact on the cultural and economic life of Bengal. The failed Indian rebellion of 1857 started near Calcutta and resulted in transfer of authority to the British Crown, administered by the Viceroy of India. Between 1905 and 1911, an abortive attempt was made to divide the province of Bengal into two zones. 

Bengal has played a major role in the Indian independence movement, in which revolutionary groups were dominant. Armed attempts to overthrow the British Raj reached a climax when Subhas Chandra Bose led the Indian National Army against the British. Bengal was also central in the rising political awareness of the Muslim populationthe Muslim League was established in Dhaka in 1906. In spite of a last-ditch effort to form a United Bengal, when India gained independence in 1947, Bengal was partitioned along religious lines. The western part went to India (and was named West Bengal) while the eastern part joined Pakistan as a province called East Bengal (later renamed East Pakistan, giving rise to Bangladesh in 1971). The circumstances of partition were bloody, with widespread religious riots in Bengal. 

In East Pakistan, starting from the Bengali Language Movement of 1952, political dissent against West Pakistani domination grew steadily. The Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, emerged as the political voice of the Bengali-speaking population of East Pakistan by the 1960s. In 1971, the crisis deepened when Rahman was arrested and a sustained military assault was launched on East Pakistan. Most of the Awami League leaders fled and set up a government-in-exile in West Bengal. The guerrilla Mukti Bahini and Bengali regulars eventually received support from the Indian Armed Forces in December 1971, resulting in a decisive victory over Pakistan on 16 December in the Bangladesh Liberation War or Indo-Pakistani War of 1971. The independent nation of Bangladesh was established. However, the nation of Bangladesh, since its creation, suffered from continuous political instability and prolonged martial and autocratic rules.

West Bengal, the western part of Bengal, became a state in India. In the 1960s and 1970s, severe power shortages, strikes and a violent Marxist-Naxalite movement damaged much of the state's infrastructure, leading to a period of economic stagnation. The Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 resulted in the influx of millions of refugees to West Bengal, causing significant strains on its infrastructure. West Bengal politics underwent a major change when the Left Front won the 1977 assembly election, defeating the incumbent Indian National Congress. The Left Front, led by Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) governed the state for over three decades.

Image:Asia 323bc.jpg|Asia in 323 BC, the Nanda Empire of Magadha and Gangaridai Empire of Bengal in relation to Alexander's Empire and neighbours.
Image:Paharpur 03.JPG|Somapura Mahavihara in Paharpur, Bangladesh is the greatest Buddhist Vihara in the Indian Subcontinent built by Dharmapala of Bengal.
Image:Clive.jpg|The loss of the Battle of Plassey, 1757, and the execution of the last independent Nawab of Bengal marks the start of British rule over Bengal.
Image:1776 Rennell - Dury Wall Map of Bihar and Bengal, India - Geographicus - BaharBengal-dury-1776.jpg|1776 map of Bengal and Bihar by James Rennell
Image:Raja Ram Mohan Roy.jpg|Raja Ram Mohan Roy is regarded as the "Father of the Bengal Renaissance"
Image:Bengal map 1893.JPG|1893 map of Bengal
Image:Tagore3.jpg|Rabindranath Tagore was Asia's first Nobel laureate and composer of Jana Gana Mana the national anthem of India as well as Amar Shonar Bangla the national anthem of Bangladesh.
Image:Nazrul.jpg|Kazi Nazrul Islam was one of the most prominent figures of Bengali literature and the national poet of Bangladesh.

==Geography==

Most of the Bengal region is in the low-lying GangesBrahmaputra River Delta or Ganges Delta. The Ganges Delta arises from the confluence of the rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna rivers and their respective tributaries. The total area of Bengal is 232,752 kmWest Bengal is 88752 km and Bangladesh 147570 km.

Most parts of Bangladesh are within 10 m above the sea level, and it is believed that about 10% of the land would be flooded if the sea level were to rise by 1 m. Because of this low elevation, much of this region is exceptionally vulnerable to seasonal flooding due to monsoons.
The highest point in Bangladesh is in Mowdok range at 1052 m in the Chittagong Hill Tracts to the southeast of the country. Summit Elevations: Frequent Internet Errors. Retrieved 13 April 2006. A major part of the coastline comprises a marshy jungle, the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world and home to diverse flora and fauna, including the Royal Bengal Tiger. In 1997, this region was declared endangered. 

West Bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of India, stretching from the Himalayas in the north to the Bay of Bengal in the south. The state has a total area of . The Darjeeling Himalayan hill region in the northern extreme of the state belongs to the eastern Himalaya. This region contains Sandakfu ()the highest peak of the state. The narrow Terai region separates this region from the plains, which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards the south. The Rarh region intervenes between the Ganges delta in the east and the western plateau and high lands. A small coastal region is on the extreme south, while the Sundarbans mangrove forests form a remarkable geographical landmark at the Ganges delta.

At least nine districts in West Bengal and 42 districts in Bangladesh have arsenic levels in groundwater above the World Health Organization maximum permissible limit of 50 g/L (micro gram per litre) or 50 parts per billion and the untreated water is unfit for human consumption. The water causes arsenicosis, skin cancer and various other complications in the body. Arsenic is four times as poisonous as mercury.

===Major cities===
The following are the largest cities in Bengal (in terms of population):

 List of major cities in Bengal 
 Rank City Country Population Area (in km2) 
 1 Dhaka Bangladesh 14,543,124 360.0 http://www.citypopulation.de/php/bangladesh-dhaka.php 
 2 Kolkata India 14,057,991 http://citypopulation.de/India-WestBengal.html 1886.67 
 3 Chittagong Bangladesh 4,079,862 168.07 http://www.citypopulation.de/php/bangladesh-chittagong.php 
 4 Gazipur Bangladesh 1,820,374 49.32 http://citypopulation.de/Bangladesh-UA.html 
 5 Narayanganj Bangladesh 1,636,441 759.57 
 6 Khulna Bangladesh 1,490,835 80.01 
 7 Asansol India 1,243,414 1467.0 
 8 Rajshahi Bangladesh 842,701 96.68 
 9 Siliguri India 705,579 640.0 
 10 Durgapur India 580,990 154.0 
 Source: World Gazetteer 2012 
 

==Demographics==
:Main articles: Demographics of Bangladesh and Demographics of West Bengal
According to provisional results of 2011 Bangladesh census, population of Bangladesh was 142,319,000, however, CIA's The World Factbook gives 163,654,860 as its population in a July 2013 estimate. According to the provisional results of the 2011 Indian national census, West Bengal has a population of 91,347,736. So, the Bengal region, as of 2011, has at least 233 million people. This figures give a population density of 1003.9/km; making it among the most densely populated areas in the world. World Bank Development Indicators Database, 2006. 

Bengali is the main language spoken in Bengal. English is often used for official work. There are small minorities who speak Hindi, Urdu, Chakma. There are several tribal languages including Santhali.

Life expectancy is around 70.36 years for Bangladesh https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bg.html and 63.4 for West Bengal. In terms of literacy, West Bengal leads with 77% literacy rate, in Bangladesh the rate is approximately 59.82%. http://www.thefinancialexpress-bd.com/old/index.php?ref=MjBfMDJfMDZfMTNfMV84OF8xNTkzMTc= The level of poverty and illiteracy is high, the proportion of people living below the poverty line is more than 30%. Bangladesh Country Statistics, Unicef 

About 20,000 people live on chars. Chars are temporary islands formed by the deposition of sediments eroded off the banks of the Ganges in West Bengal which often disappear in the monsoon season. They are made of very fertile soil. The inhabitants of chars are not recognised by the Government of West Bengal on the grounds that it is not known whether they are Bengalis or Bangladeshi refugees. Consequently, no identification documents are issued to char-dwellers who cannot benefit from health care, barely survive due to very poor sanitation and are prevented from emigrating to the mainland to find jobs when they have turned 14. On a particular char it was reported that 13% of women died at childbirth. 

==Economy==
Agriculture is the leading occupation in the region. Rice is the staple food crop. Other food crops are pulses, potato, maize, and oil seeds. Jute is the principal cash crop. Tea is also produced commercially; the region is well known for Darjeeling and other high-quality teas.

Historically, Europe once regarded Bengal as "the richest country to trade with". 

 

===West Bengal===

The service sector is the largest contributor to the gross domestic product of West Bengal, contributing 51% of the state domestic product compared to 27% from agriculture and 22% from industry. State industries are localised in the Kolkata region and the mineral-rich western highlands. DurgapurAsansol colliery belt is home to a number of major steel plants. 
 
 West Bengal had the third-largest economy in India, with a net state domestic product of US$21.5 billion. During 20012002, the state's average SDP was more than 7.8%outperforming the National GDP Growth. 
 The state has promoted foreign direct investment, which has mostly occurred in the software and electronics fields; 
Kolkata is becoming a major hub for the information technology (IT) industry. Owing to the boom in Kolkata's and the overall state's economy, West Bengal had the third-fastest-growing economy in India. It is also known as the cultural capital of India.

===Bangladesh===

In December 2005, the Central Bank of Bangladesh projected GDP growth around 6.5%. Annual Report 2004-2005, Bangladesh Bank Although two-thirds of Bangladeshis are farmers, more than three-quarters of Bangladesh's export earnings come from the garment industry, 
which began attracting foreign investors in the 1980s due to cheap labour and low conversion cost. In 2002, the industry exported US$5 billion worth of products. 
The industry now employs more than 3 million workers, 90% of whom are women. 
A large part of foreign currency earnings also comes from the remittances sent by expatriates living in other countries.

The provision of microcredit by Grameen Bank (founded by Muhammad Yunus) and by other similar organisations has contributed to the development of the economy of Bangladesh. Together, such organisations had about 5 million members by the late 1990s. "Yunus sees big Answers in Micro-credit" Globe and Mail article |http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/LAC.20080611.RYUNUS11/TPStory/Business 

==Culture==

Bengali artists performing a traditional dance.
Baul singers at Basanta-Utsab, Shantiniketan
Pohela Baishakh celebration in Dhaka
Mahashtami Puja during Durga Puja in Kolkata

The common Bengali language and culture anchors the shared tradition of two parts of politically divided Bengal. Bengal has a long tradition in folk literature, evidenced by the Charyapada, Mangalkavya, Shreekrishna Kirtana, Maimansingha Gitika or Thakurmar Jhuli. Bengali literature in the medieval age was often either religious (e.g. Chandidas), or adaptations from other languages (e.g. Alaol). During the Bengal Renaissance of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Bengali literature was modernised through the works of authors such as Michael Madhusudan Dutta, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, Rabindranath Tagore, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar and Kazi Nazrul Islam.

The Baul tradition is a unique heritage of Bangla folk music. The scholar saint Sri Anirvan loved Baul music, and in fact described himself as a simple Baul. Other folk music forms include Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya. Folk music in Bengal is often accompanied by the ektara, a one-stringed instrument. Other instruments include the dotara, dhol, flute, and tabla. The region also has an active heritage in North Indian classical music.

Bengal had also been the harbinger of modernism in Indian arts. Abanindranath Tagore, one of the important 18th century artist from Bengal is often referred to as the father of Indian modern art. He had established the first non-British art academy in India known as the Kalabhavan within the premises of Santiniketan. Santiniketan in course of time had produced many important Indian artists like Gaganendranath Tagore, Nandalal Bose, Jamini Roy, Benode Bihari Mukherjee and Ramkinkar Baij. In the post-independence era, Bengal had produced important artists like Somenath Hore, Meera Mukherjee and Ganesh Pyne.

Rice and fish are traditional favourite foods, leading to a saying that in Bengali, mach ar bhaath bangali baanaay, that translates as "fish and rice make a Bengali". Bengal's vast repertoire of fish-based dishes includes Hilsa preparations, a favourite among Bengalis. Bengalis make distinctive sweetmeats from milk products, including Rshogolla, Chmchm, and several kinds of Pithe.

Bengali women commonly wear the shai and the salwar kameez, often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs. In urban areas, many women and men wear Western-style attire. Among men, European dressing has greater acceptance. Men also wear traditional costumes such as the kurta with dhoti or pyjama, often on religious occasions. The lungi, a kind of long skirt, is widely worn by Bangladeshi men.

The greatest religious festivals are the two Eids (Eid ul-Fitr and Eid ul-Adha) for the Muslims, and the autumnal Durga Puja for Hindus. Christmas (called Bodin (Great day) in Bangla), Buddha Purnima are other major religious festivals. Other festivities include Pohela Baishakh (the Bengali New Year), Basanta-Utsab, Nobanno, and Poush parbon (festival of Poush).

Around 200 dailies are published in Bangladesh, along with more than 1800 periodicals. West Bengal had 559 published newspapers in 2005, of which 430 were in Bangla. Cricket and football are popular sports in the Bengal region. Local games include sports such as Kho Kho and Kabaddi, the later being the national sport of Bangladesh. An Indo-Bangladesh Bangla Games has been organised among the athletes of the Bengali speaking areas of the two countries. 

==Intra-Bengal relations today==
Geographic, cultural, historic, and commercial ties are growing, and both countries recognise the importance of good relations. During and immediately after Bangladesh's struggle for independence from Pakistan in 1971, India assisted refugees from East Pakistan, and intervened militarily to help bring about the independence of Bangladesh. The Indo-Bangladesh border length of 4095 km, West Bengal has a border length of 2216 km. Despite overlapping historic, geographic and cultural ties, the relation between West Bengal and Bangladesh is still well below the potential. The pan-Bengali sentiment among the people of the two parts of Bengal was at its height during the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War. While the government radio and national press in India might have backed the struggle out of strategic considerations, the Bengali broadcast and print media went out of its way to lend overwhelming support. 

Frequent air services link Kolkata with Dhaka and Chittagong. A bus service between Kolkata and Dhaka is operational. The primary road link is the Jessore Road which crosses the border at Petrapole-Benapole about 175 km north-west of Kolkata. The Train service between Kolkata and Dhaka, which was stopped after the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, was resumed in 2008. 

Visa services are provided by Bangladesh's consulate at Kolkata's Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Road and India's high commissions in Dhaka, Chittagong and Rajshahi. India has a liberal visa policy and nearly 500,000 visas are issued every year to Bangladeshi students, tourists, health-tourists and others who visit West Bengal and often transit to other parts of India.

Undocumented immigration of Bangladeshi workers is a controversial issue championed by right-wing nationalist parties in India but finds little sympathy in West Bengal. India has fenced the border to control this flow but immigration is still continuing. 

The official land border crossing at Petrapole-Benapole is the primary conduit for the over $1 billion trade between the two-halves of Bengal. The volume of unofficial exports to Bangladesh from India is reportedly in the range of $350500 million each year. 

==Gallery==

==See also==

* History of Bengal
* Governor of Bengal
* History of India
* Bangladesh
* Bengali people
* Bangals and Ghotis
* List of Bengalis
* Bengali language
* Bengali cuisine
* Music of Bangladesh
* Music of Bengal
* Bengali cinema
* East Bengal
* West Bengal
* Bengal architecture

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 

==External links==

Geo Links for Bengal
* www.hostkingdom.net- List of rulers of Bengal
* WorldStatesmen- here India
* Information portal of West Bengal
;Maps
Perry-Castaeda Library Map Collection at University of Texas at Austin Libraries
:*India from The Historical Atlas by William R. Shepherd, 1923
:*India 1760 from The Public Schools Historical Atlas edited by C. Colbeck. Longmans, Green, and Co. 1905
:*India 1882 from A Dictionary Practical, Theoretical, and Historical of Commerce and Commercial Navigation by J.R. M'Culloch. Longmans, Green and Co. London, 1882
* Art and artists of Bengal

 



[[Bucket argument]]

Isaac Newton's rotating bucket argument (also known as "Newton's bucket") was designed to demonstrate that true rotational motion cannot be defined as the relative rotation of the body with respect to the immediately surrounding bodies. It is one of five arguments from the "properties, causes, and effects" of true motion and rest that support his contention that, in general, true motion and rest cannot be defined as special instances of motion or rest relative to other bodies, but instead can be defined only by reference to absolute space. Alternatively, these experiments provide an operational definition of what is meant by "absolute rotation", and do not pretend to address the question of "rotation relative to what?". 

==Background==
These arguments, and a discussion of the distinctions between absolute and relative time, space, place and motion, appear in a General Scholium at the very beginning of Newton's work, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1687), which established the foundations of classical mechanics and introduced his law of universal gravitation, which yielded the first quantitatively adequate dynamical explanation of planetary motion. See the Principia on line at Andrew Motte translation, pp. 7782.

Despite their embrace of the principle of rectilinear inertia and the recognition of the kinematical relativity of apparent motion (which underlies whether the Ptolemaic or the Copernican system is correct), natural philosophers of the seventeenth century continued to consider true motion and rest as physically separate descriptors of an individual body. The dominant view Newton opposed was devised by Ren Descartes, and was supported (in part) by Gottfried Leibniz. It held that empty space is a metaphysical impossibility because space is nothing other than the extension of matter, or, in other words, that when one speaks of the space between things one is actually making reference to the relationship that exists between those things and not to some entity that stands between them. Concordant with the above understanding, any assertion about the motion of a body boils down to a description over time in which the body under consideration is at t1 found in the vicinity of one group of "landmark" bodies and at some t2 is found in the vicinity of some other "landmark" body or bodies. 
Detection of rotation: red flags pop out on flexible arms when either object actually rotates. A: Central object rotates. B: Outer ring rotates, but in opposite direction. C: Both rotate, but in opposite directions. D: Both are locked together and rotate in the same direction.

Descartes recognized that there would be a real difference, however, between a situation in which a body with movable parts and originally at rest with respect to a surrounding ring was itself accelerated to a certain angular velocity with respect to the ring, and another situation in which the surrounding ring was given a contrary acceleration with respect to the central object. With sole regard to the central object and the surrounding ring, the motions would be indistinguishable from each other assuming that both the central object and the surrounding ring were absolutely rigid objects. However, if neither the central object nor the surrounding ring were absolutely rigid then the parts of one or both of them would tend to fly out from the axis of rotation.

Here is an everyday experience of the basic nature of the Descartes experiment: Consider sitting in your train and noticing a train originally at rest beside you in the railway station pulling away. Initially you think it is your own train accelerating, but then notice with surprise that you feel no force. Thus, it is not your own train moving, but the neighboring train. On the other hand, you would confirm your own train is accelerating if you sensed g-forces from the acceleration of your own train.

For contingent reasons having to do with the Inquisition, Descartes spoke of motion as both absolute and relative. However, his real position was that motion is absolute. Spacetime Before Einstein from Stanford 

A contrasting position was taken by Ernst Mach, who contended that all motion was relative. 

==The argument==
Newton discusses a bucket filled with water hung by a cord. For a discussion of Newton's original argument, see If the cord is twisted up tightly on itself and then the bucket is released, it begins to spin rapidly, not only with respect to the experimenter, but also in relation to the water it contains. (This situation would correspond to diagram B above.)

Although the relative motion at this stage is the greatest, the surface of the water remains flat, indicating that the parts of the water have no tendency to recede from the axis of relative motion, despite proximity to the pail. Eventually, as the cord continues to unwind, the surface of the water assumes a concave shape as it acquires the motion of the bucket spinning relative to the experimenter. This concave shape shows that the water is rotating, despite the fact that the water is at rest relative to the pail. In other words, it is not the relative motion of the pail and water that causes concavity of the water, contrary to the idea that motions can only be relative, and that there is no absolute motion. (This situation would correspond to diagram D.) Possibly the concavity of the water shows rotation relative to something else: say absolute space? Newton says: "One can find out and measure the true and absolute circular motion of the water". 

In the 1846 Andrew Motte translation of Newton's words: See the Principia on line at Andrew Motte Translation pp. 79-81 

The argument that the motion is absolute, not relative, is incomplete, as it limits the participants relevant to the experiment to only the pail and the water, a limitation that has not been established. In fact, the concavity of the water clearly involves gravitational attraction, and by implication the Earth also is a participant. Here is a critique due to Mach arguing that only relative motion is established: 

All observers agree that the surface of rotating water is curved. However, the explanation of this curvature involves centrifugal force for all observers with the exception of a truly stationary observer, who finds the curvature is consistent with the rate of rotation of the water as they observe it, with no need for an additional centrifugal force. Thus, a stationary frame can be identified, and it is not necessary to ask "Stationary with respect to what?":

A supplementary thought experiment with the same objective of determining the occurrence of absolute rotation also was proposed by Newton: the example of observing two identical spheres in rotation about their center of gravity and tied together by a string. Occurrence of tension in the string is indicative of absolute rotation; see Rotating spheres.

==Detailed analysis==
The interface of two immiscible liquids rotating around a vertical axis is an upward-opening circular paraboloid.
The historic interest of the rotating bucket experiment is its usefulness in suggesting one can detect absolute rotation by observation of the shape of the surface of the water. However, one might question just how rotation brings about this change. Below are three approaches to understanding the concavity of the surface of rotating water in a bucket.
Force diagram for an element of water surface in co-rotating frame. Top: Radial section and selected point on water surface; the water, the co-rotating frame, and the radial section share a constant angular rate of rotation given by the vector . Bottom: Force diagram at selected point on surface. The slope of the surface adjusts to make all three forces sum to zero.

===Newton's laws of motion===
The shape of the surface of a rotating liquid in a bucket can be determined using Newton's laws for the various forces on an element of the surface. For example, see Knudsen and Hjorth. The analysis begins with the free body diagram in the co-rotating frame where the water appears stationary. The height of the water h = h(r) is a function of the radial distance r from the axis of rotation , and the aim is to determine this function. An element of water volume on the surface is shown to be subject to three forces: the vertical force due to gravity Fg, the horizontal, radially outward centrifugal force FCfgl, and the force normal to the surface of the water Fn due to the rest of the water surrounding the selected element of surface. The force due to surrounding water is known to be normal to the surface of the water because a liquid in equilibrium cannot support shear stresses. To quote Anthony and Brackett: Moreover, because the element of water does not move, the sum of all three forces must be zero. To sum to zero, the force of the water must point oppositely to the sum of the centrifugal and gravity forces, which means the surface of the water must adjust so its normal points in this direction. (A very similar problem is the design of a banked turn, where the slope of the turn is set so a car will not slide off the road. The analogy in the case of rotating bucket is that the element of water surface will "slide" up or down the surface unless the normal to the surface aligns with the vector resultant formed by the vector addition Fg + FCfgl.)

As r increases, the centrifugal force increases according to the relation (the equations are written per unit mass):
:
where  is the constant rate of rotation of the water. The gravitational force is unchanged at
:
where g is the acceleration due to gravity. These two forces add to make a resultant at an angle  from the vertical given by
:
which clearly becomes larger as r increases. To ensure that this resultant is normal to the surface of the water, and therefore can be effectively nulled by the force of the water beneath, the normal to the surface must have the same angle, that is,
:
leading to the ordinary differential equation for the shape of the surface:
:
or, integrating:
:
where h(0) is the height of the water at r = 0. In words, the surface of the water is parabolic in its dependence upon the radius.

===Potential energy===
The shape of the water's surface can be found in a different, very intuitive way using the interesting idea of the potential energy associated with the centrifugal force in the co-rotating frame.
In a reference frame uniformly rotating at angular rate , the fictitious centrifugal force is conservative and has a potential energy of the form: 

:

where r is the radius from the axis of rotation. This result can be verified by taking the gradient of the potential to obtain the radially outward force:

:
The meaning of the potential energy is that movement of a test body from a larger radius to a smaller radius involves doing work against the centrifugal force.

The potential energy is useful, for example, in understanding the concavity of the water surface in a rotating bucket. Notice that at equilibrium the surface adopts a shape such that an element of volume at any location on its surface has the same potential energy as at any other. That being so, no element of water on the surface has any incentive to move position, because all positions are equivalent in energy. That is, equilibrium is attained. On the other hand, were surface regions with lower energy available, the water occupying surface locations of higher potential energy would move to occupy these positions of lower energy, inasmuch as there is no barrier to lateral movement in an ideal liquid.

We might imagine deliberately upsetting this equilibrium situation by somehow momentarily altering the surface shape of the water to make it different from an equal-energy surface. This change in shape would not be stable, and the water would not stay in our artificially contrived shape, but engage in a transient exploration of many shapes until non-ideal frictional forces introduced by sloshing, either against the sides of the bucket or by the non-ideal nature of the liquid, killed the oscillations and the water settled down to the equilibrium shape.

To see the principle of an equal-energy surface at work, imagine gradually increasing the rate of rotation of the bucket from zero. The water surface is flat at first, and clearly a surface of equal potential energy because all points on the surface are at the same height in the gravitational field acting upon the water. At some small angular rate of rotation, however, an element of surface water can achieve lower potential energy by moving outward under the influence of the centrifugal force. Because water is incompressible and must remain within the confines of the bucket, this outward movement increases the depth of water at the larger radius, increasing the height of the surface at larger radius, and lowering it at smaller radius. The surface of the water becomes slightly concave, with the consequence that the potential energy of the water at the greater radius is increased by the work done against gravity to achieve the greater height. As the height of water increases, movement toward the periphery becomes no longer advantageous, because the reduction in potential energy from working with the centrifugal force is balanced against the increase in energy working against gravity. Thus, at a given angular rate of rotation, a concave surface represents the stable situation, and the more rapid the rotation, the more concave this surface. If rotation is arrested, the energy stored in fashioning the concave surface must be dissipated, for example through friction, before an equilibrium flat surface is restored.

To implement a surface of constant potential energy quantitatively, let the height of the water be : then the potential energy per unit mass contributed by gravity is and the total potential energy per unit mass on the surface is
:

with the background energy level independent of r. In a static situation (no motion of the fluid in the rotating frame), this energy is constant independent of position r. Requiring the energy to be constant, we obtain the parabolic form:

:

where h(0) is the height at r = 0 (the axis). See Figures 1 and 2.

The principle of operation of the centrifuge also can be simply understood in terms of this expression for the potential energy, which shows that it is favorable energetically when the volume far from the axis of rotation is occupied by the heavier substance.

==See also==

*Centrifugal force (rotating reference frame)
*Inertial frame of reference
*Mach's principle
*Mechanics of planar particle motion

*of space and time#Absolutism and relationalism|Philosophy of space and time: Absolutism vs. relationalism]
*Rotating reference frame
*Rotating spheres
*Sagnac effect

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* The isotropy of the cosmic background radiation is another indicator that the universe does not rotate. See:
** 
** 
** 

==External links==
*Newton's Views on Space, Time, and Motion from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, article by Robert Rynasiewicz. At the end of this article, loss of fine distinctions in the translations as compared to the original Latin text is discussed.
*Life and Philosophy of Leibniz see section on Space, Time and Indiscernibles for Leibniz arguing against the idea of space acting as a causal agent.



[[Breviary]]

Breviary, ink, paint and gold on parchment; third quarter 15th century (Walters Art Museum).
A breviary (from Latin brevis, 'short' or 'concise') is a liturgical book of the Latin liturgical rites of the Catholic Church containing the public or canonical prayers, hymns, the Psalms, readings, and notations for everyday use, especially by bishops, priests, and deacons in the Divine Office (i.e., at the canonical hours or Liturgy of the Hours, the Christians' daily prayer). The word can also refer to a collection of Christian orders of prayers and readings, such as contained in Anglican or Lutheran resources. In general, the word breviary may be used to refer to an abridged version of any text or a brief account or summary of some subject, but is primarily used to refer to the Catholic liturgical book. 

The volume containing the daily hours of Roman Catholic prayer was published as the Breviarium Romanum (Roman Breviary) until the reforms of Paul VI, when it became known as the Liturgy of the Hours. However, these terms are used interchangeably to refer to the Office in all its forms. This entry deals with the Breviary prior to the changes introduced by Pope Paul VI in 1974.

==Origin of name==
This word breviary (Lat. Breviarium), signifies in its primary acceptation an abridgment, or a compendium. It is often employed in this sense by Christian authors, e.g. Breviarium fidei, Breviarium in psalmos, Breviarium canonum, Breviarium regularum. In liturgical language Breviary has a special meaning, indicating a book furnishing the regulations for the celebration of Mass or the canonical Office, and may be met with under the titles Breviarium Ecclesiastici Ordinis, or Breviarium Ecclesi Romins (Roman). In the ninth century Alcuin uses the word to designate an office abridged or simplified for the use of the laity. Prudentius of Troyes, about the same period, composed a Breviarium Psalterii (v. inf. V. HISTORY). In an ancient inventory occurs Breviarium Antiphonarii, meaning "Extracts from the Antiphonary". In the "Vita Aldrici" occurs "sicut in plenariis et breviariis Ecclesi ejusdem continentur". Again, in the inventories in the catalogues, such notes as these may be met with: "Sunt et duo cursinarii et tres benedictionales Libri; ex his unus habet obsequium mortuorum et unus Breviarius", or, "Prter Breviarium quoddam quod usque ad festivitatem S. Joannis Baptist retinebunt", etc. Monte Cassino about A.D. 1100 obtained a book titled "Incipit Breviarium sive Ordo Officiorum per totam anni decursionem".

From such references, and from others of a like nature, Quesnel gathers that by the word Breviarium was at first designated a book furnishing the rubrics, a sort of Ordo. The title Breviary, as we employ itthat is, a book containing the entire canonical officeappears to date from the eleventh century. 

St. Gregory VII having, indeed, abridged the order of prayers, and having simplified the Liturgy as performed at the Roman Court, this abridgment received the name of Breviary, which was suitable, since, according to the etymology of the word, it was an abridgment. The name has been extended to books which contain in one volume, or at least in one work, liturgical books of different kinds, such as the Psalter, the Antiphonary, the Responsoriary, the Lectionary, etc. In this connection it may be pointed out that in this sense the word, as it is used nowadays, is illogical; it should be named a Plenarium rather than a Breviarium, since, liturgically speaking, the word Plenarium exactly designates such books as contain several different compilations united under one cover. This is pointed out, however, simply to make still clearer the meaning and origin of the word; and section V will furnish a more detailed explanation of the formation of the Breviary.

==History==
Mary Stuart's personal breviary, which she took with her to the scaffold, is preserved in the National Library of Russia of St. Petersburg

===Early history===
The canonical hours of the Breviary owe their remote origin to the Old Covenant when God commanded the Aaronic priests to offer morning and evening sacrifices. Other inspiration may have come from David's words in the Psalms "Seven times a day I praise you" (Ps. 119:164), as well as, "the just man meditates on the law day and night" (Ps. 1:2). 

*N.B. On the term "the Bible" below. There were not, in antiquity, as there are today, single-volume collections of all of Sacred Scripture which most Christians have in codex form in their homes and places of worship. In the years before the fourth century, as there was no universal and official canon of Sacred Scripture, there were no single-volume collections of Sacred Scripture. "The Acts of the Scilitan Martyrs", one of the earliest texts which offer evidence of the development of "the Bible", indicates that the leader of the Scilitan Martyrs possessed a "capsa", or container for scroll-form books (volumen, pl. volumina), with, as he said, "Gospels and letters". In the Sayings of the Desert Fathers, many of which antedate the fourth century, there is frequent evidence of individual anchorites possessing in book-form collections of the Psalms. This then is our earliest evidence of monks praying the Psalms as the main part of their daily scripted and Scriptural prayer regimen: the Desert Fathers.

In the early days of Christian worship the Bible furnished all that was thought necessary, containing as it did the books from which the lessons were read and the psalms that were recited. The first step in the evolution of the Breviary was the separation of the Psalter into a choir-book. At first the president of the local church (bishop) or the leader of the choir chose a particular psalm as he thought appropriate. From about the 4th century certain psalms began to be grouped together, a process that was furthered by the monastic practice of daily reciting the 150 psalms. This took so much time that the monks began to spread it over a week, dividing each day into hours, and allotting to each hour its portion of the Psalter. St Benedict in the 6th century drew up such an arrangement, probably, though not certainly, on the basis of an older Roman division which, though not so skilful, is the one in general use. Gradually there were added to these psalter choir-books additions in the form of antiphons, responses, collects or short prayers, for the use of those not skilful at improvisation and metrical compositions. Jean Beleth, a 12th-century liturgical author, gives the following list of books necessary for the right conduct of the canonical office: the Antiphonarium, the Old and New Testaments, the Passionarius (liber) and the Legendarius (dealing respectively with martyrs and saints), the Homiliarius (homilies on the Gospels), the Sermologus (collection of sermons) and the works of the Fathers, besides, of course, the Psalterium and the Collectarium. To overcome the inconvenience of using such a library the Breviary came into existence and use. Already in the 8th century Prudentius, bishop of Troyes, had in a Breviarium Psalterii made an abridgment of the Psalter for the laity, giving a few psalms for each day, and Alcuin had rendered a similar service by including a prayer for each day and some other prayers, but no lessons or homilies. The Breviary rightly so called, however, only dates from the 11th century; the earliest MS. containing the whole canonical office is of the year 1099 and is in the Mazarin library. Gregory VII (pope 10731085), too, simplified the liturgy as performed at the Roman court, and gave his abridgment the name of Breviary, which thus came to denote a work which from another point of view might be called a Plenary, involving as it did the collection of several works into one. There are several extant specimens of 12th-century Breviaries, all Benedictine, but under Innocent III (pope 11981216) their use was extended, especially by the newly founded and active Franciscan order. These preaching friars, with the authorization of Gregory IX, adopted (with some modifications, e.g. the substitution of the "Gallican" for the "Roman" version of the Psalter) the Breviary hitherto used exclusively by the Roman court, and with it gradually swept out of Europe all the earlier partial books (Legendaries, Responsories), &c., and to some extent the local Breviaries, like that of Sarum. Finally, Nicholas III (pope 12771280) adopted this version both for the curia and for the basilicas of Rome, and thus made its position secure.

===Local and regular breviaries===
The Benedictines and Dominicans have Breviaries of their own. The only other types that merit notice are:
# the Mozarabic Breviary, once in use throughout all Spain, but now confined to a single foundation at Toledo; it is remarkable for the number and length of its hymns, and for the fact that the majority of its collects are addressed to God the Son;
# the Ambrosian, now confined to Milan, where it owes its retention to the attachment of the clergy and people to their traditionary rites, which they derive from St Ambrose.

===Early modern reforms===
Until the council of Trent every bishop had full power to regulate the Breviary of his own diocese; and this was acted upon almost everywhere. Each monastic community, also, had one of its own. Pius V (pope 15661572), however, while sanctioning those which could show at least 200 years of existence, made the Roman obligatory in all other places. But the influence of the court of Rome has gradually gone much beyond this, and has superseded almost all the local "uses". The Roman has thus become nearly universal, with the allowance only of additional offices for saints specially venerated in each particular diocese. The Roman Breviary has undergone several revisions: The most remarkable of these is that by Francis Quignonez, cardinal of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme (1536), which, though not accepted by Rome (it was approved by Clement VII and Paul III, and permitted as a substitute for the unrevised Breviary, until Pius V in 1568 excluded it as too short and too modern, and issued a reformed edition (Breviarium Pianum, Pian Breviary) of the old Breviary), formed the model for the still more thorough reform made in 1549 by the Church of England, whose daily morning and evening services are but a condensation and simplification of the Breviary offices. Some parts of the prefaces at the beginning of the English Prayer-Book are free translations of those of Quignonez. The Pian Breviary was again altered by Sixtus V in 1588, who introduced the revised Vulgate, in 1602 by Clement VIII (through Baronius and Bellarmine), especially as concerns the rubrics; and by Urban VIII (16231644), a purist who altered the text of certain hymns.

In the 17th and 18th centuries a movement of revision took place in France, and succeeded in modifying about half the Breviaries of that country. Historically, this proceeded from the labours of Jean de Launoy (16031678), "le dnicheur des saints", and Louis Sbastien le Nain de Tillemont, who had shown the falsity of numerous lives of the saints; while theologically it was produced by the Port Royal school, which led men to dwell more on communion with God as contrasted with the invocation of the saints. This was mainly carried out by the adoption of a rule that all antiphons and responses should be in the exact words of Scripture, which, of course, cut out the whole class of appeals to created beings. The services were at the same time simplified and shortened, and the use of the whole Psalter every week (which had become a mere theory in the Roman Breviary, owing to its frequent supersession by saints' day services) was made a reality. These reformed French Breviariese.g. the Paris Breviary of 1680 by Archbishop Franois de Harlay (16251695) and that of 1736 by Archbishop Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc (16551746)show a deep knowledge of Holy Scripture, and much careful adaptation of different texts.

===Later modern reforms===
During the pontificate of Pius IX a strong Ultramontane movement arose against the French Breviaries of 1680 and 1736. This was inaugurated by Montalembert, but its literary advocates were chiefly Dom Gueranger, a learned Benedictine monk, abbot of Solesmes, and Louis Veuillot (18131883) of the Univers; and it succeeded in suppressing them everywhere, the last diocese to surrender being Orleans in 1875. The Jansenist and Gallican influence was also strongly felt in Italy and in Germany, where Breviaries based on the French models were published at Cologne, Mnster, Mainz and other towns. Meanwhile, under the direction of Benedict XIV (pope 17401758), a special congregation collected much material for an official revision, but nothing was published. In 1902, under Leo XIII, a commission under the presidency of Monsignor Louis Duchesne was appointed to consider the Breviary, the Missal, the Pontifical and the Ritual.

Significant changes came in 1910 with the reform of the Roman Breviary by Pope Pius X. This revision modified the traditional psalm scheme so that, while all 150 psalms were used in the course of the week, these were said without repetition. Those assigned to the Sunday office underwent the least revision, although noticeably fewer psalms are recited at Matins, and both Lauds and Compline are slightly shorter due to psalms (or in the case of Compline the first few verses of a psalm) being removed. Pius X was probably influenced by earlier attempts to eliminate repetition in the psalter, most notably the liturgy of the Benedictine congregation of St. Maur. However, since Cardinal Quignonez's attempt to reform the Breviary employed this principlealbeit with no regard to the traditional schemesuch notions had floated around in the western Church, and can particularly be seen in the Paris Breviary.

Pope Pius XII introduced optional use of a new translation of the Psalms from the Hebrew to a more classical Latin. Most breviaries published in the late 1950s and early 1960s used this "Pian Psalter".

Pope John XXIII also revised the Breviary in 1960, introducing changes drawn up by his predecessor Pope Pius XII. The most notable alteration is the shortening of most feasts from nine to three lessons at Matins, keeping only the Scripture readings (the former lesson i, then lessons ii and iii together), followed by either the first part of the patristic reading (lesson vii) or, for most feasts, a condensed version of the former second Nocturn, which was formerly used when a feast was reduced in rank and commemorated.

===Manuscripts and printed editions===
Before the rise of the mendicant orders (wandering friars) in the thirteenth century, the daily services were usually contained in a number of large volumes. The first occurrence of a single manuscript of the daily office was written by the Benedictine order at Monte Cassino in Italy in 1099. By a strange twist, the Benedictines were not a mendicant order, but a stable, monastery-based order, and single-volume breviaries are rare from this early period.

The arrangement of the Psalms in the Rule of St. Benedict had a profound impact upon the breviaries used by secular and monastic clergy alike, up until 1911 when Pope St. Pius X introduced his reform of the Roman Breviary. In many places, every diocese, order or ecclesiastical province maintained its own edition of the breviary. 

However, mendicant friars travelled around a lot and needed a shortened, or abbreviated, daily office contained in one portable book, and single-volume breviaries flourished from the thirteenth century onwards.

These abbreviated volumes soon became very popular and eventually supplanted the Roman Catholic Church's Curia office, previously said by non-monastic clergy. 

Before the advent of printing, breviaries were written by hand and were often richly decorated with initials and miniature illustrations telling stories in the lives of Christ or the saints, or stories from the Bible.

Later printed breviaries usually have woodcut illustrations, interesting in their own right but the poor relation of the beautifully illuminated breviaries.

The beauty and value of many of the Latin Breviaries were brought to the notice of English churchmen by one of the numbers of the Oxford Tracts for the Times, since which time they have been much more studied, both for their own sake and for the light they throw upon the English Prayer-Book.

From a bibliographical point of view some of the early printed Breviaries are among the rarest of literary curiosities, being merely local. The copies were not spread far, and were soon worn out by the daily use made of them. Doubtless many editions have perished without leaving a trace of their existence, while others are known by unique copies. In Scotland the only one which has survived the convulsions of the 16th century is Aberdeen Breviary, a Scottish form of the Sarum Office (the Sarum Rite was much favoured in Scotland as a kind of protest against the jurisdiction claimed by the diocese of York), revised by William Elphinstone (bishop 14831514), and printed at Edinburgh by Walter Chapman and Andrew Myllar in 15091510. Four copies have been preserved of it, of which only one is complete; but it was reprinted in facsimile in 1854 for the Bannatyne Club by the munificence of the Duke of Buccleuch. It is particularly valuable for the trustworthy notices of the early history of Scotland which are embedded in the lives of the national saints. Though enjoined by royal mandate in 1501 for general use within the realm of Scotland, it was probably never widely adopted. The new Scottish Proprium sanctioned for the Roman Catholic province of St Andrews in 1903 contains many of the old Aberdeen collects and antiphons.

The Sarum or Salisbury Breviary itself was very widely used. The first edition was printed at Venice in 1483 by Raynald de Novimagio in folio; the latest at Paris, 1556, 1557. While modern Breviaries are nearly always printed in four volumes, one for each season of the year, the editions of the Sarum never exceeded two parts.

== Contents of the Roman Breviary==
At the beginning stands the usual introductory matter, such as the tables for determining the date of Easter, the calendar, and the general rubrics. The Breviary itself is divided into four seasonal partswinter, spring, summer, autumnand comprises under each part:
# the Psalter;
# Proprium de Tempore (the special office of the season);
# Proprium Sanctorum (special offices of saints);
# Commune Sanctorum (general offices for saints);
# Extra Services.

These parts are often published separately.

=== The Psalter ===

This psalm book is the very backbone of the Breviary, the groundwork of the Catholic prayer-book; out of it have grown the antiphons, responsories and versicles. Until the 1911 reform, the psalms were arranged according to a disposition dating from the 8th century, as follows: Psalms i.cviii., with some omissions, were recited at Matins, twelve each day from Monday to Saturday, and eighteen on Sunday. The omissions were said at Lauds, Prime and Compline. Psalms cixcxlvii (except cxvii, cxviii and cxlii) were said at Vespers, five each day. Psalms cxlviiicl were always used at Lauds, and give that hour its name. The text of this Psalter is that commonly known as the Gallican. The name is misleading, for it is simply the second revision (A.D. 392) made by Jerome of the old Itala version originally used in Rome. Jerome's first revision of the Itala (A.D. 383), known as the Roman, is still used at St Peter's in Rome, but the "Gallican", thanks especially to St Gregory of Tours, who introduced it into Gaul in the 6th century, has ousted it everywhere else. The Antiphonary of Bangor proves that Ireland accepted the Gallican version in the 7th century, and the English Church did so in the 10th.

Following the 1911 reform, Matins was reduced to nine Psalms every day, with the other psalms redistributed throughout Prime, Terce, Sext, and Compline. For Sundays and special feasts Lauds and Vespers largely remained the same, Psalm 118 remained distributed at the Little Hours and Psalms 4, 90, and 130 were kept at Compline.

=== The Proprium de Tempore ===
This contains the office of the seasons of the Christian year (Advent to Trinity), a conception that only gradually grew up. There is here given the whole service for every Sunday and week-day, the proper antiphons, responsories, hymns, and especially the course of daily Scripture-reading, averaging about twenty verses a day, and (roughly) arranged thus: for Advent, Isaiah; Epiphany to Septuagesima, Pauline Epistles; Lent, patristic homilies (Genesis on Sundays); Passion-tide, Jeremiah; Easter to Whitsun, Acts, Catholic epistles and Apocalypse; Whitsun to August, Samuel and Kings; August to Advent, Wisdom books, Maccabees, Prophets.

=== The Proprium Sanctorum ===
This contains the lessons, psalms and liturgical formularies for saints' festivals, and depends on the days of the secular month. The readings of the second Nocturn are mainly hagiological biography, with homilies or papal documents for certain major feasts, particularly those of Jesus and Mary. Some of this material has been revised by Leo XIII, in view of archaeological and other discoveries. The third Nocturn consists of a homily on the Gospel which is read at that day's Mass. Covering a great stretch of time and space, they do for the worshipper in the field of church history what the Scripture readings do in that of biblical history.

=== The Commune Sanctorum ===
This comprises psalms, antiphons, lessons, &c., for feasts of various groups or classes (twelve in all); e.g. apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and the Blessed Virgin Mary. These offices are of very ancient date, and many of them were probably in origin proper to individual saints. They contain passages of great literary beauty. The lessons read at the third nocturn are patristic homilies on the Gospels, and together form a rough summary of theological instruction.

=== Extra services ===
Here are found the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Office of the Dead (obligatory on All Souls' Day), and offices peculiar to each diocese.

== Elements of the Hours ==
It has already been indicated, by reference to Matins, Lauds, &c., that not only each day, but each part of the day, has its own office, the day being divided into liturgical "hours." A detailed account of these will be found in the article Canonical Hours. Each of the hours of the office is composed of the same elements, and something must be said now of the nature of these constituent parts, of which mention has here and there been already made. They are: psalms (including canticles), antiphons, responsories, hymns, lessons, little chapters, versicles and collects.

=== Psalms ===
Before the 1911 reform, the multiplication of saints' festivals, with practically the same festal psalms, tended to repeat the about one-third of the Psalter, with a correspondingly rare recital of the remaining two-thirds. Following this reform, the entire Psalter is again generally recited each week, with the festal psalms restricted to only the highest-ranking feasts. As in the Greek usage and in the Benedictine, certain canticles like the Song of Moses (Exodus xv.), the Song of Hannah (1 Sam. ii.), the prayer of Habakkuk (iii.), the prayer of Hezekiah (Isaiah xxxviii.) and other similar Old Testament passages, and, from the New Testament, the Magnificat, the Benedictus and the Nunc dimittis, are admitted as psalms.

=== Antiphons ===
The antiphons are short liturgical forms, sometimes of biblical, sometimes of patristic origin, used to introduce a psalm. The term originally signified a chant by alternate choirs, but has quite lost this meaning in the Breviary.

=== Responsories ===
The responsories are similar in form to the antiphons, but come at the end of the psalm, being originally the reply of the choir or congregation to the precentor who recited the psalm.

=== Hymns ===
The hymns are short poems going back in part to the days of Prudentius, Synesius, Gregory of Nazianzus and Ambrose (4th and 5th centuries), but mainly the work of medieval authors.

=== Lessons ===
The lessons, as has been seen, are drawn variously from the Bible, the Acts of the Saints and the Fathers of the Church. In the primitive church, books afterwards excluded from the canon were often read, e.g. the letters of Clement of Rome and the Shepherd of Hermas. In later days the churches of Africa, having rich memorials of martyrdom, used them to supplement the reading of Scripture. Monastic influence accounts for the practice of adding to the reading of a biblical passage some patristic commentary or exposition. Books of homilies were compiled from the writings of SS. Augustine, Hilary, Athanasius, Isidore, Gregory the Great and others, and formed part of the library of which the Breviary was the ultimate compendium. In the lessons, as in the psalms, the order for special days breaks in upon the normal order of ferial offices and dislocates the scheme for consecutive reading. The lessons are read at Matins (which is subdivided into three nocturns).

=== Little chapters ===
The little chapters are very short lessons read at the other "hours."

=== Versicles ===
The versicles are short responsories used after the little chapters in the minor hours. They appear after the hymns in Lauds and Vespers.

=== Collects ===
The collects come at the close of the office and are short prayers summing up the supplications of the congregation. They arise out of a primitive practice on the part of the bishop (local president), examples of which are found in the Didach (Teaching of the Apostles) and in the letters of Clement of Rome and Cyprian. With the crystallization of church order improvisation in prayer largely gave place to set forms, and collections of prayers were made which later developed into Sacramentaries and Orationals. The collects of the Breviary are largely drawn from the Gelasian and other Sacramentaries, and they are used to sum up the dominant idea of the festival in connection with which they happen to be used.

==Celebration==
Before 1910 the difficulty of harmonizing the Proprium de Tempore and the Proprium Sanctorum, to which reference has been made, was only partly met in the thirty-seven chapters of general rubrics. Additional help was given by a kind of Catholic Churchman's Almanack, called the Ordo Recitandi Divini Officii, published in different countries and dioceses, and giving, under every day, minute directions for proper reading. In 1960 John XXIII simplified the rubrics governing the Breviary in order to make it easier to use.

Every cleric in Holy Orders and many other members of religious orders must publicly join in or privately read aloud (i.e. using the lips as well as the eyesit takes about two hours in this way) the whole of the Breviary services allotted for each day. In large churches where they were celebrated the services were usually grouped; e.g. Matins and Lauds (about 7.30 A.M.); Prime, Terce (High Mass), Sext, and None (about 10 A.M.); Vespers and Compline (4 P.M.); and from four to eight hours (depending on the amount of music and the number of high masses) are thus spent in choir. Lay use of the Breviary has varied throughout the Church's history. In some periods laymen did not use the Breviary as a manual of devotion to any great extent. The late Medieval period saw the recitation of certain hours of the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin, which was based on the Breviary in form and content, becoming popular among those who could read, and Bishop Challoner did much to popularise the hours of Sunday Vespers and Compline (albeit in English translation) in his 'Garden of the Soul' in the eighteenth century. The Liturgical Movement in the twentieth century saw renewed interest in the Offices of the Breviary and several popular editions were produced containing the vernacular as well as the Latin.

The complete pre-Pius X Roman Breviary was translated into English (by the Marquess of Bute in 1879; new ed. with a trans, of the Martyrology, 1908), French and German. Bute's version is noteworthy for its inclusion of the skilful renderings of the ancient hymns by J.H. Newman, J.M. Neale and others. Several editions of the Pius X Breviary were produced during the twentieth century, including a notable edition prepared with the assistance of the Sisters of Stanbrook Abbey in the 1950s. Two editions in English and Latin were produced in the mid-sixties, which conformed to the rubrics of 1960, published by Liturgical Press and Benziger in America. These used the Pius XII psalter. Baronius Press's revised edition of the Liturgical Press edition uses the older Gallican psalter of St. Jerome. This edition was published and released in 2012 for pre-orders only. In 2013, the publication has resumed printing and is available on Baronius web site. 

Under Pope Benedict XVI's motu proprio Summorum Pontificum, Roman Catholic bishops, priests, and deacons are again permitted to use the 1962 edition of the Roman Breviary, promulgated by Pope John XXIII to satisfy their obligation to recite the Divine Office every day.

In 2008, an i-breviary was launched, which combines the ancient breviaries with the latest computer technology.

==See also==
* Book of Hours
* Canonical Hours
* Horologion
* Little Office of Our Lady
* Liturgical books of the Roman Rite
* Liturgy of the Hours

==Notes==

==References==
* F. Cabrol, Introduction aux tudes liturgiques
* Probst, Kirchenlex. ii., s.v. "Brevier";
* Bumer, Geschichte des Breviers (Freiburg, 1895)
* P. Batiffol, L'Histoire du brviaire romain (Paris, 1893; Eng. tr.)
* Baudot, Le Brviaire romain (1907).
* A complete bibliography is appended to the article by F. Cabrol in the Catholic Encyclopaedia, vol. ii. (1908).
* Kellerbook.com: Information concerning the development of breviaries and psalters]
* A history of the Divine Office/Breviary from EWTN
* 

==External links==
*Psalter Schemas (Catholic), from 1900-Present

===Medieval breviaries===
*14th century breviary written in Gothic Textualis script, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Libraries

===Breviaries according the Curial or Roman use (pre-Vatican II)===
*The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Winter (part 1)
*The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Spring (part 2)
*The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Summer (part 3)
*The 1908 Roman Breviary in English (Pre-Pius X Psalter), Autumn/Fall (part 4)
*The 1961 Roman Breviary in Latin
*The 1911 Roman Breviary in Latin and English
*Canonical Hours according to the 1911 Breviarium Romanum without the festal propers of Common of the Saints
*Breviarium Romanum cum Psalterium, proprio,& Officiis Sanctorum ad usum cleri Basilicae Vaticanae, pars Autumnalis (1740)
*Breviarium romanum ex decreto sacrosancti Concilii tridentini restitutum (1888), Spring
*Breviarium Romanum ex decreto Sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum,Pars Verna(1799)
*Breviarium Romanum ex decreto Sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum,Pars Hiemalis(1799)
*Breviarium Romanum ex decreto Sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, Pars Autumnalis (1799)
*Breviarium Romanum, Pars Autumnalis (1828)
*Breviarium Romanum, Pars Aestiva (1828)
*Breviarium Romanum, Pars Autumnalis (1861)
*The Breviary of Quignonez (1537)
*Divinum Officium in Latin and English

===Breviaries according Pre-Tridentine usages outside of Rome (pre-Vatican II)===
*Breviarium Ordinis fratrum beatissimae Virginis Mariae de monte Carmelo, Pars Heimalis(Carmelite Breviary)
*Breviarium Ordinis fratrum beatissimae Virginis Mariae de monte Carmelo, Pars Aestiva (Carmelite Breviary)
*Breviarium Cisterciense Reformatum (The Cistercian Breviary)
*Breviarium monasticum juxta regulam s. patris Benedicti, ad usum, Pars Verna (The Monastic Breviary according to the Benedictine Usage)
*Breviarium monasticum juxta regulam s. patris Benedicti, ad usum, Pars Autumnalis
*Breviarium monasticum juxta regulam s. patris Benedicti, ad usum, Pars Hyemalis
*Breviarium monasticum juxta regulam s. patris Benedicti, ad usum, Pars Aestiva
*Breviarium Aberdonense (The Aberdeen Breviary)
*The Colbertine Breviary
*The Hereford Breviary
*Breviarium ad usum insignis ecclesiae Sarum (The Sarum Breviary)
* Breviarium ad usum insignis Ecclesie Eboracensis (The York Breviary)
*Breviary offices from lauds to compline inclusive, tr. from the Sarum book supplemented by Gallican and Monastic Uses
*Breviaries according the diocesan usages of France including that of Nantes, Orleans, Rheims, etc.
*Breviarium Parisiense, Pars Verna (The Paris Breviary)
*Breviarium Gothicum (The Mozarabic Breviary part 1)
*Breviarium Gothicum (The Mozarabic Breviary part 2)
*Breviarium Sacrum Ordinum Cartusiensis (The Carthusian Breviary)
*Breviarium Ambrosianum
*Breviarium juxta ritum sacri Ordinis prdicatorum (Dominican Breviary)
*Breviarium canonicorum regularium Ordinis Prmonstratensis. Pars hyemalis (Praemonstratensian Breviary)

===Contemporary (i.e. post-Vatican II) breviaries===
*Universalis Online Breviary
*Liturgy of the Hours by eBreviaryA5 size booklet arrangement for those requiring print-outs, whether for individual Hours or all the Hours of a day combined
*Liturgy of the Carthusian Order of the Catholic Church
*Divine Office

===Non-Catholic breviaries===
*The Treasury of Daily Prayer, the classic Christian hours of prayer, as used within the Lutheran Church since the 16th century, with Psalms, hymns, Scripture and readings, for every day.
*The Missio Dei BreviarySimpler and relatively accessible breviary composed from an Anabaptist theology.
*The Anglican Breviary: an adaptation of the 1911 Roman Breviary incorporating numerous modifications from Anglican sources
*Brotherhood Prayer Book, "a Lutheran book of liturgical hours with all 150 Psalms and Old Testament Canticles in English and pointed with the Reformation Gregorian tones."

*

[[Boomer]]

Boomer may refer to:

== People ==
* Boomer (surname)
* Boomer (nickname)

== Places ==
* Boomer Township, Pottawattamie County, Iowa
* Boomer Township, Wilkes County, North Carolina
* Boomer, West Virginia, a census-designated place
* Boomer Lake, an artificial reservoir in Stillwater, Oklahoma
* Boomers! Parks, a theme park / family entertainment center chain

== Animals ==
* An adult male kangaroo, nicknamed "boomer" in Australia
* An alternate name for the Mountain Beaver

==Fictional characters==
=== Comics ===
* Owen Mercer, the current Captain Boomerang in the DC Comics universe, nicknamed "Boomer"
* Rotor Walrus, a character from Sonic the Hedgehog comics, nicknamed "Boomer" in early issues
* Tabitha Smith, a Marvel Comics comic book superhero, formerly called Boomer

=== Video games ===
* Boomers, a faction of xenophobic people in .
* The Boomer, a recurring Special Infected in the Left 4 Dead series.
* Boomers, heavily armored soldiers of the locust horde in the Gears of war series.
* Boomer, a character in the Skylanders video game, known for wielding explosives enthusiastically.
* Boomer, a playable clown character in the Ballz fighting game
* Boomer, a character that appeared in 
* Boomer, a pixl in the game Super Paper Mario

=== Television ===
* Boomer, an anthropomorphic tug boat from the 1989 TV series, Tugs
* Boomer (Bubblegum Crisis), a fictional synthetic life form developed by Katsuhito Stingray in the anime series Bubblegum Crisis
* Boomer (Lilo & Stitch), experiment 288 from Lilo & Stitch: The Series
* Lieutenant Boomer, a character in the 1978 television series Battlestar Galactica
** Sharon Valerii, a character in the 2004 re-imagined series Battlestar Galactica, known by her call-sign "Boomer"
* Boomer, one of the two Targetmaster partners of Autobot chemist Quickmix in Transformers
* Boomer, the blond hair member of the Rowdyruff Boys, a trio of villains in the animated series The Powerpuff Girls
* Boomer, the title character, a dog, in the 1980 TV series Here's Boomer
* Boomer is the name of Jasmine Dubrow's (played by Vivica A. Fox) dog in the movie Independence Day
* Boomer Parker, one of the two protagonists of Pair of Kings
* Boomer, Tom DeLonge's character in the video for First Date by Blink-182
* Boomer, one of the main protagonists in the TV series Redakai: Conquer the Kairu.

=== Others ===
* Boomer, a woodpecker in the 1981 animated Disney film The Fox and the Hound
* Captain Boomer, a British whaling ship captain who appears briefly in Herman Melville's Moby Dick
* Boomer, the redhead tomboy from the Burger King Kids Club

== Sports ==
=== Teams ===
* Australia men's national basketball team, officially nicknamed "Australian Boomers"
* Bulleen Boomers, a basketball club based in Bulleen, a north-eastern suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
* Calgary Boomers, a former professional association football team in Calgary, Alberta, Canada
* Melbourne Boomers, an Australian women's basketball club
* Schaumburg Boomers, a Frontier League baseball team based in Schaumburg, Illinois

=== Mascots ===
* Boomer (K9) the dog, the Port Vale F.C. mascot
* Boomer (Pacers Mascot), the mascot of the Indiana Pacers
* Boomer the Bear, the mascot for the Spokane Chiefs WHL hockey team
* Boomer and Sooner, the two mascots of the University of Oklahoma
* Buzz and Boomer, the official mascots of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers
* Boomer the Bulldog, the mascot of Dean College sports

== In the military ==
* A ballistic missile submarine in American naval slang
* VT-27, a US Navy training squadron nicknamed the "Boomers"

==Other uses==
* Boomers (Oklahoma settlers), advocates for the opening of the Unassigned Lands of Oklahoma Territory for settlement
* The Boomers (band), a Canadian rock band from Ontario
* Boomer, a freeware pharmacokinetic modeling software

== See also ==
* Baby boomer, someone who was born during the period following World War II
* The Boomer Project, a market research firm, headquartered in Richmond, Virginia
* Boom (disambiguation)
* 



[[B. F. Skinner]]

Burrhus Frederic (B. F.) Skinner (March 20, 1904  August 18, 1990) was an American psychologist, behaviorist, author, inventor, and social philosopher. The science of human behavior is used to eliminate poverty, sexual oppression, government as we know it, create a lifestyle without that such as war. https://behavioranalysishistory.pbworks.com/w/page/2039033/Skinner%2C%20Burrhus%20Frederic He was the Edgar Pierce Professor of Psychology at Harvard University from 1958 until his retirement in 1974. Muskingum.edu 

Skinner invented the operant conditioning chamber, also known as the Skinner Box. Schacter D, L., Gilbert D, T., & Wegner D, M. (2011). Psychology. (2 ed.). New York: Worth publishers. He was a firm believer of the idea that human free will was actually an illusion and any human action was the result of the consequences of that same action. If the consequences were bad, there was a high chance that the action would not be repeated; however if the consequences were good, the actions that led to it would be reinforced. Schacter, Daniel L., and Gilbert Daniel. (2011). Psychology. (2 ed.). New York, 2011. Web. 22 Mar. 2013. He called this the principle of reinforcement. 

He innovated his own philosophy of science called radical behaviorism, B. F. Skinner, About Behaviorism and founded his own school of experimental research psychologythe experimental analysis of behavior, coining the term operant conditioning. His analysis of human behavior culminated in his work Verbal Behavior, as well as his philosophical manifesto Walden Two, both of which have recently seen enormous increase in interest experimentally and in applied settings. See Verbal Behavior for research citations. Contemporary academia considers Skinner a pioneer of modern behaviorism along with John B. Watson and Ivan Pavlov.

Skinner discovered and advanced the rate of response as a dependent variable in psychological research. He invented the cumulative recorder to measure rate of responding as part of his highly influential work on schedules of reinforcement. B. F. Skinner, (1938) The Behavior of Organisms. C. B. Ferster & B. F. Skinner, (1957) Schedules of Reinforcement. In a June 2002 survey, Skinner was listed as the most influential psychologist of the 20th century. He was a prolific author who published 21 books and 180 articles. Lafayette.edu, accessed on 5-20-07. BFSkinner.org, Smith Morris Bibliography 

== Biography ==
The Skinners' grave at Mount Auburn Cemetery
Skinner was born in Susquehanna, Pennsylvania to William and Grace Skinner. His father was a lawyer. He became an atheist after a Christian teacher tried to assuage his fear of the hell that his grandmother described. "Within a year I had gone to Miss Graves to tell her that I no longer believed in God. 'I know,' she said, 'I have been through that myself.' But her strategy misfired: I never went through it." B.F. Skinner, pp. 387-413, E.G. Boring and G. Lindzey's A History of Psychology in Autobiography (Vol. 5), New York: Appleton Century-Crofts, 1967. His brother Edward, two and a half years younger, died at age sixteen of a cerebral hemorrhage. He attended Hamilton College in New York with the intention of becoming a writer. He found himself at a disadvantage at Hamilton College with many due to his intellectual attitude. B.F. Skinner: A Life . by Daniel W. Bjork: 9781557984166: Amazon.com: Books. N.p., n.d. Web. 04 June 2013. While attending, he joined Lambda Chi Alpha Fraternity. He wrote for the school paper, but as an atheist, he was critical of the religious school he attended. He also attended Harvard University after receiving his B.A. in English literature in 1926 where he would later research, teach, and eventually become a prestigious board member. While at Harvard, he invented his prototype for the Skinner Box. Also, a fellow student Fred Keller, convinced Skinner he could make an experimental science from the study of behavior. This led Skinner to join Keller and they created different tools for small experiments. After graduation, he unsuccessfully tried to write a great novel while he lived with his parents, which he later called the Dark Years. He soon became disillusioned with his literary skills despite encouragement from widely renowned literary genius Robert Frost and concluded that he had little world experience and no strong personal perspective from which to write. His encounter with John B. Watson's Behaviorism led him into graduate study in psychology and to the development of his own operant behaviorism. 

Skinner received a Ph.D. from Harvard in 1931, and remained there as a researcher until 1936. He then taught at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis and later at Indiana University, where he was chair of the psychology department from 19461947, before returning to Harvard as a tenured professor in 1948. He remained at Harvard for the rest of his life. In 1973 Skinner was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto II. 

In 1936, Skinner married Yvonne Blue. The couple had two daughters, Julie (m. Vargas) and Deborah (m. Buzan). He died of leukemia on August 18, 1990, http://www.humanistsofutah.org/humanists/bfskinner.html and is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Bjork, D.W. (1993). B.F. Skinner, A Life. New York: Basic Books. Skinner continued to write and work until just before his death. A few days before Skinner died, he was given a lifetime achievement award by the American Psychological Association and delivered a 15-minute address concerning his work. 

A controversial figure, Skinner has been depicted in many different ways. Much of Skinners criticism derived from his penchant for attempting to apply science proven in laboratory environments at a universal level.

== Theory ==

Skinner called his particular brand of behaviorism "Radical" behaviorism. About Behaviorism Ch. 1 Causes of Behaviour  3 Radical Behaviorism B. F. Skinner 1974 ISBN 0-394-71618-3 Radical behaviorism is the philosophy of the science of behavior. It seeks to understand behavior as a function of environmental histories of reinforcing consequences. Such a functional analysis makes it capable of producing technologies of behavior (see Applied behavior analysis). This applied behaviorism lies on the opposite side of the ideological spectrum as the field of cognitive science. Unlike less austere behaviorism, it does not accept private events such as thinking, perceptions, and unobservable emotions in a causal account of an organism's behavior

 The position can be stated as follows: what is felt or introspectively observed is not some nonphysical world of consciousness, mind, or mental life but the observer's own body. This does not mean, as I shall show later, that introspection is a kind of psychological research, nor does it mean (and this is the heart of the argument) that what are felt or introspectively observed are the causes of the behavior. An organism behaves as it does because of its current structure, but most of this is out of reach of introspection. At the moment we must content ourselves, as the methodological behaviorist insists, with a person's genetic and environment histories. What are introspectively observed are certain collateral products of those histories.
...
In this way we repair the major damage wrought by mentalism. When what a person does attributed to what is going on inside him, investigation is brought to an end. Why explain the explanation? For twenty five hundred years people have been preoccupied with feelings and mental life, but only recently has any interest been shown in a more precise analysis of the role of the environment. Ignorance of that role led in the first place to mental fictions, and it has been perpetuated by the explanatory practices to which they gave rise. ibid. pp. 1820 of the paperback edition which had the redacted typo s/it/is/. 

Skinner stood at the opposite position from humanistic psychology for his whole career, and denied humans possessing freedom and dignity as well as evidenced in his book Beyond Freedom and Dignity. Most of his theories were supposed to be based on self-observation, which caused him to become a supporter for behaviorism. Much of this self-observed theory stemmed from Thorndikes Puzzle Box, a direct antecedent to Skinners Box. The psychologist further expanded on Thorndikes earlier work by introducing the concept of Reinforcement to Thorndikes Law of Effect. See B.F. Skinner: A Life for research citations. Skinner was an advocate of behavioral engineering and he thought that people should be controlled through the systematic allocation of external rewards. Thomas Grenning "B. F. Skinner: 1904-1990" Journal of Humanistic Psychology vol.31 no.2 Spring,1991 112-113 Skinner believed that behavior is maintained from one condition to another through similar or same consequences across these situations. In short, behaviors are causal factors that are influenced by the consequences. His contribution to the understanding of behavior influenced many other scientists to explain social behavior and contingencies. Carlson, Neil and et al. 2010. "Psychology the Science of Behaviour", p. 447. Pearson Canada, United States of America. ISBN 978-0-205-64524-4. 

Reinforcement is a central concept in Behaviorism, and was seen as a central mechanism in the shaping and control of behavior. A common misconception is that negative reinforcement is synonymous with punishment. This misconception is rather pervasive, and is commonly found in even scholarly accounts of Skinner and his contributions. To be clear, while positive reinforcement is the strengthening of behavior by the application of some event (e.g., praise after some behavior is performed), negative reinforcement is the strengthening of behavior by the removal or avoidance of some aversive event (e.g., opening and raising an umbrella over your head on a rainy day is reinforced by the cessation of rain falling on you).

Both types of reinforcement strengthen behavior, or increase the probability of a behavior reoccurring; the difference is in whether the reinforcing event is something applied (positive reinforcement) or something removed or avoided (negative reinforcement). Punishment and extinction have the effect of weakening behavior, or decreasing the future probability of a behavior's occurrence, by the application of an aversive stimulus/event (positive punishment or punishment by contingent stimulation), removal of a desirable stimulus (negative punishment or punishment by contingent withdrawal), or the absence of a rewarding stimulus, which causes the behavior to stop (extinction).

Skinner also sought to understand the application of his theory in the broadest behavioral context as it applies to living organisms, namely natural selection. 

== Schedules of reinforcement ==

Part of Skinner's analysis of behavior involved not only the power of a single instance of reinforcement, but the effects of particular schedules of reinforcement over time.

The most notable schedules of reinforcement presented by Skinner were interval (fixed or variable) and ratio (fixed or variable).

* Continuous reinforcement  constant delivery of reinforcement for an action; every time a specific action was performed the subject instantly and always received a reinforcement. This method is impractical to use, and the reinforced behavior is prone to extinction.

* Interval Schedules : based on the time intervals between reinforcements Psychology 2nd Edition 
**Fixed Interval Schedule (FI) : An operant conditioning principle in which reinforcements are presented at fixed time periods, provided that the appropriate response is made.
**Variable Interval Schedule (VI) : An operant conditioning principle in which behaviour is reinforced based on an average time that has expired since the last reinforcement.
Both FI and VI tend to produce slow, methodical responses because the reinforcements follow a time scale that is independent of how many responses occur. 

*Ratio Schedules : based on the ratio of responses to reinforcements 
**Fixed Ratio Schedule (FR) : An operant conditioning principle in which reinforcement is delivered after a specific number of responses have been made.
**Variable Ratio Schedule (VR) : An operant conditioning principle in which the delivery of reinforcement is based on a particular average number of responses (ex. slot machines).
VR produce slightly higher rates of responding than FR because organism doesnt know when next reinforcement is. The higher the ratio, the higher the response rate tends to be. Daniel L. Schacter, Daniel T. Gilbert, Daniel M. Wegner.(2011).Schedules of Reinforcement. Psychology second edition. 

== Inventions ==

=== Air crib ===
In an effort to help his wife cope with the day-to-day tasks of child rearing due to the birth of their second child, Skinner thought he might be able to improve upon the standard crib. He invented the 'air-crib' to meet this challenge. An 'air-crib' Air-crib photograph in "What Man Can Make of Man", by James Bennet. The Atlantic, June 2012. (also known as a 'baby tender' or humorously as an 'heir conditioner') is an easily cleaned, temperature and humidity-controlled crib Skinner designed to assist in the raising of babies.

Skinner designed this initial, preliminary prototype of the Air-Crib because he thought it would help parents who were awakened by their crying babies at night due to cold temperatures, and a need for essential clothing, or sheets. Despite allegations to the contrary, Skinners daughter Deborah claims to never have felt abused or neglected by use of the Air-Crib. He thought doing so would alleviate troublesome environmental issues. Holland, J. (1992). B.F Skinner. Pittsburgh: American Psychologist.
 

It was one of his most controversial inventions, and was popularly mischaracterized as cruel and experimental. Snopes.com "One Man and a Baby Box", accessed on 12-29-07. The crib was often compared to his operant conditioning chamber, crudely known as the "Skinner Box." This association with a system of experimentation and pellet rewards quashed any success. It was designed to make early childcare simpler (by reducing laundry, diaper rash, cradle cap, etc.), while encouraging the baby to be more confident, mobile, comfortable, healthy and therefore less prone to cry. Babies sleep and will sometimes play in air cribs but apart from newborns, most of a baby's waking hours will be spent out of the crib. Reportedly it had some success in these goals. Air-cribs were later unsuccessfully commercially manufactured by several companies. 

A 2004 book by Lauren Slater, entitled Slater, L. (2004) Skinner's Box: Great Psychology Experiments of the Twentieth Century|Opening Skinner's Box: Great Psychological Experiments of the Twentieth Century], London, Bloomsbury caused much controversy by mentioning the common rumors that Skinner had used his baby daughter Deborah in some of his experiments and that she had subsequently committed suicide. Although Slater's book stated that the rumors were false, Slater also allowed the reader to believe that Deborah had disappeared. A reviewer in The Observer in March 2004 then misquoted Slater's books as supporting the rumors. This review was read by Deborah Skinner (now Deborah Buzan, an artist and writer living in London) who wrote a vehement riposte in The Guardian. 

=== Operant conditioning chamber ===

While a researcher at Harvard, Thorne, B. M., & Henley, T. B. (2001). Connections in the history and systems of psychology. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. B. F. Skinner invented the operant conditioning chamber, popularly referred to as the Skinner box, Popplestone, J. A., & McPherson, M. W. (1994). An illustrated history of American psychology (2nd ed.). Akron, OH: The University of Akron Press. to measure responses of organisms (most often, rats and pigeons) and their orderly interactions with the environment. The box had a lever and a food tray, and a hungry rat could get food delivered to the tray pressing the lever. Skinner observed that when a rat was put in the box, it would wander around, sniffing and exploring, and would usually press the bar by accident, at which point a food pellet would drop into the tray. After that happened, the rate of bar pressing would increase dramatically and remain high until the rat was no longer hungry.

Skinner discovered that consequences for the organism played a large role in how the organism responded in certain situations. Benjamin, L. T. (2007). A brief history of modern psychology. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. For instance, when the rat would pull the lever it would receive food. Subsequently, the rat made frequent pulls on the lever. Thorne, B. M., & Henley, T. B. (2001).Connections in the history and systems of psychology. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. Negative reinforcement was also exemplified by Skinner placing rats into an electrified chamber that delivered unpleasant shocks. Levers to cut the power were placed inside these boxes. By running a current through the operant conditioning chamber, Skinner noticed that the rats, after accidentally pressing the lever in a frantic bid to escape, quickly learned the effects of implementing the lever and consequently used this knowledge to stop the currents both during and prior to electrical shock. These two learned responses are known as Escape Learning and Avoidance Learning. 
The operant chamber for pigeons involves a plastic disc in which the pigeon pecks in order to open a drawer filled with grains. Edward K, Fancher, R.(1995). B. F. Skinner: A Life-Two Views. Contemporary Psychology: A journal of Reviews. 40(8): 727727. The Skinner box led to the principle of reinforcement, which is the probability of something occurring based on the consequences of a behavior. Thorne, B. M., & Henley, T. B. (2001) 

This device was an example of his lifelong ability to invent useful devices, which included whimsical devices in his childhood B. F. Skinner, (1984) Particulars of My Life. Devices included a potato shooting machine and a perpetual motion machine, as well as a device to separate ripe from unripe berries. to the cumulative recorder to measure the rate of response of organisms in an operant chamber. Even in old age, Skinner invented a Thinking Aid to assist in writing. 

=== Cumulative recorder ===
The cumulative recorder is an instrument used to automatically record behavior graphically. Its graphing mechanism consisted of a rotating drum of paper equipped with a marking needle. The needle would start at the bottom of the page and the drum would turn the roll of paper horizontally. This cumulative recorder was used for the Skinner box to record the rat's behavior. This apparatus produced consistent and accurate records of behavior. 

=== Teaching machine ===
The teaching machine, a mechanical invention to automate the task of programmed instruction

The teaching machine was a mechanical device whose purpose was to administer a curriculum of programmed instruction. In one incarnation, it housed a list of questions, and a mechanism through which the learner could respond to each question. Upon delivering a correct answer, the learner would be rewarded. 

Skinner advocated the use of teaching machines for a broad range of students (e.g., preschool aged to adult) and instructional purposes (e.g., reading and music). Another of the multiple machines he envisioned could teach rhythm:

:A relatively simple device supplies the necessary contingencies. The student taps a rhythmic pattern in unison with the device. "Unison" is specified very loosely at first (the student can be a little early or late at each tap) but the specifications are slowly sharpened. The process is repeated for various speeds and patterns. In another arrangement, the student echoes rhythmic patterns sounded by the machine, though not in unison, and again the specifications for an accurate reproduction are progressively sharpened. Rhythmic patterns can also be brought under the control of a printed score. (Skinner, 1961. Teaching machines. Scientific American, 205, 90-112. doi:10.2307/1926170, p. 381).

The teaching machine had such instructional potential because it provided immediate and regular reinforcement that maintained students interest, as the material in the machine always novel (Skinner, 1961, p. 387). In this way, a students attention could be maintained without the use of aversive controls. The efficiency of the teaching machine resulted from its automatic provision of reinforcement, individualized pace setting, and a coherent instructional sequence for the student. It engaged students and allowed them to learn by doing.

Teaching machines, though perhaps rudimentary, were not rigid instruments of instruction. They could be adjusted and improved based upon reports of students performance. For example, if a students report showed numerous incorrect responses, then the machine could be reprogrammed to provide less advanced prompts or questions- the idea being that students acquire behaviors most efficiently when their error rate is minimized. Along these lines, multiple choice formats were not best suited for teaching machines because contingencies of reinforcement would be left to chance; moreover, this format could increase student mistakes and induce erroneous behaviors.

Not only useful in teaching explicit skills, machines could also promote the development of a repertoire of behaviors Skinner called self-management. Self-management refers to how students think- how they attend to the environment with the view of responding appropriately to stimuli. Machines give students the opportunity to first pay attention before receiving a reward as reinforcement. This is in stark contrast with what Skinner noticed as the classroom practice of initially capturing students attention (e.g., with a lively video) and delivering a reward (e.g., entertainment) before they have actually done attended- a practice which actually counters the development of self-management and fails to correctly apply reinforcements for correct behavior.
What Skinner referred to as a teaching machine would probably be akin to a computer software program today that provided highly structured and incremental instruction. Skinners influence on such machines is undeniable. He was the first to pioneer the use of machines in the classroom, especially at the primary level. Today teaching machines such as Language Labs have been incorporated into modern education. Though it was just one of a number of inventions, it embodies much of Skinners theory of learning and has wide-reaching implications for education in general and classroom instruction in particular. 

There has been a resurgence of interest in the notion of the teaching machine and its relationship to adaptive learning systems of the early 21st Century Philip McRae, Ph.D. 

=== Pigeon-guided missile ===

The US Navy required a weapon effective against the German Bismarck class battleships. Although missile and TV technology existed, the size of the primitive guidance systems available rendered any weapon ineffective. Project Pigeon Skinner, B. F. (1960). Pigeons in a pelican. American Psychologist, 15, 2837. Reprinted in: Skinner, B. F. (1972). Cumulative record (3rd ed.). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,pp. 574591. Described throughout Skinner, B. F. (1979). The shaping of a behaviorist: Part two of an autobiography. New York: Knopf. was potentially an extremely simple and effective solution, but despite an effective demonstration it was abandoned when more conventional solutions became available and in particular the radar system. The project centered on dividing the nose cone of a missile into three compartments, and encasing a pigeon in each. Each compartment used a lens to project an image of what was in front of the missile onto a screen. The pigeons would peck toward the object, thereby directing the missile. 

Skinner complained "our problem was no one would take us seriously." 
The point is perhaps best explained in terms of human psychology (i.e., few people would trust a pigeon to guide a missile no matter how reliable it proved). The project was also featured by 

=== Verbal summator ===
A device for discovering "latent speech", Skinner experimented with a device he called the "verbal summator." Although Skinner was not a supporter of the concepts of personal assessment or projective testing, he eventually created a tool that was similar to an auditory version of the Rorschach inkblots. This was later known as the verbal summator. This invention was created in order to project subconscious thoughts, much like the inkblots have done. He used this device to create data for his verbal behavior theory. Other researchers later saw this device as a chance to conduct research and for applied purposes for research and applied purposes. The concept of the verbal summator sparked interest within the scientific community and eventually led to other new tests: the tautophone test, the auditory apperception test, and the Azzageddi test and has inspired many others. 

== Verbal Behavior ==

Challenged by Alfred North Whitehead during a casual discussion while at Harvard to provide an account of a randomly provided piece of verbal behavior, B. F. Skinner, (1957) Verbal Behavior. The account in the appendix is that he asked Skinner to explain why he said "No black scorpion,Carter is falling upon this table." Skinner set about attempting to extend his then-new functional, inductive, approach to the complexity of human verbal behavior. Developed over two decades, his work appeared as the culmination of the William James lectures in the book Verbal Behavior. Although Noam Chomsky was highly critical of Verbal Behavior, he conceded that "S-R psychology" (which Skinner's system was most certainly not: operant conditioning consists of a stimulus (or antecedent) (S) emitting a response (R) which then becomes more or less likely in the future dependent upon its consequence (C)) A. N. Chomsky, (1957) "A Review of BF Skinner's Verbal Behavior." in the preface, 2nd paragraph was a reason for giving it "a review." Verbal Behavior had an uncharacteristically slow reception, partly as a result of Chomsky's review, paired with Skinner's neglect to address or rebut any of Chomsky's condemnations. Richelle, M. (1993). B. F. Skinner: A reappraisal. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Skinner's peers may have been slow to adopt and consider the conventions within Verbal Behavior due to its lack of experimental evidenceunlike the empirical density that marked Skinner's previous work. However, Skinner's functional analysis of verbal behavior has seen a resurgence of interest in applied settings. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior (Journal) 

== Influence on education ==

Skinner influenced education as well as psychology in both his ideology and literature. In Skinners view, education has two major purposes: (1) to teach repertoires of both verbal and nonverbal behavior; and (2) to encourage students to display an interest in instruction. He endeavored to bring students behavior under the control of the environment by reinforcing it only when particular stimuli were present. Because he believed that human behavior could be affected by small consequences, something as simple as the opportunity to move forward after completing one stage of an activity could prove reinforcing (Skinner, 1961, p. 380). Skinner favored active learning in the sense that students were not merely passive recipients of information doled out by teachers. He was convinced that a student had to take action; to acquire behavior, the student must engage in behavior (Skinner, 1961, p. 389).

Moreover, Skinner was quoted as saying "Teachers must learn how to teach ... they need only to be taught more effective ways of teaching." Skinner asserted that positive reinforcement is more effective at changing and establishing behavior than punishment, with obvious implications for the then widespread practice of rote learning and punitive discipline in education. Skinner also suggests that the main thing people learn from being punished is how to avoid punishment.

In The Technology of Teaching, Skinner has a chapter on why teachers fail (pages 93113): Essentially he says that teachers have not been given an in-depth understanding of teaching and learning. Without knowing the science underpinning teaching, teachers fall back on procedures that work poorly or not at all, such as:
:* using aversive techniques (which produce escape and avoidance and undesirable emotional effects);
:* relying on telling and explaining ("Unfortunately, a student does not learn simply when he is shown or told." p. 103);
:* failing to adapt learning tasks to the student's current level;
:* failing to provide positive reinforcement frequently enough.

Skinner suggests that any age-appropriate skill can be taught. The steps are
#Clearly specify the action or performance the student is to learn to do.
#Break down the task into small achievable steps, going from simple to complex.
#Let the student perform each step, reinforcing correct actions.
#Adjust so that the student is always successful until finally the goal is reached.
#Transfer to intermittent reinforcement to maintain the student's performance.
Skinner's views on education are extensively presented in his book The Technology of Teaching. It is also reflected in Fred S. Keller's Personalized System of Instruction and Ogden R. Lindsley's Precision Teaching.

Skinner associated punishment with avoidance. For example, he thought a child may be forced to practice playing his instrument as a form of seemingly productive discipline. This child would then associate practicing with punishment and thus learn to hate and avoid practicing the instrument. Additionally, teachers who use educational activities to punish children could cause inclinations towards rebellious behavior such as vandalism and opposition to education. 

== Walden Two and Beyond Freedom and Dignity ==
Skinner is popularly known mainly for his books Walden Two and Beyond Freedom and Dignity for which he made the cover of TIME Magazine. "B.F. Skinner Sep. 20, 1971." http://www.time.com/time/covers/0,16641,19710920,00.html. Web. The former describes a visit to a fictional "experimental community" B. F. Skinner, (1968). "The Design of Experimental Communities", International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (Volume 16). New York: Macmillan, 1968, pages 271-275. in 1940s United States, where the productivity and happiness of the citizens is far in advance of that in the outside world because of their practice of scientific social planning and use of operant conditioning in the raising of children.

Walden Two, like Thoreau's Walden, champions a lifestyle that does not support war or foster competition and social strife. It encourages a lifestyle of minimal consumption, rich social relationships, personal happiness, satisfying work and leisure. Ramsey, Richard David, Morning Star: The Values-Communication of Skinner's Walden Two, Ph.D. dissertation, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, December 1979, available from University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, MI. Attempts to analyze Walden Two, Beyond Freedom and Dignity, and other Skinner works in the context of Skinner's life; lists over 500 sources. In 1967, Kat Kinkade founded the intentional community Twin Oaks, using Walden Two as a blueprint. The community is still in existence today and continues to use the Planner-Manager system and other aspects of the original book in its self-governance.

In Beyond Freedom and Dignity, Skinner suggests that a technology of behavior could help to make a better society. We would, however, have to accept that an autonomous agent is not the driving force of our actions. Skinner offers alternatives to punishment and challenges his readers to use science and modern technology to construct a better society.

== Political views ==
Skinner's political writings emphasized his hopes that an effective and human science of behavioral control  a technology of human behavior  could help problems unsolved by earlier approaches or aggravated by advances in technology such as the atomic bomb. One of Skinner's stated goals was to prevent humanity from destroying itself. see Beyond Freedom and Dignity, 1974 for example He comprehended political control as aversive or non-aversive, with the purpose to control a population. Skinner supported the use of positive reinforcement as a means of coercion, citing Jean-Jacques Rousseau's novel as an example of freedom literature that "did not fear the power of positive reinforcement". 

Skinner's book, Walden Two, presents a vision of a decentralized, localized society, which applies a practical, scientific approach and futuristically advanced behavioral expertise to peacefully deal with social problems. Skinner's utopia is both a thought experiment and a rhetorical piece. In his book, Skinner answers the problem that exists in many utopian novels  "What is the Good Life?" In Walden Two, the answer is a life of friendship, health, art, a healthy balance between work and leisure, a minimum of unpleasantness, and a feeling that one has made worthwhile contributions to one's society. This was to be achieved through behavioral technology, which could offer alternatives to coercion, as good science applied correctly would help society, and allow all people to cooperate with each other peacefully. Skinner described his novel as "my New Atlantis", in reference to Bacon's utopia. A matter of Consequences, p. 412. He opposed corporal punishment in the school, and wrote a letter to the California Senate that helped lead it to a ban on spanking. 

== Superstitious pigeons ==
One of Skinner's experiments examined the formation of superstition in one of his favorite experimental animals, the pigeon. Skinner placed a series of hungry pigeons in a cage attached to an automatic mechanism that delivered food to the pigeon "at regular intervals with no reference whatsoever to the bird's behavior." He discovered that the pigeons associated the delivery of the food with whatever chance actions they had been performing as it was delivered, and that they subsequently continued to perform these same actions. ECON 252, Lecture 8 by Professor Robert Schiller at Yale University 

Skinner suggested that the pigeons behaved as if they were influencing the automatic mechanism with their "rituals" and that this experiment shed light on human behavior:

Modern behavioral psychologists have disputed Skinner's "superstition" explanation for the behaviors he recorded. Subsequent research (e.g. Staddon and Simmelhag, 1971), while finding similar behavior, failed to find support for Skinner's "adventitious reinforcement" explanation for it. By looking at the timing of different behaviors within the interval, Staddon and Simmelhag were able to distinguish two classes of behavior: the terminal response, which occurred in anticipation of food, and interim responses, that occurred earlier in the interfood interval and were rarely contiguous with food. Terminal responses seem to reflect classical (as opposed to operant) conditioning, rather than adventitious reinforcement, guided by a process like that observed in 1968 by Brown and Jenkins in their "autoshaping" procedures. The causation of interim activities (such as the schedule-induced polydipsia seen in a similar situation with rats) also cannot be traced to adventitious reinforcement and its details are still obscure (Staddon, 1977). Timberlake & Lucas, (1985) "JEAB" 

This experiment was also repeated on humans, in a less controlled manner, on the popular British TV series Trick or Treat, leading to similar conclusions to Skinner. 

== B.F. Skinner Quotations ==

"I do not admire myself as a person. My successes do not override my shortcomings" Journal of Humanistic Psychology Spring 1991 vol. 31 no. 2 112-113 

"We must delegate control of the population as a whole to specialiststo police, priests, teachers, therapies, and so on, with their specialized reinforcers and their codified contingencies" Beyond freedom and dignity 1971 August Psychology Today 3781 

"It is a mistake to suppose that the whole issue is how to free man. The issue is to improve the way in which he is controlled" "I have been misunderstood" An interview with B.F.Skinner 1972 March/April Center Magazine, pp. 6365 

"Education is what survives when what has been learnt has been forgotten" http://faculty.mc3.edu/cgrodanz/cg-edu.htm 

"As the senses grow dull, the stimulating environment becomes less clear. When reinforcing consequences no longer follow, we are bored, discouraged and depressed." 

== Criticism ==

=== J. E. R. Staddon ===
As understood by Skinner, ascribing dignity to individuals involves giving them credit for their actions. To say "Skinner is brilliant" means that Skinner is an originating force. If Skinner's determinist theory is right, he is merely the focus of his environment. He is not an originating force and he had no choice in saying the things he said or doing the things he did. Skinner's environment and genetics both allowed and compelled him to write his book. Similarly, the environment and genetic potentials of the advocates of freedom and dignity cause them to resist the reality that their own activities are deterministically grounded. J. E. R. Staddon (The New Behaviorism, 2001) has argued the compatibilist position, that Skinner's determinism is not in any way contradictory to traditional notions of reward and punishment, as he believed. Staddon, J. (1995) On responsibility and punishment. The Atlantic Monthly, Feb., 8894. Staddon, J. (1999) On responsibility in science and law. Social Philosophy and Policy, 16, 146-174. Reprinted in Responsibility. E. F. Paul, F. D. Miller, & J. Paul (eds.), 1999. Cambridge University Press, pp. 146174. 

=== Noam Chomsky ===
Perhaps Skinner's best known critic, Noam Chomsky published a review of Skinner's Verbal Behavior two years after it was published. The 1959 review became better known than the book itself. B. F. Skinner, (1970) "On 'Having' A Poem" talks about the poem, its publication, and contains the poem and a reply to it as well. Real Audio mp3 Ogg Chomsky's review has been credited with launching the cognitive movement in psychology and other disciplines. Skinner, who rarely responded directly to critics, never formally replied to Chomsky's critique. Many years later, Kenneth MacCorquodale's reply On Chomsky's Review of Skinner's Verbal Behavior was endorsed by Skinner.

Chomsky also reviewed Skinner's Beyond Freedom and Dignity, using the same basic motives as his Verbal Behavior review. Among Chomsky's criticisms were that Skinner's laboratory work could not be extended to humans, that when it was extended to humans it represented 'scientistic' behavior attempting to emulate science but which was not scientific, that Skinner was not a scientist because he rejected the hypothetico-deductive model of theory testing, and that Skinner had no science of behavior. A. N. Chomsky, (1972) "The Case Against B. F. Skinner." 

=== Psychodynamic psychology ===
Skinner has been repeatedly criticized for his supposed animosity towards Freud, psychoanalysis, and psychodynamic psychology. There is clear evidence, however, that Skinner shared several of Freud's assumptions, and that he was influenced by Freudian points of view in more than one field, among them the analysis of defense mechanisms, such as repression. To study such phenomena, Skinner even designed his own projective test. 

=== TV Guide ===
In the controversial books Beyond Freedom and Dignity (1971) and Walden II (1946/1968), Skinner laid out his vision of utopian society in which behavior was controlled by the judicious application of the principle of reinforcement. beyond freedom and dignity. New York: Bantam Books. In those books, he put forth the simple but stunning claim that our subjective sense of free will is an illusion and that when we think that we are exercising free will, we are actually responding to present and past patterns of reinforcement. We do things in the present that have been rewarding in the past, and our sense of "choosing" to do them is nothing more than an illusion. Skinner argued that his insights could be used to increase human well-being and solve social problems. Not surprisingly, that claim sparked an outcry from critics who believed that Skinner was giving away one of our most cherished attributes  free will  and calling for a repressive society that manipulated people for its own ends. The criticism extended to TV Guide, which featured an interview with Skinner and called his ideas "the taming of mankind through a system of dog obedience schools for all."

== List of awards and positions ==
*1926 A.B., Hamilton College
*1930 M.A., Harvard University
*19301931 Thayer Fellowship
*1931 Ph.D., Harvard University
*19311932 Walker Fellowship
*19311933 National Research Council Fellowship
*19331936 Junior Fellowship, Harvard Society of Fellows*1936-1937 Instructor, University of Minnesota
*19371939 Assistant Professor, University of Minnesota
*19391945 Associate Professor, University of Minnesota
*1942 Guggenheim Fellowship (postponed until 1944-1945)
*1942 Howard Crosby Warren Medal, Society of Experimental Psychologists
*19451948 Professor and Chair, Indiana University
*19471948 William James Lecturer, Harvard University
*19481958 Professor, Harvard University
*19491950 President of the Midwestern Psychological Association
*19541955 President of the Eastern Psychological Association
*1958 Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award, American Psychological Association
*19581974 Edgar Pierce Professor of Psychology, Harvard University
*19641974 Career Award, National Institute of Mental Health
*1966 Edward Lee Thorndike Award, American Psychological Association
*19661967 President of the Pavlovian Society of North America
*1968 National Medal of Science, National Science Foundation
*1969 Overseas Fellow in Churchill College, Cambridge
*1971 Gold Medal Award, American Psychological Foundation
*1971 Joseph P. Kennedy, Jr., Foundation for Mental Retardation International award
*1972 Humanist of the Year, American Humanist Association
*1972 Creative Leadership in Education Award, New York University
*1972 Career Contribution Award, Massachusetts Psychological Association
*19741990 Professor of Psychology and Social Relations Emeritus, Harvard University
*1978 Distinguished Contributions to Educational Research Award and Development, American Educational Research Association
*1978 National Association for Retarded Citizens Award
*1985 Award for Excellence in Psychiatry, Albert Einstein School of Medicine
*1985 President's Award, New York Academy of Science
*1990 William James Fellow Award, American Psychological Society
*1990 Lifetime Achievement Award, American Psychology Association
*1991 Outstanding Member and Distinguished Professional Achievement Award, Society for Performance Improvement
*1997 Scholar Hall of Fame Award, Academy of Resource and Development

=== Honorary degrees ===
Skinner received honorary degrees from:
*Alfred University
*Ball State University Dickinson College
*Hamilton College
*Harvard University
*Hobart and William Smith Colleges
*Johns Hopkins University
*Keio University
*Long Island University C. W. Post Campus
*McGill University
*North Carolina State University
*Ohio Wesleyan University
*Ripon College
*Rockford College
*Tufts University
*University of Chicago
*University of Exeter
*University of Missouri
*University of North Texas
*Western Michigan University
*University of Maryland, Baltimore County.

== In popular culture ==
Writer of The Simpsons Jon Vitti named Principal Skinner character after behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner. Reiss, Mike. (2002). Commentary for "Principal Charming", in The Simpsons: The Complete Second Season . 20th Century Fox. 

== Bibliography ==
*Behavior of Organisms|The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis], 1938. ISBN 1-58390-007-1, ISBN 0-87411-487-X.
*Walden Two, 1948. ISBN 0-87220-779-X (revised 1976 edition).
*Science and Human Behavior, 1953. ISBN 0-02-929040-6. A free copy of this book (in a 1.6 MB .pdf file) may be downloaded at the B. F. Skinner Foundation BFSkinner.org.
*Schedules of Reinforcement, with C. B. Ferster, 1957. ISBN 0-13-792309-0.
*Verbal Behavior, 1957. ISBN 1-58390-021-7.
*The Analysis of Behavior: A Program for Self Instruction, with James G. Holland, 1961. This self-instruction book is no longer in print, but the B. F. Skinner Foundation web site has an interactive version. ISBN 0-07-029565-4.
*The Technology of Teaching, 1968. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts Library of Congress Card Number 68-12340 E 81290
*Contingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoretical Analysis, 1969. ISBN 0-390-81280-3.
*Beyond Freedom and Dignity, 1971. ISBN 0-394-42555-3.
*About Behaviorism, 1974. ISBN 0-394-49201-3, ISBN 0-394-71618-3.
*Particulars of My Life: Part One of an Autobiography, 1976. ISBN 0-394-40071-2.
*Reflections on Behaviorism and Society, 1978. ISBN 0-13-770057-1.
*The Shaping of a Behaviorist: Part Two of an Autobiography, 1979. ISBN 0-394-50581-6.
*Notebooks, edited by Robert Epstein, 1980. ISBN 0-13-624106-9.
*Skinner for the Classroom, edited by R. Epstein, 1982. ISBN 0-87822-261-8.
*Enjoy Old Age: A Program of Self-Management, with M. E. Vaughan, 1983.
*A Matter of Consequences: Part Three of an Autobiography, 1983. ISBN 0-394-53226-0, ISBN 0-8147-7845-3.
*Upon Further Reflection, 1987. ISBN 0-13-938986-5.
*Recent Issues in the Analysis of Behavior, 1989. ISBN 0-675-20674-X.
*Cumulative Record: A Selection of Papers, 1959, 1961, 1972 and 1999 as Cumulative Record: Definitive Edition. This book includes a reprint of Skinner's October 1945 Ladies' Home Journal article, "Baby in a Box," Skinner's original, personal account of the much-misrepresented "Baby in a box" device. ISBN 0-87411-969-3 (paperback)

== See also ==
* Back to Freedom and Dignity
* Behaviorism
* Applied behavior analysis

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Chiesa, M. (2004).Radical Behaviorism: The Philosophy and the Science ISBN
* Epstein, R. (1997) Skinner as self-manager. Journal of applied behavior analysis. 30, 545-569. Retrieved from the World Wide Web on: June 2, 2005 from ENVMED.rochester.edu
*
* Sundberg, M.L. (2008) The VB-MAPP: The Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement Program
* Basil-Curzon, L. (2004) Teaching in Further Education: A outline of Principles and Practice
* Hardin, C.J. (2004) Effective Classroom Management
* Kaufhold, J. A. (2002) The Psychology of Learning and the Art of Teaching
* Bjork, D. W. (1993) B. F. Skinner: A Life
* Dews, P. B. (Ed.)(1970) Festschrift For B. F. Skinner.New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
* Evans, R. I. (1968) B. F. Skinner: the man and his ideas
* Nye, Robert D. (1979) What Is B. F. Skinner Really Saying?. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
* Rutherford, Alexandra (2009) Beyond the box: B. F. Skinner's technology of behavior from laboratory to life, 1950s-1970s.. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
* Sagal, P. T. (1981) Skinner's Philosophy. Washington, D.C.: University Press of America.
* Skinner, B. F. (1976) Particulars of my life: Part 1 of an Autobiography
* Skinner, B. F. (1979) The Shaping of a Behaviorist: Part 2 of an Autobiography
* Skinner, B. F. (1983) A Matter of Consequences: Part 3 of an Autobiography
* Smith, D. L. (2002). On Prediction and Control. B. F. Skinner and the Technological Ideal of Science. In W. E. Pickren & D. A. Dewsbury, (Eds.), Evolving Perspectives on the History of Psychology, Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
* Swirski, Peter (2011) "How I Stopped Worrying and Loved Behavioural Engineering or Communal Life, Adaptations, and B.F. Skinner's Walden Two". American Utopia and Social Engineering in Literature, Social Thought, and Political History. New York, Routledge.
* Wiener, D. N. (1996) B. F. Skinner: benign anarchist
* Wolfgang, C.H. and Glickman, Carl D. (1986) Solving Discipline Problems Allyn and Bacon, Inc

== External links ==

*B. F. Skinner homepage
*National Academy of Sciences biography
*B.F. Skinner profile, NNDB
*I was not a lab rat, response by Skinner's daughter about the "baby box"
*Audio Recordings Society for Experimental Analysis of Behavior
*Youtube Video Skinner and Teaching Machine
*Superstition in the Pigeon by B.F. Skinner (Full Text)
*"B. F. Skinner", NNDB
*Reprint of "the Minotaur of the Behaviorist Maze: Surviving Stanford's Learning House in the 1970s: Journal of Humanistic Psychology, Vol. 51, Number 3, July 2011. 266272.



[[Bill]]

Bill may refer to:

== Documents ==
* Banknote, paper money (especially in the US)
* Handbill, Flyer (pamphlet), paper leaflet
* Poster, form of advertising
* Billboard, large board on which to display advertising posters or displays
* Bill (proposed law), law put before a legislature
* Invoice, commercial document issued by a seller to a buyer

* Bill of lading, document issued by a carrier receiving goods for transport
* Bill of materials, document listing the parts needed to make a product
* Bill of quantities, tendering document detailing the quantities of materials needed to build a proposed construction
* Operational bills, tendering document detailing the operations needed to build a proposed construction
* Waybill, document describing a shipment
* Menu or bill of fare
* Utility bill, see invoice

== Tools and weapons ==
* Bill (weapon), a weapon similar to a halberd
* Billhook, a long-handled cutting tool (sometimes weapon) with a curved blade
* BILL Anti-tank guided weapon, a Swedish anti-tank weapon
* BILL 2 Anti-tank guided weapon, a Swedish anti-tank weapon

== Other objects called 'bill' ==
* Beak, an alternative name for a bird's, usually a duck's, beak
* Peninsulas of land jutting out into the sea, such as 'Portland Bill'
* Police, with 'old bill' as a slang term in the UK
* Rostrum, the 'beak' or 'sword' of a billfish (marlin, swordfish, etc.)
* Visor or partial brim as a feature of a cap, sometimes called a "peaked cap"

== Entertainment ==
* Bill (Tripping Daisy album), 1992
*Bill (Bill Cosby album), 1973 compilation album
* Meet Bill, a 2008 comedy film formerly known as Bill
* Bill (1981 film), a 1981 TV movie starring Mickey Rooney
**, sequel the 1981 film
* "Bill" (song), a song by Peggy Scott-Adams
* "Bill" (Show Boat), a song in the Jerome Kern-Oscar Hammerstein II musical Show Boat
* The Bill, a long-running British police drama
* Bill (Kill Bill), character in the Kill Bill films
*Bill (2015 film), an upcoming family adventure-comedy film from the cast of Horrible Histories

== People ==
* Common nickname for William
:This section includes only individuals whose last name is Bill, or whose only generally-known name is Bill. 
* Bill (surname)
* Alfred H. Bill, American writer
* Bill W. (Bill Wilson, 18951971), co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous
* Buffalo Bill (Bill Cody, 18461917), American bison hunter and showman.
* Charles Bill (18431915), British Conservative Party Member of Parliament (MP) Leek 18921906

== Others ==
* Bill the Goat, mascot of the US Naval Academy
* Bill the Pony, a pony appearing in The Lord of the Rings novel
* Bill Ferny, the previous owner of the pony mentioned above
* Bills (subculture), a Congolese youth subculture in the late 1950s, idolising cowboy Western movies
* Buffalo Bills, an American NFL football team
* Tropical Storm Bill (disambiguation), a list of storms named Bill
* Bill, Wyoming, a railroad crew-change station
* Bill, a lizard in Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
* Bill the Cat, a Bloom County character
* characters in the Mario game series
** Bullet Bill
** Banzai Bill
* Mr. Bill, claymation character from Saturday Night Live

== See also ==
*Billy (disambiguation)
*Billie (disambiguation)
*Bili (disambiguation)
*Will (disambiguation)
*William (disambiguation)



[[Bill Macy]]

Bill Macy (born Wolf Martin Garber; May 18, 1922) is an American television, film and stage actor, born in Revere, Massachusetts, to Mollie (ne Friedopfer) and Michael Garber, a manufacturer. Bill Macy profile at FilmReference.com He was raised in Brooklyn, New York and worked as a cab driver before pursuing acting.

Macy is best known for playing Walter Findlay, the long-suffering husband of the title character on the 1970s television situation comedy Maude. He was also an original cast member of the long-running theatrical revue Oh! Calcutta! He has made more than 70 appearances on film and television, including a memorable role as the co-inventor of the 'Opti-grab' in the 1979 Steve Martin comedy The Jerk, and as the head television writer in My Favorite Year (1982).

He appeared in the popular television movie Perry Mason & The Case Of The Murdered Madame (1987) as banker Richard Wilson, who, along with three other bankers, employed the murder victim's public relation company prior to her murder. 

He appeared occasionally on Seinfeld as one of the residents of the Florida retirement community in which Jerry Seinfeld's parents lived. He also appeared on the short-lived sitcom Back to You. IMDb profile He made a guest appearance as a patient on Chicago Hope and as an aging gambler on the series Las Vegas. In 2006 he made an appearance on My Name is Earl in the second-season episode, "Van Hickey" as an elderly patient in a nursing home who claims he "once tongue-kissed a Jamaican woman."

==References==

==External links==
*
*
*



[[Bob Knight]]

Robert Montgomery "Bob" Knight (born October 25, 1940) is an American retired basketball coach. Nicknamed "The General," Knight won 902 NCAA Division I men's college basketball games, most all-time at the time of his retirement and currently third all-time behind his former player, Mike Krzyzewski of Duke and Jim Boeheim of Syracuse. He is best known as the head coach of the Indiana Hoosiers from 1971&ndash;2000. He also coached at Texas Tech (2001&ndash;2008) and at Army (1965&ndash;1971). 

While at Indiana, Knight led his teams to three NCAA championships, one National Invitation Tournament (NIT) championship, and 11 Big Ten Conference championships. He received the National Coach of the Year honor four times and the Big Ten Coach of the Year honor eight times. In 1984, he coached the USA men's Olympic team to a gold medal, becoming one of only three basketball coaches to win an NCAA title, NIT title, and an Olympic gold medal. 

Knight was one of college basketball's most successful and innovative coaches, having perfected and popularized the motion offense. He has also been praised for running clean programs (none of his teams were ever sanctioned by the NCAA for recruiting violations) and graduating most of his players. However, Knight has also attracted controversy; he famously threw a chair across the court during a game, was once arrested for assault, and regularly displayed a combative nature during encounters with members of the press. Knight remains "the object of near fanatical devotion" from his former players and Indiana fans. 

In 2008, Knight joined ESPN as a men's college basketball studio analyst during Championship Week and for coverage of the NCAA Tournament. For the 2008&ndash;09 season, he joined ESPN as a part-time color commentator as well as continuing his studio analyst duties.

==Playing career==
Knight was born in Massillon, Ohio and grew up in Orrville, Ohio. Knight began his career as a player at Orrville High School. He continued under Basketball Hall of Fame coach Fred Taylor at Ohio State in 1958. Despite being a star player in high school, he played a reserve role as a forward on the 1960 Ohio State Buckeyes team that won the NCAA Championship and featured future Hall of Fame players John Havlicek and Jerry Lucas. The Buckeyes lost to the Cincinnati Bearcats in each of the next two NCAA Championship games, of which Knight was also a part.

Due in part to the star power of those Ohio State teams, playing time was usually scarce for Knight, but that did not prevent him from making an impact; in the 1961 NCAA Championship game, Knight came off the bench with 1:41 on the clock and Cincinnati leading Ohio State, 61-59. In the words of then-Ohio State assistant coach Frank Truitt,
Knight got the ball in the left front court and faked a drive into the middle. Then crossed over like he worked on it all his life and drove right in and laid it up. That tied the game for us, and Knight ran clear across the floor like a 100-yard dash sprinter and ran right at me and said, 'See there, coach, I should have been in that game a long time ago!'
To which Truitt replied, "Sit down, you hot dog. You're lucky you're even on the floor." Steve and Mark Heisler. "Bob Knight: The Unauthorized Biography." New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc., 2006. 22. ISBN 074324348X 

In addition to lettering in basketball at Ohio State, it has been claimed that Knight also lettered in football and baseball; however, the official list of Ohio State football letter earners does not include Knight. Knight graduated with a degree in history and government in 1962.

==Army Black Knights==
After graduation in 1962, Knight coached junior varsity basketball at Cuyahoga Falls High School in Ohio for one year. Knight then enlisted in the U.S. Army and accepted an assistant coaching position with the Army Black Knights in 1963, where, two years later, he was named the head coach at the relatively young age of 24. In six seasons at West Point, Knight won 102 games, with his first as a head coach coming against Worcester Polytechnic Institute. One of his players was Mike Krzyzewski, who would later serve as his assistant before becoming a Hall of Fame head coach at Duke. Mike Silliman was also another of Knight's players at Army, and Bob Knight was quoted as saying, "Mike Silliman is the best player I have ever coached."

==Indiana University Hoosiers==
In 1971 the Indiana University Hoosiers hired Knight as head coach. Because of his time spent coaching at Army and his disciplinarian nature, Knight earned the nickname "The General." During his 29 years as head coach at Indiana, the Hoosiers won 662 games, including 22 seasons of 20 or more wins, while losing but 239, a remarkable .735 winning percentage. In 24 NCAA tournament appearances at Indiana, Hoosier teams under Bob Knight won 42 of 63 games (.667), winning titles in 1976, 1981, and 1987, while losing in the semi-finals in 1973 and 1992.

===1970s===
In 197273, Knight's second year as coach, Indiana won the Big Ten championship and reached the Final Four, but lost to UCLA. The following season, 197374, Indiana once again captured a Big Ten title. In the two following seasons, 197475 and 197576, Knight's teams were undefeated in the regular season and won 37-consecutive Big Ten games on their way to their fourth conference title in a row. The 197475 Hoosiers swept the entire Big Ten by an average of 22.8 points per game. However, in an 8382 win against Purdue they lost consensus All-American forward Scott May to a broken left arm. With May playing just 7 minutes, the No. 1 Hoosiers lost to Kentucky, 9290, in the Midwest Regional. The following season, 197576, the Hoosiers went the entire season and 1976 NCAA tournament without a single loss, beating Michigan, 8668, in the title game. Immediately after the game, Knight lamented that "it should have been two." The 1976 Hoosiers remains the last undefeated NCAA Division I men's basketball team. Indiana won the 1979 NIT championship.

===1980s===
The 197980 Hoosiers won the Big Ten championship and advanced to the 1980 Sweet Sixteen. The following season, in 198081, star-guard Isiah Thomas and Knight's Hoosiers once again won a conference title and won the 1981 NCAA tournament, Knight's second national title. In 19821983, Knight's No. 1 ranked Hoosiers were favorites to win another national championship. However with an injury to All-American Ted Kitchel mid-season, the Hoosiers' prospects were grim. Knight asked for fan support to rally around the team, which ultimately won the Big Ten championship. Nevertheless in the tournament Kitchel's absence was felt and the team lost to Kentucky in the 1983 Sweet Sixteen.

Around this time, Knight eschewed wearing ties and sportcoats on the sidelines in favor of his now-famous sweaters.

Knight with young fans at Frank Truitt's house in Columbus, summer of 1988

Knight and his 198586 team were profiled in a best-selling book A Season on the Brink. To write it Knight granted author John Feinstein almost unprecedented access to the Indiana basketball program, as well as insights into Knight's private life. Feinstein depicts a coach who is quick with a violent temper, but also one who never cheats and strictly follows all of the NCAA's rules. The following season, in 198687, Knight won a share of the Big Ten title and his third national championship against Syracuse in the 1987 NCAA tournament. In the 19881989 season the Hoosiers again won a Big Ten championship.

===1990s===
From 199091 through 199293, the Hoosiers posted 87 victories, the most by any Big Ten team in a three-year span, breaking the mark of 86 set by Coach Knight's Indiana teams of 197476. Teams from these three seasons spent all but two of the 53 poll weeks in the top 10, and 38 of them in the top 5. They captured two Big Ten crowns in 199091 and 199293, and during the 199192 season reached the Final Four. During the 199293 season, the 314 Hoosiers finished the season at the top of the AP Poll, but were defeated by Kansas in the Elite Eight.

Throughout the mid and late 1990s Knight continued to experience success with continual NCAA tournament appearances and a minimum of 19 wins each season. However, 1993 would be Knight's last conference championship and 1994 would be his last trip to the Sweet Sixteen.

===Dismissal===
On March 14, 2000, just before Indiana was to begin play in the NCAA tournament, the CNN/SI network ran a piece on Knight in which former player Neil Reed claimed he had been choked by Knight in a 1997 practice. Knight denied the claims in the story. However, less than a month later, CNN Sports Illustrated aired a tape of an IU practice from 1997 that appeared to show Knight placing his hand on the neck of Neil Reed. CNN.com - Fired Bob Knight calms angry student demonstrators - September 11, 2000 

In response, Indiana University president Myles Brand announced that spring he had adopted a "zero tolerance" policy with regard to Bob Knight's behavior. Later in the year, in September 2000, Indiana freshman Kent Harvey reportedly said, "Hey, Knight, what's up?" to Knight. According to Harvey, Knight then grabbed him by the arm and lectured him for not showing proper respect, insisting that Harvey address him as either "Mr. Knight" or "Coach Knight" instead of simply "Knight." Brand stated that this incident was only one of numerous complaints that occurred after the zero-tolerance policy had been placed on Knight. He asked Knight to resign on September 10. When Knight refused, however, Brand relieved him of his coaching duties effective immediately. Knight's dismissal was met with outrage from students. That night, thousands of Indiana students marched from Indiana University's Assembly Hall to Brand's home, burning him in effigy. 

Harvey was supported by some and vilified by many who claim he had intentionally set up Knight. Kent Harvey's stepfather, Mark Shaw, was a former Bloomington-area radio talk show host and Knight critic. Threats Follow Knight Dismissal - http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2000/09/11/sports/main232140.shtml On September 13, Knight said goodbye to a crowd of some 6,000 supporters in Dunn Meadow at Indiana University. He asked that they not hold a grudge against Harvey and that they continue to support the basketball team. Knight's firing made national headlines, including the cover of Sports Illustrated and around the clock coverage on ESPN. It was also covered heavily on major news programs such as CBS News and CNN.

==International coaching==
In 1979 Knight guided the United States Pan American team to a gold medal in Puerto Rico. In 1984 Knight led the U.S. national team to a gold medal in the Olympic Games as coach of the 1984 basketball team (coaches do not receive medals in the Olympics). Players on the team included Michael Jordan and Knight's Indiana player and protege Steve Alford.

==Texas Tech Red Raiders==
Knight watches his team practice in November 2007.
After taking a season off following his dismissal from Indiana, all the while on the lookout for vacancies, Knight accepted the head coaching job at Texas Tech, though his hiring was opposed by a group of faculty led by Walter Schaller. At the press conference introducing him, Knight quipped, "This is without question the most comfortable red sweater I've had on in six years." 

Knight quickly improved the program, which had not been to an NCAA tournament since 1996. He led the Red Raiders to postseason appearances in each of his first four years at the school (three NCAA Championship tournaments and one NIT). After a rough 2006 season, the team improved in 2007, finishing 2113 and again making it to the NCAA Championship tournament, where it lost to Boston College in the first round. The best performance by the Red Raiders under Knight came in 2005 when they advanced as far as the Sweet Sixteen. In both 2006 and 2007 under Knight, Texas Tech defeated two Top 10-ranked teams in consecutive weeks. During Knight's first six years at Texas Tech, the Red Raiders won 126 games, an average of 21 wins per season.

On February 4, 2008, Bob Knight retired as head coach of the Texas Tech Red Raiders. His son Pat Knight, the head coach designate since 2005, was immediately named as his successor. The younger Knight stated that, after many years of coaching, his father was exhausted and ready to retire. Just after achieving his 900th win, Knight handed the job over to Pat in the mid-season in part to allow him to get acquainted with coaching the team earlier, instead of having him wait until October, the start of the next season. Following retirement Knight continued living in Lubbock. 

==Life after coaching==
In 2008, Knight was hired as a studio analyst and occasional color commentator by ESPN. http://sports.espn.go.com/ncb/news/story?id=3269476 In November 2012, he called an Indiana Men's Basketball game for the first time, something he had previously refused to do. Current Indiana Hoosiers Men's basketball coach Tom Crean has reached out to Knight in an attempt to get him to visit the school again. Knight has thus far rebuffed all attempts to bring him back to Bloomington. http://www.cbssports.com/mcc/blogs/entry/26283066/32640014 

==Coaching philosophy==
Bob Knight was an innovator of the motion offense, which he perfected and popularized. The system emphasizes post players setting screens and perimeter players passing the ball until a teammate becomes open for an uncontested jump shot or lay-up. This required players to be unselfish, disciplined, and effective in setting and using screens to get open. Knight's Army background and his focus on fundamentals, strict discipline, and precision earned him the nickname "General".

Knight's motion offense didn't take shape until his time at Indiana. Prior to that, at Army, he ran a "reverse action" that involved reversing the ball from one side of the floor to the other and screening along with it. According to Knight, it was a "West Coast offense" that Pete Newell used exclusively during his coaching career. After being exposed to the Princeton offense, Knight instilled more cutting with the offense he employed, which evolved into the motion offense that he ran for most of his career. Knight continued to develop the offense, instituting different cuts over the years and putting his players in different scenarios.

Knight was well known for the extreme preparation he put into each game and practice. He was often quoted as saying, "Most people have the will to win, few have the will to prepare to win." Often during practice, Knight would instruct his players to a certain spot on the floor and give them options of what to do based on how the defense might react. In contrast to set plays, Knight's offense was designed to react according to the defense.

The 3-point shot was adopted nationally in the NCAA in 1986, mid-way through Knight's coaching career. Although he opposed the rule change throughout his life, it did compliment his offense well by improving the spacing on the floor. Knight's offense also emphasized a two-count. Players in the post are expected to try and post in the paint for two seconds and if they don't receive the ball they go set a screen. Players with the ball are expected to hold the ball for two seconds to see where they are going to take it. Screens are supposed to be held for two seconds, as well.

On defense Knight was known for emphasizing tenacious "man-to-man" defense where defenders contest every pass and every shot, and to help teammates when needed. However, Knight has also incorporated a zone defense periodically after eschewing that defense for the first two decades of his coaching career. 

Knight's coaching also included a firm emphasis on academics. All but four of his four-year players completed degrees, a ratio of nearly 98 percent. Nearly 80 percent of his players graduated compared to the national average of 42 percent for Division I schools. 

==Legacy==

===Accomplishments===
Bob Knight's all time coaching record is 902371. His 902 wins in NCAA Division I men's college basketball games is third all-time to Jim Boeheim, and his former player, Mike Krzyzewski. Knight achieved his 880th career win on January 1, 2007 and passed retired North Carolina coach Dean Smith for most career victories, a title he held until his win total was surpassed by Krzyzewski on November 15, 2011. Knight is the youngest coach to reach 200 (age 35), 300 (age 40) and 400 (age 44) wins. He was also among the youngest to reach other milestones of 500 (age 48) and 600 (age 52) wins.

Texas Tech's participation in the 2007 NCAA Tournament gave Knight more NCAA Tournaments appearances than any other coach. He is the only coach to win the NCAA, the NIT, an Olympic Gold medal, and a Pan American Games Gold medal. Knight is also one of only three people, along with Dean Smith and Joe B. Hall, who had both played on and coached a winning NCAA championship basketball team.

===Recognition===
Knight received a number of personal honors during and after his coaching career. He was named the National Coach of the Year four times (1975, 1976, 1987, 1989) and Big Ten Coach of the Year eight times (1973, 1975, 1976, 1980, 1981, 1989, 1992, 1993). In 1975 he was a unanimous selection as National Coach of the Year, an honor he was accorded again in 1976 by Associated Press, United Press International, and Basketball Weekly. In 1987 he was the first person to be honored with the Naismith Coach of the Year Award. In 1989 he garnered National Coach of the Year honors by the AP, UPI, and the United States Basketball Writers Association. Knight was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1991.
Knight with Krzyzewski
On November 17, 2006, Knight was recognized for his impact on college basketball as a member of the founding class of the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame. The following year he was the recipient of the Naismith Award for Men's Outstanding Contribution to Basketball. Knight was also inducted into the Army Sports Hall of Fame (Class of 2008) and the Indiana Hoosiers athletics Hall of Fame (Class of 2009). In August 2003, he was honored as the first inductee in The Vince Lombardi Titletown Legends.

===Coaching tree===

A number of assistant coaches, players, and managers of Knight have gone on to be coaches. Among them are Hall of Fame Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski, UCLA coach Steve Alford and NBA coaches Randy Wittman, Mike Woodson, Keith Smart, Evansville Coach Marty Simmons, St. Louis Coach Jim Crews and Lawrence Frank.

==In the media==

===Books about Knight===
In 1986 author John Feinstein published A Season on the Brink, which detailed the 198586 season of the Indiana Hoosiers. Granted almost unprecedented access to the Indiana basketball program, as well as insights into Knight's private life, the book quickly became a major best-seller and spawned a new genre, as a legion of imitators wrote works covering a single year of a sports franchise. In the book Feinstein depicts a coach who is quick with a violent temper, but also one who never cheats and strictly follows all of the NCAA's rules.

Two years later author Joan Mellen penned the book Bob Knight: His Own Man (ISBN 0-380-70809-4), in part to rebut Feinstein's A Season on the Brink. Mellen deals with seemingly all the causes celebres in Knight's career and presents the view that he is more sinned against than sinning.

A number of close associates and friends of Knight have also written books about him. Former player and current UCLA head basketball coach Steve Alford wrote Playing for Knight: My Six Seasons with Bobby Knight, published in 1990.

Knight's autobiography, written with longtime friend and sports journalist Bob Hammel, was titled Knight: My Story and published in 2003. Three years later Steve Delsohn and Mark Heisler wrote Bob Knight: An Unauthorized Biography.

===Film and television===
Knight has appeared or been featured in numerous films and television productions. In 1994 a feature film titled Blue Chips was about Pete Bell, a volatile but honest college basketball coach under pressure to win who decides to blatantly violate NCAA rules to field a competitive team after a sub-par season. It starred Nick Nolte as Bell and NBA star Shaquille O'Neal as Neon Bodeaux, a once-in-a-lifetime player Bell woos to his school with gifts and other perks. The coach's temper and wardrobe were modeled after Knight's, though at no time has Knight been known to illegally recruit. Knight himself appears in the movie and coaches against Nolte in the film's climactic game.

ESPN's first feature-length film was A Season on the Brink, a 2002 TV adaptation from John Feinstein's book. In the movie Knight is played by veteran character actor Brian Dennehy. ESPN also featured Knight in a reality show titled Knight School, which followed a handful of Texas Tech students as they competed for the right to join the basketball team as a non-scholarship player.

Knight made a cameo appearance as himself in the 2003 film Anger Management. In 2008, Knight appeared in a commercial as part of Volkswagen's Das Auto series where Max, a 1964 black Beetle interviews famous people. When Knight talked about Volkswagen winning the best resale value award in 2008, Max replied, "At least one of us is winning a title this year." This prompted Knight to throw his chair off the stage and walk out saying, "I may not be retired." 

Knight also made an appearance in a TV commercial for with fellow coaches Mike Krzyzewski, Rick Pitino, and Roy Williams, in a parody of Tom Cruise in Risky Business. 

In 2009, Knight produced 3 instructional coaching DVD librarieson motion offense, man-to-man defense, and instilling mental toughnesswith Championship Productions.

==Family and charity==
Knight and his son Pat while coaching at Texas Tech.
Knight married Nancy Lou on April 17, 1963 and the two divorced in 1985. Together they had two sons, Tim and Pat. Pat played at Indiana from 199195 and served as head coach at Lamar from the time of his father's retirement until his dismissal in 2014. In 1988 Knight married Karen Vieth Edgar, a former Oklahoma high school basketball coach.

Knight has a high regard for education and has made generous donations to the schools he has been a part of, particularly libraries. At Indiana University Knight endowed two chairs, one in history and one in law. He also raised nearly $5 million for the Indiana University library system by championing a library fund to support the library's activities. The fund was ultimately named in his honor.

When Knight came to Texas Tech in 2001, he gave $10,000 to the library, the first gift to the Coach Knight Library Fund which has now collected over $300,000. On November 29, 2007, the Texas Tech library honored this with A Legacy of Giving: The Bob Knight Exhibit.

==Criticism and controversy==

===1970s===
*It was reported (although years after the incident) that Knight choked and punched IU's longtime sports information director, Kit Klingelhoffer, in the 1970s, over a news release that upset the coach. 

* On December 7, 1974, Indiana and Kentucky met in the regular season in Bloomington with a 98-74 Indiana win. Near the end of the game, Bob Knight went to the Kentucky bench where the official was standing to complain about a call. Before he left, Knight hit Kentucky coach Joe B. Hall in the back of the head. UK's assistant coach Lynn Nance, a former FBI agent who was about 6 feet 5 inches, had to be restrained by Hall from hitting Knight. Hall later said, "It publicly humiliated me." Knight said the slap to the head was something he has done, "affectionately" to his own players for years. "But maybe someone would not like that," he said. "If Joe didn't like it, I offer an apology. I don't apologize for the intent." ... "Hall and I have been friends for a long time," Knight said. "If he wants to dissolve the friendship, that's up to him." Knight blamed the furor on Hall, noting in his inimitable style, "If it was meant to be malicious, I'd have blasted the fucker into the seats." 

*During the 1979 Pan American Games in San Juan, Puerto Rico, Knight was accused of assaulting a police officer while coaching the US Basketball team before a practice session. He was later convicted in absentia to a six-month jail sentence, but extradition efforts by the Puerto Rican government were not successful. 

===1980s===
*In a game at Bloomington on January 31, 1981 between Indiana and Purdue, Hoosier star Isiah Thomas allegedly hit Purdue guard Roosevelt Barnes in what some critics described as a "sucker punch". Video replay shown by Knight later showed Barnes had mistakenly thrown the first punch, and that Thomas was merely reacting to this. When the two schools played their second game of the season at Purdue on February 7, 1981, Knight claimed a number of derisive chants were directed at him, his wife, and Indiana University. In response Knight invited Purdue athletic director George King on his weekly television show to discuss the matter, but King declined. Therefore, in place of King, Knight brought onto the show a "jackass" (male donkey) wearing a Purdue hat as a representative of Purdue. The 198081 Hoosiers would go on to win the 1981 NCAA National Championship, the school's fourth national title.

*On Saturday, February 23, 1985 in game at Bloomington between Purdue and Indiana, with just five minutes into the game, a scramble for a loose ball resulted in a foul call on Indiana's Daryl Thomas. Knight, irate, insisted the call should have been for a jump ball and ultimately received a technical foul. Purdue's Steve Reid stepped to the free throw line to shoot the resulting free throws, but before he could Knight grabbed a red plastic chair from Indiana's bench and threw it across the floor toward the basket in front of Reid. Knight was ejected from the game. He apologized for his actions the next day and was given a one-game suspension and two years' probation from the Big Ten. Since the incident, Knight has occasionally joked about throwing the chair by saying that he saw an old lady standing on the opposite sideline and threw her the chair so she could sit down. 

*Women's groups nationwide were outraged by Knight's comments during an April 1988 interview with Connie Chung in which he said, "I think that if rape is inevitable, relax and enjoy it" (the comment had already had gotten weatherman Tex Antoine fired from WABC-TV in New York 12 years earlier and would ultimately derail the Texas gubernatorial bid of Clayton Williams two years later). Knight's comment was in reference to an Indiana basketball game in which he felt the referees were making poor calls against the Hoosiers.

===1990s===
*At a practice leading up to an Indiana-Purdue game in West Lafayette in 1991, Bob Knight unleashed a torrent of expletives and threats designed to motivate his Indiana team. In one portion he exclaims he is "fucking tired of losing to Purdue." Unknown to most, someone was secretly taping the speech. The speech has since gone viral and has over 1.84 million views on YouTube alone. Although the source of who taped the speech remains unknown, many former players suspect it was former manager and current NBA coach Lawrence Frank. Players who were present were unable to remember the speech because such expletive-filled outbursts by Knight were so frequent. 

*In March 1992 prior to the NCAA regional finals, controversy erupted after Knight playfully mock whipped Indiana players Calbert Cheaney and Pat Graham during practice. The bullwhip had been given to Knight as a gift from his team. Several black leaders complained at the racial connotations of the act (Cheaney is black.) (Knight: My Story, pg. 297.) 

*In January 1993, Knight mentioned the arrival of Ivan Renko to his team, as a trap to expose unreputable basketball recruiting experts. Even though Renko was completely fictitious, several recruiting services started listing him as a prospect.

*Knight was shown berating an NCAA volunteer at a March 1995 post-game press conference following a 65&ndash;60 loss to Missouri in the first round of the NCAA tournament held in Boise, Idaho. The volunteer, Rance Pugmire, informed the press that Knight would not be attending the press conference, when in reality, Knight was running a few minutes late and had planned on attending per NCAA rules. Knight was shown saying: "You've only got two people that are going to tell you I'm not going to be here. One is our SID Information Director, and the other is me. Who the hell told you I wasn't going to be here? I'd like to know. Do you have any idea who it was?...Who?...They were from Indiana, right?...No, they weren't from Indiana, and you didn't get it from anybody from Indiana, did you?...No, II'll handle this the way I want to handle it now that I'm here. You (EXPLETIVE) it up to begin with. Now just sit there or leave. I don't give (EXPLETIVE) what you do. Now back to the game." 

*Former IU player Neil Reed alleged that Knight had grabbed him by the neck in a choking manner during a 1997 practice. A videotape of the incident was shown on CNN. 

===2000s===
*On February 19, 2000, Clarence Doninger, Knight's boss, alleged to have been physically threatened by the coach during a confrontation after a game. 

*An IU investigation inquired about an allegation in which Knight berated and physically intimidated a university secretary, once throwing a potted plant in anger, showering her with glass and debris. The University later asked the coach to issue an apology to the secretary. 

*It was alleged that Knight attacked assistant coach Ron Felling, throwing him out of a chair after overhearing him criticizing the basketball program in a phone conversation. 

*On September 8, 2000, IU freshman Kent Harvey told campus police Knight grabbed him roughly by the arm and berated him for speaking to the coach disrespectfully. Knight admitted putting his hand on the student's arm and lecturing him on civility, but denied that he was rough or raised his voice. The coach was fired from IU two days later. 

*Two days after Knight was fired from Indiana University, Jeremy Schaap of ESPN interviewed him and discussed his time at Indiana. Towards the end of the interview, Knight talked about his son, Patrick, who had also been dismissed by the university, wanting an opportunity to be a head coach. Schaap, thinking that Knight was finished, attempted to move on to another subject, but Knight insisted on continuing about his son. Schaap repeatedly tried to ask another question when Knight shifted the conversation to Schaap's style of interviewing, notably chastising him about interruptions. Knight then commented (referring to Schaap's father, Dick Schaap), "You've got a long way to go to be as good as your dad!" 
*In March 2006, a student's heckling at Baylor University resulted in Knight having to be restrained by a police officer. The incident was not severe enough to warrant any action from the Big 12 Conference. 
*On November 13, 2006, Knight was shown allegedly hitting player Michael Prince under the chin to get him to make eye contact. Although Knight didn't comment on the incident afterwards and has not yet done so, Prince, his parents, and Texas Tech Athletic Director Gerald Myers insisted that Knight did nothing wrong and that he merely lifted Prince's chin and told him, "Hold your head up and don't worry about mistakes. Just play the game." Prince commented, "He was trying to teach me and I had my head down so he raised my chin up. He was telling me to go out there and don't be afraid to make mistakes. He said I was being too hard on myself." 
*On October 21, 2007, James Simpson of Lubbock, Texas, accused Knight of firing a shotgun in his direction after he yelled at Knight and another man for hunting too close to his home. Knight denied the allegations. An argument between the two men was recorded via camera phone and aired later on television. 
* On December 17, 2009, Knight insulted longtime rival Kentucky and its coach John Calipari, saying, "We've gotten into this situation where integrity is really lacking and that's why I'm glad I'm not coaching. You see we've got a coach at Kentucky, who put two schools [UMass and Memphis] on probation and he's still coaching. I really don't understand that."

===2010s===
* On April 18, 2011, video surfaced showing Knight responding to a question concerning John Calipari and the University of Kentucky men's basketball team by stating that in the previous season, Kentucky made an Elite Eight appearance with "five players who had not attended a single class that semester." These claims were later disproven by the University and the players in question, including Patrick Patterson, who graduated in three years, and John Wall, who finished the semester in question with a 3.5 GPA. Knight later apologized for his comments stating, "My overall point is that 'one-and-dones' are not healthy for college basketball. I should not have made it personal to Kentucky and its players and I apologize." 

==Head coaching record==

(*) Indicates record/standing at timeof resignation from Texas Tech. 

Source: 

Source: 

==See also==
* List of college men's basketball coaches with 600 wins
* List of NCAA Men's Division I Final Four appearances by coach

==Notes==

==References==
*"The Archives". 2004-05 Army Men's Basketball Media Guide. Retrieved December 23, 2005.
*"History". 2005-06 Indiana Men's Basketball Media Guide. Retrieved December 23, 2005.
*"Texas Tech Record Book". 2005-06 Red Raider Media Guide. Retrieved December 23, 2005.

==External links==

* Texas Tech profile
* 



[[Black metal]]

Black metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music. Common traits include fast tempos, shrieked vocals, highly distorted guitars played with tremolo picking, blast beat drumming, raw (lo-fi) recording and unconventional song structures.

During the 1980s, several thrash metal and death metal bands formed a prototype for black metal. This so-called "first wave" included bands such as Venom, Bathory, Hellhammer and Celtic Frost. A "second wave" arose in the early 1990s, spearheaded by Norwegian bands such as Mayhem, Burzum, Darkthrone, Immortal and Emperor. The early Norwegian black metal scene developed the style of their forebears into a distinct genre. Norwegian-inspired black metal scenes emerged throughout Europe and North America, although some other scenes developed their own styles independently. 

Initially a synonym for "Satanic metal", black metal is often met with hostility from mainstream culture. Many artists express extreme anti-Christian and misanthropic views, and several of the genre's "second wave" pioneers have been convicted for church burnings and murder. There is also a small neo-Nazi movement within black metal, although it has been shunned by most prominent artists. 

== Characteristics ==
Although nowadays, 'black metal' often refers to the Norwegian style with high-pitched or raspy vocals and raw production, it has also been used for bands as different as Death SS, Mercyful Fate, Mayhem, Blasphemy, Emperor. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 274. and the Greek and Finnish bands that emerged around the same time as the Norwegian scene. 

=== Instrumentation ===
Norwegian-inspired black metal guitarists usually favor high-pitched guitar tones and heavy distortion. The guitar is usually played with much use of fast (un-muted) tremolo picking. Guitarists often use dissonancealong with specific scales, intervals and chord progressionsto create a sense of dread. The tritone or flat-fifth is often used, for example. Guitar solos and low guitar tunings are rare in black metal. 

The bass guitar is seldom used to play stand-alone melodies. It is not uncommon for the bass guitar to be muted against the guitar, or for it to homophonically follow the bass lines of the guitar. Typically, drumming is fast and uses double-bass, blast beats, or both.

Black metal songs often stray from conventional song structure and often lack clear verse-chorus sections. Instead, many black metal songs contain lengthy and repetitive instrumental sections.

The Greek styleestablished by Rotting Christ, Varathron and Necromantia J. Campbell: Varathron "Genesis of the Unaltered Evil" DLP/Triple LP and TS Out Now, 30 January 2012, accessed on 13 December 2012. has more traditional heavy metal Chad Bowar: Retro Recommendation: Rotting Christ - Thy Mighty Contract, 24 June 2011, accessed on 13 December 2012. and death metal Stefan Glas: Rotting Christ. Passage to Arcturo. In: Metal Hammer, March 1992, pp. 70f. traits than Norwegian black metal.

=== Vocals and lyrics ===
Traditional black metal bands usually use high-pitched and raspy vocals which include shrieking, screaming and snarling. This vocal style was influenced by Quorthon of Bathory, and is one of the traits that distinguishes the vocals of many traditional black metal artists from those of death metal, which usually uses low-pitched growls.

Black metal was originally used as a term for extreme metal bands with Satanic and anti-Christian lyrics; today, the most common lyrical theme is opposition to Christianity and other organized religions. As part of this, many artists write lyrics that could be seen to promote atheism, antitheism, paganism or Satanism. The anti-Christianity of secular or pagan artists is often linked to the Christianization of their countries. Other oft-explored themes are depression, nihilism, misanthropy, death and other dark topics. However, over time, many artists have begun to focus more on topics like winter, nature, mythology, folklore, philosophy and fantasy. (For more information about black metal lyrics, see the ideology section below.)

=== Production ===
Low-cost production quality was typical for early black metal artists with low budgets, where recordings would often be done in their homes or basements. Even when they were able to raise their production quality, many artists chose to keep making low fidelity (lo-fi) recordings. The reason for this was to stay true to the genre's underground roots and to make the music sound more "raw" and "cold". One of the better-known examples of this is the album Transilvanian Hunger by Darkthrone  a band whom Johnathan Selzer of Terrorizer magazine says "represent the DIY aspect of black metal". Many have claimed that, originally, black metal was not meant to attract a big audience. Trelldom and God Seed vocalist Gaahl said that during its early years, "black metal was never meant to reach an audience, it was purely for our own satisfaction". 

A common black metal trait is the use of corpse paint

=== Imagery and performances ===
Many bands choose not to play live. Marc Spermeth: Besessen von der Dunkelheit und dem Bsen. In: Ablaze, no. 5, May/June 1995, p. 12. Ben Ratliff: Thank You, Professor, That Was Putrid. In: The New York Times, 14 December 2009. Those who do maintain that these "live performances are not for entertainment or spectacle. Sincerity, authenticity and extremity are valued above all else." Some bands consider their concerts to be rituals and often make use of stage props and theatrics. Many bands, such as Mayhem and Gorgoroth, are noted for their controversial shows, which have featured impaled animal heads, mock crucifixions, medieval weaponry and band members doused in animal blood. 

Black metal artists often appear dressed in black with combat boots, bullet belts, spiked wristbands and inverted crosses/pentagrams to reinforce their anti-Christian or anti-religious stance. However, the most stand-out trait is their use of corpse paint  black and white makeup (sometimes mixed with real or fake blood), which is used to create a corpse-like appearance.

In the early 1990s, most pioneering black metal artists used simple black-and-white pictures or writing on their record covers. This could have been meant as a reaction against death metal bands, who at that time had begun to use brightly colored album artwork. Most underground black metal artists have continued this style. In the main, black metal album covers are usually atmospheric or provocative; some feature natural or fantasy landscapes (for example Burzum's Filosofem and Emperor's In the Nightside Eclipse) while others are violent, perverted, sacrilegious and iconoclastic (for example Marduk's Fuck Me Jesus and Dimmu Borgir's In Sorte Diaboli).

== History ==
The following depiction follows a classification according to which pioneers like Venom, Bathory and Hellhammer were part of a "first wave" and the "second wave" was begun by the early Norwegian scene; especially by Mayhem vocalist Dead's suicide, Enrico Ahlig: Marduk-Gitarrist besitzt Leichenteile von Dead, 5 June 2012, accessed on 9 January 2013. Mayhem's leader Euronymous, who founded the Norwegian scene after Dead's suicide, and Darkthrone's album A Blaze in the Northern Sky. Hendrik Mbus: National Socialist Black Metal, accessed on 2 January 2013. Jon "Metalion" Kristiansen: The Saga of True Norwegian Black Metal, accessed on 2 January 2013. Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: Darkthrone. A Blaze in the Northern Sky. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 97. There are also other definitions according to which other albums like Sarcfago's I.N.R.I. Mersus: 5 Klassiker. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 84. or Samael's Worship Him sG: 5 Klassiker. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 79. began the "second wave".

=== First wave ===
The first wave of black metal refers to those bands during the 1980s who influenced the black metal sound and formed a prototype for the genre. They were often speed metal or thrash metal bands. 

The term "black metal" was coined by the English band Venom with their second album Black Metal (1982). Although deemed thrash metal rather than black metal by today's standards, the album's lyrics and imagery focused more on anti-Christian and Satanic themes than any before it. Their music was fast, unpolished in production and with raspy or grunted vocals. Venom's members also adopted pseudonyms, a practice that would become widespread among black metal musicians.

Venom's album titled Black Metal inspired the name of the genre

Another major influence on black metal was the Swedish band Bathory. The band, led by Thomas Forsberg (aka 'Quorthon'), created "the blueprint for Scandinavian black metal". Not only was Bathory's music dark, fast, heavily distorted, lo-fi and with anti-Christian themes, Quorthon was also the first to use the "shrieked" vocals that came to define black metal. The band played in this style on their first four albums: Bathory (1984), The Return of the Darkness and Evil (1985), Under the Sign of the Black Mark (1987) and Blood Fire Death (1988). With Blood Fire Death and the two following albums, Bathory pioneered the style that would become known as Viking metal.

Hellhammer from Switzerland "made truly raw and brutal music" Daniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 244, accessed on 24 January 2013. with Satanic lyrics, and became an important influence on later black metal; "Their simple yet effective riffs and fast guitar sound were groundbreaking, anticipating the later trademark sound of early Swedish death metal". In 1984, members of Hellhammer formed Celtic Frost, Biography, accessed on 24 January 2013. whose music "explored more orchestral and experimental territories. The lyrics also became more personal, with topics about inner feelings and majestic stories. But for a couple of years, Celtic Frost was one of the world's most extreme and original metal bands, with a huge impact on the mid-90's black metal scene". Tom G. Warrior of Hellhammer and Celtic Frost credited English hardcore punk band Discharge as "a revolution, much like Venom", saying, "When I heard the first two Discharge records, I was blown away. I was just starting to play an instrument and I had no idea you could go so far." J. Bennett, "Procreation of the Wicked", Precious Metal: Decibel Presents the Stories Behind 25 Extreme Metal Masterpieces, Albert Mudrian, ed., Da Capo Press, pp. 34f. 

The Danish band Mercyful Fate influenced the Norwegian scene with their imagery and lyrics. Frontman King Diamond, who wore ghoulish black-and-white facepaint on stage, inspired what became known as "corpse paint".

Other artists usually considered part of this movement include Kreator, Sodom and Destruction (from Germany), Bulldozer and Death SS (from Italy), whose vocalist Steve Sylvester was a member of the Ordo Templi Orientis. Death SS. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 474. 

=== End of the first wave ===
In 1987, in the fifth issue of his Slayer fanzine, Metalion wrote that "the latest fad of Black/Satanic bands seems to be over", Incubus. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 88. the tradition being continued by a few bands like Incubus and Morbid Angel (from the United States), Sabbat (from Great Britain), Tormentor (from Hungary), Sarcfago (from Brazil), Grotesque Tiamat. In: Slayer, no. 8, 1991, p. 6. Daniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 249, accessed on 8 October 2012. and Treblinka Daniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 81, accessed on 24 September 2012. /early Tiamat Daniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 162f., accessed on 24 September 2012. (from Sweden).

Other early black metal bands include Sabbat (formed 1983 in Japan), Ronald Ziegler: Merchandise whorery, accessed on 23 June 2013. Parabellum (formed 1983 in Colombia), Salem (formed 1985 in Israel) and Mortuary Drape (formed 1986 in Italy). Gtz Khnemund: Mortuary Drape. Tolling 13 Knell (DLP). In: Rock Hard, no. 174, accessed on 14 June 2013. Japanese band Sigh formed in 1990 and was in regular contact with key members of the Norwegian scene. Their debut album, Scorn Defeat, became "a cult classic in the black metal world". Biography, accessed on 23 June 2013. 

In the years before the Norwegian black metal scene arose, important recordings were released by Root and Master's Hammer (from Czechoslovakia), Von (from the United States), Rotting Christ (from Greece), Samael (from Switzerland) and Blasphemy (from Canada), whose debut album Fallen Angel of Doom (1990) is considered one of the most influential records for the war metal style Robert Mller: Wollt Ihr den ewigen Krieg?. Der tote Winkel. In: Metal Hammer, November 2011. (also known as war black metal or bestial black metal). Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: SARCOFAGO. I.N.R.I. In: Rock Hard, Nr. 304, September 2012, p. 73. Fenriz of the Norwegian band Darkthrone called Master's Hammer's debut album Ritual "the first Norwegian black metal album, even though they are from Czechoslovakia". Fenriz: Darkthrone Biography and Video Clips. 21 November 2009, accessed on 24 September 2012. 

In 1990 and 1991, Northern European metallers began to release music influenced by these bands or the older ones from the first wave. In Sweden this included Marduk, Dissection, Nifelheim and Abruptum. In Finland, there emerged a scene that mixed first wave black metal influences with elements of death metal and grindcore; this included Beherit, Archgoat and Impaled Nazarene, whose debut album Tol Cormpt Norz Norz Norz Rock Hard journalist Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann considers a part of war metal's roots. Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: Impaled Nazarene. Tol Cormpt Norz Norz Norz. In: Rock Hard, no. 307, December 2012, p. 77. Bands such as Demoncy and Profanatica emerged during this time in the United States, when death metal was more popular among extreme metal fans. The Norwegian band Mayhem's concert in Leipzig with Eminenz and Manos in 1990, later released as Live in Leipzig, was said to have had a strong influence on the East German scene Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: Die Knige vom Westwall. Die legendren Protagonisten von damals im exklusiven Interview. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 92. and is even called the unofficial beginning of German black metal. Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: Deutschland, deine Schwarzmetall-Bands. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 89. 

=== Second wave ===

The second wave of black metal began in the early 1990s and was spearheaded by the Norwegian black metal scene. During 19901993 a number of Norwegian artists began performing and releasing a new kind of black metal music; this included Mayhem, Thorns, Burzum, Darkthrone, Immortal, Satyricon, Emperor, Enslaved, Carpathian Forest and Gorgoroth. They developed the style of their 1980s forebears into a distinct genre. This was partly thanks to a new kind of guitar playing developed by Snorre 'Blackthorn' Ruch of Stigma Diabolicum/Thorns and ystein 'Euronymous' Aarseth of Mayhem. Fenriz of Darkthrone has credited them with this innovation in a number of interviews. He described it as being "derived from Bathory" and noted that "those kinds of riffs became the new order for a lot of bands in the '90s". Kory Grow: WEB-EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW: DARKTHRONE'S FENRIZ, PART 2! HIS THOUGHTS ON 'TRANSILVANIAN HUNGER' AND HIP. Some members of these Norwegian bands would be responsible for a spate of crimes and controversy, including church burnings and murder (see below). The scene was bitterly opposed to Christianity and organized religion as a whole. In interviews during the early 1990s, members of the scene presented themselves as misanthropic Devil worshippers who wanted to spread hatred, sorrow and evil. When asked why such statements were made to the press, Ihsahn of Emperor said that this "was very much to create fear among people" and "to be in opposition to society". More detail about the scene's ideologies can be found in the ideology section. Visually, the dark themes of their music was complemented with corpsepaint, which became a way for many black metal artists to distinguish themselves from other metal bands of the era. 

==== Helvete and Deathlike Silence ====
The basement of Helvete, showing graffiti from the early 1990s

During MayJune 1991, Euronymous of Mayhem opened an independent record shop named Helvete (Norwegian for 'hell') in Oslo. It quickly became the focal point of Norway's emerging black metal scene and a meeting place for many of its musicians; especially the members of Mayhem, Burzum, Emperor and Thorns. Jon 'Metalion' Kristiansen, writer of the fanzine Slayer, said that the opening of Helvete was "the creation of the whole Norwegian Black Metal scene". In its basement, Euronymous founded an independent record label named Deathlike Silence Productions. With the rising popularity of his band and others like it, the underground success of Euronymous's label is often credited for encouraging other record labels, who had previously shunned black metal acts, to then reconsider and release their material.

==== Dead's suicide ====
On 8 April 1991, Mayhem vocalist Per Yngve Ohlin (who called himself 'Dead') committed suicide while alone in a house shared by the band. Fellow musicians described Dead as odd, introverted and depressed. Before going onstage he went to great lengths to make himself look like a corpse and would cut his arms while singing. Mayhem's drummer, Hellhammer, said that Dead was the first to wear the distinctive 'corpse paint' that became widespread in the scene. 

He was found with slit wrists and a shotgun wound to the head. The weapon belonged to Mayhem's guitarist, Euronymous, which lead to rumours that the shotgun was left there to be used by Dead. Dead's suicide note apologized for firing the weapon indoors and ended: "Excuse all the blood". Before calling the police, Euronymous went to a nearby shop and bought a disposable camera with which he photographed the body, after re-arranging some items. One of these photographs was later used as the cover of a bootleg live album: Dawn of the Black Hearts. 

In time, rumors spread that Euronymous had made a stew with bits of Dead's brain and had made necklaces with bits of his skull. Euronymous allegedly gave some of these necklaces to musicians he deemed worthy. He used Dead's suicide to foster Mayhem's 'evil' image and claimed Dead had killed himself because extreme metal had become 'trendy' and commercialized. Mayhem bassist Jrn 'Necrobutcher' Stubberud noted that "people became more aware of the metal scene after Dead had shot himself I think it was Dead's suicide that really changed the scene". 

Two other members of the early Norwegian scene would later commit suicide: Erik 'Grim' Brdreskift (of Immortal, Borknagar, Gorgoroth) in 1999 and Espen 'Storm' Andersen (of Strid) in 2001. Ravn: Strid. In: Slayer, No. 20, Blood Fire Death, 2010, p. 78. 

==== Church burnings ====
The Fantoft stave church 

Musicians and fans of the Norwegian black metal scene took part in over 50 arsons of Christian churches in Norway from June 1992 to 1996. Some of the buildings were hundreds of years old and seen as important historical landmarks. One of the first and most notable was Norway's Fantoft stave church, which police believed was burnt by Varg Vikernes of the one-man band Burzum. The cover of Burzum's EP Aske (Norwegian for 'ashes') is a photograph of the Fantoft stave church after its destruction. In May 1994, he was found guilty for burning down Holmenkollen Chapel, Skjold Church and sane Church. To coincide with the release of Mayhem's De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas, Vikernes and Euronymous had also allegedly plotted to bomb Nidaros Cathedral, which appears on the album cover. The musicians Faust, Samoth, (both of Emperor) and Jrn Inge Tunsberg (of Hades Almighty) were also convicted for church arsons. Members of the Swedish scene started to burn churches in 1993.

Many of those convicted for the church burnings have said that their actions were a symbolic "retaliation" against Christianity in Norway. Mayhem drummer Hellhammer said he had called for attacks on mosques and Hindu temples. Today, opinions on the church burnings differ within the black metal community. Guitarist Infernus and former vocalist Gaahl of the band Gorgoroth have praised the church burnings in interviews, with the latter saying "there should have been more of them, and there will be more of them". However, Necrobutcher and Kjetil Manheim of Mayhem have condemned the church burnings, with the latter claiming "It was just people trying to gain acceptance within a strict group black metal scene ... they wanted some sort of approval and status". Watain vocalist Erik Danielsson respected the attacks, but said of those responsible: "the only Christianity they defeated was the last piece of Christianity within themselves. Which is a very good beginning, of course". Black Metal Satanica, 2008. 

==== Murder of Euronymous ====
In early 1993, animosity arose between Euronymous and Vikernes. On the night of 10 August 1993, Varg Vikernes (of Burzum) and Snorre 'Blackthorn' Ruch (of Thorns) drove from Bergen to Euronymous's apartment in Oslo. Upon their arrival a confrontation began and Vikernes fatally stabbed Euronymous. His body was found on the stairs outside the apartment with 23 cut wounds  two to the head, five to the neck, and sixteen to the back. Steinke, Darcey. "Satan's Cheerleaders". SPIN. February 1996. 

It has been speculated that the murder was the result of either a power struggle, a financial dispute over Burzum records or an attempt at "outdoing" a stabbing in Lillehammer the year before by Faust. Vikernes denies all of these, claiming that he attacked Euronymous in self-defense. He says that Euronymous had plotted to stun him with an electroshock weapon, tie him up and torture him to death while videotaping the event. He said Euronymous planned to use a meeting about an unsigned contract to ambush him. Vikernes, Varg: A Burzum Story: Part II - Euronymous. Burzum.org. On the night of the murder, Vikernes claims he intended to hand Euronymous the signed contract and "tell him to fuck off", but that Euronymous "panicked" and attacked him first. He also claims that most of the cut wounds were caused by broken glass Euronymous had fallen on during the struggle. The self-defense story is doubted by Faust and other members of the scene.

Vikernes was arrested on 19 August 1993 in Bergen. Many other members of the scene were taken in for questioning around the same time. Some of them confessed to their crimes and implicated others. In May 1994, Vikernes was sentenced to 21 years in prison (Norway's maximum penalty) for the murder of Euronymous, the arson of four churches, and for the theft and storage of 150 kg of explosives. However, he only confessed to the latter. Two churches were burnt the day he was sentenced, "presumably as a statement of symbolic support". Vikernes smiled when his verdict was read and the picture was widely reprinted in the news media. Blackthorn was sentenced to eight years in prison for being an accomplice to the murder. That month saw the release of Mayhem's album De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas, which featured Euronymous on guitar and Vikernes on bass guitar. Before the release, Euronymous's family had asked Mayhem's drummer, Hellhammer, to remove the bass tracks recorded by Vikernes. Hellhammer said: "I thought it was appropriate that the murderer and victim were on the same record. I put word out that I was re-recording the bass parts, but I never did". In 2003, Vikernes failed to return to Tnsberg prison after being given a short leave. He was re-arrested shortly after while driving a stolen car with various weapons. Vikernes was released on parole in 2009. 

==== The second wave outside Norway ====
Black metal scenes also emerged on the European mainland during the early 1990s, inspired by the Norwegian scene or the older bands, or both. In Poland, a scene was spearheaded by Graveland and Behemoth. In France, a close-knit group of musicians known as Les Lgions Noires emerged; this included artists such as Mtiilation, Vlad Tepes, Belketre and Torgeist. In Belgium, there were acts such as Ancient Rites and Enthroned. Bands such as Black Funeral, Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariot emerged during this time in the United States.

A notable black metal group in England at the time was Cradle of Filth, who released three demos in a black/death metal style with symphonic flourishes, followed by a studio album, which featured a then-unusual hybrid style of black and gothic metal. The band then abandoned black metal for gothic metal, becoming one of the most successful extreme metal bands to date. John Serba of AllMusic commented that their first album "made waves in the early black metal scene, putting Cradle of Filth on the tips of metalheads' tongues, whether in praise of the band's brazen attempts to break the black metal mold or in derision for its 'commercialization' of an underground phenomenon that was proud of its grimy heritage ". Another English band called Necropolis never released any music, but "began a desecratory assault against churches and cemeteries in their area" and "almost caused Black Metal to be banned in Britain as a result".

The controversy surrounding Absurd drew attention to the German black metal scene. In 1993, the members murdered a boy from their school, Sandro Beyer. A photo of Beyer's gravestone is on the cover of one of their demos, Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke: Black Sun: Aryan Cults, Esoteric Nazism, and the Politics of Identity. NYU Press, 2003. p. 206. Thuringian Pagan Madness, along with pro-Nazi statements. It was recorded in prison and released in Poland by Graveland drummer Capricornus. Absurd: Thuringian Pagan Madness, Capricornus Prod. 1995. The band's early music, however, was more influenced by Oi! and Rock Against Communism (RAC) than by black metal, and described as being "more akin to '60s garage punk than some of the Black Metal of their contemporaries". Alexander von Meilenwald from German band Nagelfar considers Ungod's 1993 debut Circle of the Seven Infernal Pacts, Desaster's 1994 demo Lost in the Ages, Tha-Norr's 1995 album Wolfenzeitalter, Lunar Aurora's 1996 debut Weltengnger and Katharsis's 2000 debut 666 Alexander von Meilenwald: 5 Klassiker. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 82. to be the most important recordings for the German scene. He said they were "not necessarily the best German releases, but they all kicked off something". 

=== After the second wave ===
In the beginning of the second wave, the different scenes developed their own styles; as Alan 'A. A. Nemtheanga' Averill says, "you had the Greek sound and the Finnish sound, and the Norwegian sound, and there was German bands and Swiss bands and that kind of thing". By the mid-1990s, the style of the Norwegian scene was being adopted by bands worldwide, and in 1998, Kerrang! journalist Malcolm Dome said that "black metal as we know it in 1998 owes more to Norway and to Scandinavia than any other particular country". Newer black metal bands also began raising their production quality and introducing additional instruments such as synthesizers and even full-symphony orchestras.

By the late 1990s, the underground deemed many of the Norwegian pioneers, like Emperor, Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann: War Black Metal: Die Extremsten der Extremen. Was bleibt, ist Schutt und Asche. In: Rock Hard, no. 279, pp. 71-73. Tornado: Up Against the Wall Motherfucker!!!!. A Worst Case Scenario Written by Tornado!. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, pp. 406f. Immortal, Dimmu Borgir, Ancient, Covenant/The Kovenant, and Satyricon, to have commercialized or sold out to the mainstream media and "big bastard labels". 

After Euronymous's death, "ome bands went more towards the Viking metal and epic style, while some bands went deeper into the abyss". Since 1993, the Swedish scene had carried out church burnings, grave desecrations and other violent acts. In 1995, Jon Ndtveidt of Dissection joined the Misanthropic Luciferian Order (MLO). Andrea Biagi: Biography Part One. "The First Era", accessed on 25 October 2012. In 1997, he and another MLO member were arrested and charged with shooting dead a 37-year-old man. It was said he was killed "out of anger" because he had "harassed" the two men. Ndtveidt received a 10-year sentence. Andrea Biagi: THE KILLING, accessed on 25 October 2012. As the victim was a homosexual immigrant, Dissection was accused of being a Nazi band, Dissection. Fear the Return!. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 568-570. but Ndtveidt denied this and dismissed racism and nationalism. The Swedish band Shining, founded in 1996, began writing music almost exclusively about depression and suicide, musically inspired by Strid and by Burzum's albums Hvis lyset tar oss and Filosofem. Sabine Langner: Shining. Verzweiflung, mein Erbe. In: Legacy, no. 73, accessed on 27 September 2012. Vocalist Niklas Kvarforth wanted to "force feed" his listeners "with self-destructive and suicidal imagery and lyrics". In the beginning he used the term "suicidal black metal" for his music. Shining (25.04.07). However, he stopped using the term in 2001 because it had begun to be used by a slew of other bands, whom he felt had misinterpreted his vision and were using the music as a kind of therapy rather than a weapon against the listener as Kvarforth intended. He said that he "wouldn't call Shining a black metal band" and called the "suicidal black metal" term a "foolish idea". 

Watain singer Erik Danielsson in torn clothes and covered with blood
According to Erik Danielsson, when his band Watain formed in 1998 there were very few bands who took black metal as seriously as the early Norwegian scene had. A newer generation of Swedish Satanic bands like Watain and Ondskapt, supposedly inspired by Ofermod, Nathan T. Birk: OFERMOD. Stahlschrulle: Ofermod - Tiamt. the new band of Nefandus member Belfagor, put this scene "into a new light". Kvarforth said, "It seems like people actually afraid again". "The current Swedish black metal scene has a particularly ambitious and articulate understanding of mysticism and its validity to black metal. Many Swedish black metal bands, most notably Watain and Dissection, are were affiliated with the Temple of the Black Light, or Misanthropic Luciferian Order , a Theistic, Gnostic, Satanic organization based in Sweden." Upon his release in 2004, Jon Ndtveidt restarted Dissection with new members whom he felt were able to "stand behind and live up to the demands of Dissection's Satanic concept". FAUST LEAVES DISSECTION BECAUSE OF THE SATANIC CONCEPT, accessed on 25 October 2012. He started calling Dissection "the sonic propaganda unit of the MLO" Dissection: Live Legacy, Nuclear Blast 2003. INTERVIEW FOR THE FANS BY THE FANS. - Final Interview with Jon Ndtveidt -, accessed on 25 October 2012. and released a third full-length album, Reinkaos. The lyrics contain magical formulae from the Liber Azerate and are based on the organization's teachings. REINKAS, accessed on 25 October 2012. After the album's release and a few concerts, Ndtveidt said that he had "reached the limitations of music as a tool for expressing what I want to express, for myself and the handful of others that I care about" and disbanded Dissection before committing suicide. Official Statement about Jons Death, 2006, accessed on 25 October 2012. 

A part of the underground scene adopted a Jungian interpretation of the church burnings and other acts of the early scene as the re-emergence of ancient archetypes, which Kadmon of Allerseelen and the authors of Lords of Chaos had implied in their writings, and mixed this interpretation with Paganism and an interest in Nationalism. Varg Vikernes was seen as "an ideological messiah" by some, J. Bennett: NSBM Special Report. although Vikernes had disassociated himself from black metal and his neo-Nazism had nothing to do with that subculture. This led to the rise of National Socialist black metal (NSBM), which Hendrik Mbus of Absurd calls "the logical conclusion" of the Norwegian black metal "movement". Other parts of the scene oppose NSBM as it is "indelibly linked with As Tr and opposed to Satanism", or look upon Nazism "with vague skepticism and indifference". Members of the NSBM scene, among others, see the Norwegian bands as poseurs whose "ideology is cheap", although they still respect Vikernes and Burzum, whom Grand Belial's Key vocalist Richard Mills called "the only Norwegian band that remains unapologetic and literally convicted of his beliefs". 

In France, besides Les Lgions Noires (The Black Legions), a NSBM scene arose. Members of French band Funeral desecrated a grave in Toulon in June 1996, and a 19-year-old black metal fan stabbed a priest to death in Mulhouse on Christmas Eve 1996. According to MkM of Antaeus, the early French scene "was quite easy to divide: either you were NSBM and you had the support from zine and the audience, or you were part of the black legions and you had that 'cult' aura". Ankit: Interview with MKM from Antaeus and Aosoth (French Black Metal), 23 August 2011, accessed on 31 December 2012. Many French bands, like Deathspell Omega and Aosoth, have an avantgarde approach Jan Jaedike: Merrimack. Appetite for Destruction. In: Rock Hard, no. 302, July 2012, p. 62. and a disharmonic sound that is representative of that scene. Tobias Gerber, Sebastian Kessler: Video-Special zum deutschen Black Metal, 11 April 2011, accessed on 31 December 2012. 

In Australia, a scene led by bands like Destryer 666, Vomitor, Hobbs' Angel of Death, Nocturnal Graves and Gospel of the Horns arose. This scene's typical style is a mixture of old school black metal and raw thrash metal influenced by old Celtic Frost, Bathory, Venom and Sodom but also with its own elements. Gtz Khnemund: Gospel of the Horns. Schluss mit dem schngeistigen Quatsch!. In: Rock Hard, no. 306, November 2012, p. 43. 

In Sicily, a scene was created by people like Agghiastru, Rosario Badalamenti and Nadur called Mediterranean scene and led by Inchiuvatu. They decided to use the Sicilian language for the lyrics and were influenced by Mediterranean folk music Grind Zone, n5/2007. and the Italian progressive rock of the seventies. This will to create a "Mediterranean way to black metal" in the mid nineties was also shared by bands like Moonspell and Nightfall. Flash, n160/2002. 

The early American black metal bands remained underground. Some of themlike Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariotjoined an international NSBM organization called the Pagan Front, although Judas Iscariot sole member Akhenaten left the organization. Gunnar Sauermann: Special: Black Metal in den USA. Schwarzes Amerika. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, pp. 88f. Other bands like Averse Sefira never had any link with Nazism. The US bands have no common style. Many were musically inspired by Burzum but did not necessarily adopt Vikernes's ideas. Profanatica's music is close to death metal, Gunnar Sauermann: Verfeindete Brder. Tod gegen Schwarz  Death oder Black Metal?. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, p. 90. while Demoncy were accused of ripping off Gorgoroth riffs. Gunnar Sauermann: Special: Black Metal in den USA. Schwarzes Amerika. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, p. 91. There also emerged bands like Xasthur and Leviathan (whose music is inspired by Burzum and whose lyrics focus on topics like suicide), Janne: I don't consider myself a poet, by any means. Roberto Martinelli: Interview with XASTHUR. In: Maelstrom, no. 11. Nachtmystium, Krallice, Heiko Behr: Black Metal: Da kreischt die Avantgarde. In: Die Zeit, 9 December 2011. Wolves in the Throne Room (a band linked to the crust punk scene and the environmental movement), and Liturgy (whose frontman Hunter Hunt-Hendrix wants to replace traditional black metal's "death and atrophy" with "life and hypertrophy"). Jon Caramanica: If You Celebrate Nihilism, Is It Somethingism?. In: The New York Times, 5 June 2011. These bands eschew black metal's traditional lyrical content for "something more Whitman-esque" and have been rejected by some traditional black metallers for their ideologies Watain. Black Metal Militia. In: Slayer, no. 20, Blood Fire Death, 2010, p. 9. and the post-rock and shoegazing influences some of them have adopted. 

The year 1993 saw the formation of Melechesh in Jerusalem, "undoubtedly the first overtly anti-Christian band to exist in one of the holiest cities in the world". Melechesh began as a straightforward black metal act with their first foray into folk metal occurring on the title track of their 1996 EP The Siege of Lachish. Their subsequent albums saw the group straddling the boundaries between black, death, and thrash metal. A younger band, Arallu, was formed in the late 1990s and has relationships with both Melechesh and Salem. Both Melechesh and Arallu perform a style they describe as "Mesopotamian Black Metal", a blend of black metal with Mesopotamian folk music. 

Since the 2000s, a number of anti-Islamic and anti-religious black metal bandswhose members come from Muslim backgroundshave emerged in the Middle East. Janaza, believed to be Iraq's first female black metal artist, released the demo Burning Quran Ceremony in 2010. Its frontwoman, Anahita, said that her parents and brother were killed by a suicide bomb during the Iraq War. Another Iraqi band, Seeds of Iblis, released their debut EP Jihad Against Islam in 2011 through French label Legion of Death. These bands, along with Tadnees (from Saudi Arabia), False Allah (from Bahrain) and Mosque of Satan (from Lebanon), style themselves as the "Arabic Anti-Islamic Legion". Another Lebanese band, Ayat, drew much attention with their debut album Six Years of Dormant Hatred, released through North American label Moribund Records in 2008. Kelly, Kim. "When Black Metal's Anti-Religious Message Gets Turned on Islam". The Atlantic, 11 July 2012. 

== Stylistic divisions ==
Regarding the sound of black metal, there are two conflicting groups within the genre: "those that stay true to the genre's roots, and those that introduce progressive elements". The former believe that the music should always be minimalist  performed only with the standard guitar-bass-drums setup and recorded in a low fidelity style. One supporter of this train of thought is Blake Judd of Nachtmystium, who has rejected labeling his band black metal for its departure from the genre's typical sound. Snorre Ruch of Thorns, on the other hand, has said that modern black metal is "too narrow" and believes that this was "not the idea at the beginning". 

Since the 1990s, different styles of black metal have emerged and some have melded Norwegian-style black metal with other genres.
* Symphonic black metal is a style of black metal that incorporates symphonic and orchestral elements. This may include the usage of instruments found in symphony orchestras (piano, violin, cello, flute and keyboards), "clean" or operatic vocals and guitars with less distortion.
* Viking metal melds the Nordic black metal style with Nordic folk music and focuses on Viking themes. Viking metal often has a harsh black metal sound, which may be "augmented by sorrowful keyboard melodies". Vocals are typically a mixture of high-pitched shrieks and "clean" choral singing. The origin of Viking metal can be traced to the albums Blood Fire Death (1988) and Hammerheart (1990) by Swedish band Bathory. 
* Pagan metal is metal music with lyrics and imagery that focus on paganism. The Norwegian band In the Woods... was one of the first bands commonly viewed as pagan metal. In the mid-1990s, Irish bands such as Cruachan and Primordial began to combine black metal with Irish folk music.
* Blackened death metal melds death metal with black metal. Examples of blackened death metal bands are Belphegor, Behemoth, Akercocke and Sacramentum. Pretorious, Neil (30 July 2009). "Review - Sacramentum - Far Away from the Sun". The Metal Observer. "If you think that Blackened Death Metal begins and ends with DISSECTION, then think again. SACRAMENTUM seriously dropped the (snow) ball with 'The Coming of Chaos' and 'Thy Black Destiny', but on 'Far Away from the Sun' they really delivered the goods on all fronts." 
* Black-doom, also known as blackened doom, melds doom metal with black metal. Examples of blackened doom bands are Barathrum, REVIEWS. Forgotten Tomb, Woods of Ypres and Katatonia. 
* War metal, also known as war black metal or bestial black metal, is an aggressive, cacophonous and chaotic black metal style, described by Rock Hard journalist Wolf-Rdiger Mhlmann as "rabid" and "hammering". Important influences include first wave band Sodom, first wave/death metal band Possessed as well as old grindcore, black and death metal bands like Repulsion, Autopsy, Sarcfago and the first two Sepultura releases. War metal bands include Blasphemy, Archgoat, Impiety, In Battle, and Zyklon-B. 

== Ideology ==
Taake vocalist Hst  the inverted Christian cross is often used by black metallers to signify their opposition to Christianity

Bands that were part of the 'first wave' had 'Satanic' imagery and lyrics, although most of them were not Satanists. However, for the early 'second wave' bands in Norway, Satanism as an ideology defined black metal. Another part of the scene adopted Paganism, "often coupled with nationalism", although the early Pagan bands did not call themselves 'black metal'. Bands associating themselves with black metal are generally opposed to Christianity and the other major religions. Arguably, this is the only shared belief among those calling their music black metal. Artists who oppose Christianity tend to promote atheism, antitheism, paganism or Satanism. Many artists also write lyrics that appear to be nihilistic and misanthropic. 

An article in the Chronicles of Chaos webzine noted that "An overriding feature of almost all black metal is the fascination with the past". Regarding this, Aaron Weaver from Wolves in the Throne Room said: "I think that black metal is an artistic movement that is critiquing modernity on a fundamental level, saying that the modern world view is missing something". As part of this, some black metal artists have written about or focused on the ancient pre-Christian cultures of their homelands. Sam Dunn noted of the Norwegian scene that "unlike any other heavy metal scene, the culture and the place is incorporated into the music and imagery". In a Norwegian documentary, Fenriz stated that "black metal is individualism above all", and artists tend to be supportive of individualism, although followers of Euronymous tended towards support of anti-individualism. According to Benjamin Hedge Olson's master thesis, "Black Metal is characterized by a conflict between radical individualism and group identity and by an attempt to accept both polarities simultaneously".

Olson writes that some artists hold a belief similar to transcendentalists. They try to leave or "transcend" their physical form and receive knowledge from a higher being. They are dissatisfied with a "world that they feel is devoid of spiritual and cultural significance", want to rise above it and challenge "this secularism with religious fanaticism". Olson calls the concerts by these bands "musical rituals designed to achieve both scenic solidarity and mystical transcendence" and considers the "cknowledgment that the performers, through ritual performance, have transcended their mundane, physical forms and taken on a spiritual persona associated with the deity" as a typical step of black metal concerts he attended.

Some prominent musicians within the scene hold that black metal does not need to represent any particular ideology. For example, Jan Axel Blomberg (Hellhammer) said in an interview with Metal Library that "In my opinion, black metal today is just music". Likewise, Sigurd Wongraven has said that black metal "doesn't necessarily have to be all Satanic, as long as it's dark". Eric Horner commented: "Though many bands base it on Satanic belief, I disagree that it is the only way to be 'black metal'. Black metal to me is pure emotion and individuality with a real vibe to it". However, an article in Metalion's Slayer fanzine attacked musicians that "care more about their guitars than the actual essence onto which the whole concept was and is based upon", and insisted that "the music itself doesn't come as the first priority". 

=== Satanism ===
The downward-pointing pentagram is commonly used by bands in the genre

Black metal was originally a term for extreme metal bands with Satanic lyrics and imagery. However, most of the 'first wave' bands (including Venom, who coined the term 'black metal') were not Satanists and merely used it to provoke. One of the few exceptions was Mercyful Fate singer and Church of Satan member King Diamond, whom Michael Moynihan calls "one of the only performers of the '80s Satanic metal who was more than just a poseur using a devilish image for shock value".

In the early 1990s, many Norwegian black metalers presented themselves as misanthropic Devil worshippers who wanted to spread hatred, sorrow and evil. Mayhem's Euronymous was the key figure behind this ideology. They attacked the Church of Satan for its "freedom and life-loving" views. Esa Lahdenpera: Northern Black Metal Legends. In: Kill Yourself, no. 2, August 1993. Retrieved 30 January 2013. The theistic Satanism they espoused was an inversion of Christianity. Benjamin Hedge Olson wrote that they "transform Venom's quasi-Satanic stage theatrics into a form of cultural expression unique from other forms of metal or Satanism" and "abandoned the mundane identities and ambitions of other forms of metal in favor of religious and ideological fanaticism". Euronymous professed to be in favor of totalitarianism and against individualism, compassion, peace, happiness and fun. When asked why such statements were made to the press, Ihsahn of Emperor said that this "was very much to create fear among people". He added that the scene wanted "to be in opposition to society" and focused "more on just being 'evil' than having a real Satanic philosophy". According to Lords of Chaos, many who knew Euronymoussuch as Kjetil Manheim, Vikernes and Blackthornsay that his "extreme Satanic image" was an act. Mortiis, however, said that Euronymous "was such a devil worshipper you wouldn't believe it", Ian Christe: Sound of the Beast: the Complete Headbanging History of Heavy Metal. New York, NY: Harper Collins, 2004. and Metalion (who knew Euronymous since 1985 and considered him to be his best friend) said that Euronymous "was always telling what he thought worshipping death and being extreme". Tenebris (allegedly Jon Ndtveidt Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011. ) from the Misanthropic Luciferian Order wrote that the Norwegian scene was mainly concerned with ideological Satanism and "vanished with his death in '93". MLO. Misantropiska Lucifer Orden. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 551. As for the other scene members, Sanna Fridh says that there is no evidence to support their early claims of being Devil worshippers, Fridh, Sanna. Satan: The Perfect Man: A Symbol and Gender Analysis of Satanism in Black Metal. University of Gothenburg, 2010. p. 6. and Leif A. Lier, who led the police investigation after Euronymous's death, said he and his men had not met one Satanist. Faust said: "For some people it was bloody serious, but to a lot of them it was all a big hype". At the time, bands who were not theistic Satanists were not deemed 'black metal' by Euronymous and some other scene members (like Faust) and bands with a Norwegian style, but without Satanic lyrics, tended to use other terms for their music. Today there are still prominent musicians  such as Infernus, Arioch, Dr. Rape: Funeral Mist. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, New York: Bazillion Points Books 2011. pp. 420f. Nornagest and Erik Danielsson  who state that black metal bands must be theistic Satanists. Some bands like the reformed Dissection and Watain terrybezer: Unpublished Watain Interview Extras!, 27 March 2009, accessed on 21 November 2012. insist that all members must be of the same Satanic belief, whereas Michael W. Ford of Black Funeral Black Funeral. Embrace The Sounds Of Grim Medieval Vampiric Black Metal.... In: Kill Yourself!!! Magazine, no. 3, 1995, p. 36, accessed on 21 November 2012. and MkM of Antaeus Ophth: AntaeuS, accessed on 21 November 2012. believe black metal must be Satanic but not all band members need to be Satanists. Some bands have moved from Satanism to Paganism; as black metal traditionally is defined by Satanism, "for many 'purist' black metallers, this latter move disqualifies a band as 'black', placing it instead beneath a variety of other modifiers: pagan, Viking, troll, forest, and the like". 

Others shun the belief in Satan, seeing it as "Judeo-Christian" in origin, Varg Vikernes: "A Burzum Story: Part III - The Lie-Propaganda". Burzum.org. "Writing the deeds of Darkness and Evil". Official Bathory website. Retrieved 29 October 2012. and regard Satanists as perpetuating, and playing a part in, the "Judeo-Christian" worldview. "Mayhem vs. Burzum: Opposing views of black metal", Invisible Oranges, 21 September 2011. Quorthon of Bathory said that he used 'Satan' and 'Satanism' to provoke and attack Christianity. However, with his third and fourth albums he began "attacking Christianity from a different angle", realizing that Satanism is a "Christian product" and seeing them both as "religious hocus-pocus". Nevertheless, some artists use Satan as a symbol or metaphor for their beliefs. This includes LaVeyan Satanists (who are atheist) and others. Vocalist Gaahl, who considers himself a Norse Shaman, Tatiana Godarska: GORGOROTH'S GAAHL  INFINITE DIMENSIONS, 19 June 2006, accessed on 28 October 2012. said: "We use the word 'Satanist' because it is Christian world and we have to speak their language When I use the word 'Satan', it means the natural order, the will of a man, the will to grow, the will to become the superman". Interview with Gaahl of Gorgoroth, 7 October 2004. Tartarean Desire Webzine. Varg Vikernes called himself a Satanist in early interviews but "now downplays his former interest in Satanism", saying he was using Satan as a symbol for Odin as the 'adversary' of the Christian God. Det Som Engang Varg. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries, p. 292. He started seeing Satanism as an introduction to Paganism.

The Norwegian band Antestor

=== Unblack metal ===

Unblack metal, or Christian black metal, is music that sounds musically similar to black metal but with artists, lyrics, and imagery that promote Christianity. The Australian band Horde's debut album Hellig Usvart, released through Nuclear Blast in 1994, is often credited as being the first Christian black metal album, although the sole member, known as Anonymous, has stated that "there were similar bands prior to Horde, even in Norway", referring to such bands as Antestor, who formed in 1990, although prior to 1993 they were a death/doom band bearing a different name, Crush Evil. Hellig Usvart caused great controversy in the black metal scene, and death threats were sent to Nuclear Blast Records headquarters demanding them to release the members' names. The name of Anonymous was later revealed as Jayson Sherlock, a drummer for the bands Mortification and Paramaecium.

Many in the black metal scene see "Christian black metal" as an oxymoron. On the British black metal documentary (2007), all interviewed musicians stated, when asked about the matter, that black metal cannot be Christian. The term "Christian black metal" drew mocking replies from black metal musicians, for example Martin Walkyier of the English metal band Sabbat commented: "'Christian black metal?' What do they do? Do they build churches? Do they repair them? (laughs)". In fact, the early unblack metal groups Horde and Antestor refused to call their music "black metal" because they felt that the term was strongly associated with Satanism. Horde called its music "holy unblack metal", and Antestor preferred to call their music "sorrow metal" instead. Horde member Jayson Sherlock posted on Facebook that he did not understand how Christians can play black metal music. "For the life of me, I will never understand why Christians think they can play Black Metal. I really don't think they understand what true Black Metal is." However, many current unblack metal bands, such as Crimson Moonlight, feel that black metal has now changed from an ideological movement to a purely musical genre, and that is why they also call their own music black metal. 

=== National Socialist black metal ===

National Socialist black metal (NSBM) is black metal music by artists who promote National Socialist (Nazi) or similar beliefs through their lyrics and imagery. The ideology of such bands is typically a mix of paganism, white supremacy, white separatism and antisemitism. However, some bands meld these beliefs with Satanism or occultism, rather than paganism. NSBM is not seen as a distinct genre, but as a neo-vlkisch movement or subculture within black metal. Varg Vikernes was the first to bring such views into the scene. Although his music has always been non-political, he began to express such views in writings and interviews after his arrest in 1993. However, he has since distanced himself from the NSBM scene and, although he still holds such beliefs, he refers to himself as an "Odalist" rather than a National Socialist or fascist. Some black metal bands have made references to Nazi Germany for shock value, causing them to be wrongly labeled as NSBM.

NSBM artists are a small minority within black metal, according to Mattias Gardell Gardell, Mattias. Gods of the Blood (2003). and Benjamin Hedge Olson. They have been criticized by some prominent and influential black metal musicians  including Jon Ndtveidt, Tormentor, Metal Heart 2/00 King ov Hell, Infernus, Lord Ahriman, Emperor Magus Caligula, Richard Lederer, Michael W. Ford, and the members of Arkhon Infaustus. Some liken Nazism to Christianity in that it is authoritarian, collectivist, and a "herd mentality". Olson writes that the shunning of Nazism within the scene "has nothing to do with notions of a 'universal humanity' or a rejection of hate" but that Nazism is shunned "because its hatred is too specific and exclusive".

== Media ==

=== Documentaries on black metal ===
* Det svarte alvor (1994)
* Satan Rides the Media (1998)
* Norsk Black Metal (2003) was aired on Norwegian TV by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK).
* (2005) touches on black metal in the early 1990s, and includes an extensive 25-minute feature on the DVD release.
* True Norwegian Black Metal (2007) is a five-part feature from VICE. It explores some of the aspects of the lifestyle, beliefs and controversies surrounding former Gorgoroth vocalist Gaahl. 
* Black Metal: A Documentary (2007), produced by Bill Zebub, explores the world of black metal from the point of view of the artists. There is no narrator and no one outside of black metal takes part in any interview or storytelling.
* Pure Fucking Mayhem (2009) tells the story of the black Metal band Mayhem and the tragedies surrounding them. 
* (2007)
* Once Upon a Time in Norway (2008)
* Black Metal Satanica (2008)
* Until the Light Takes Us (2009) explores black metal's origins and subculture, featuring exclusive interviews and including rare footage from the Black Circle's early days.
* Out of the Black  A Black Metal Documentary (2012), an examination of the musical and social origins of black metal while exploring the full spectrum of the religious ideology within the scene. Also examines black metal in America and the multiple differences between the American and the Scandinavian scene. 
* One Man Metal (2012) explores the lifestyle and thoughts of the members of the three one-man bands Xasthur, Leviathan and Striborg. 
* "Attention! Black Metal" (2012)

=== References in media ===
* A black metal mockumentary Legalize Murder was released in 2006.
* The cartoon show Metalocalypse is about an extreme metal band called Dethklok, with many references to leading black metal artists on the names of various businesses, such as Fintroll's convenience store, Dimmu Burger, Gorgoroth's electric wheelchair store, Carpathian Forest High School, Marduk's Putt & Stuff, Burzum's hot-dogs and Behemoth studios (the man who owns Behemoth studios is also named Mr. Grishnackh). In the episode "Dethdad", Dethklok travels to Norway to both visit Toki's dying father and the original black metal record store, much to the dismay of the band members when they find out the store does not sell any of their music, described by the owner as being "too digital".
* A Norwegian commercial for a laundry detergent once depicted black metal musicians as part of the advertisement. 
* Black metal bands such as 1349, Emperor, Behemoth, Dimmu Borgir, Enslaved and Satyricon have had their videos make appearances on MTV's Headbangers Ball.
* Comedian Brian Posehn made a visual reference to Norwegian black metal bands in the music video for his comedy song "Metal by Numbers". 
* A KFC commercial screened in Canada (2008) and Australia (2010) featuring a fictional black metal band called Hellvetica. Onstage, the band's singer does a fire-eating trick. Once backstage, he takes a bite of the spicy KFC chicken and declares, "Oh man, that is hot".
* An episode of Bones featured the discovery of a human skeleton at a black metal concert in Norway. The episode was called "Mayhem on a Cross" and is the twenty-first episode of the fourth season.
* There are many references to black/extreme metal bands (Bathory, Marduk, Cradle of Filth and Dimmu Borgir) in ke Edwardson's 1999 crime novel Sun and Shadow (Sol och skugga). The plot involves the music of a fictional Canadian black metal band called Sacrament. As part of the inquiry, Inspector Winter tries to distinguish between black and death metal artists. 

== See also ==

* List of black metal bands
* Extreme metal
* Unblack metal

== References ==

=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Bin Laden (disambiguation)]]

bin Laden () is an Arabic language surname synonymous with Osama bin Laden (19572011), it may also pertain to the Saudi Binladin Group, a holding company for the assets of the bin Laden family, and other notable members of Osama's family.

==People==
*Abdallah Osama bin Laden (born 1976), Saudi businessman and son of Osama bin Laden
*Ashin Wirathu, Burmese Buddhist monk labeled "Burmese Bin Laden" for religious intolerance towards Muslims.
*Bakr bin Laden, Saudi businessman and half-brother of Osama bin Laden
*Hamza bin Laden (born 1991), Saudi al-Qaeda figure and son of Osama bin Laden
*Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden (19081967), Saudi businessman who amassed the bin Laden family fortune, father of Osama bin Laden
*Omar bin Laden (born 1981), Saudi son of Osama bin Laden
*Saad bin Laden (19792009), Saudi al-Qaeda figure and son of Osama bin Laden
*Salem bin Laden (19461988), Saudi former head of the bin Laden family and brother of Osama bin Laden
*Tarek bin Laden (born 1947), Saudi businessman and half-brother of Osama bin Laden
*Wafah Dufour (ne bin Laden, born 1975), American model and niece of Osama bin Laden
*Yeslam bin Ladin (born 1950), Swiss businessman and the half-brother of Al-Qaeda leader

==Other uses==
*Osama bin Laden (elephant), an elephant that killed at least 27 people in India from 2004 to 2006
*bin Laden (song), a 2005 hip hop song by Immortal Technique and Mos Def
*bin Laden Weed, a hip hop song on Three 6 Mafia's 2005 album Da Unbreakables
*bin Laden, a nickname for the 500 euro note
*Tere Bin Laden, a 2010 Bollywood comedy film



[[Blizzard Entertainment]]

Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. is an American video game developer and publisher founded on February 8, 1991, under the name Silicon & Synapse by three graduates of UCLA, Michael Morhaime, Allen Adham and Frank Pearce and is currently a subsidiary of American company Activision Blizzard. Based in Irvine, California, the company originally concentrated primarily on the creation of game ports for other studios before beginning development of their own software in 1993 with the development of games like Rock n' Roll Racing and The Lost Vikings. In 1994 the company became Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. before being acquired by distributor Davidson & Associates and later by Vivendi. Shortly thereafter, Blizzard shipped their breakthrough hit .
Blizzard went on to create several successful video games, including the Warcraft sequels, StarCraft, and Diablo series, and the MMORPG World of Warcraft. Their most recent projects include Diablo III, World of Warcraft's fifth expansion, Warlords of Draenor, and the first expansion of StarCraft II, Heart of the Swarm.

On July 9, 2008, Activision officially merged with Vivendi Games, culminating in the inclusion of the Blizzard brand name in the title of the resulting holding company. On July 25, 2013, Activision Blizzard announced the purchase of 429 million shares from owner Vivendi. As a result, Activision Blizzard became an independent company. Activision Blizzard Announces Transformative Purchase of Shares from Vivendi and New Capital Structure. Retrieved July 25, 2013. 
Blizzard Entertainment offers events to meet players and to announce games: the BlizzCon in California, United States, and the Blizzard Worldwide Invitational in other countries, such as Paris, France and Seoul, South Korea.

== History ==
Blizzard's headquarters in Irvine, California
Blizzard Entertainment was founded by Michael Morhaime, Allen Adham, and Frank Pearce as Silicon & Synapse on February 8th 1991, a year after all three had received their bachelor's degrees from UCLA. In the early days the company focused on creating game ports for other studios. Ports include titles such as J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I and Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess. In 1993, the company developed games such as Rock n' Roll Racing and The Lost Vikings (published by Interplay Productions).

In early 1994 they were acquired by distributor Davidson & Associates for $6.75 million. Dean Takahashi: game-development Co-Founder Looks at Chaos in Early Stages and Future Challenges. In: Los Angeles Times, March 13, 1994.  Interview with Allen Adham. The same year the company briefly changed its name to Chaos Studios, before finally settling on Blizzard Entertainment after it was discovered that another company with the Chaos name already existed. Dean Takahashi: Briefcase: Technology. In: Los Angeles Times, May 24, 1994. Shortly thereafter, Blizzard shipped their breakthrough hit .

Blizzard has changed hands several times since then: Davidson was acquired along with Sierra On-Line by a company called CUC International in 1996; CUC then merged with a hotel, real-estate, and car-rental franchiser called HFS Corporation to form Cendant in 1997. In 1998 it became apparent that CUC had engaged in accounting fraud for years before the merger; Cendant's stock lost 80% of its value over the next six months in the ensuing widely discussed accounting scandal. The company sold its consumer software operations, Sierra On-line which included Blizzard, to French publisher Havas in 1998, the same year Havas was purchased by Vivendi. Blizzard was part of the Vivendi Games group of Vivendi. In July 2008 Vivendi Games merged with Activision, using Blizzard's name in the resulting company, Activision Blizzard.

In 1996, Blizzard acquired Condor Games, which had been working on the game Diablo for Blizzard at the time. Condor was renamed Blizzard North, and has since developed hit games Diablo, Diablo II, and its expansion pack . Blizzard North was located in San Mateo, California; the company originated in Redwood City, California.

Blizzard launched their online gaming service Battle.net in January 1997 with the release of their action-RPG Diablo. In 2002, Blizzard was able to reacquire rights for three of its earlier Silicon & Synapse titles from Interplay Entertainment and re-release them under Game Boy Advance. In 2004, Blizzard opened European offices in the Paris suburb of Vlizy, Yvelines, France, responsible for the European in-game support of World of Warcraft. On November 23, 2004, Blizzard released World of Warcraft, its MMORPG offering. On May 16, 2005, Blizzard announced the acquisition of Swingin' Ape Studios, a video game developer which had been developing . The company was then merged into Blizzard's other teams after StarCraft: Ghost was "postponed indefinitely". On August 1, 2005, Blizzard announced the consolidation of Blizzard North into the headquarters at 131 Theory in UC Irvine's University Research Park in Irvine, California. In 2008, Blizzard moved their headquarters to 16215 Alton Parkway in Irvine, California.

World of Warcraft was the fourth released game set in the fantasy Warcraft universe, which was first introduced by in 1994. This excludes expansion packs and the cancelled . Blizzard announced World of Warcraft on September 2, 2001. The game was released on November 23, 2004, on the 10th anniversary of the Warcraft franchise.

The first expansion set of the game, of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade|The Burning Crusade], was released on January 16, 2007. The second expansion set, of Warcraft: Wrath of the Lich King|Wrath of the Lich King], was released on November 13, 2008. The third expansion set, of Warcraft: Cataclysm|Cataclysm] entered into closed beta testing in late June 2010 and was released to the public on December 7, 2010. 

With more than 10 million monthly subscriptions in October 2010, World of Warcraft is currently the world's most-subscribed MMORPG, "MMOG Active Subscriptions 21.0", MMOGCHART.COM, June 29, 2006. and holds the Guinness World Record for the most popular MMORPG by subscribers. In April 2008, World of Warcraft was estimated to hold 62 percent of the MMORPG subscription market. In 2008, Blizzard was honored at the 59th Annual Technology & Engineering Emmy Awards for the creation of World of Warcraft. Mike Morhaime accepted the award.

As the website Gamasutra in February 2012 writes, Blizzard Entertainment will lay off around 600 employees "in order to address the changing needs of our company", as the Blizzard CEO and co-founder Mike Morhaime in a statement said. Blizzard cuts 600 employees in organizational shift, Gamasutra. Retrieved March 1, 2012. Blizzard has an office in Austin, Texas as well as in numerous countries around the globe. As of 2012 Blizzard has 4,700 employees across 11 cities, including nearly 1,700 located at their headquarters in Irvine, California. 

== Games ==
=== Games Developed ===

 Title Year Platform(s) Genre 
 as Silicon & Synapse 
 RPM Racing 1991 SNES Racing video game 
 The Lost Vikings 1992 Amiga, Amiga CD32, GBA, MS-DOS, Genesis, SNES Side-scrolling video game 
 Rock n' Roll Racing 1993 SNES, Genesis, GBA Racing video game 
 as Blizzard Entertainment 
 Blackthorne 1994 SNES, Sega 32X, MS-DOS, GBA, Mac OS Platform game 
 The Death and Return of Superman 1994 SNES, Genesis Side-scrolling video game 
 1994 MS-DOS, Mac OS Real-time strategy game 
 Justice League Task Force 1995 Genesis, SNES Versus fighting game 
 1995 MS-DOS, Linux, AmigaOS 4, Mac OS, Saturn, PlayStation, Windows Real-time strategy game 
 1996 Mac OS, MS-DOS, PlayStation, Saturn, Windows Expansion pack 
 Diablo 1996 Windows, Mac OS, PlayStation Action role-playing game 
 The Lost Vikings II 1997 SNES, Saturn, PlayStation, Windows Side-scrolling video game 
 StarCraft 1998 Windows, Mac OS, Nintendo 64 Real-time strategy game 
 1998 Windows, Mac OS Expansion pack 
 Warcraft II: Battle.net Edition] 1999 Windows, Mac OS Real-time strategy game 
 Diablo II 2000 Windows, Mac OS, OS X Action role-playing game 
 2001 Windows, Mac OS, OS X Expansion pack 
 2002 Windows, Mac OS, OS X Real-time strategy game 
 2003 Windows, Mac OS, OS X Expansion pack 
 World of Warcraft 2004 Windows, OS X MMORPG 
 2007 Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 2008 Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 2010 Windows, OS X Real-time strategy game 
 2010 Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 Diablo III 2012 Windows, OS X, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 Action role-playing game 
 2012 Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 2013 Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 2014 Windows, OS X, iOS, Android Digital CCG 
 2014 Windows, OS X, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox One Expansion pack 
 In development Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 In development Windows, OS X Expansion pack 
 Heroes of the Storm In development Windows, OS X Multiplayer online battle arena 
 Titan (project name) In development TBA MMO 

=== Ports ===

 Title Year Platform(s) Genre 
 as Silicon & Synapse 
 Battle Chess 1992 Windows 3.x and Commodore 64 ports Chess 
 Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess 1992 Amiga port Chess 
 J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I 1992 Amiga port Role-playing video game 
 Castles 1992 Amiga port Strategy video game 
 MicroLeague Baseball 1992 Amiga port Sports video game 
 Lexi-Cross 1992 Macintosh port Puzzle video game 
 Dvorak on Typing 1992 Macintosh port Educational game 
 1994 Windows 3.x port Mahjong Solitaire 

=== Main franchises ===
Currently, Blizzard has three main franchises in the gaming industry: Warcraft, Diablo, and StarCraft. Multiple games have been released for each of these game series, and other media based around the intellectual property for each franchise. Numerous books have been written to expand the story for each series, along with media such as comics and collectible card games. Blizzard Entertainment announced in 2006 that they will be producing a Warcraft live-action movie. The movie is currently in development, financed and produced by Legendary Pictures, Atlas Entertainment and Film4. 

=== Unreleased games ===
Notable unreleased titles include , which was cancelled on May 22, 1998, Shattered Nations, and , which was "Postponed indefinitely" on March 24, 2006 after being in development hell for much of its lifespan, and whose current status is in question. The company also has a history of declining to set release dates, choosing to instead take as much time as needed, generally saying a given product is "done when it's done." 

Pax Imperia II was originally announced as a title to be published by Blizzard. Blizzard eventually dropped Pax Imperia II, though, when it decided it might be in conflict with their other space strategy project, which became known as StarCraft. THQ eventually contracted with Heliotrope and released the game in 1997 as .

== Warden client ==

Blizzard has made use of a special form of software known as the 'Warden Client'. The Warden client is known to be used with Blizzard's Online Games such as Diablo and World of Warcraft, and the Terms of Service contain a clause consenting to the Warden software's RAM scans while a Blizzard game is running. WoW -> Legal -> Terms of Use. Worldofwarcraft.com (December 9, 2010). Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

The Warden client scans a small portion of the code segment of running processes in order to determine whether any third-party programs are running. The goal of this is to detect and address players who may be attempting to run unsigned code or third party programs in the game. This determination of third party programs is made by hashing the scanned strings and comparing the hashed value to a list of hashes assumed to correspond to banned third party programs. rootkit.com The Warden's reliability in correctly discerning legitimate versus illegitimate actions was called into question when a large scale incident happened when many Linux users were banned after an update to Warden caused it to incorrectly detect Cedega as a cheat program. Linux Users Banned From World of Warcraft? | Linuxlookup. Web.archive.org (February 16, 2008). Retrieved July 8, 2011. Blizzard issued a statement claiming they had correctly identified and restored all accounts and credited them with 20 days play. Blizzard Unbans Linux World of Warcraft Players | Linuxlookup. Web.archive.org (August 3, 2008). Retrieved July 8, 2011. 
Warden scans all processes running on a computer, not just the World of Warcraft game, and could possibly run across what would be considered private information and other personally identifiable information. It is because of these peripheral scans that Warden has been accused of being spyware and has run afoul of controversy among privacy advocates. Guttridge, Luke. (November 8, 2005) WoW's Warden stirs controversy  news  play. Play.tm. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Definitions and Supporting Documents. Antispywarecoalition.org. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Look! what is Blizzard doing on your pc?  MMOsite News Center. News.mmosite.com (November 27, 2006). Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

== Battle.net 2.0 ==

Blizzard released its revamped Battle.net service in 2009. This service allows people who have purchased Blizzard products (StarCraft, II: Wings of Liberty|StarCraft II], Diablo II, and III: Reign of Chaos|Warcraft III], as well as their expansions) to download digital copies of games they have purchased, without needing any physical media.

On November 11, 2009, Blizzard required all World of Warcraft accounts to switch over to Battle.net Accounts. This transition now means that all current Blizzard titles can be accessed, downloaded, and played with a singular Battle.net login. World of Warcraft. World of Warcraft. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

Battle.net 2.0 is the new platform for matchmaking service for Blizzard games which offers players a host of additional features. Players will now be able to track their friend's achievements, view match history, avatars, etc. Players will also be able to unlock a wide range of achievements (rewards for completing game content) for Blizzard games. This means players can enjoy new avatars, decals, badges etc, for their accounts.

The service also allows players to chat simultaneously with players from other Blizzard games. For example, players no longer need to create multiple user names or accounts for most Blizzard products. StarCraft II, Diablo III, Hearthstone, World of Warcraft and the Battle.net Launcher support the ability for users to cross communicate. This means that a player could be in a game of StarCraft II, and he/she may send or receive messages from friends playing World of Warcraft or Diablo III. To enable cross game communication players need to become either Battletag or Real ID friends.

== Privacy controversy and Real ID ==
On July 6, 2010, Blizzard announced that they were changing the way their forums worked to require that users identify themselves with their real name. The reaction from the community was overwhelmingly negative with multiple game magazines calling the change "foolhardy" and an "Epic Fail". Why Blizzards new forum plan is an epic fail. PC Gamer (2010-07-07). Retrieved July 8, 2011. It resulted in a significant user response on the Blizzard forums, including one thread on the issue reaching over 11,000 replies. This included personal details of a Blizzard employee who gave his real name "to show it wasn't a big deal". Shortly after revealing his real name, forum users posted personal information including his phone number, picture, age, and home address. 

Some technology media outlets suggested that displaying real names through Real ID is a good idea and would benefit both Battle.net and the Blizzard community. But others were worried that Blizzard were opening their fans up to real-life dangers such as stalking, harassment, and employment issues, since a simple Internet search by someone's employer can reveal their online activities. Geeking Out About 21st Century Digital REDACTED. Geekingoutabout.com (2010-07-06). Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

Blizzard initially responded to some of the concerns by saying that the changes would not be retroactive to previous posts, that parents could set up the system so that minors cannot post, and that posting to the forums is optional. However, due to the huge negative response, Blizzard President Michael Morhaime issued a statement rescinding the plan to use real names on Blizzard's forums for the time being. World of Warcraft  English (NA) Forums -> Regarding real names in forums. Forums.worldofwarcraft.com. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

Apart from the negative side effects of Real ID relating to privacy, the new addition boasts new features for current Blizzard titles. For instance, real names for friends, cross-realm and cross-game chat, rich presence and broadcasts are included with the Real ID system. 

Real names for friends: Real ID friends will appear under their real-life names on friends lists. This means that when chatting, communicating in-game, or viewing a character's profile, the user will be able to retrieve the player's account name as opposed to the character name. Blizzard offers the rationalization that "this saves the hassle of remembering multiple character names in order to communicate" but fail to mention that this means you can always be found when playing the game, no matter what characters or even server you are currently logged in on.

Cross-realm and cross-game chat: With Real ID, friends can chat cross-realm and cross-faction in World of Warcraft. Prior to Real ID this was not possible as players needed to be on the same server and same faction in order to communicate. Furthermore, cross game chat was not available to players playing different Blizzard titles. This is no longer the case as Real ID allows players to chat across different Blizzard games like Starcraft 2 to Diablo 3 to World of Warcraft.

Rich Presence: This feature allows players to track and monitor what their friends are playing in real time. This means when they open their friends list they will be able to view the current game their friend might be playing.
Broadcasts: Allows players to broadcast a short status message for their friends to see. This means a player can make his or her status busy, available, etc. In additon, a player can send out short messages to update any change of plans which can be viewed by all friends.

== Legal disputes ==
===StarCraft privacy lawsuit===
In 1998 Donald P. Driscoll, an Albany, California attorney filed a suit on behalf of Intervention, Inc., a California consumer group against Blizzard Entertainment for "unlawful business practices" for the action of collecting data from a user's computer without their permission. Errata: Blizzard Entertainment. Attrition.org. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

=== FreeCraft ===

On June 20, 2003, Blizzard issued a cease and desist letter to the developers of an open source clone of the Warcraft engine called FreeCraft, claiming trademark infringement. This hobby project had the same gameplay and characters as Warcraft II, but came with different graphics and music.

As well as a similar name, FreeCraft enabled gamers to use Warcraft II graphics, provided they had the Warcraft II CD. The programmers of the clone shut down their site without challenge. Soon after that the developers regrouped to continue the work by the name of Stratagus. Howard Wen, '&#39;Stratagus: Open Source Strategy Games'&#39; linuxdevcenter.com July 15, 2004. Linuxdevcenter.com. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

=== World of Warcraft Private Server Complications ===
On December 5, 2008, Blizzard issued a cease and desist letter to many administrators of high population World of Warcraft private servers (essentially slightly altered hosting servers of the actual World of Warcraft game, that players do not have to pay for). Blizzard used the Digital Millennium Copyright Act to influence many private servers to fully shut down and cease to exist. Blizzard legal targets private servers (Accessed Oct. 12, 2009) In 2008 a private server by the name of ChaosCrusade was served with a DMCA notification. 

=== Founder Electronics infringement lawsuit ===
On August 14, 2007, Beijing University Founder Electronics Co., Ltd. sued Blizzard Entertainment Limited for copyright infringement claiming 100 million yuan in damages. The lawsuit alleged the Chinese edition of World of Warcraft reproduced a number of Chinese typefaces made by Founder Electronics without permission. Founder prosecuting Blizzard online game World of Warcraft Tort Claiming 100 million yuan. Foundertype.com (August 14, 2007). Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

=== MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. ===

On July 14, 2008, the U.S. District of Arizona ruled on the case MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. The Court found that MDY was liable for copyright infringement since users of its Glider bot program were breaking the End User License Agreement and Terms of Use for World of Warcraft. MDY Industries appealed the judgment of the district court, and a judgment was delivered by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals on December 14, 2010, in which the summary judgment against MDY for contributory copyright infringement was reversed. Nevertheless, they ruled that the bot violated the DMCA and the case was sent back to the district court for review in light of this decision. 

=== Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. v. Valve Corporation ===
Shortly after Valve Corporation filed its trademark for "Dota" to secure the franchising rights for Dota 2, DotA-Allstars, LLC, run by former contributors to the games's predecessor, Defense of the Ancients, filed an opposing trademark in August 2010. DotA All-Stars, LLC was sold to Blizzard Entertainment in 2011. After the opposition was overruled in Valve's favor, Blizzard filed an opposition against Valve in November 2011, citing their license agreement with developers, as well as their ownership of DotA-Allstars, LLC. Blizzard conceded their case in May 2012, however, giving Valve undisputed commercial rights to Dota, while Blizzard would rename their StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm mod "Blizzard All-Stars", which would become the stand-alone game, Heroes of the Storm. 

== Related companies ==
Over the years, some former Blizzard employees have moved on and established gaming companies of their own:
* Flagship Studios, creators of , also worked on Mythos.
* ArenaNet, ArenaNet. Web.archive.org (December 6, 2006). Retrieved July 8, 2011. creators of the Guild Wars franchise.
* Ready at Dawn Studios, creators of Daxter, and an kami port for the Wii.
* Red 5 Studios, Red 5 Studios currently working on Firefall, a free to play game MMOG.
* Castaway Entertainment, About Castaway Entertainment. Web.archive.org (January 12, 2008). Retrieved July 8, 2011. currently in a state of financial crisis, ceased working on a game similar to the Diablo series, Djinn.
* Click Entertainment, Click Entertainment. Eurogamer.net (April 27, 2001). Retrieved July 8, 2011. creators of Throne of Darkness.
* Carbine Studios, Carbine Studios. Carbine Studios. Retrieved July 8, 2011. currently working on a massively multiplayer title WildStar.
* Turpitude Design, founded by Stieg Hedlund.
* Hyboreal Games, Hyboreal Games Q&A  Shacknews  video games, PlayStation, Xbox 360 and Wii video game news, previews and downloads founded by Michio Okamura.
* Runic Games, founded by Travis Baldree, Erich Schaefer, and Max Schaefer; creators of Torchlight.
* Trion Worlds, currently working on the games Rift, Defiance and End of Nations.
* Undead Labs, founded by Jeff Strain and worked on the video game State of Decay.

== See also ==

* Blizzard North
* BlizzCon

== References ==

== External links ==

* Blizzard's website
* Blizzard UK's website
* Battle.Net website



[[Robert Bellarmine]]

Saint Robert Bellarmine, S.J. (; 4 October 1542  17 September 1621) was an Italian Jesuit and a Cardinal of the Catholic Church. He was one of the most important figures in the Counter-Reformation. He was canonized in 1930 and named a Doctor of the Church. Bellarmine is also widely remembered for his role in the Galileo affair.

==Early life==
Bellarmine was born at Montepulciano, the son of noble, albeit impoverished, parents, Vincenzo Bellarmino and his wife Cinzia Cervini, who was the sister of Pope Marcellus II. Smith, (2009). As a boy he knew Virgil by heart and composed a number of poems in Italian and Latin. One of his hymns, on Mary Magdalene, is included in the Breviary.

He entered the Roman novitiate in 1560, remaining in Rome three years. He then went to a Jesuit house at Mondov, in Piedmont, where he learned Greek. While at Mondov, he came to the attention of Francesco Adorno, the local Jesuit Provincial Superior, who sent him to the University of Padua. 

==Career==
Bellarmine's systematic study of theology began at Padua in 1567 and 1568, where his teachers were adherents of Thomism. In 1569 he was sent to finish it at the University of Leuven in Flanders. There he was ordained, and obtained a reputation both as a professor and a preacher. He was the first Jesuit to teach at the university, where the subject of his course was the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas. His residence in Leuven lasted seven years. In poor health, in 1576 he made a journey to Italy. Here he remained, commissioned by Pope Gregory XIII to lecture on polemical theology in the new Roman College (now known as the Pontifical Gregorian University. 

===New duties after 1589===
Until 1589, Bellarmine was occupied as professor of theology. After the murder in that year of Henry III of France, Pope Sixtus V sent Enrico Caetani as legate to Paris http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/bios1585-ii.htm#Caetani to negotiate with the Catholic League of France, and chose Bellarmine to accompany him as theologian. http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/bios1599#Bellarmino He was in the city during its siege by Henry of Navarre.

The next pope, Clement VIII, set great store by him. He was made rector of the Roman College in 1592, examiner of bishops in 1598, and cardinal in 1599. Immediately after his appointment as Cardinal, Pope Clement made him a Cardinal Inquisitor, in which capacity he served as one of the judges at the trial of Giordano Bruno, and concurred in the decision which condemned Bruno to be burned at the stake as a heretic. Blackwell (1991, pp. 47&ndash;48). 

In 1602 he was made archbishop of Capua. He had written against pluralism and non-residence of bishops within their dioceses. As bishop he put into effect the reforming decrees of the Council of Trent. He received some votes in the 1605 conclaves which elected Pope Leo XI, Pope Paul V, and in 1621 when Pope Gregory XV was elected, but only in the second conclave of 1605 was he papabile. 

===The Galileo case===
In 1616, on the orders of Paul V, Bellarmine summoned Galileo, notified him of a forthcoming decree of the Congregation of the Index condemning the Copernican doctrine of the mobility of the Earth and the immobility of the Sun, and ordered him to abandon it. Blackwell (1991, p. 126). The Vatican archives contain an unsigned copy of a more strongly worded formal injunction purporting to have been served on Galileo shortly after Bellarmine's admonition, ordering him "not to hold, teach, or defend" the condemned doctrine "in any way whatever, either orally or in writing", and threatening him with imprisonment if he refused to obey. However, whether this injunction was ever properly served on Galileo is a subject of much scholarly disagreement.(Blackwell, 1991, p. 127&ndash;128) Galileo agreed to do so. Fantoli (2005, p.119). Some scholars have suggested that Galileo's agreement was only obtained after some initial resistance. Otherwise, the formal injunction purporting to have been served on him during his meeting with Bellarmine (see earlier footnote) would have been contrary to the Pope's instructions (Fantoli. 2005, pp.121, 124). 

When Galileo later complained of rumors to the effect that he had been forced to abjure and do penance, Bellarmine wrote out a certificate denying the rumors, stating that Galileo had merely been notified of the decree and informed that, as a consequence of it, the Copernican doctrine could not be "defended or held". Blackwell (1991, p.127). Unlike the previously mentioned formal injunction (see earlier footnote), this milder restriction would have allowed Galileo to continue using and teaching the mathematical content of Copernicus's theory as a purely theoretical device for predicting the apparent motions of the planets. Maurice Finocchiaro's English translations of the purported formal injunction, the decree of the Congregation of the Index and Cardinal Bellarmine's certificate are available on-line. Cardinal Bellarmine believed such a demonstration could not be found because it would contradict the unanimous consent of the Fathers' scriptural exegesis, to which the Council of Trent, in 1546, defined all Catholics must adhere. Bellarmine's 12 April 1615 letter to Galileo, translated in 

Bellarmine wrote to heliocentrist Paolo Antonio Foscarini: the Council Trent prohibits interpreting Scripture against the common consensus of the Holy Fathers; and if Your Paternity wants to read not only the Holy Fathers, but also the modern commentaries on Genesis, the Psalms, Ecclesiastes, and Joshua, you will find all agreeing in the literal interpretation that the sun is in heaven and turns around the earth with great speed, and that the earth is very far from heaven and sits motionless at the center of the world.andI say that if there were a true demonstration that the sun is at the center of the world and the earth in the third heaven, and that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles the sun, then one would have to proceed with great care in explaining the Scriptures that appear contrary, and say rather that we do not understand them than that what is demonstrated is false. But I will not believe that there is such a demonstration, until it is shown me. Nor is it the same to demonstrate that by assuming the sun to be at the center and the earth in heaven one can save the appearances, and to demonstrate that in truth the sun is at the center and the earth in heaven; for I believe the first demonstration may be available, but I have very great doubts about the second, and in case of doubt one must not abandon the Holy Scripture as interpreted by the Holy Fathers.

In 1633, nearly twelve years after Bellarmine's death, Galileo was again called before the Inquisition in this matter.

Modern physicist Pierre Duhem "suggests that in one respect, at least, Bellarmine had shown himself a better scientist than Galileo by disallowing the possibility of a 'strict proof of the earth's motion,' on the grounds that an astronomical theory merely 'saves the appearances' without necessarily revealing what 'really happens.'" McMullin (2008) 

==Death==
In his old age he was bishop of Montepulciano for four years, after which he retired to the Jesuit college of St. Andrew in Rome, where he died on 17 September 1621, aged 78.

==Works==
Bellarmine's books bear the stamp of their period; the effort for literary elegance (so-called "maraviglia") had given place to a desire to pile up as much material as possible, to embrace the whole field of human knowledge, and incorporate it into theology. His controversial works provoked many replies, and were studied for some decades after his death. On Laymen or Secular People; On the Temporal Power of the Pope. Against William Barclay; and On the Primary Duty of the Supreme Pontiff, are included in Bellarmine, On Temporal and Spiritual Authority, Stefania Tutino, trans., Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 2012 At Leuven he made extensive studies in the Church Fathers and scholastic theologians, which gave him the material for his book De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis (Rome, 1613). It was later revised and enlarged by Sirmond, Labbeus, and Casimir Oudin. Bellarmine wrote the preface to the new Sixto-Clementine Vulgate. 

===Dogmatics===

From his research grew his Disputationes de controversiis christianae fidei (also called Disputationes), first published at Ingolstadt in 1581&ndash;1593. This major work was the earliest attempt to systematize the various religious controversies of the time. Bellarmine devoted eleven years to it while at the Roman College. The first volume of the Disputationes treats of the Word of God, of Christ, and of the Pope; the second of the authority of ecumenical councils, and of the Church, whether militant, expectant, or triumphant; the third of the sacraments; and the fourth of Divine grace, free will, justification, and good works. 

===Venetian Interdict===

Under Pope Paul V (reigned 1605&ndash;1621), a major conflict arose between Venice and the Papacy. Paolo Sarpi, as spokesman for the Republic of Venice, protested against the papal interdict, and reasserted the principles of the Council of Constance and of the Council of Basel, denying the pope's authority in secular matters. Bellarmine wrote three rejoinders to the Venetian theologians, and may have warned Sarpi of an impending murderous attack. 

===Allegiance oath controversy and papal authority===

Bellarmine also became involved in controversy with King James I of England. From a point of principle for English Catholics, this debate drew in figures from much of Western Europe. W. B. Patterson, James VI and I and the Reunion of Christendom (1997), pp. 76-77. It raised the profile of both protagonists, King James as a champion of his own restricted Calvinist Protestantism, and Bellarmine for Tridentine Catholicism.

===Devotional works===
During his retirement, he wrote several short books intended to help ordinary people in their spiritual life: De ascensione mentis in Deum per scalas rerum creatorum opusculum (The Mind's Ascent to God) (1614) which was translated into English as Jacob's Ladder (1638) without acknowledgement by Henry Isaacson, http://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/eebo/A08025.0001.001?view=toc The Art of Dying Well (1619) (in Latin, English translation under this title by Edward Coffin), and The Seven Words on the Cross.

==Canonization and final resting place==
Bellarmine was canonized by Pope Pius XI in 1930; the following year he was declared a Doctor of the Church. His remains, in a cardinal's red robes, are displayed behind glass under a side altar in the Church of Saint Ignatius, the chapel of the Roman College, next to the body of his student, St. Aloysius Gonzaga, as he himself had wished. In the Roman Catholic calendar of saints Saint Robert Bellarmine's feast day is on 17 September, the day of his death; but some continue to use pre-1969 calendars, in which for 37 years his feast day was on 13 May. The rank attributed to his feast has been "double" (1932&ndash;1959) and its equivalent "third-class feast" (1960&ndash;1968); in 1969 it was downgraded to an "optional memorial". 

==Legacy==
Bellarmine University in Louisville, Kentucky is named after him, as are Bellarmine College Preparatory in San Jose, California and Bellarmine Preparatory School in Tacoma, Washington. Fairfield University has a Bellarmine Hall dedicated to the saint.

St. Robert Bellarmine, a church in the New Orleans suburb of Arabi, Louisiana, was destroyed shortly after its completion by Hurricane Betsy in 1965. The church was put completely underwater in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina and took on more water from Hurricane Rita less than a month later. The parish was permanently dissolved by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans immediately after Rita, and its territory was absorbed by Our Lady of Prompt Succor in neighboring Chalmette.

==Footnotes==

==References==

*Bellarmine, Robert, Spiritual Writings, New York: Paulist Press, 1989. eds., Roland J. Teske and John Patrick Donnelly ISBN 0-8091-0389-3.
* 
* 
* 
*
*

==External links==

*Bellarmine's Letters at Historical Archives of the Pontifical Gregorian University
*St. Robert Bellarmine from Fr. Alban Butler's Lives of the Saints
*
*CERL page
*Episodes from his life at Catholic forum web-site.
*De Laicis (treatise on civil government) in English translation
*The Seven Words on the Cross
*The Eternal Happiness of the Saints
*The Art of Dying Well (archive.org)
*The Art of Dying Well (text PDF)
*The Writings of St. Robert Bellarmine as a Source for the Declaration of Independence
* Saint Robert Bellarmine: A Moderate in a Disputatious Age



[[Bildungsroman]]

In literary criticism, a Bildungsroman (; ), novel of formation, novel of education, Encyclopdia Britannica or coming-of-age story (though it may also be known as a subset of the coming-of-age story) is a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood (coming of age), and in which, therefore, character change is extremely important. 

==History==
The term was coined in 1819 by philologist Karl Morgenstern in his university lectures, and later famously reprised by Wilhelm Dilthey, who legitimized it in 1870 and popularized it in 1905. The genre is further characterized by a number of formal, topical, and thematic features. Iversen 2010; Change and Continuity The term coming-of-age novel is sometimes used interchangeably with Bildungsroman, but its use is usually wider and less technical.

The birth of the Bildungsroman is normally dated to the publication Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship by Johann Wolfgang Goethe in 179596. Although the Bildungsroman arose in Germany, it has had extensive influence first in Europe and later throughout the world. Thomas Carlyle translated Goethes novel into English, and after its publication in 1824, many British authors wrote novels inspired by it. In the 20th century, it has spread to Germany, Britain, France, Moretti (1987) and Hirsh and several other countries around the globe.

The genre translates fairly directly into cinematic form, the coming-of-age film.

==Plot outline==
A Bildungsroman relates the growing up or "coming of age" of a sensitive person who goes in search of answers to life's questions with the expectation that these will result from gaining experience of the world. The genre evolved from folklore tales of a dunce or youngest son going out in the world to seek his fortune. Usually in the beginning of the story there is an emotional loss which makes the protagonist leave on his journey. In a Bildungsroman, the goal is maturity, and the protagonist achieves it gradually and with difficulty. The genre often features a main conflict between the main character and society. Typically, the values of society are gradually accepted by the protagonist and he/she is ultimately accepted into society  the protagonist's mistakes and disappointments are over. In some works, the protagonist is able to reach out and help others after having achieved maturity.

There are many variations and subgenres of Bildungsroman that focus on the growth of an individual. An Entwicklungsroman ("development novel") is a story of general growth rather than self-cultivation. An Erziehungsroman ("education novel") focuses on training and formal schooling, while a Knstlerroman ("artist novel") is about the development of an artist and shows a growth of the self. Werlock, James P. (2010) The Facts on File companion to the American short story, Volume 2, p. 387 

==Examples==

===Precursors===
* Hayy ibn Yaqdhan, by Ibn Tufail (12th century), a precursor of the genre 
*Lazarillo de Tormes (1554) 

===18th Century===
* The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, by Henry Fielding (1749) 
* Candide, by Voltaire (1759) 
* The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, by Laurence Sterne (1759) 
* Emile, or On Education, by Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1763)
*Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship, by Johann Wolfgang Goethe (179596)

===19th Century===
* Jane Eyre, by Charlotte Bront (1847) http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/bronte/cbronte/bildungs.html 
* Pendennis, by William Makepeace Thackeray (18481850)
* David Copperfield, by Charles Dickens (1850)
* Green Henry, by Gottfried Keller (1855) 
* Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens (1861)
* The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, by Mark Twain (1884)
* What Maisie Knew, by Henry James (1897) "Formalism and the Novel: Henry James," in Martin Coyle et al., eds., Encyclopedia or Literature and Criticism (New York: Routledge Florence, 1990), p. 593. 

===20th Century===

* Martin Eden, by Jack London (1909) 
* The Book of Khalid, by Ameen Rihani (1911) Geoffrey Nash, "Ameen Rihani's The Book of Khalid and the Voice of Thomas Carlyle," New Comparison Journal, no. 17, The British Comparative Literature Association, University of Essex, Colchester, UK, 1994. 
* Sons and Lovers, by D. H. Lawrence (1913) 
* A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, by James Joyce (1916) 
* by Hermann Hesse (1919, prologue added in 1960)
* This Side of Paradise by F. Scott Fitzgerald (1920) Hendriksen, Jack; This side of paradise as a Bildungsroman; ISBN 0-8204-1852-8 
* Pather Panchali, by Bibhutibhushan Bandopadhyay (1929) 
* Black Boy, by Richard Wright (1945), http://www.blackstone.lioninc.org/bildungsroman.pdf 
* The Catcher in the Rye, by J.D. Salinger (1951) 
* The Voyage of the Dawn Treader (for plot character Eustace Scrubb) by C. S. Lewis (1952)
* Goodbye, Columbus, by Philip Roth (1959) 
* A Separate Peace, by John Knowles (1959)
* To Kill a Mockingbird, by Harper Lee (1960) 
* Dune, by Frank Herbert (1965) 
* The Outsiders, by S. E. Hinton (1967) 
* A Wizard of Earthsea, by Ursula K. Le Guin (1968) 
* Bless Me, Ultima, by Rudolfo Anaya (1972)
* Bright Lights, Big City, by Jay McInerney (1984) http://www.randomhouse.com/kvpa/mcinerney/introduction_to_the_good_life_and_jays_tour.html 
* Ender's Game, by Orson Scott Card (1985) 
* Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, by Jeanette Winterson (1985) 
* Norwegian Wood, by Haruki Murakami (1987) 
* English Music, by Peter Ackroyd (1992) 
* The Perks of Being a Wallflower, by Stephen Chbosky (1999) 

===21st Century===
* Persepolis, by Marjane Satrapi (2000) 
* The Secret Life of Bees, by Sue Monk Kidd (2002) 
* The Kite Runner, by Khaled Hosseini (2003) 
* Never Let Me Go, by Kazuo Ishiguro (2005) 
* Indecision, by Benjamin Kunkel (2005) 
* Black Swan Green, by David Mitchell (2006) 
* Indignation, by Philip Roth (2008).
* The Interestings, by Meg Wolitzer (2013) 

==See also==

* Knstlerroman

==Notes==

==Citations==

== References ==
* Abel, Elizabeth, Marianne Hirsch, and Elizabeth Langland. 1983. The Voyage In: Fictions of Female Development. Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England.
* Bakhtin, Mikhail. Mikhail. 1996. The Bildungsroman and its Significance in the History of Realism. In Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Edited by Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin, Tex.: University of Texas Press, 1059.
* Engel, Manfred (2008): Variants of the Romantic 'Bildungsroman' (with a Short Note on the 'Artist Novel')". In: Gerald Gillespie, Manfred Engel and Bernard Dieterle (eds.), Romantic Prose Fiction (= A Comparative History of Literatures in European Languages, vol. XXIII; ed. by the International Comparative Literature Association). Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins, pp. 263295. ISBN 978-90-272-3456-8.
* Iversen, Anniken Telnes (2009): Change and Continuity: The Bildungsroman in English. University of Troms, Munin.
* 
* Lynch, Jack (1999) Glossary of Literary and Rhetorical Terms, entry for bildungsroman, Rutgers University
* Summerfield, Giovanna and Downward, Lisa (2010) New Perspectives on the European Bildungsroman

* 
* Feng, Pin-chia Kingston A. 1997. The Female Bildungsroman by Toni Morrison and Maxine Hong Kingston: A Postmodern Reading, Modern American Literature: New Approaches. New York: Peter Lang.
* Japtok, Martin Michael. 2005. Growing up Ethnic: Nationalism and the Bildungsroman in African-American and Jewish-American Fiction. University of Iowa Press.
* Karafilis, Maria. 1998. "Crossing the Borders of Genre: Revisions of the Bindungsroman in Sandra Cisneros's the House on Mango Street and Jamaica Kincaid's Annie John." Journal of the Midwest Modern Language Association. 31, no. 2: 6378.
* Minden, Michael (1997): The German Bildungsroman: Incest and Inheritance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Moretti, Franco. 1987. The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European Culture. London: Verso.
* Nyatetu-Waigwa, Wangari wa. 1996. The Liminal Novel: Studies in the Francophone-African Novel as Bildungsroman. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
* Otano, Alicia. 2005. Speaking the Past: Child Perspective in the Asian American Bildungsroman, Contributions to Asian American Literary Studies. Lit Verlag.

==External links==

* List of literary genres by GCMS Elementary School Library
* Genres by Brooklyn College
* Literary genre by Perspectives on Theistic Evolution
* Undergraduate digital humanities project featuring articles and personal narratives

 



[[Bachelor]]

A bachelor is a man who is neither married nor cohabitating and who lives independently outside of his parents' home or other institutional setting. "men who live independently, outside of their parents' home and other institutional settings, who are neither married nor cohabitating" 
Pitt, Richard and Elizabeth Borland. 2008. "Bachelorhood and Men's Attitudes about Gender Roles" The Journal of Men's Studies 16:140158 

==Origin and medieval usage==

The word is from Anglo-Norman bacheler (later suffixal change to bachelier; cf. escolier "student", from earlier escoler), a young squire in training. The ultimate source of the word is uncertain, it may be from Medieval Latin baccalari(u)s "vassal farmer" or "farm hand" (cf. Provenal bacalar, Tuscan bacalaro "squire"), i.e. one who tends a baccalaria, a term for a grazing farm (from bacca "cow"), Middle Latin meanings: Du Cange (1733), 906-912.
 or it may be from Latin baculum "a stick" (as the knight-in-training would practice with a wooden club before receiving his sword). etymological discussion, with references:
Uwe Friedrich Schmidt, Praeromanica Der Italoromania Auf Der Grundlage Des LEI (A und B), Europische Hochschulschriften 49, 9: Italienische Sprache und Literatur, Peter Lang, 2009, 117-120. 

The Old French term crossed into English around 1300, referring to one belonging to the lowest stage of knighthood. Knights bachelor were either poor vassals who could not afford to take the field under their own banner, or knights too young to support the responsibility and dignity of knights banneret.

From the 14th century, the term was also used for a junior member of a guild (otherwise known as "yeomen") or university; hence, an ecclesiastic of an inferior grade, for example, a young monk or even recently appointed canon; Severtius, de episcopis Lugdunen-sibus, p. 377, in du Cange. and also an inferior grade in scholarship, i.e. one holding a "bachelor's degree" In this sense the word baccalarius or baccalaureus first appears at the University of Paris in the 13th century, in the system of degrees established under the auspices of Pope Gregory IX, as applied to scholars still in statu pupillari. 
Thus there were two classes of baccalarii: the baccalarii cursores, theological candidates passed for admission to the divinity course; and the baccalarii dispositi, who, having completed this course, were entitled to proceed to the higher degrees.

==Use for "unmarried man" in the 19th and 20th centuries==

In the Victorian era, the term eligible bachelor was used in the context of upper class matchmaking, denoting a young man who was not only unmarried and eligible for marriage, but also considered "eligible" in financial and societal terms for the prospective bride under discussion. Also in the Victorian era, the term "confirmed bachelor" denoted a man who was resolute to remain unmarried.

By the later 19th century, the term "bachelor" had acquired the general sense of "unmarried man". The expression bachelor party is recorded 1882. In 1895, a feminine equivalent "bachelor-girl" was coined, replaced in US English by the somewhat humorous "bachelorette" by the mid-1930s. After World War II, this terminology came to be seen as antiquated, and has been mostly replaced by the gender-neutral term "single" (first recorded 1964). In England and Wales, the term "bachelor" remained the official term used for the purpose of marriage registration until 2005, when it was abolished in favour of "single." 

In certain Gulf Arab countries, "bachelor" can refer to men who are single as well as immigrant men married to a spouse residing in their country of origin (due to the high added cost of sponsoring a spouse onsite), http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/general/hundreds-of-bachelors-crammed-in-squalid-and-dilapidated-buildings-1.194725 and a colloquial term "executive bachelor" is also used in rental and sharing accommodation advertisements to indicate availability to white-collar bachelors in particular. http://www.google.com/search?q=executive-bachelor 

== Historical examples of bachelors (men who never married) ==
(chronologically, by date of birth)

 Ancient Period Medieval Period, Renaissance, and Early Enlightenment Late Enlightenment and Modern Period 
 Heraclitus Aquinas Vivaldi 
 Gorgias W.K.C. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. III (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969), 36. da Vinci Joseph Thomas, M.D., Universal Pronouncing Dictionary of Biography and Mythology, Vol. II (Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1908), 2396. Handel Victor Schoelcher, The Life of Handel, Vol. II (London: Robert Cocks & Co., 1857), 380. 
 Plato William Leist Readwin Cates, A Dictionary of General Biography (London: Spottiswoode and Co., 1875), 890. Erasmus Virgil McClure Harris, Ancient, Curious and Famous Wills (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1911), 120. Pope Hubert Marshall Skinner, The Schoolmaster in Comedy and Satire (New York: American Book Company, 1894), 129. 
 Epicurus Bernard Frischer, The Sculpted Word: Epicureanism and Philosophical Recruitment in Ancient Greece (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), 63. Copernicus Thomas W. Becker, Eight Against the World: Warriors of the Scientific Revolution (Bloomington: AuthorHouse, 2007), 17. Voltaire Ian Davidson, Voltaire in Exile (London: Atlantic Books, 2004), 14. 
 Horace John Hazel, Who's Who in the Roman World (London: Routledge, 2001), 140. Raphael Emma Louise Parry, The Two Great Art Epochs (Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co., 1914), 210. Bayes Tucker McElroy, Ph.D., A to Z of Mathematicians (New York: Facts on File, Inc., 2005), 25. 
 Jesus Arthur Kenyon Rogers, The Life and Teachings of Jesus (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1894), 270. Gilbert Todd Timmons, Makers of Western Science (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, Inc., 2012), 52. Hume Nicholas Phillipson, David Hume: The Philosopher as Historian (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012), 12. 
 Plotinus William Smith, D.C.L., LL.D. (Editor), A Dictionary of Christian Biography, Literature, Sects and Doctrines (London: John Murray, 1887), 485. Brahe Thomas W. Becker, Eight Against the World: Warriors of the Scientific Revolution (Bloomington: AuthorHouse, 2007), 17. Smith John Rae, Life of Adam Smith (London: Macmillan & Co., 1895), 213. 
 Augustine Bradley G. Green (Editor), Shapers of Christian Orthodoxy (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2010), 236. Galileo Mary Allan-Olney, The Private Life of Galileo (Boston: Nichols and Noyes, 1870), 75. Kant Friedrich Paulsen, Immanuel Kant, His Life and Doctrine (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1902), 26. 
 Descartes Henry Smith Williams, The Historians' History of the World, Vol. 11 (London: Kooper and Jackson, Ltd., 1909), 638. Gibbon Elbert Hubbard, Little Journeys to the Homes of Famous Women (New York: William H. Wise & Co., 1916), 165. 
 Pascal Terrence E. Cook, The Great Alternatives of Social Thought: Aristocrat, Saint, Capitalist, Socialist (Savage, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1991), 97. Beethoven H.A. Rudall, Beethoven (London: Sampson, Low, Marston and Company, 1903), 28. 
 Locke George Bancroft, History of the United States of America, Vol. 1 (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1916), 561. Schopenhauer August Bebel, Woman in the Past, Present and Future (San Francisco: International Publishing Co., 1897), 58. 
 Spinoza Richard Francks, Modern Philosophy: The Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (London: Routledge, 2003), 59. Schubert Dr. Heinrich Kreissle von Hellborn, Franz Schubert: A Musical Biography , trans. by Edward Wilberforce (London: William H. Allen & Co., 1866), 64. 
 Newton Joseph Thomas, M.D., Universal Pronouncing Dictionary of Biography and Mythology, Vol. II (Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1908), 1814. Chopin Tad Szulc, Chopin in Paris: The Life and Times of the Romantic Composer (Da Capo Press, 2000), 61. 
 Leibniz David S. Kidder, The Intellectual Devotional Biographies: Revive Your Mind, Complete Your Education, and Acquaint Yourself with the World's Greatest Personalities (New York: Rodale, Inc., 2010), 6. Liszt John C. Tibbetts, Schumann - A Chorus of Voices (Amadeus Press, 2010), 146. 
 Bayle Karl C. Sandberg, At the Crossroads of Faith and Reason: An Essay on Pierre Bayle (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1966), vii. Kierkegaard Martin Buber, \"The Question to the Single One,\" from Sren Kierkegaard: Critical Assessments of Leading Philosophers, edited by Daniel W. Conway (London: Routledge, 2002), 45. 
 Thoreau Hamilton Wright Mabie, Noble Living and Grand Achievement: Giants of the Republic (Philadelphia: John C. Winston & Co., 1896), 665. 
 Spencer William Henry Hudson, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Herbert Spencer (London: Watts & Co., 1904), 23. 
 Brahms William Lines Hubbard (Editor), American History and Encyclopedia of Music, Musical Biographies, Vol. 1 (New York: Irving Squire, 1910), 97. 
 James Paul Crumbley, Student's Encyclopedia of Great American Writers, Vol. II, 1830-1900 (New York: Facts on File, Inc., 2010), 305. 
 Van Gogh Nathalie Heinich, The Glory of Van Gogh: An Anthropology of Admiration, trans. by Paul Leduc Brown (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996), 85. 
 Nietzsche William Mackintire Salter, Nietzsche the Thinker: A Study (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1917), 7. 
 Kafka Daniel S. Burt, The Literary 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Novelists, Playwrights, and Poets of All Time, Revised Edition (New York: Facts on File, Inc., 2009), 116. 
 Tesla Margaret Cheney, Tesla: Master of Lightning (Metrobooks/Barnes & Noble, 1999), preface p. vi. 
 Sartre Arthur Coleman Danto, Jean-Paul Sartre (Minneapolis: Viking Press, 1975), 166. 

==See also==
* Eligible bachelor
* Bachelor pad
* Bachelor party
* Bachelorette
* Spinster

==Footnotes==

==External links==
*Cole, David. "Note on Analyticity and the Definability of 'Bachelor'." Philosophy Department of the University of Minnesota Duluth. 1 February 1999.



[[Background radiation]]

The weather station outside of the Atomic Testing Museum on a hot summer day. Displayed background gamma radiation level is 9.8 R/h (0.82 mSv/a) This is very close to the world average background radiation of 0.87 mSv/a from cosmic and terrestrial sources.
Displays showing ambient radiation fields of 0.120-0.130 Sv/h (1.05-1.14 mSv/a) in a nuclear power plant. This reading includes natural background from cosmic and terrestrial sources, but excludes any contribution from contamination in the air, food, and water.

Background radiation is the ubiquitous ionizing radiation that people on the planet Earth are exposed to, including natural and artificial sources.

Both natural and artificial background radiation varies depending on location and altitude.

 
 Average annual human exposure to ionizing radiation (millisievert) 
 Radiation source World USA Japan Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan \"Radiation in environment\" retrieved 2011-6-29 Remark 
 Inhalation of air 1.26 2.28 0.40 mainly from radon, depends on indoor accumulation 
 Ingestion of food & water 0.29 0.28 0.40 (K-40, C-14, etc.) 
 Terrestrial radiation from ground 0.48 0.21 0.40 depends on soil and building material 
 Cosmic radiation from space 0.39 0.33 0.30 depends on altitude 
 sub total (natural) 2.40 3.10 1.50 sizeable population groups receive 10-20 mSv 
 Medical 0.60 3.00 2.30 world-wide figure excludes radiotherapy; US figure is mostly CT scans and nuclear medicine. 
 Consumer items - 0.13 cigarettes, air travel, building materials, etc. 
 Atmospheric nuclear testing 0.005 - 0.01 peak of 0.11 mSv in 1963 and declining since; higher near sites 
 Occupational exposure 0.005 0.005 0.01 world-wide average to all workers is 0.7 mSv, mostly due to radon in mines; US is mostly due to medical and aviation workers. 
 Chernobyl accident 0.002 - 0.01 peak of 0.04 mSv in 1986 and declining since; higher near site 
 Nuclear fuel cycle 0.0002 0.001 up to 0.02 mSv near sites; excludes occupational exposure 
 Other - 0.003 Industrial, security, medical, educational, and research 
 sub total (artificial) 0.61 3.14 2.33 
 Total 3.01 6.24 3.83 millisievert per year 

==Natural background radiation==
 Average annual dosage from natural radiation varies by several mSv between different European countries. 

Radioactive material is found throughout nature. Detectable amounts occur naturally in soil, rocks, water, air, and vegetation, from which it is inhaled and ingested into the body. In addition to this internal exposure, humans also receive external exposure from radioactive materials that remain outside the body and from cosmic radiation from space. The worldwide average natural dose to humans is about 2.4 millisievert (mSv) per year. This is four times more than the worldwide average artificial radiation exposure, which in the year 2008 amounted to about 0.6 mSv per year. In some rich countries like the US and Japan, artificial exposure is, on average, greater than the natural exposure, due to greater access to medical imaging. In Europe, average natural background exposure by country ranges from under 2 mSv annually in the United Kingdom to more than 7 mSv annually in Finland. 

===Air===
The biggest source of natural background radiation is airborne radon, a radioactive gas that emanates from the ground. Radon and its isotopes, parent radionuclides, and decay products all contribute to an average inhaled dose of 1.26 mSv/a. Radon is unevenly distributed and varies with weather, such that much higher doses apply to many areas of the world, where it represents a significant health hazard. Concentrations over 500 times higher than the world average have been found inside buildings in Scandinavia, the United States, Iran, and the Czech Republic. > Radon is a decay product of uranium, which is relatively common in the Earth's crust, but more concentrated in ore-bearing rocks scattered around the world. Radon seeps out of these ores into the atmosphere or into ground water or infiltrates into buildings. It can be inhaled into the lungs, along with its decay products, where they will reside for a period of time after exposure.

Although radon is naturally occurring, exposure can be enhanced or diminished by human activity, notably house construction. A poorly sealed basement in an otherwise well insulated house can result in the accumulation of radon within the dwelling, exposing its residents to high concentrations. The widespread construction of well insulated and sealed homes in the northern industrialized world has led to radon becoming the primary source of background radiation in some localities in northern North America and Europe. Since it is heavier than air, radon tends to collect in basements and mines. Basement sealing and suction ventilation reduce exposure. Some building materials, for example lightweight concrete with alum shale, phosphogypsum and Italian tuff, may emanate radon if they contain radium and are porous to gas. 

Radiation exposure from radon is indirect. Radon has a short half-life (4 days) and decays into other solid particulate radium-series radioactive nuclides. These radioactive particles are inhaled and remain lodged in the lungs, causing continued exposure. Radon is thus the second leading cause of lung cancer after smoking, and accounts for 15,000 to 22,000 cancer deaths per year in the US alone. Radon and Cancer: Questions and Answers - National Cancer Institute (USA) 

About 100,000 Bq/m3 of radon was found in Stanley Watras's basement in 1984. He and his neighbours in Boyertown, Pennsylvania, United States may hold the record for the most radioactive dwellings in the world. International radiation protection organizations estimate that a committed dose may be calculated by multiplying the equilibrium equivalent concentration (EEC) of radon by a factor of 8 to 9 and the EEC of thoron by a factor of 40 . 

===Cosmic radiation===

Estimate of the maximum dose of radiation received at an altitude of 12 km January 20, 2005, following a violent solar flare. The doses are expressed in microsieverts per hour.
The Earth and all living things on it are constantly bombarded by radiation from outer space. This radiation primarily consists of positively charged ions from protons to iron and larger nuclei derived sources outside our solar system. This radiation interacts with atoms in the atmosphere to create an air shower of secondary radiation, including X-rays, muons, protons, alpha particles, pions, electrons, and neutrons. The immediate dose from cosmic radiation is largely from muons, neutrons, and electrons, and this dose varies in different parts of the world based largely on the geomagnetic field and altitude. This radiation is much more intense in the upper troposphere, around 10 km altitude, and is thus of particular concern for airline crews and frequent passengers, who spend many hours per year in this environment. During their flights airline crews typically get an extra dose on the order of 2.2 mSv (220 mrem) per year. 

Similarly, cosmic rays cause higher background exposure in astronauts than in humans on the surface of Earth. Astronauts in low orbits, such as in the International Space Station or the Space Shuttle, are partially shielded by the magnetic field of the Earth, but also suffer from the Van Allen radiation belt which accumulates cosmic rays and results from the Earth's magnetic field. Outside low Earth orbit, as experienced by the Apollo astronauts who traveled to the Moon, this background radiation is much more intense, and represents a considerable obstacle to potential future long term human exploration of the moon or Mars.

Cosmic rays also cause elemental transmutation in the atmosphere, in which secondary radiation generated by the cosmic rays combines with atomic nuclei in the atmosphere to generate different nuclides. Many so-called cosmogenic nuclides can be produced, but probably the most notable is carbon-14, which is produced by interactions with nitrogen atoms. These cosmogenic nuclides eventually reach the Earth's surface and can be incorporated into living organisms. The production of these nuclides varies slightly with short-term variations in solar cosmic ray flux, but is considered practically constant over long scales of thousands to millions of years. The constant production, incorporation into organisms and relatively short half-life of carbon-14 are the principles used in radiocarbon dating of ancient biological materials such as wooden artifacts or human remains.

===Terrestrial sources===
Terrestrial radiation, for the purpose of the table above, only includes sources that remain external to the body. The major radionuclides of concern are potassium, uranium and thorium and their decay products, some of which, like radium and radon are intensely radioactive but occur in low concentrations. Most of these sources have been decreasing, due to radioactive decay since the formation of the Earth, because there is no significant amount currently transported to the Earth. Thus, the present activity on earth from uranium-238 is only half as much as it originally was because of its 4.5 billion year half-life, and potassium-40 (half-life 1.25 billion years) is only at about 8% of original activity. The effects on humans of the actual diminishment (due to decay) of these isotopes is minimal however. This is because humans evolved too recently for the difference in activity over a fraction of a half-life to be significant. Put another way, human history is so short in comparison to a half-life of a billion years, that the activity of these long-lived isotopes has been effectively constant throughout our time on this planet.

In addition, many shorter half-life and thus more intensely radioactive isotopes have not decayed out of the terrestrial environment, however, because of natural on-going production of them. Examples of these are radium-226 (decay product of uranium-238) and radon-222 (a decay product of radium-226).

===Food and water===
Some of the essential elements that make up the human body, mainly potassium and carbon, have radioactive isotopes that add significantly to our background radiation dose. An average human contains about 30 milligrams of potassium-40 (40K) and about 10 nanograms (108 g) of carbon-14 (14C), which has a decay half-life of 5,730 years. Excluding internal contamination by external radioactive material, the largest component of internal radiation exposure from biologically functional components of the human body is from potassium-40. The decay of about 4,000 nuclei of 40K per second Radioactive human body  Harvard University Natural Science Lecture Demonstrations makes potassium the largest source of radiation in terms of number of decaying atoms. The energy of beta particles produced by 40K is also about 10 times more powerful than the beta particles from 14C decay.
14C is present in the human body at a level of 3700 Bq with a biological half-life of 40 days. http://www.ead.anl.gov/pub/doc/carbon14.pdf There are about 1,200 beta particles per second produced by the decay of 14C. However, a 14C atom is in the genetic information of about half the cells, while potassium is not a component of DNA. The decay of a 14C atom inside DNA in one person happens about 50 times per second, changing a carbon atom to one of nitrogen. The global average internal dose from radionuclides other than radon and its decay products is 0.29 mSv/a, of which 0.17 mSv/a comes from 40K, 0.12 mSv/a comes from the uranium and thorium series, and 12 Sv/a comes from 14C. 

===Areas with high NBR===
Some areas have greater dosage than the country-wide averages. Annual terrestrial radiation doses in the world In the world in general, exceptionally high natural background locales include Ramsar in Iran, Guarapari in Brazil, Karunagappalli in India, Arkaroola, South Australia Extreme Slime and Yangjiang in China. 

The highest level of purely natural radiation ever recorded on the Earth's surface was 90 Gy/h on a Brazilian black beach (areia preta in Portuguese) composed of monazite. This rate would convert to 0.8 Gy/a for year-round continuous exposure, but in fact the levels vary seasonally and are much lower in the nearest residences. The record measurement has not been duplicated and is omitted from UNSCEAR's latest reports. Nearby tourist beaches in Guarapari and Cumuruxatiba were later evaluated at 14 and 15 Gy/h. 

The highest background radiation in an inhabited area is found in Ramsar, primarily due to the use of local naturally radioactive limestone as a building material. The 1000 most exposed residents receive an average external effective radiation dose of 6 mSv per year, (0.6 rem/yr,) six times more than the ICRP recommended limit for exposure to the public from artificial sources. They additionally receive a substantial internal dose from radon. Record radiation levels were found in a house where the effective dose due to ambient radiation fields was 131 mSv/a, (13.1 rem/yr) and the internal committed dose from radon was 72 mSv/a (7.2 rem/yr). This unique case is over 80 times higher than the world average natural human exposure to radiation.

Epidemiological studies are underway to identify health effects associated with the high radiation levels in Ramsar. It is much too early to draw statistically significant conclusions. While so far support for beneficial effects of chronic radiation (like longer lifespan) has not been observed, a protective and adaptive effect is suggested by at least one study whose authors nonetheless caution that data from Ramsar are not yet sufficiently strong to relax existing regulatory dose limits. 

===Photoelectric===
Background radiation doses in the immediate vicinities of particles of high atomic number materials, within the human body, have a small enhancement due to the photoelectric effect. 

==Artificial background radiation==

===Medical===
The global average human exposure to artificial radiation is 0.6 mSv/a, primarily from medical imaging. This medical component can range much higher, with an average of 3 mSv per year across the USA population. Other human contributors include smoking, air travel, radioactive building materials, historical nuclear weapons testing, nuclear power accidents and nuclear industry operation.

A typical chest x-ray delivers 0.02 mSv (2 mrem) of effective dose. (5,000 patient dose measurements from 375 hospitals) A dental x-ray delivers a dose of 5 to 10 Sv The average American receives about 3 mSv of diagnostic medical dose per year; countries with the lowest levels of health care receive almost none. Radiation treatment for various diseases also accounts for some dose, both in individuals and in those around them.

===Consumer items===
Cigarettes contain polonium-210, originating from the decay products of radon, which stick to tobacco leaves. Heavy smoking results in a radiation dose of 160 mSv/year to localized spots at the bifurcations of segmental bronchi in the lungs from the decay of polonium-210. This dose is not readily comparable to the radiation protection limits, since the latter deal with whole body doses, while the dose from smoking is delivered to a very small portion of the body. 

Air travel causes increased exposure to cosmic radiation. The average extra dose to flight personnel is 2.19 mSv/year. 

===Atmospheric nuclear testing===
Per capita thyroid doses in the continental United States resulting from all exposure routes from all atmospheric nuclear tests conducted at the Nevada Test Site from 1951-1962.
Frequent above-ground nuclear explosions between the 1940s and 1960s scattered a substantial amount of radioactive contamination. Some of this contamination is local, rendering the immediate surroundings highly radioactive, while some of it is carried longer distances as nuclear fallout; some of this material is dispersed worldwide. The increase in background radiation due to these tests peaked in 1963 at about 0.15 mSv per year worldwide, or about 7% of average background dose from all sources. The Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 prohibited above-ground tests, thus by the year 2000 the worldwide dose from these tests has decreased to only 0.005 mSv per year. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation 

===Occupational exposure===
The ICRP recommends limiting occupational radiation exposure to 50 mSv (5 rem) per year, and 100 mSv (10 rem) in 5 years. 

At an IAEA conference in 2002, it was recommended that occupational doses below 12 mSv per year do not warrant regulatory scrutiny. http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1145_web.pdf 

===Nuclear accidents===
Under normal circumstances, nuclear reactors release small amounts of radioactive gases, which cause negligibly-small radiation exposures to the public. Events classified on the International Nuclear Event Scale as incidents typically do not release any additional radioactive substances into the environment. Large releases of radioactivity from nuclear reactors are extremely rare. Until the present day, there were two major civilian accidents - the Chernobyl accident and the Fukushima I nuclear accidents - which caused substantial contamination. The Chernobyl accident was the only one to cause immediate deaths.

Total doses from the Chernobyl accident ranged from 10 to 50 mSv over 20 years for the inhabitants of the affected areas, with most of the dose received in the first years after the disaster, and over 100 mSv for liquidators. There were 28 deaths from acute radiation syndrome. 

Total doses from the Fukushima I accidents were between 1 and 15 mSv for the inhabitants of the affected areas. Thyroid doses for children were below 50 mSv. 167 cleanup workers received doses above 100 mSv, with 6 of them receiving more than 250 mSv (the Japanese exposure limit for emergency response workers). 

The average dose from the Three Mile Island accident was 0.01 mSv. 

Non-civilian: In addition to the civilian accidents described above, several accidents at early nuclear weapons facilities - such as the Windscale fire, the contamination of the Techa River by the nuclear waste from the Mayak compound, and the Kyshtym disaster at the same compound - released substantial radioactivity into the environment. The Windscale fire resulted in thyroid doses of 5-20 mSv for adults and 10-60 mSv for children. The doses from the accidents at Mayak are unknown.

===Nuclear fuel cycle===
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and other U.S. and international agencies, require that licensees limit radiation exposure to individual members of the public to 1 mSv (100 mrem) per year.

===Other===
Coal plants emit radiation in the form of radioactive fly ash which is inhaled and ingested by neighbours, and incorporated into crops. A 1978 paper from Oak Ridge National Laboratory estimated that coal-fired power plants of that time may contribute a whole-body committed dose of 19 Sv/a to their immediate neighbours in a radius of 500 m. The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation's 1988 report estimated the committed dose 1 km away to be 20 Sv/a for older plants or 1 Sv/a for newer plants with improved fly ash capture, but was unable to confirm these numbers by test. When coal is burned, uranium, thorium and all the uranium daughters accumulated by disintegration  radium, radon, polonium  are released. Radioactive materials previously buried underground in coal deposits are released as fly ash or, if fly ash is captured, may be incorporated into concrete manufactured with fly ash.

==Other usage==
In other contexts, background radiation may simply be any radiation that is pervasive, whether ionizing or not. A particular example of this is the cosmic microwave background radiation, a nearly uniform glow that fills the sky in the microwave part of the spectrum; stars, galaxies and other objects of interest in radio astronomy stand out against this background.

In a laboratory, background radiation refers to the measured value from any sources that affect an instrument when a radiation source sample is not being measured. This background rate, which must be established as a stable value by multiple measurements, usually before and after sample measurement, is subtracted from the rate measured when the sample is being measured.

Background radiation for occupational doses measured for workers is all radiation dose that is not measured by radiation dose measurement instruments in potential occupational exposure conditions. This includes both "natural background radiation" and any medical radiation doses. This value is not typically measured or known from surveys, such that variations in the total dose to individual workers is not known. This can be a significant confounding factor in assessing radiation exposure effects in a population of workers who may have significantly different natural background and medical radiation doses. This is most significant when the occupational doses are very low.

==See also==
* Background radiation equivalent time (BRET)
* Environmental radioactivity
* Banana equivalent dose
* Noise (electronics)

==References==

==External links==
* Background radiation description from the Radiation Effects Research Foundation
* Environmental and Background Radiation FAQ from the Health Physics Society
* Radiation Dose Chart from the American Nuclear Society
* Radiation Dose Calculator from the US Environmental Protection Agency

 

[[Balmoral]]

Balmoral may refer to:

== Places ==

=== Australia ===
* Balmoral, New South Wales, a locality of Sydney
* Balmoral, New South Wales (Lake Macquarie)
* Balmoral, New South Wales (Southern Highlands)
* Balmoral, Queensland
* Balmoral, Victoria

=== Canada ===
* Balmoral, British Columbia
* Balmoral, New Brunswick
* Balmoral Parish, New Brunswick
* Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia
* Balmoral, Ontario, a community in Haldimand County
* Balmoral Grist Mill Museum, Balmoral Mills, Nova Scotia
* Balmoral, Manitoba

=== New Zealand ===
* Balmoral, New Zealand, a suburb of Auckland

=== Northern Ireland ===
* Balmoral (), an area of Belfast
* Balmoral railway station, Belfast
* Balmoral Golf Club, Belfast
* The Balmoral Show, an agricultural show that takes place annually in the Kings Hall, Belfast

=== Scotland ===
* Balmoral Castle, a residence of Queen Elizabeth II in Aberdeenshire, Scotland
* The Balmoral Hotel, a luxury hotel located in Edinburgh

=== South Africa ===
* Balmoral, Mpumalanga, a village and colliery near Witbank

=== United States ===
* Balmoral, Louisiana
* Balmoral, Maryland
* Balmoral, Tennessee
* Balmoral, Wisconsin
* Balmoral Park, horse racing track in Crete, Illinois
* Lakewood Balmoral Historic District, Chicago, Illinois

== Clothing ==
* Balmoral bonnet, an unbrimmed cap common in Highland dress, named for the Scottish village and castle
* Balmoral (shoe), a type of men's dress shoe
* Balmoral tartan, a tartan pattern worn by the British Royal Family

== Education ==
* Balmoral College, Banfield, Buenos Aires, Argentina
* Balmoral Hall School, Winnipeg, Canada
* Balmoral High School (Belfast, Northern Ireland)
* Balmoral Jr Secondary School, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
* Balmoral State High School, Queensland, Australia

== Ships ==
* The MV Balmoral is a passenger ship used for pleasure cruises in the United Kingdom
* The Balmoral (cruise ship) of Fred. Olsen Cruise Lines

== Theater ==
* Balmoral (play), a 1987 play by Michael Frayn

== See also ==
* Balmoral Reef Plate, small tectonic plate in the Pacific Ocean north of Fiji
* Battle of CoralBalmoral, a series of actions in May and June 1968 during the Vietnam War



[[Bannock]]

Bannock has more than one meaning:

* Bannock (food), a kind of bread, usually prepared by pan-frying
* Bannock people, a Native American people of what is now southeastern Oregon and western Idaho
* Bannock County, Idaho
* Bannock, Ohio
* Bannock Pass, between Idaho and Montana

== See also ==
*Bannack, Montana, town named after the tribe, today a ghost town



[[Banquo]]

Lord Banquo, Thane of Lochaber, is a character in William Shakespeare's 1606 play Macbeth. In the play, he is at first an ally to Macbeth (both are generals in the King's army) and they are together when they meet the Three Witches. After prophesying that Macbeth will become king, the witches tell Banquo that he will not be king himself, but that his descendants will be. Later, Macbeth in his lust for power sees Banquo as a threat and has him murdered; Banquo's son, Fleance, escapes. Banquo's ghost returns in a later scene, causing Macbeth to react with alarm during a public feast.

Shakespeare borrowed the character of Banquo from Holinshed's Chronicles, a history of Britain published by Raphael Holinshed in 1587. In Chronicles Banquo is an accomplice to Macbeth in the murder of the king, rather than a loyal subject of the king who is seen as an enemy by Macbeth. Shakespeare may have changed this aspect of his character in order to please King James, who was thought at the time to be a descendant of the real Banquo. Critics often interpret Banquo's role in the play as being a foil to Macbeth, resisting evil where Macbeth embraces it. Sometimes, however, his motives are unclear, and some critics question his purity. He does nothing to accuse Macbeth of murdering the king, even though he has reason to believe Macbeth is responsible. 

==Source==

Macbeth and Banquo meeting the witches in a woodcut from Holinshed's Chronicles 
Shakespeare often used Raphael Holinshed's Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Irelandcommonly known as Holinshed's Chroniclesas a source for his plays, and in Macbeth he borrows from several of the tales in that work. Holinshed portrays Banquo as an historical figure: he is an accomplice in Mac Bethad mac Findlach's (Macbeth's) murder of Donnchad mac Crnin (King Duncan) and plays an important part in ensuring that Macbeth, not Mel Coluim mac Donnchada (Malcolm), takes the throne in the coup that follows. Holinshed in turn used an earlier work, the Scotorum Historiae (15267) by Hector Boece, as his source. Boece's work is the first known record of Banquo and his son Fleance; and scholars such as David Bevington generally consider them fictional characters invented by Boece. In Shakespeare's day, however, they were considered historical figures of great repute, and the king, James I, based his claim to the throne in part on a descent from Banquo. The House of Stuart was descended from Walter fitz Alan, the first High Steward of Scotland, and he was believed to have been the grandson of Fleance and Gruffydd ap Llywelyn's daughter, Nesta verch Gruffydd. In reality Walter fitz Alan was the son of a Breton knight. 

Unlike his sources, Shakespeare gives Banquo no role in the King's murder, making it a deed committed solely by Macbeth and his wife. Why Shakespeare's Banquo is so different from the character described by Holinshed and Boece is not known, though critics have proposed several possible explanations. First among them is the risk associated with portraying the king's ancestor as a murderer and conspirator in the plot to overthrow a rightful king, as well as the author's desire to flatter a powerful patron. But Shakespeare may also simply have altered Banquo's character because there was no dramatic need for another accomplice to the murder. There was, however, a need to provide a dramatic contrast to Macbeth; a role that many scholars argue is filled by Banquo. Similarly, when Jean de Schelandre wrote about Banquo in his Stuartide in 1611, he also changed the character by portraying him as a noble and honourable manthe critic D. W. Maskell describes him as Schelandre's paragon of valour and virtueprobably for reasons similar to Shakespeare's. 

Banquo's role in the coup that follows the murder is harder to explain. Banquo's loyalty to Macbeth, rather than Malcolm, after Duncan's death makes him a passive accomplice in the coup: Malcolm, as Prince of Cumberland, is the rightful heir to the throne and Macbeth a usurper. Daniel Amneus, however, argues that when Ross and Angus bring King Duncan's praise, and the news that Macbeth has been granted the title of Thane of Cawdor, the "greater honor" Macbeth, Act 1, Scene 3, line 104. he ascribes to Macbeth is actually his title as Prince of Cumberland. If Macbeth, rather than Malcolm, is Prince of Cumberland then Macbeth would be next in line to the throne and no coup would be needed, effectively removing this ambiguity from Banquo's character. 

==Role in the play==
Macbeth and Banquo with the Witches by Henry Fuseli
Banquo is in a third of the play's scenes, as both a human and a ghost. As significant as he is to the plot, he has fewer lines than the relatively insignificant Ross, a Scottish nobleman who survives the play. In the second scene of the play, King Duncan describes the manner in which Macbeth, Thane of Glamis, and Banquo, Thane of Lochaber, bravely led his army against invaders, fighting side by side. In the next scene, Banquo and Macbeth, returning from the battle together, encounter the Three Witches, who predict that Macbeth will become Thane of Cawdor, and then king. Banquo, skeptical of the witches, challenges them to predict his own future, and they foretell that Banquo will never himself take the throne, but will beget a line of kings. Banquo remains skeptical after the encounter, wondering aloud if evil can ever speak the truth. He warns Macbeth that evil will offer men a small, hopeful truth only in order to catch them in a deadly trap. Macbeth. Act 1, Scene 3. 

When Macbeth kills the king and takes the throne, Banquothe only one aware of this encounter with the witchesreserves judgment for God. He is unsure whether Macbeth committed regicide to gain the throne, but muses in a soliloquy that "I fear / Thou play'dst most foully for 't". Macbeth, Act 3, Scene 1, lines 23. He offers his respects to the new King Macbeth and pledges loyalty. Macbeth. Act 3, Scene 1. Later, worried that Banquo's descendants and not his own will rule Scotland, Macbeth sends men to kill Banquo and his son Fleance. During the melee, Banquo holds off the assailants so that Fleance can escape, but is himself killed. Macbeth. Act 3, Scene 3. The ghost of Banquo later returns to haunt Macbeth at the banquet in act three, scene four. A terrified Macbeth sees him, while the apparition is invisible to his guests. He appears again to Macbeth in a vision granted by the Three Witches, wherein Macbeth sees a long line of kings descended from Banquo. Macbeth. Act 4, Scene 1. 

==Analysis==
===Foil to Macbeth===
Macbeth and Banquo Meeting the Three Witches by John Wootton
Many scholars see Banquo as a foil and a contrast to Macbeth. Macbeth, for example, eagerly accepts the Three Witches' prophecy as true and seeks to help it along. Banquo, on the other hand, doubts the prophecies and the intentions of these seemingly evil creatures. Whereas Macbeth places his hope in the prediction that he will be king, Banquo argues that evil only offers gifts that lead to destruction. Banquo steadily resists the temptations of evil within the play, praying to heaven for help, while Macbeth seeks darkness, and prays that evil powers will aid him. This is visible in act two; after Banquo sees Duncan to bed, he says: "There's husbandry in heaven, / Their candles are all out". Macbeth, Act 2, Scene 1, lines 45. This premonition of the coming darkness in association with Macbeth's murders is repeated just before Banquo is killed: "it will be rain to-night", Macbeth, Act 3, Scene 3, line 16. Banquo tells his son Fleance. 

Banquo's status as a contrast to Macbeth makes for some tense moments in the play. In act two, scene one, Banquo meets his son Fleance and asks him to take both his sword and his dagger ("Hold, take my sword ... Take thee that too" ). He also explains that he has been having trouble sleeping due to "cursed thoughts that nature / gives way to in repose!" Macbeth, Act 2, Scene 1, lines 89. On Macbeth's approach, he demands the sword returned to him quickly. Scholars have interpreted this to mean that Banquo has been dreaming of murdering the king as Macbeth's accomplice in order to take the throne for his own family, as the Three Witches prophesied to him. In this reading, his good nature is so revolted by these thoughts that he gives his sword and dagger to Fleance to be sure they do not come true, but is so nervous at Macbeth's approach that he demands them back. Other scholars have responded that Banquo's dreams have less to do with killing the king and more to do with Macbeth. They argue that Banquo is merely setting aside his sword for the night. Then, when Macbeth approaches, Banquo, having had dreams about Macbeth's deeds, takes back his sword as a precaution in this case. 

Macbeth eventually sees that Banquo can no longer be trusted to aid him in his evil, and considers his friend a threat to his newly acquired throne. Thus he has him murdered. Banquo's ability to live on in different ways is another oppositional force, in this case to Macbeth's impending death. His spirit lives on in Fleance, his son, and in his ghostly presence at the banquet. 

===Ghost scenes===
When Macbeth returns to the witches later in the play, they show him an apparition of the murdered Banquo, along with eight of his descendants. The scene carries deep significance: King James, on the throne when Macbeth was written, was believed to be separated from Banquo by nine generations. What Shakespeare writes here thus amounts to a strong support of James' right to the throne by lineage, and for audiences of Shakespeare's day, a very real fulfillment of the witches' prophecy to Banquo that his sons would take the throne. This apparition is also deeply unsettling to Macbeth, who not only wants the throne for himself, but also desires to father a line of kings. 

Banquo's other appearance as a ghost during the banquet scene serves as an indicator of Macbeth's conscience returning to plague his thoughts. Banquo's triumph over death appears symbolically, insofar as he literally takes Macbeth's seat during the feast. Shocked, Macbeth uses words appropriate to the metaphor of usurpation, describing Banquo as "crowned" with wounds. The spirit drains Macbeth's manhood along with the blood from his cheeks; as soon as Banquo's form vanishes, Macbeth announces: "Why, so; being gone, / I am a man again." Macbeth, Act 3, Scene 4, lines 106107. 

Like the vision of Banquo's lineage, the banquet scene has also been the subject of criticism. Critics have questioned whether not one, but perhaps two ghosts appear in this scene: Banquo and Duncan. Scholars arguing that Duncan attends the banquet state that Macbeth's lines to the Ghost could apply equally well to the slain king. "Thou canst not say I did it", for example, can mean that Macbeth is not the man who actually killed Banquo, or it can mean that Duncan, who was asleep when Macbeth killed him, cannot claim to have seen his killer. To add to the confusion, some lines Macbeth directs to the ghost, such as "Thy bones are marrowless", Macbeth, Act 3, Scene 4, line 91. cannot rightly be said of Banquo, who has only recently died. 

Scholars debate whether Macbeth's vision of Banquo is real or a hallucination. Macbeth had already seen a hallucination before killing Duncan: a knife hovering in the air. Several performances of the play have even ignored the stage direction to have the Ghost of Banquo enter at all, heightening the sense that Macbeth is growing mad, since the audience cannot see what he claims to see. Scholars opposing this view claim that while the dagger is unusual, ghosts of murdered victims are more believable, having a basis in the audience's superstitions. Spirits in other Shakespeare playsnotably Hamlet and Midsummer Night's Dreamexist in ambiguous forms, occasionally even calling into question their own presence. 

==Performances and interpretations==
Banquo's role, especially in the banquet ghost scene, has been subject to a variety of interpretations and mediums. Shakespeare's text states: "Enter Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth's place." Macbeth, Act 3, Scene 4. Several television versions have altered this slightly, having Banquo appear suddenly in the chair, rather than walking onstage and into it. Special effects and camera tricks also allow producers to make the ghost disappear and reappear, highlighting the fact that only Macbeth can see it. 

Stage directors, unaided by post-production effects and camera tricks, have used other methods to depict the ghost. In the late 19th century, elaborate productions of the play staged by Henry Irving employed a wide variety of approaches for this task. In 1877 a green silhouette was used to create a ghostlike image; ten years later a trick chair was used to allow an actor to appear in the middle of the scene, and then again from the midst of the audience. In 1895 a shaft of blue light served to indicate the presence of Banquo's spirit. In 1933 a Russian director named Theodore Komisarjevsky staged a modern retelling of the play (Banquo and Macbeth were told of their future through palmistry); he used Macbeth's shadow as the ghost. 

Film adaptations have approached Banquo's character in a variety of ways. In 1936 Orson Welles helped produce an African-American cast of the play, including Canada Lee in the role of Banquo. Akira Kurosawa's 1957 adaptation Throne of Blood makes the character into Capitan Miki (played by Minoru Chiaki), slain by Macbeth's equivalent (Captain Washizu) when his wife explains that she is with child. News of Miki's death does not reach Washizu until after he has seen the ghost in the banquet scene. In Roman Polanski's 1971 adaptation, Banquo is played by acclaimed stage actor Martin Shaw, in a style reminiscent of earlier stage performances. Polanski's version also emphasises Banquo's objection to Macbeth's ascendency by showing him remaining silent as the other thanes around him hail Macbeth as king. in the 1990 telling of Macbeth in a New York Mafia crime family setting, Men of Respect, the character of Banquo is named "Bankie Como" and played by American actor Dennis Farina.

==See also==
*List of ghosts

==References==



[[British Army]]

The British Army is the land warfare branch of the British Armed Forces. The English Army, founded in 1660, was succeeded in 1707 by the new British Army, The English Army comprised Irish and Welsh regiments as Ireland was a client state of England, and Wales was part of England before the union with Scotland. incorporating existing Scottish regiments. It was administered by the War Office from London, which was subsumed into the Ministry of Defence in 1964. The professional head of the British Army is the Chief of the General Staff.

The full-time element of the British Army is referred to as the Regular Army and has been since the creation of the reservist Territorial Force in 1908. All members of the Army swear (or affirm) allegiance to the monarch as commander-in-chief. However, the Bill of Rights of 1689 requires Parliamentary consent for the Crown to maintain a standing army in peacetime. Parliament approves the continued existence of the Army by passing an Armed Forces Act at least once every five years. In contrast to the Royal Navy, Royal Marines and Royal Air Force, the British Army does not include Royal in its title because, after a historic struggle between Parliament and monarchy, the British Army has always been answerable to Parliament rather than the Monarch. Many of the Army's constituent regiments and corps have been granted the "Royal" prefix and have members of the Royal Family occupying senior honorary positions within some regiments.

Throughout its history, the British Army has seen action in a number of major wars involving the world's great powers, including the Seven Years' War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War, the First World War and Second World War. Repeatedly emerging victorious from these decisive wars has allowed Britain to influence world events with its policies and establish itself as one of the world's leading military and economic powers. Today, the British Army is deployed in several countries, including as an expeditionary force and a United Nations peacekeeping force. Additionally, the British Army maintains five permanent overseas postings. 
Welsh Guards Trooping the Colour 2007

== History ==

John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, was one of the first generals in the British Army, fighting campaigns in the War of the Spanish Succession.

Shortly after the Act of Union in 1707 the English Army and Scottish and Irish regiments were amalgamated to form the British Army. The order of seniority of the most senior line regiments in the British Army is based on the order of seniority in the English army. Scottish and Irish regiments were only allowed to take a rank in the English army from the date of their arrival in England or the date when they were first placed on the English establishment. For example, in 1694 a board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of English, Irish and Scots regiments serving in the Netherlands; the regiment that became known as the Scots Greys were designated as the 4th Dragoons because there were three English regiments raised prior to 1688 when the Scots Greys were first placed on the English establishment. In 1713, when a new board of general officers was convened to decide upon the rank of several regiments, the seniority of the Scots Greys was reassessed and based on their entry into England in June 1685. At that time there was only one English regiment of dragoons, and so after some delay the Scots Greys obtained the rank of 2nd Dragoons in the British Army.

Following William and Mary's accession to the throne, England involved itself in the War of the Grand Alliance, primarily to prevent a French invasion restoring Mary's father, James II. Miller, p. 144 Following the union of England and Scotland in 1707, and the creation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801, British foreign policy on the continent was to contain expansion by its competitor powers such as France and Spain. Spain, in the previous two centuries, had been the dominant global power, and the chief threat to England's early transatlantic ambitions, but was now waning. The territorial ambitions of the French, however, led to the War of the Spanish Succession Mallinson, p. 50 and the Napoleonic Wars. Russian activity led to the Crimean War. After 1745, recruits were increasingly drawn from Scotland; by the mid-1760s between one fifth and one third of officers were from Scotland. The Oxford Illustrated History of the British Army (1994) p. 103 

From the time of the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763, Great Britain, and its successor, the United Kingdom, was one of the leading military and economic powers of the world. 

===Early British Empire===
The British Empire expanded in this time to include colonies, protectorates, and Dominions throughout the Americas, Africa, Asia and Australasia. Although the Royal Navy is widely regarded as having been vital for the rise of the British Empire, and British dominance of the world, the British Army played an important role in the colonisation of India and other regions. Mallinson, p. 104 Typical tasks included garrisoning the colonies, capturing strategically important territories, and participating in actions to pacify colonial borders, provide support to allied governments, suppress Britain's rivals, and protect against foreign powers and hostile natives.

The death of General Wolfe during the Battle of the Plains of Abraham; the campaigns of the French and Indian War resulted in British control of modern Canada.
British soldiers also helped capture strategically important territories, allowing the empire to expand. The army was also involved in numerous wars to pacify the borders, or to prop up friendly governments, and thereby keep other, competitive, empires away from the British Empire's borders. Among these actions were the Seven Years' War, Mallinson, p. 106 the American Revolutionary War, Mallinson, p. 129 the Napoleonic Wars, Mallinson, p. 165 the First and Second Opium Wars, Mallinson, p. 102 the Boxer Rebellion, the New Zealand wars, the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, Mallinson, p. 210 the First and Second Boer Wars, Mallinson, p. 257 the Fenian raids, the Irish War of Independence, Mallinson, p. 282 its serial interventions into Afghanistan (which were meant to maintain a friendly buffer state between British India and the Russian Empire), Mallinson, p. 203 and the Crimean War (to keep the Russian Empire at a safe distance by coming to Turkey's aid). Mallinson, p. 195 

As had its predecessor, the English Army, the British Army fought Spain, France, and the Netherlands for supremacy in North America and the West Indies. With native and provincial assistance, the Army conquered New France in the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War and subsequently suppressed a Native American uprising in Pontiac's War. Pontiacs War Baltimore County Public Schools The British Army suffered defeat in the American War of Independence, losing the Thirteen Colonies but holding on to Canada. Mallinson, p. 110 

The Duke of Wellington's and Field Marshal von Blcher's triumph over Napoleon Bonaparte at the Battle of Waterloo
The British Army was heavily involved in the Napoleonic Wars and served in multiple campaigns across Europe (including continuous deployment in the Peninsular War), the Caribbean, North Africa and later in North America. The war between the British and the First French Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte stretched around the world and at its peak, in 1813, the regular army contained over 250,000 men. A Coalition of Anglo-Dutch and Prussian Armies under the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal von Blcher defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. Mallinson, p. 177 

The English had been involved, both politically and militarily, in Ireland since being given the Lordship of Ireland by the Pope in 1171. The campaign of the English republican Protector, Oliver Cromwell, involved uncompromising treatment of the Irish towns (most notably Drogheda and Wexford) that had supported the Royalists during the English Civil War. The English Army (and subsequently the British Army) stayed in Ireland primarily to suppress numerous Irish revolts and campaigns for independence. In addition to its ongoing conflict with ethnic Irish nationalists, it was faced with the prospect of battling Anglo-Irish and Ulster Scots peoples in Ireland, angered primarily by unfavourable taxation of Irish produce imported into Britain, who, alongside other Irish groups, had raised their own volunteer army and threatened to emulate the American colonists if their conditions were not met. Having learnt from their experience in America, the British government sought a political solution. The British Army found itself fighting Irish rebels, both Protestant and Catholic, primarily in Ulster and Leinster (Wolfe Tone's United Irishmen) in the 1798 rebellion. The 1798 Irish Rebellion BBC 

The Battle of Rorke's Drift in 1879 saw a small British force repel an overwhelming attack by Zulu forces; eleven Victoria Crosses were awarded for the defence.
In addition to battling the armies of other European Empires (and of its former colonies, the United States, in the American War of 1812), in the battle for global supremacy, the British Army fought the Chinese in the First and Second Opium Wars, and the Boxer Rebellion, Mori tribes in the first of the New Zealand Wars, Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula's forces and British East India Company mutineers in the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the Boers in the First and Second Boer Wars, Irish Fenians in Canada during the Fenian raids and Irish separatists in the Anglo-Irish War. 
The vastly increasing demands of imperial expansion, and the inadequacies and inefficiencies of the underfunded, post-Napoleonic Wars British Army, and of the Militia, Yeomanry, and Volunteer Force, led to the Cardwell and Childers Reforms of the late 19th century, which gave the British Army its modern shape, and redefined its regimental system. The Haldane Reforms of 1907 formally created the Territorial Force as the Army's volunteer reserve component by merging and reorganising the Volunteer Force, Militia, and Yeomanry. Cassidy, p. 79 

===World wars===

The Second Battle of El Alamein reversed German ambitions in North Africa, and is often cited as one of the turning points of the Second World War.

Great Britain's dominance of the world had been challenged by numerous other powers; in the 20th century, most notably Germany. A century before, it was still vying with Napoleonic France for pre-eminence in Europe and around the world, and Hannoverian Britain's natural allies were the various Kingdoms and principalities of Northern Germany. By the middle of the 19th century, Britain and France were allied in preventing Russia's appropriation of the Ottoman Empire (although it was the fear of French invasion that led, shortly after, to the creation of the Volunteer Force). By the first decade of the 20th century, however, the UK was allied with France (by the Entente Cordiale) and Russia (which had its own secret agreement with France of mutual support in any war against the Prussian-led German Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire), and when the First World War broke out in 1914, the British Army sent the British Expeditionary Force to France and Belgium to prevent Germany from occupying these countries. Ensor, pp. 525526 The British Army created the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force in Egypt and sent it to Gallipoli in an unsuccessful attempt to capture Constantinople and secure a sea route to Russia. The Encyclopdia Britannica, Vol.7, Edited by Hugh Chisholm, (1911), 3; "Constantinople, the capital of the Turkish Empire." After the retreat from Gallipoli nearly 400,000 men in 13 divisions from the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force and the Force in Egypt formed a strategic reserve in Egypt called the Egyptian Expeditionary Force. Keogh 1955, p. 32 Wavell 1968, p. 41 With most of the strategic reserve sent to the Western Front, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force of two British infantry and one Australian and New Zealand mounted division in the Eastern Force, successfully defend the Suez Canal and Romani in 1916 from German and Ottoman incursions. Powles 1922, p. 50 Falls 1930 Vol. 1, pp. 380406 This force captured the Sinai and garrisoned the extended lines of communication, but in early 1917 their advance was stopped at Gaza until towards the end of the year when a greatly enlarged force of infantry and mounted troops captured Beersheba, most of southern Palestine and Jerusalem. Allenby's force, now including Indian Army units which replaced a number of British units sent to the Western Front, captured the southern Jordan Valley in 1918 and carried out two major, but unsuccessful attacks to Amman and Es Salt and occupied part of the Jordan Valley, during preparations for his final successful assault in September at the Battle of Megiddo. As a result of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force's capture of two Ottoman armies, an armistice with the Ottoman Empire was signed on 31 October 1918. Carver 2003 pp. 194244 
British Mark I tank during the First World War. Note the guidance wheels behind the main body which were later scrapped as they were unnecessary. Armoured vehicles of this time still required much infantry and artillery support and still do to a lesser extent today. Photo by Ernest Brooks.

The war would be the most devastating in British military history, with near 800,000 men killed and over 2 million wounded. In the early part of the war, the professional force of the BEF was virtually destroyed and, by turns, a volunteer (and then conscripted) force replaced it. Major battles included the Battle of the Somme. Mallinson, p. 310 Advances in technology saw advent of the tank, with the creation of the Royal Tank Regiment, and advances in aircraft design, with the creation of the Royal Flying Corps, which were to be decisive in future battles. Trench warfare dominated strategy on the Western Front, and the use of chemical and poison gases added to the devastation. 

The Second World War broke out in 1939 with the German invasion of Poland. Mallinson, p. 335 British assurances to the Polish led the British Empire to declare war on Germany. Again an Expeditionary Force was sent to France, only to be hastily evacuated as the German forces swept through the Low Countries and across France in 1940. Mallinson, p. 342 Only the Dunkirk evacuation saved the entire Expeditionary Force from capture. Later, however, the British would have spectacular success defeating the Italians and Germans at the Battle of El Alamein in North Africa, Taylor (1976), p. 157 and in the D-Day invasion of Normandy with the help of American, Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, Indian and Free French forces. Almost half of the Allied soldiers on D-day were British. In the Far East, the British army battled the Japanese in Burma. Taylor (1976), p. 210 The Second World War saw the British Army develop its Special Air Service, Commando units and the Parachute Regiment. Mallinson, p. 371 

===Postcolonial era===
Soldiers from the Parachute Regiment guard Argentine prisoners of war during the Falklands War.
After the end of the Second World War, the British Army was significantly reduced in size, although National Service continued until 1960. Mallinson, p. 384 This period also saw the process of decolonisation commence with the partition and independence of India and Pakistan, followed by the independence of British colonies in Africa and Asia. Accordingly the army's strength was further reduced, in recognition of Britain's reduced role in world affairs, outlined in the 1957 Defence White Paper. Merged regiments and new brigading  many famous units to lose separate identity, The Times, 25 July 1957 This was despite major actions in Korea in the early 1950s and Suez in 1956. Mallinson, p. 407 A large force of British troops also remained in Germany, facing the threat of Soviet invasion. Mallinson, p. 440 The British Army of the Rhine was the Germany garrison formation, with the main fighting force being I (BR) Corps. The Cold War saw significant technological advances in warfare and the Army saw more technologically advanced weapons systems come into service. Mallinson, p. 442 

Despite the decline of the British Empire, the Army was still deployed around the world, fighting wars in Aden, Mallinson, p. 401 Indonesia, Cyprus, Kenya and Malaya. Mallinson, p. 402 In 1982 the British Army, alongside the Royal Marines, helped to recapture the Falkland Islands during the Falklands conflict against Argentina. 

In the three decades following 1969, the Army was heavily deployed in Northern Ireland, to support the Royal Ulster Constabulary (later the Police Service of Northern Ireland) in their conflict with republican paramilitary groups, called Operation Banner. Mallinson, p. 411 The locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment was formed, later becoming home service battalions in the Royal Irish Regiment in 1992, before being disbanded in 2006. Over 700 soldiers were killed during the Troubles. Following the IRA ceasefires between 1994 and 1996 and since 1997, demilitarisation has taken place as part of the peace process, reducing the military presence from 30,000 to 5,000 troops. Army ending its operation in NI BBC News, 31 July 2007 On 25 June 2007, the Second Battalion Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment vacated the Army complex at Bessbrook Mill in Armagh. This is part of the 'normalisation' programme in Northern Ireland in response to the IRA's declared end to its activities. Troops pull out of Bessbrook Operation Banner News, 25 June 2007 

== Today ==

=== Personnel ===
Troopers of the Blues and Royals.
The British Army is purely a professional force since National service came to an end. The full-time element of the British Army is referred to as the Regular Army since the creation of the reservist Territorial Force in 1908. The size and structure of the British Army is continually evolving, but on 1 December 2013, the British Army employed; 95,800 Regulars, 3,130 Gurkhas dasa.mod Regular personnel, table 2 page 8. 1 December 2013. and 26,500 Army Reservists for a combined component strength of 125,430 personnel.

The future transformation of the British Army is referred to as "Army 2020", which is the result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) in October 2010 and a number of following reviews and modifications thereafter. According to the Ministry of Defence, Army 2020 will "ensure that the British Army remains the most capable Army in its class" and enable "it to better meet the security challenges of the 2020s and beyond". Transforming The British Army July 2012 Initially, the SDSR outlined a reduction of the Regular British Army by 7,000 to a trained strength of 95,000 personnel by 2015. However, following a further independent review on the future structure of the British Army, "Future Reserves 2020", it was announced that the Regular Army will be reduced to a trained strength of 82,000 while the Army Reserve will be increased to a trained strength of around 30,000 personnel. There will of course be an added margin for soldiers in training. This reform will bring the ratio of regular and part-time personnel of the British Army in line with US and Canadian allies. Perhaps the most important aspect of Army 2020 is that the Army Reserve will become "fully integrated" with the Regular Army and "better prepared" for overseas deployments and operations. However, budget cuts have made Britain a "hostile recruiting environment", with barely half the required number of new reservists actually signing up. 

In addition to the active elements of the British Army (Regular and Army Reserve), all ex-Regular Army personnel remain liable to be recalled for duty in a time of need, this is known as the Regular Reserve. British Army: Regular Reserve, 27 January 2014 The Regular Reserve is separated into two categories: A and D. Category A is mandatory, with the length of time serving in category A depending on time spent in Regular service. Category D is voluntary and consists of personnel who are no-longer required to serve in category A. Regular Reserves in both category A and D serve under a fixed-term reserve contract and are liable to report for training or service overseas and at home. These contracts are similar in nature to those of the Army Reserve. dasa.mod - reserves and cadet strengths, table 3 page 13 - read note 2. April 2013. The Long Term Reserve is also part of the Regular Reserve but excludes personnel serving in categories A and D. Unlike the other reserves the Long Term Reserve do not serve under a contract of any sort, instead they retain a "statutory liability for service" and may be recalled to service under Section 52 of the Reserve Forces Act (RFA) 1996 (until the age of 55). In 2007 there were 121,800 Regular Reserves of the British Army, of which, 33,760 served in categories A and D. dasa.mod - reserves and cadet strengths, table 3 page 5. April 2012. Publications since April 2013 no longer report the entire strength of the Regular Reserve, instead they only give a figure for the Regular Reserves serving in categories A and D only. They had a reported strength of 31,300 personnel in 2013. 

The table below shows historical personnel trends of the British Army from 1750 to 2014. The Army Reserve  or Territorial Army, as it was known then  did not come into existence until 1908. Defence personnel statistics, (Library House of Commons) Page 8. Hansard 20 March 1950 Size of the Territorial Army 1950. Hansard, THE TERRITORIAL ARMY 20 July 1960. Hansard, ARMY ESTIMATES March 1970. Defence Statistics 1998 Table 7, years 1980 and 1990. UK Reserve Forces Strengths, years 19952000 (Download PDF). 

 Historical personnel trends of the British Army 
 25px(17071800) 25px(18011921) 25px(1921 Present) 
 1750 1800 1817 1850 1883 1900 1901 1918 1939 1945 1950 1960 1970 1978 1980 1990 2000 2010 2014 
 Regular 78,900 80,300 92,000 99,100 124,000 301,500 430,000 3,818,292 230,000 3,120,000 364,100 315,000 174,000 163,000 159,000 152,800 110,100 108,900 98,930 
 Army Reserve 270,000 82,500 120,000 80,000 65,100 63,300 72,500 44,840 27,410 26,500 
 Total 78,900 80,300 92,000 99,100 124,000 301,500 430,000 3,818,292 500,000 3,120,000 446,600 435,000 254,000 228,100 222,300 225,300 154,940 136,310 125,430 

Soldiers of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers during a training exercise in 2014
;Notes:

:a After the Napoleonic Wars. However, during the Wars, the British Army expanded from 40,000 men in 1793 Chappell, p. 8 to a peak of 250,000 men in 1813. Chandler & Beckett, p. 132 
:b After the First Boer War.
:c During the Second Boer War.
:d End of the First World War.
:e Start of the Second World War.
:f End of the Second World War.
:g Reserve forces included in the figure above for regular personnel (In 1945, approximately 540,000 of the men serving in the British Army were Reservists).
:h National Service ends in that year.

=== Equipment ===

Infantry
The basic infantry weapon of the British Army is the L85A2 assault rifle, sometimes equipped with an L17A2 underbarrel grenade launcher. The rifle has several variants, such as the L86A2, the Light Support Weapon (LSW), and the L22A2 carbine issued to tank crews. Support fire is provided by the FN Minimi light machine gun and the L7 General Purpose Machine Gun (GPMG); indirect fire by 51 and 81 mm mortars. Sniper rifles used include the L118A1 7.62 mm, the L115A3 and the AW50F, all produced by Accuracy International. Some units use the L82A1 .50 calibre Barrett sniper rifle. More recently, the L128A1 (Benelli M4) 'combat shotgun' has been adopted, and is intended for close quarters combat in Afghanistan. 

Armour
The British Army's main battle tank is the Challenger 2. Challenger 2 BA Systems "UKDS 2013" Other armoured vehicles include the Supacat "Jackal" MWMIK and the Iveco "Panther" CLV. The Warrior Infantry Fighting Vehicle is the primary armoured personnel carrier, although many variants of the Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (tracked) are used too, as well as the Saxon APC and the FV430 series, which is now having its engines and armour replaced and returned to front-line service as the Bulldog. The British Army commonly uses the Land Rover Wolf and Land Rover Defender. 

Artillery
The Army uses three main artillery systems: the Multi Launch Rocket System (MLRS), AS-90 and L118. The MLRS was first used operationally in Operation Granby and has a range of 70 km. GMLRS British Army The AS-90 is a 155 mm self-propelled gun. The L118 Light Gun is a 105 mm towed gun used primarily in support of 16 Air Assault Brigade, 19 Light Brigade and 3 Commando Brigade (Royal Marines). 105 mm Light Gun BAe Systems The Rapier FSC Missile System is the Army's primary battlefield air defence system, widely deployed since the Falklands War and the Starstreak HVM (High Velocity Missile) is a surface-to-air weapon, launched either by a single soldier or from a vehicle-mounted launcher. Starstreak II sighted Janes 

Army Aviation
The Army Air Corps (AAC) provides direct aviation support for the Army, although the RAF also contributes by providing support helicopters. The primary attack helicopter is the Westland WAH-64 Apache, a license-built, modified version of the US AH-64 Apache, which replaced the Westland Lynx AH7 in the anti-tank role. The Lynx remains in service as an armed escort, surveillance and light utility helicopter. Other types are used in specialised roles e.g. the Westland Gazelle as a light surveillance aircraft Gazelle British Army and the Bell 212 for support in specific Jungle / 'hot and high' environments The Eurocopter AS 365N Dauphin is used for Special Operations Aviation and the Britten-Norman Islander is a light fixed-wing aircraft used for airborne reconnaissance and command and control. 

File:Challenger Main Battle Tank with Improved Armour MOD 45149015.jpg|Challenger II main battle tank.
File:MCV-80.jpg|Warrior IFV.
File:Apache WAH64D Helicopter MOD 45149194.jpg|AgustaWestland Apache attack helicopter.
File:Soldier from A Company 1 Royal Anglian Checking his Gun in Afghanistan MOD 45154068.jpg|Soldier checking his L85A2 Assault Rifle.

== Recent and current conflicts ==

=== Persian Gulf War ===

The ending of the Cold War saw a significant cut in manpower, as outlined in the Options for Change review. Defence (Options for Change) Hansard, 25 July 1990 Despite this, the Army has been deployed in an increasingly global role, and contributed 50,000 troops to the coalition force that fought Iraq in the Persian Gulf War. British forces were put in control of Kuwait after it was liberated.
47 British Military personnel died during the Persian Gulf War. 

=== Balkans conflicts ===

The British Army was deployed to Yugoslavia in 1992; initially this force formed part of the United Nations Protection Force. Mallinson, p. 446 In 1995 command was transferred to IFOR and then to SFOR. Mallinson, p. 447 Currently troops are under the command of EUFOR. Over 10,000 troops were sent. In 1999 British forces under the command of SFOR were sent to Kosovo during the conflict there. Command was subsequently transferred to KFOR. Mallinson, p. 448 Between early 1993 and June 2010, 72 British military personnel died on operations in the former Yugoslavian countries of Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia. Operations in the Balkans: British Fatalities Defence factsheet 

=== War in Afghanistan ===

In November 2001 the United Kingdom, as a part of Operation Enduring Freedom with the United States, invaded Afghanistan to topple the Taliban. Mallinson, p. 452 The 3rd Division were deployed in Kabul, to assist in the liberation of the troubled capital. The Royal Marines' 3 Commando Brigade (part of the Royal Navy but including a number of Army units), also swept the mountains. Operations in Afghanistan: Chronology of Events, September 2001  December 2002 Defence factsheet The British Army is today concentrating on fighting Taliban forces and bringing security to Helmand province. Approximately 7,900 British troops (including marines, airmen and sailors) are currently in Afghanistan, making it the second largest force after the US. Around 500 extra British troops were deployed in 2009, bringing the British Army deployment total up to 9,500 (excluding Special Forces). UK sends 500 more to Afghanistan BBC News, 15 October 2009 In December 2012 the Prime Minister, David Cameron, announced that 3,800 troops - almost half of the force serving in Helmand Province - would be withdrawn during 2013 with numbers to fall to approximately 5,200. UK to withdraw 3,800 troops from Afghanistan during 2013 BBC, 19 December 2012 By March 2014 troop levels were down to 4,000. Combat operations are projected to end in 2014. Between 2001 and May 2012 a total of 414 British military personnel have died on operations in Afghanistan. Operations in Afghanistan: British Fatalities Defence factsheet 

=== Iraq War ===

In 2003 the United Kingdom was a major contributor to the invasion of Iraq, sending a force that would reach 46,000 military personnel. Operations in Iraq: Facts and figures Defence factsheet The British Army controlled the southern regions of Iraq and maintained a peace-keeping presence in the city of Basra until their withdrawal on 30 April 2009. 179 British Military personnel have died on operations in Iraq. Operations in Iraq: British Fatalities Defence factsheet All of the remaining British troops were fully withdrawn from Iraq after the Iraqi government refused to extend their mandate. 

=== The Troubles ===

Although having permanent garrisons there, the British Army was initially deployed in a peacekeeping role  codenamed "Operation Banner"  in Northern Ireland in the wake of Unionist attacks on Nationalist communities in Derry Bloomfield, K Stormont in Crisis (Belfast 1994) p 114 and Belfast PRONI: Cabinet conclusions file CAB/4/1460 and to prevent further Loyalist attacks on Catholic communities, under Operation Banner between 1969 and 2007 in support of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and its successor, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI). There has been a steady reduction in the number of troops deployed in Northern Ireland since the Good Friday Agreement was signed in 1998. Army dismantles NI post BBC News, 31 July 2000 In 2005, after the Provisional Irish Republican Army announced an end to its armed conflict in Northern Ireland, the British Army dismantled posts and withdrew many troops, and restored troop levels to that of a peace-time garrison. Army To Dismantle Tower Block Post Skyscrapernews, 2 August 2005 

Operation Banner ended at midnight on 31 July 2007, bringing to an end some 38 years of continuous deployment, making it the longest in the British Army's history. An internal British Army document released in 2007 stated that the British Army had failed to defeat the IRA but had made it impossible for them to win through the use of violence. Operation Helvetic replaced Operation Banner in 2007 maintaining fewer servicemen in a much more benign environment. From 1971 to 1997 a total of 763 British military personnel were killed during the "Troubles". Remembrance Day: Where they fell BBC News, 13 November 2010 Some 300 deaths during the conflict were attributed to the British Army, including paramilitary and civilians. A total of 303 RUC officers were killed in the same time period. In March 2009, two soldiers and a Police Officer were killed in separate dissident republican attacks in Northern Ireland. Policeman shot dead in N Ireland BBC News, 10 March 2009 

File:BritishPatrolHelmand01.jpg|British soldiers in May 2007, during the War in Afghanistan.
File:3 Para Helmand 2007.jpg|3 Para in combat in Helmand Province, Afghanistan
File:Land Rover Defender 110 patrol vehicles.jpg|British soldiers in March 2003, during the invasion of Iraq.
File:South Belfast 1981.jpg|British Army patrol in South Belfast during the Troubles.

== Current deployments ==

=== High intensity operations ===

 Country Dates Deployment Details 
 Afghanistan 2001 4,000 troops British troops have been based in Afghanistan since the US-led invasion there in 2001. Currently, under Operation Herrick, the Army maintains troops in Camp Souter in Kabul and a brigade on 6-monthly rotation in the southern province of Helmand, mostly based in Camp Bastion and forward operating bases. As of November 2013 the 19th Deployment (Herrick 19) is under way. In December 2012 the Prime Minister, David Cameron, announced that 3,800 troops  almost half of the force serving in Helmand Province  would be withdrawn during 2013 with numbers to fall to approximately 5,200. Combat operations are projected to end in 2014. 

=== Low intensity operations ===

 Country Dates Deployment Details 
 Cyprus 1960 Two resident infantry battalions, Royal Engineers, 16 Flight Army Air Corps and Joint Service Signals Unit at Ayios Nikolaos as a part of British Forces Cyprus The UK retains two Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus after the island's independence. The bases serve as forward bases for deployments in the Middle East. British forces are also deployed separately with UN peacekeeping forces on the island. Principal facilities are Alexander Barracks at Dhekelia and Salamanca Barracks at Episkopi. Somme Barracks (Cyprus) Hansard, 26 March 2001 
 Falkland Islands 1982 An infantry company group and an Engineer Squadron Previously a platoon-sized Royal Marines Naval Party acted as the military presence. After the war in 1982 between Argentina and the UK, the garrison was enlarged and bolstered with an RAF base at Mount Pleasant on East Falkland. Falklands Forces Have A Vital Role To Play Falkland Islands News Network, 3 May 2006 
 Gibraltar 17041991 One infantry battalion, Joint Provost and Security Unit as a part of British Forces Gibraltar British Army garrison is provided by an indigenous regiment, the Royal Gibraltar Regiment, which has been on the Army regular establishment since the last British battalion left in 1991. Royal Gibraltar Regiment trains in the UK Defence News, 13 May 2010 
 Northern Ireland 1920 About 3,200 troops Heyman, p. 101 Since 2007 part of Operation Helvetic which replaced Operation Banner. 
 Sierra Leone 1999 Minimal The British Army were deployed to Sierra Leone, a former British colony on Operation Palliser in 1999 to aid the government in quelling violent uprisings by militiamen, under United Nations resolutions. Troops remain in the region to provide military support and training to the Sierra Leonean government. British troops withdraw from Sierra Leone Daily Mail, 2002 The International Military Assistance Training Team (IMATT (SL)) in Sierra Leone 

=== Permanent overseas postings ===

 Country Dates Deployment Details 
 Belize 1940s Ten soldiers British troops were based in Belize from the late 1940s until 1994. Belize's neighbour, Guatemala, claimed the territory and there were numerous border disputes. At the request of the Belizean government, British troops remained in Belize after independence in 1981 to provide a defence force. Belize Ministry of Defence The main training unit closed in November 2011, leaving a token presence of around ten soldiers. 
 Brunei 1962 One battalion from the Royal Gurkha Rifles, British Garrison, Training Team Brunei (TTB) and 7 Flight Army Air Corps A Gurkha battalion has been maintained in Brunei since the Brunei Revolt in 1962 at the request of Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddin III. The Training Team Brunei (TTB) is the Army's jungle warfare school, while the small number of garrison troops support the battalion. 7 Flight Army Air Corps provides helicopter support to both the Gurkha battalion and the TTB. 
 Canada 1972 British Army Training Unit Suffield and 29 (BATUS) Flight Army Air Corps A training centre in the Alberta prairie which is provided for the use of British Army and Canadian Forces under agreement with the government of Canada. British forces conduct regular, major armoured training exercises here every year, with helicopter support provided by 29 (BATUS) Flight AAC. 
 Germany 19452020 1st (UK) Armoured Division as part of British Forces Germany British forces remained in Germany after the end of the Second World War. Forces declined considerably after the end of the Cold War, and in October 2010 the Prime Minister, David Cameron, announced large cuts in defence with all UK troops currently in Germany to leave by 2020. Defence review: Cameron unveils armed forces cuts, BBC News Retrieved 19 October 2010. 
 Kenya 2010 British Army Training Unit Kenya The Army has a training centre in Kenya, under agreement with the Kenyan government. It provides training facilities for three infantry battalions per year 

== Formation and structure ==

The structure of the British Army is complex, due to the different origins of its various constituent parts. It is broadly split into the Regular Army (full-time Officers/soldiers and units) and the Army Reserve (Spare-time Officers/soldiers and units).

In terms of its military structure, it has two parallel organisations, one administrative and one operational.

Administrative
* Regiments and Corps. These are listed below (in the template to the right), ranging from the Household Cavalry to the Army Physical Training Corps and the Royal Logistic Corps. Uniquely and somewhat confusingly, the Infantry, which is not a corps but a collection of separate regiments, is administered by 'Divisions' of infantry  Guards Division, Queen's Division, Scottish Division and so on. Heyman, p.105 

Operational
* The major operational command is based at Andover and is known as "Army Headquarters". Army Command reorganization Defence Marketing Intelligence, 10 November 2011 It is split into divisions and subordinate units ranging from regiments to squadrons.
* Divisions (1 Div. based in Herford in Germany and 3 Div. based in Bulford) Heyman, p. 92 
** Brigades, both fighting and in a non fighting regional capacity within HQ LF (for example, 43 (Wessex) Brigade based in Bulford).

===Structure of units===

The standard operational units are structured as follows, although various units have their own structure, conventions, names and sizes: 
 

 Type of Unit Division Brigade Battalion / Regiment Company / Squadron Platoon / Troop Section Fire Team 
 Contains 23 Brigades 35 Battalions 57 Companies 3 Platoons 3 Sections 2 Fire Teams 4 Individuals 
 Personnel 10,000 5,000 550750 100 30 810 4 
 Commanded by Maj-Gen Brig Lt Col Maj Capt, Lt or 2nd Lt Cpl LCpl 

Corps are made up of two or more divisions, but now are rarely deployed as a purely national formation due to the size of the British Army. 

In place of a Battalion, a task-specific Battlegroup may be formed. A battlegroup is grown around the core of either an armoured regiment or infantry battalion, and has other units added or removed from it as necessary for its purpose. It results in a mixed formation of armour, infantry, artillery, engineers and support units, typically consisting of between 600 and 700 soldiers under the command of a Lieutenant Colonel. 

A number of elements of the British Army use alternative terms for battalion, company and platoon. These include the Royal Armoured Corps, Corps of Royal Engineers, Royal Logistic Corps, and the Royal Corps of Signals who use regiment (battalion), squadron (company) and troop (platoon). The Royal Artillery are unique in using the term regiment in place of both corps and battalion, they also replace company with battery and platoon with troop. 

=== Divisions ===

The British Army currently has two operational divisions. Heyman, pp. 9293 

 Name Headquarters Subunits 
 50px 1st Armoured Division Herford, Germany Two armoured brigades. 
 50px 3rd Division Bulford, Salisbury Three mechanized brigades and one light brigade. 

There are also a some ten brigades which are not part of any division report directly into Support Command. Support Command Ministry of Defence 

===Rapid Reaction Force===
16 Air Assault Brigade forms the bulk of the Army's rapid reaction force.

===Combat support===
Force Troops Command, or FTC, forms the basis of the Army's Combat support, containing units ranging from artillery to military police. Ministry of Defence: Structure 

=== Aviation components ===

The British Army operates alongside the Royal Air Force and the Fleet Air Arm as part of Joint Helicopter Command, but the army also has its own Army Air Corps. Military helicopters of all three services are commanded by Joint Helicopter Command, a joint 2 star headquarters operating under HQ Land Forces. Joint Helicopter Command Strategic Defence Review 

=== Special forces ===
The SAS Cap Badge.

The British Army contributes two of the three special forces formations within the United Kingdom Special Forces Command; the Special Air Service Regiment and the Special Reconnaissance Regiment. The most famous formation is the Special Air Service Regiment. The SAS comprises one regular Regiment and two Army Reserve Regiments. 

The regular Regiment, 22 SAS, has its headquarters and depot located in Hereford and consists of five squadrons: A, B, D, G and Reserve with a training wing. Fremont-Barnes, p. 62 The two reserve SAS Regiments; 21 SAS and 23 SAS have a more limited role, to provide depth to the UKSF group through the provision of Individual and collective augmentation to the regular component of UKSF and standalone elements up to task group (Regimental) level focused on support and influence (S&I) operations to assist conflict stabilisation. 

The Special Reconnaissance Regiment (SRR), formed in 2005 from existing assets, undertakes close reconnaissance and special surveillance tasks. Special Forces Support Group were formed around 1st Battalion the Parachute Regiment, with attached Royal Marines and RAF Regiment assets, the unit is also open to any member of the HM Armed Forces. The Special Forces Support Group are under the Operational Control of Director Special Forces to provide operational manoeuvre support to the elements of United Kingdom Special Forces. 

=== British Overseas Territories military units ===
Numerous military units were raised historically in British territories, including self-governing and Crown colonies, and protectorates. Whereas the Dominions, such as Canada and Australia, had their own armies before achieving complete independence, units raised in those territories which remained part of the realm of the UK were, and are, ultimately under the control of the UK government, and do not constitute separate armies. The UK retains responsibility for the defence of all of the fourteen remaining British Overseas Territories. Although the Cayman Islands premier has stated the desire to raise a Cayman Islands Defence Force when it can be afforded (it currently has only a cadet corps), becoming the fifth, only four of the remaining British Overseas Territories retain locally-raised regiments:

* Bermuda Regiment DefenceNews ArticleRoyal Anglian soldiers boost Bermuda Regiment Defence News, 19 January 2011, 
* Royal Gibraltar Regiment Royal Gibraltar Regiment trains in UK Defence News, 12 May 2011 
* Falkland Islands Defence Force Falkland Islands Defence Force: 150 years of Voluntary Service Falklands Info, November 2004 
*Royal Montserrat Defence Force 

Image:Falklandsdf.jpg|Falkland Islands Defence Force on parade in June 2013.
File:Bermuda Regiment PNCO Cadre Promotion Parade.jpg|Bermuda Regiment PNCO Cadre Promotion Parade in Army Uniforms#No.3: Warm weather ceremonial uniform|No. 3 (Summer) Dress].
File:Changing of the Guard duo - Royal Gibraltar Regiment.jpg|Changing of the Guard - Royal Gibraltar Regiment in 2012.

=== Royal Navy and RAF ground units ===
The other armed services have their own infantry units which are not part of the British Army. The Royal Marines are amphibious light infantry forming part of the Naval Service, and the Royal Air Force has the RAF Regiment used for airfield defence, force protection duties and Forward Air Control. 

== Recruitment ==

The Army mainly recruits within the United Kingdom; it normally has a recruitment target of around 12,000 soldiers per year. Army recruitment increases by 9% BBC News, 18 August 2006 Low unemployment in Britain has resulted in the Army having difficulty in meeting its target. In the early years of the 21st century there has been a marked increase in the number of recruits from other (mostly Commonwealth) countries. In 2006 overseas recruitment, mostly in Commonwealth countries, generated more than 6,000 soldiers from 54 nations; together with the 3,000 Gurkhas, 10% of the British Army is a foreign national. Britain's child army New Statesman, 5 February 2007 

The Ministry of Defence now caps the number of recruits from Commonwealth countries, although this will not affect the Gurkhas. If the trend continues 10% of the army will be from Commonwealth countries before 2012. The cap is in place as some fear the army's British character is being diluted, and employing too many could make the army seen as employing mercenaries. The minimum recruitment age is 16 years (after the end of GCSEs), although soldiers may not serve on operations below 18 years; the maximum recruitment age was raised in January 2007 from 26 to 33 years. The normal term of engagement is 22 years, and, once enlisted, soldiers are not normally permitted to leave until they have served at least 4 years. 

There has been a strong and continuing tradition of recruiting from Ireland including what is now the Republic of Ireland. Over 200,000 Irish soldiers fought in the First World War. More than 60,000 Irishmen from what was then the Irish Free State (now the Republic of Ireland) and 38,000 from Northern Ireland served in the Second World War, The Oxford companion to Irish history, Sean J. Connolly, p. 505 all volunteered.

=== Oath of allegiance ===
Troops of the Grenadier Guards on guard at Buckingham Palace. Various army regiments supply troops to guard the Royal residences.

All soldiers must take an oath of allegiance upon joining the Army, a process known as attestation. Those who wish to swear by God use the following words:

Others replace the words "swear by Almighty God" with "solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm". Under the reign of another monarch, the name of the monarch and all pronouns with gender are replaced appropriately.

=== Training establishments ===

The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst is the home of British Army officer training
* Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (RMAS) is the officer training establishment. All officers, regular and reserve, attend RMAS at some point in their training.
* Royal School of Artillery (RSA) trains the Royal Artillery.
* Royal School of Military Engineering (RSME) trains the Corps of Royal Engineers as well as personnel from across the Armed Forces and other Government Departments in a variety of general engineering and specialist skills.
* Army Training Units:
** ATR Winchester
** ATC Pirbright
* Infantry Training Centres:
** Infantry Training Centre, Catterick
** Infantry Battle School, Brecon
** Support Weapons School, Warminster
* Army Foundation College (Harrogate)
* Regional training centres
* Welbeck Defence Sixth Form College

== Flags and ensigns ==
An Army landing craft of the Royal Logistic Corps
The British Army does not have its own specific ensign for the whole Army, unlike the Royal Navy, which uses the White Ensign, and the RAF, which uses the Royal Air Force Ensign. Instead, the Army has different flags and ensigns, some for the entire army and many for the different regiments and corps. The official flag of the Army as a whole is the Union Flag, flown in a ratio of 3:5. A non-ceremonial flag also exists, which is used at recruiting events, military events and exhibitions. It also flies from the Ministry of Defence building in Whitehall. 

Whilst at war, the Union Flag is always used, and this flag represents the Army on The Cenotaph at Whitehall in London (the UK's memorial to its war dead). 

The British Army has throughout its history operated ships, ports and myriad boats. Boats, Landing Craft and Ports are still operated by the Army and ensigns exists for vessels commanded by the Army. The Royal Logistic Corps operates a large fleet of vessels from its base at Marchwood near Southampton. The Royal Engineers has had fleets since the introduction of diving in 1838 and was granted an ensign following the foundation of the Royal Engineers Submarine Mining Service in 1871, where it operated sea mine laying ships, before transfer of the trade to the Royal Navy. The Corps maintains a Blue Ensign defaced by the crest of the Board of Ordnance from where the Corps developed, which it flys from its fleet and shore establishments that routinely operate boats. 

Each Foot Guards and line regiment (excluding The Rifles and Royal Gurkha Rifles (RGR)) also has its own flags, known as Coloursnormally a Regimental Colour and a Queen's Colour. The design of different Regimental Colours vary but typically the colour has the Regiment's badge in the centre. The RGR carry the Queen's Truncheon in place of Colours. 

File:Flag of the United Kingdom (3-5).svg|Flag Ratio: 3:5. The official flag of the Army.
File:BritishArmyFlag2.svg|The non-ceremonial flag of the British Army. Sometimes the word Army in gold letters appears below the badge.
File:British Army Ensign01.svg|Ensign for general use by the Royal Logistic Corps
File:British Army Ensign00.svg|Ensign flown by the Royal Logistic Corps from vessels commanded by commissioned officers
File:Royal Engineers Ensign.png|Ensign of the Corps of Royal Engineers

== Ranks, specialisms and insignia ==

 
 Abbreviation: FM Gen Lt Gen Maj Gen Brig Col Lt Col Maj Capt Lt 2Lt OCdt 
 * 1Rank in abeyance. 

 
 Abbreviation: Cdr WO1 WO2 S/Sgt /C/Sgt Sgt Cpl /Bdr L/Cpl /L/Bdr Pte 

Every regiment and corps has its own distinctive insignia, such as cap badge, beret, tactical recognition flash and stable belt.

Throughout the army there are many official specialisms. They do not affect rank, but they do affect pay bands:

* Ranger
* Paratrooper
* Musician
* Survey Technician
* Farrier
* Biomedical Scientist
* Driver Tank Transporter
* Registered General Nurse
* Radar Operator
* Telecom Op (Special)
* Meteorologist
* Aircraft Technician
* Military Engineer Bomb Disposal
* Special Air Service Soldier
* Telecom Op (Linguist)
* Ammunition Technician
* Operator Special Intelligence
* Construction Materials Technician
* Driver Specialist
* Armoured Engineer
* Royal Armoured Corps Crewman
* Army Diver
* Sapper

== Tommy Atkins and other nicknames ==

A long established nickname for a British soldier has been Tommy Atkins or Tommy for short. The origins are obscure but most probably derive from a specimen army form circulated by the Adjutant-General Sir Harry Calvert to all units in 1815 where the blanks had been filled in with the particulars of a Private Thomas Atkins, No 6 Company, 23rd Regiment of Foot. German soldiers in both world wars would usually refer to their British opponents as Tommys. Present-day British soldiers are often referred to as Toms or just Tom. The British Army magazine Soldier has a regular cartoon strip, Tom, featuring the everyday life of a British soldier. Outside the services, soldiers are generally known as squaddies by the British popular press, and the general public. Songs for squaddies: the war musical Lads in Their Hundreds The Guardian, 19 May 2010 

Another nickname which applies only to soldiers in Scottish regiments is Jock, derived from the fact that in Scotland the common Christian name John is often changed to Jock in the vernacular.
Welsh soldiers are occasionally referred to as Taffy or just Taff. This may only apply to those from the Taff-Ely Valley in South Wales, where a large portion of men, left unemployed from the decline of the coal industry in the area, enlisted during the First and Second World Wars. Alternatively, it is derived from the supposed Welsh pronunciation of Dafydd The Concise Oxford Dictionary ISBN 978-0-19-861131-8 the vernacular form of Dave or Davey, the patron Saint of Wales being Saint David. Collins English Dictionary ISBN 0-00-716334-7 As a nickname for the Welsh it has existed since 1699. "Taffy, n.2" OED Online. June 2013. Oxford University Press. (accessed 26 June 2013). 
Irish soldiers are referred to as Paddy or Mick.

Junior officers in the army are sometimes known as Ruperts by the Other ranks especially for those from a privileged background. "Rupert, n." OED Online. June 2013. Oxford University Press. (accessed 26 June 2013). This nickname is believed to be derived from the children's comic book character Rupert Bear who epitomises traditional public school values and from the purported preponderance of that particular forename amongst young men from a public school background. Beevor, Antony (1990). Inside the British Army. London: Chatto & Windus. ISBN 0-7011-3466-6 

== See also ==
* Army Cadet Force (ACF)
* ArmyNET
* British Army Uniform
* British campaign medals
* British military history
* Future of the British Army (Army 2020)
* Jankers (army punishments)
* List of British Army installations
* Ministry of Defence
* Modern equipment of the British Army
* Redcoat
* Royal Air Force
* Royal Navy
* Sexual orientation and military service
* Army Reserve (United Kingdom)
* United Kingdom Special Forces
* Volunteer Force

==Notes and references==
;References

;Notes

== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*The Oxford History of the British Army edited by David Chandler and Ian Beckett, Oxford Paperbacks; (2003)

== External links ==

* British Army Website
* British Army Reserve Support
* British Army Sports, Museums & Associations Website
* UK Defence Statistics 2008
* British Army/Navy/RAF Website
* "Discussion of British Soldier Letters From Rev. War" (Article)
* Extensive information about the British Army, Royal Navy and the RAF
* British Army Quick Facts

Army
 



[[Bruin]]

Bruin is an Old English word used for brown bears (from the Dutch bruin meaning brown). It is often mistakenly said to mean a pregnant bear. Bruin or Bruins or BRUIN may refer to the following:

*Bruin, the brown bear in the Reynard cycle fables, whence the word was introduced into English.

==Surname==
Bruin and Bruins are Dutch surnames that can be equivalent to Brown (surname) or be patronymic (Bruin/Bruijn was a form of Bruno).
;Bruin
*Jan Bruin (born 1969), Dutch footballer
*Joseph Bruin (1809-1882), American slave trader
*Will Bruin (born 1989), American soccer player
;Bruins
*Bruno Bruins (born 1963), Dutch politician
*Derk-Elsko Bruins (192386), Dutch-German decorated member of the Waffen SS
*Hanke Bruins Slot (born 1977), Dutch politician
*Jan Bruins (194097), Dutch motorcycle road racer
*Luigi Bruins (born 1987), Dutch footballer
*Mary Bruins Allison (born 1903), American doctor and missionary
*Rcardo Bruins Choi (born 1985), Dutch-Korean racecar driver
*Regina Bruins (born 1986), Dutch racing cyclist
*Theo Bruins (192993), Dutch pianist and composer
;De Bruin
*See De Bruin, De Bruijn, De Bruyn

==Places==
*Lake Bruin, ox-bow lake of the Mississippi River located in northeastern Louisiana
**Lake Bruin State Park
*Bruin, Kentucky, United States
*Bruin, Pennsylvania, United States
*Bruin's Slave Jail, building in Alexandria, Virginia

==Sports teams==
*Boston Bruins, an American NHL hockey team
*UCLA Bruins, mascot of the sports teams of the University of California, Los Angeles
*Providence Bruins, an American AHL hockey team affiliated with the above NHL team
*George Fox University has a Bruin as the school mascot
*Salt Lake Community College's athletic teams are called the Bruins
*Bob Jones University
*Bellevue University's athletic teams are called the Bruins
*Kellogg Community College's athletic teams are called the Bruins
*Belmont University
*Chilliwack Bruins former Canadian major junior ice hockey team
*New Westminster Bruins were a junior ice hockey team from the Western Hockey League

==Other==
*Oud bruin, Belgian beer
*Heineken Oud Bruin, Dutch beer
*Yamaha Bruin 350, utility all-terrain vehicle
*Brown University Interactive Language, a programming language
*Rasmus Klump, a comic strip published as Bruin

==See also==
* List of Bruin mascots
* Ursine



[[Bayesian probability]]

Bayesian probability is one of the different interpretations of the concept of probability. The Bayesian interpretation of probability can be seen as an extension of propositional logic that enables reasoning with hypotheses, i.e., the propositions whose truth or falsity is uncertain.

Bayesian probability belongs to the category of evidential probabilities; to evaluate the probability of a hypothesis, the Bayesian probabilist specifies some prior probability, which is then updated in the light of new, relevant data (evidence). Paulos, John Allen. The Mathematics of Changing Your Mind, New York Times (US). August 5, 2011; retrieved 2011-08-06 The Bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation.

In contrast to interpreting probability as the "frequency" or "propensity" of some phenomenon, Bayesian probability is a quantity that we assign for the purpose of representing a state of knowledge, Jaynes, E.T. "Bayesian Methods: General Background." In Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Applied Statistics, by J. H. Justice (ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986 or a state of belief. In the Bayesian view, a probability is assigned to a hypothesis, whereas under the frequentist view, a hypothesis is typically tested without being assigned a probability.

The term "Bayesian" refers to the 18th century mathematician and theologian Thomas Bayes, who provided the first mathematical treatment of a non-trivial problem of Bayesian inference. Stigler, Stephen M. (1986) The history of statistics. Harvard University press. pg 131. Mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace pioneered and popularised what is now called Bayesian probability. Stigler, Stephen M. (1986) The history of statistics., Harvard University press. pp97-98, 131. 

Broadly speaking, there are two views on Bayesian probability that interpret the probability concept in different ways. According to the objectivist view, the rules of Bayesian statistics can be justified by requirements of rationality and consistency and interpreted as an extension of logic. Cox, Richard T. Algebra of Probable Inference, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001 According to the subjectivist view, probability quantifies a "personal belief". de Finetti, B. (1974) Theory of probability (2 vols.), J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York Many modern machine learning methods are based on objectivist Bayesian principles. Bishop, C.M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2007 

==Bayesian methodology==

Bayesian methods are characterized by the following concepts and procedures:

* The use of random variables, or, more generally, unknown quantities, to model all sources of uncertainty in statistical models. This also includes uncertainty resulting from lack of information.
* The need to determine the prior probability distribution taking into account the available (prior) information.
* The sequential use of the Bayes' formula: when more data become available, calculate the posterior distribution using the Bayes' formula; subsequently, the posterior distribution becomes the next prior.
* For the frequentist a hypothesis is a proposition (which must be either true or false), so that the frequentist probability of a hypothesis is either one or zero. In Bayesian statistics, a probability can be assigned to a hypothesis that can differ from 0 or 1 if the truth value is uncertain.

==Objective and subjective Bayesian probabilities==

Broadly speaking, there are two views on Bayesian probability that interpret the 'probability' concept in different ways. For objectivists, probability objectively measures the plausibility of propositions, i.e. the probability of a proposition corresponds to a reasonable belief everyone (even a "robot") sharing the same knowledge should share in accordance with the rules of Bayesian statistics, which can be justified by requirements of rationality and consistency. For subjectivists, probability corresponds to a 'personal belief'. For subjectivists, rationality and coherence constrain the probabilities a subject may have, but allow for substantial variation within those constraints. The objective and subjective variants of Bayesian probability differ mainly in their interpretation and construction of the prior probability.

==History==

The term Bayesian refers to Thomas Bayes (1702&ndash;1761), who proved a special case of what is now called Bayes' theorem in a paper titled "An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances". McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. (2011). In that special case, the prior and posterior distributions were Beta distributions and the data came from Bernoulli trials. It was Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749&ndash;1827) who introduced a general version of the theorem and used it to approach problems in celestial mechanics, medical statistics, reliability, and jurisprudence. Stigler, Stephen M. (1986) The history of statistics. Harvard University press. Chapter 3. Early Bayesian inference, which used uniform priors following Laplace's principle of insufficient reason, was called "inverse probability" (because it infers backwards from observations to parameters, or from effects to causes). Fienberg, Stephen. E. (2006) When did Bayesian Inference become "Bayesian"? Bayesian Analysis, 1 (1), 1&ndash;40. See page 5. After the 1920s, "inverse probability" was largely supplanted by a collection of methods that came to be called frequentist statistics. 

In the 20th century, the ideas of Laplace were further developed in two different directions, giving rise to objective and subjective currents in Bayesian practice. In the objectivist stream, the statistical analysis depends on only the model assumed and the data analysed. Bernardo, J.M. (2005), Reference analysis, Handbook of statistics, 25, 17&ndash;90 No subjective decisions need to be involved. In contrast, "subjectivist" statisticians deny the possibility of fully objective analysis for the general case.

In the 1980s, there was a dramatic growth in research and applications of Bayesian methods, mostly attributed to the discovery of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, which removed many of the computational problems, and an increasing interest in nonstandard, complex applications. Wolpert, R.L. (2004) A conversation with James O. Berger, Statistical science, 9, 205&ndash;218 Despite the growth of Bayesian research, most undergraduate teaching is still based on frequentist statistics. Bernardo, Jos M. (2006) A Bayesian mathematical statistics primer. ICOTS-7 Nonetheless, Bayesian methods are widely accepted and used, such as in the fields of machine learning and talent analytics.

==Justification of Bayesian probabilities==

The use of Bayesian probabilities as the basis of Bayesian inference has been supported by several arguments, such as the Cox axioms, the Dutch book argument, arguments based on decision theory and de Finetti's theorem.

===Axiomatic approach===
Richard T. Cox showed that Bayesian updating follows from several axioms, including two functional equations and a controversial hypothesis of differentiability. It is known that Cox's 1961 development (mainly copied by Jaynes) is non-rigorous, and in fact a counterexample has been found by Halpern. Halpern, J. A counterexample to theorems of Cox and Fine, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 10: 67-85. The assumption of differentiability or even continuity is questionable since the Boolean algebra of statements may only be finite. Dupr, Maurice J., Tipler, Frank T. New Axioms For Bayesian Probability, Bayesian Analysis (2009), Number 3, pp. 599-606 Other axiomatizations have been suggested by various authors to make the theory more rigorous. 

===Dutch book approach===
The Dutch book argument was proposed by de Finetti, and is based on betting. A Dutch book is made when a clever gambler places a set of bets that guarantee a profit, no matter what the outcome of the bets. If a bookmaker follows the rules of the Bayesian calculus in the construction of his odds, a Dutch book cannot be made.

However, Ian Hacking noted that traditional Dutch book arguments did not specify Bayesian updating: they left open the possibility that non-Bayesian updating rules could avoid Dutch books. For example, Hacking writes Hacking (1967, Section 3, page 316), Hacking (1988, page 124) "And neither the Dutch book argument, nor any other in the personalist arsenal of proofs of the probability axioms, entails the dynamic assumption. Not one entails Bayesianism. So the personalist requires the dynamic assumption to be Bayesian. It is true that in consistency a personalist could abandon the Bayesian model of learning from experience. Salt could lose its savour."

In fact, there are non-Bayesian updating rules that also avoid Dutch books (as discussed in the literature on "probability kinematics" following the publication of Richard C. Jeffreys' rule, which is itself regarded as Bayesian http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/bayes-theorem/ ). The additional hypotheses sufficient to (uniquely) specify Bayesian updating are substantial, complicated, and unsatisfactory. van Frassen, B. (1989) Laws and Symmetry, Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-824860-1 

===Decision theory approach===
A decision-theoretic justification of the use of Bayesian inference (and hence of Bayesian probabilities) was given by Abraham Wald, who proved that every admissible statistical procedure is either a Bayesian procedure or a limit of Bayesian procedures. Wald, Abraham. Statistical Decision Functions. Wiley 1950. Conversely, every Bayesian procedure is admissible. Bernardo, Jos M., Smith, Adrian F.M. Bayesian Theory. John Wiley 1994. ISBN 0-471-92416-4. 

==Personal probabilities and objective methods for constructing priors==
Following the work on expected utility theory of Ramsey and von Neumann, decision-theorists have accounted for rational behavior using a probability distribution for the agent. Johann Pfanzagl completed the Theory of Games and Economic Behavior by providing an axiomatization of subjective probability and utility, a task left uncompleted by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern: their original theory supposed that all the agents had the same probability distribution, as a convenience. Pfanzagl (1967, 1968) Pfanzagl's axiomatization was endorsed by Oskar Morgenstern: "Von Neumann and I have anticipated" the question whether probabilities "might, perhaps more typically, be subjective and have stated specifically that in the latter case axioms could be found from which could derive the desired numerical utility together with a number for the probabilities (cf. p. 19 of The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior). We did not carry this out; it was demonstrated by Pfanzagl ... with all the necessary rigor". Morgenstern (1976, page 65) 

Ramsey and Savage noted that the individual agent's probability distribution could be objectively studied in experiments. The role of judgment and disagreement in science has been recognized since Aristotle and even more clearly with Francis Bacon. The objectivity of science lies not in the psychology of individual scientists, but in the process of science and especially in statistical methods, as noted by C. S. Peirce. Recall that the objective methods for falsifying propositions about personal probabilities have been used for a half century, as noted previously. Procedures for testing hypotheses about probabilities (using finite samples) are due to Ramsey (1931) and de Finetti (1931, 1937, 1964, 1970). Both Bruno de Finetti and Frank P. Ramsey acknowledge their debts to pragmatic philosophy, particularly (for Ramsey) to Charles S. Peirce.

The "Ramsey test" for evaluating probability distributions is implementable in theory, and has kept experimental psychologists occupied for a half century. Davidson et al. (1957) 
This work demonstrates that Bayesian-probability propositions can be falsified, and so meet an empirical criterion of Charles S. Peirce, whose work inspired Ramsey. (This falsifiability-criterion was popularized by Karl Popper. "Karl Popper" in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Popper, Karl. (2002) The Logic of Scientific Discovery 2nd Edition, Routledge ISBN 0-415-27843-0 (Reprint of 1959 translation of 1935 original) Page 57. )

Modern work on the experimental evaluation of personal probabilities uses the randomization, blinding, and Boolean-decision procedures of the Peirce-Jastrow experiment. Peirce & Jastrow (1885)
 Since individuals act according to different probability judgments, these agents' probabilities are "personal" (but amenable to objective study).

Personal probabilities are problematic for science and for some applications where decision-makers lack the knowledge or time to specify an informed probability-distribution (on which they are prepared to act). To meet the needs of science and of human limitations, Bayesian statisticians have developed "objective" methods for specifying prior probabilities.

Indeed, some Bayesians have argued the prior state of knowledge defines the (unique) prior probability-distribution for "regular" statistical problems; cf. well-posed problems. Finding the right method for constructing such "objective" priors (for appropriate classes of regular problems) has been the quest of statistical theorists from Laplace to John Maynard Keynes, Harold Jeffreys, and Edwin Thompson Jaynes: These theorists and their successors have suggested several methods for constructing "objective" priors:
* Maximum entropy
* Transformation group analysis
* Reference analysis
Each of these methods contributes useful priors for "regular" one-parameter problems, and each prior can handle some challenging statistical models (with "irregularity" or several parameters). Each of these methods has been useful in Bayesian practice. Indeed, methods for constructing "objective" (alternatively, "default" or "ignorance") priors have been developed by avowed subjective (or "personal") Bayesians like James Berger (Duke University) and Jos-Miguel Bernardo (Universitat de Valncia), simply because such priors are needed for Bayesian practice, particularly in science. Bernardo, J. M. (2005). Reference Analysis. Handbook of Statistics 25 (D. K. Dey and C. R. Rao eds). Amsterdam: Elsevier, 17-90 The quest for "the universal method for constructing priors" continues to attract statistical theorists. 

Thus, the Bayesian statistician needs either to use informed priors (using relevant expertise or previous data) or to choose among the competing methods for constructing "objective" priors.

==See also==
* Bertrand's paradox  a paradox in classical probability, solved by E.T. Jaynes in the context of Bayesian probability
* De Finetti's game  a procedure for evaluating someone's subjective probability
* QBism  a controversial application of Bayesian probabilities to quantum mechanics
* Uncertainty
* An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* de Finetti, Bruno. "Probabilism: A Critical Essay on the Theory of Probability and on the Value of Science," (translation of 1931 article) in Erkenntnis, volume 31, September 1989.
* de Finetti, Bruno (1937) "La Prvision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives," Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincar,
* de Finetti, Bruno. "Foresight: its Logical Laws, Its Subjective Sources," (translation of the 1937 article in French) in H. E. Kyburg and H. E. Smokler (eds), Studies in Subjective Probability, New York: Wiley, 1964.
* de Finetti, Bruno (1974&ndash;5). Theory of Probability. A Critical Introductory Treatment, (translation by A.Machi and AFM Smith of 1970 book) 2 volumes. Wiley ISBN 0-471-20141-3, ISBN 0-471-20142-1
* DeGroot, Morris (2004) Optimal Statistical Decisions. Wiley Classics Library. (Originally published 1970.) ISBN 0-471-68029-X.
* Partly reprinted in: Grdenfors, Peter and Sahlin, Nils-Eric. (1988) Decision, Probability, and Utility: Selected Readings. 1988. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-33658-9
* Hajek, A. and Hartmann, S. (2010): "Bayesian Epistemology", in: Dancy, J., Sosa, E., Steup, M. (Eds.) (2001) A Companion to Epistemology, Wiley. ISBN 1-4051-3900-5 Preprint
*
* Hartmann, S. and Sprenger, J. (2011) "Bayesian Epistemology", in: Bernecker, S. and Pritchard, D. (Eds.) (2011) Routledge Companion to Epistemology. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-96219-3 (Preprint)
* 
* 
* Jaynes E.T. (2003) Probability Theory: The Logic of Science, CUP. ISBN 978-0-521-59271-0 (Link to Fragmentary Edition of March 1996).
* McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. (2011). The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes' Rule Cracked The Enigma Code, Hunted Down Russian Submarines, & Emerged Triumphant from Two Centuries of Controversy. New Haven: Yale University Press. 13-ISBN 9780300169690/10-ISBN 0300169698; OCLC 670481486
*
* 
*
*
* Ramsey, Frank Plumpton (1931) "Truth and Probability" ( PDF), Chapter VII in The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical Essays, Reprinted 2001, Routledge. ISBN 0-415-22546-9,
*
* Stigler, Stephen M. (1999) Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and Methods. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-83601-4
* Stone, JV (2013). Chapter 1 of book "Bayes Rule: A Tutorial Introduction", University of Sheffield, England.
* Updated classic textbook. Bayesian theory clearly presented.

Probability



[[Bert Bell]]

De Benneville "Bert" Bell (February 25, 1895  October 11, 1959) was the National Football League (NFL) commissioner from 1945 until his death in 1959. As commissioner, he introduced competitive parity into the NFL to improve the league's commercial viability and promote its popularity, and he helped make the NFL the most financially sound sports enterprise and preeminent sports attraction in the United States (US). He was posthumously inducted into the charter class of the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

Bell played football at the University of Pennsylvania, where as quarterback, he led his team to an appearance in the 1917 Rose Bowl. After being drafted into the US Army during World War I, he returned to complete his collegiate career at Penn and went on to become an assistant football coach with the Quakers in the 1920s. During the Great Depression, he was an assistant coach for the Temple Owls and a co-founder and co-owner of the Philadelphia Eagles.

With the Eagles, Bell led the way in cooperating with the other NFL owners to establish the National Football League Draft in order to afford the weakest teams the first opportunity to sign the best available players. He subsequently became sole proprietor of the Eagles, but the franchise suffered financially. Eventually, he sold the team and bought a share in the Pittsburgh Steelers. During World War II, Bell astutely argued against the league suspending operations until the war's conclusion.

After the war, he was elected NFL commissioner and sold his ownership in the Steelers. As commissioner, he implemented a proactive anti-gambling policy, negotiated a merger with the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), and unilaterally crafted the entire league schedule with an emphasis on enhancing the dramatic effect of late-season matches. During the Golden Age of Television, he tailored the game's rules to strengthen its appeal to mass media and enforced a policy of blacking out local broadcasts of home contests to safeguard ticket receipts. Amid criticism from franchise owners and under pressure from Congress, he unilaterally recognized the NFLPA and facilitated in the development of the first pension plan for the players. He survived to oversee the "Greatest Game Ever Played" and to envision what the league would become in the future.

==Early life (18951932)==
Bell was born de Benneville Bell, Didinger with Lyons: 6; cf. Claassen: 163, Yost: 54 on February 25, 1895, MacCambridge: 41; cf. Didinger with Lyons: 6, Rothe: 34, King: 20, Lyons: 1 in Philadelphia to John C. Bell and Fleurette de Benneville Myers. Lyons: 1; cf. Didinger with Lyons: 6 His father was an attorney who served a term as the Pennsylvania Attorney General. Lyons: 3 His older brother, John C. Jr., was born in 1892. Bert's parents were very wealthy, MacCambridge 2005: 41; cf. Lyons: 13 and his mother's lineage predated the American Revolutionary War. Lyons: 2 His father, a Quaker of the University of Pennsylvania (class of 1884) during the early days of American football, accompanied him to his first football game when Bell was six years old. Sullivan: 2324 Thereafter, Bell regularly engaged in football games with childhood friends. Lyons: 34. 

In 1904, Bell matriculated at the Episcopal Academy, the Delancey School from 1909 to 1911 and then the Haverford School until 1914. About this time, his father was installed as athletics director at Penn and helped form the NCAA. Lyons: 23, 5. At Haverford, Bell captained the school's football, basketball, and baseball teams, Lyons: 4; cf. King: 21. and "was awarded The Yale Cup [for being] 'The pupil who has done the most to promote athletics in the school.'" Although he excelled at baseball, his devotion was to football. Lyons: 5 His father, who was named a trustee at Penn in 1911, Marquis: 286 said of Bell's plans for college, "Bert will go to Penn or he will go to hell." 

===University of Pennsylvania (19141919)===
Bell (left) with Penn teammates Ben Derr (center) and Joe Berry in 1916.
Bell entered Penn in the fall of 1914 as an English major and joined Phi Kappa Sigma. Lyons: 57 Rothe: 34 In a rare occurrence for a sophomore, he became the starting quarterback for Penn's coach George H. Brooke. On the team, he also was as a defender, punter, and punt returner. After the team's 30 start, Bell temporarily shared possession of his quarterbacking duties until he subsequently reclaimed them later in the season, Lyons: 67 as Penn finished with a record of 352. MacCambridge 2009: 1080 

Prior to Penn's 1916 season, his mother died while he was en route to her bedside. Lyons:7-8 Nevertheless, he started the first game for the Quakers under new coach Bob Folwell, but mixed results left him platooned for the rest of the season. Penn finished with a record of 721. However, the Quakers secured an invitation to the 1917 Rose Bowl against the Oregon Ducks. King: 21; cf. Lyons: 9 Although the best offensive gain for Penn during their 20-14 loss to Oregon was a 20-yard run by Bell, he was replaced late in the game at quarterback after throwing an interception. Lyons: 10 

In the 1917 season, Bell led Penn to a 920 record. Afterwards, he registered with a Mobile Hospital Unit of the US Army for World War I and was deployed to France in May 1918. Lyons: 1115 As a result of his unit participating in hazardous duty, it received a congratulatory letter for bravery from General John J. Pershing, and Bell was promoted to first sergeant. Lyons: 1620. After the war, Bell returned to the United States in March 1919. He returned to Penn as captain of the team in the fall and again performed erratically. The Quakers finished 1919 with a 621 record. Academically, his aversion to attending classes forced him to withdraw from Penn without a degree in early 1920. ; cf. Lyons: 2021, MacCambridge 2005: 42, Willis: 310311 His collegiate days ended with his having been a borderline All-American, Lyons: 20; cf. Umphlett: 143144 but this period of his life had proven that he "possessed the qualities of a leader." ; cf. Colleges Already Preparing for Football by Cleaning Out Cash Registers and Polishing Up Stars 

===Early career (19201932)===
Bell assembled the Stanley Professionals in Chicago in 1920, but he disbanded it prior to playing any games because of negative publicity received by Chicago due the Black Sox Scandal. ; cf. Stanley Football Team Disbands He joined John Heisman's staff at Penn as an assistant coach in 1920, and Bell would remain there for several years. Lyons: 2223. At Penn, he was well regarded as a football coach, and after its 1924 season, he drew offers for, but declined, head-coaching assignments at other universities. At least as early as 1926, his avocation was socializing Lyons: 23-29 and frequenting Saratoga Race Course, where he counted as friends Tim Mara, Art Rooney, and George Preston Marshall. Lyons writes, against all common sense, it was Jack Mara, Tim's son, as the person he befriended. Lyons: 23, 29 In 1928, Bell tendered his resignation at Penn in protest over the emphasis of in-season scrimmages during practices by Lud Wray, a fellow assistant coach. Lyons: 2527 Bell's resignation was accommodated prior to the start of the 1929 season. 

Bell was then an employee of the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia. At one ponit, he tried his hand as a stock broker and lost $50,000 (presently, $) during the Wall Street Crash of 1929. Lyons: 30-32 His father bailed him out of his deprivation, and he returned to working at the Ritz. From 1930 until 1932, he was a backfield coach for the Temple Owls football team. ; cf. Rothe: 34, Lyons: 28, Willis: 310 In 1932, Marshall tried to coax Bell into buying the rights to a NFL franchise, but Bell disparaged the league and ridiculed the idea. Lyons: 49 When Pop Warner was hired to coach Temple for the 1933 season, Warner chose to hire his own assistants and Bell was let go. Lyons: 28; cf. MacCambridge 2009: 1081 

==NFL career==

===Philadelphia Eagles (19331940)===
By early 1933, Bell's opinion on the NFL had changed, and he wanted to become an owner of a team based in Philadelphia. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 56, 95. After being advised by the NFL that a prerequisite to a franchise being rendered in Philadelphia was that the Pennsylvania Blue Laws would have to be mollified, Westcott: 101; cf. Willis: 303304, Algeo: 1315, Ruck; Patterson, and Weber: 95 he was the force majeure in lobbying to getting the laws deprecated. He borrowed funds from Frances Upton, partnered with Wray, Lyons: 4647; cf. Claassen: 336, MacCambridge 2005: 42, Peterson: 112, Westcott: 101 and he procured the rights to a franchise in Philadelphia which he christened as the Philadelphia Eagles. Lyons: 47; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 42 
 
After the inaugural 1933 Philadelphia Eagles season, Willis: 310311; cf. Coenen: 237, Didinger with Lyons: 255 Bell married Upton at St. Madeleine Sophie Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia. Lyons: 3338, 41. Days later, his suggestion to bestow the winner of the NFL championship game with the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy was affirmed. Willis: 327328 In 1934, the Eagles finished with a 47 record, Didinger with Lyons: 255 The Eagles' inability to seriously challenge other teams made it difficult to sell tickets, Lyons: 54 and his failure to sign a talented college prospect Lyons: 56; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 43 led him to adduce that the only way to bring stability to the league was to institute a draft to ensure the weakest teams had an advantage in signing the preeminent players. Peterson: 119; cf. Williams: 41 In 1935, his proposal for a draft was accepted, Willis: 341343; cf. Lyons: 5758, DeVito: 84, Didinger with Lyons: 256 and in February 1936, the first draft kicked off, at which he acted as Master of Ceremonies. Williams: 4142; cf. Peterson: 119 Later that month, his first child, Bert Jr., was born. Lyons: 60 

In the Eagles' first three years, the partners exhausted $85,000 (presently, $), MacCambridge 2005: 43; cf. Lyons: 63 and at a public auction, Bell became sole owner of the Eagles with a bid of $4,500 (presently, $). MacCambridge 2005: 43; cf. Claassen: 335, Lyons: 63 Austerity measures forced him to supplant Wray as head coach of the Eagles, Lyons: 63; cf. Claassen: 342 wherein Bell led the Eagles to an 111 finish, their worst record ever (as of the season). ;Didinger with Lyons: 256 In December, an application for a franchise in Los Angeles was obstructed by Bell and Pittsburgh Steelers owner Rooney as they deemed it too far of a distance to travel for games. Willis: 355 During the Eagles' 2-8-1 1937 season, Didinger with Lyons: 257 his second child, John "Upton", was born. Lyons: 70 In the Eagles' first profitable season, 1938, they posted a 56 record. Lyons: 7273. The Eagles finished 191 in 1939 and 110 in 1940. Didinger with Lyons: 258 

===Pittsburgh Steelers (19401945)===
In December 1940, Bell conciliated the sale of Rooney's Steelers to Alexis Thompson, Algeo: 16 and then Rooney acquired half of Bell's interest in the Eagles. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 183184; cf. Herskowitz: 149, Lyons: 8182 In a series of events known as the Pennsylvania Polka, Rooney and Bell exchanged their entire Eagles roster and their territorial rights in Philadelphia to Thompson for his entire Steelers roster and his rights in Pittsburgh. Lyons: 87; Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 187 Ostensibly, Rooney had provided assistance to Bell by rewarding him with a 20% commission on the sale of the Steelers. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 303; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 45 Bell became the Steelers head coach and Rooney became the general manager. Ruck; with Patterson and Weber: 187; cf. Lyons: 88, MacCambridge 2005: 45 

During the training camp of the Pittsburgh's inaugural season with the nickname Steelers, Bell was buoyant with optimism about the team's prospect, but he became crestfallen after Rooney denigrated the squad and flippantly remarked that they looked like the "ame old Steelers" (SOS). ; cf. Claassen: 247, Lyons: 90, Leblanc: 62 After losing the first two games of the 1941 season, Rooney compelled Bell into resigning as head coach. Lyons: 9091 Bell's coaching career ended with a 10462 record, and for coaches with at least five years in the NFL, it is the worst record ever (as of the 2012 season). Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 225; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 45 His first daughter and last child, Jane Upton, was born several months after the season's conclusion. Lyons: 92 

By 1943, 40% of the NFL rosters had been drafted into the United States Armed Forces for World War II. Algeo: 29, 35, 46. The resulting difficulty in fielding a full-strength squad led some owners to recommend the league should shut down until the war ended. Bell auspiciously argued against this as he feared they might not be able to resume operations easily after the war, and since Major League Baseball was continuing unabated, then they should also. DeVito: 103 

Throughout Bell's affiliation with the Steelers, he suffered monetarily and Rooney bought an increasing allotment of the franchise from him. Rooney; Halaas and Masich: 71 Compounding Bell's problems, Arch Ward organized the All-America Football Conference (AAFC) in 1944 to displace the NFL's sovereignty in professional football. MacCambridge 2005: 13; cf. Davis 2005: 196197 Ward's AAFC promptly began luring players to join the league, Davis 2005: 199; cf. Piascik: 11, Littlewood 166, Staudohar: 56 which resulted in salaries being driven up drastically. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 228; cf. Davis 2005: 200201 In Bill Dudley's contract proceedings with the Steelers, he attributed Bell's anxiety during the negotiations to the rivalry from the AAFC. Whittingham: 229 Furthermore, by the end of 1945, the Steelers were in their most economically perilous situation in its history. Claassen: 251252 

===NFL commissioner (19461959)===

====Election, Hapes-Filchock, and the NFL schedule (19461948)====
Elmer Layden was appointed the first NFL commissioner in 1941, but Ward appeared as dictating his hiring. Littlewood: 133 Layden tendered his resignation for personal reasons January 1946. Davis 2005: 199; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 15, Peterson: 159 Bell, who was not well respected in Pittsburgh, Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 225; cf. Davis 2005: 201 was elected to replace him. Williams: 41; cf. Lyons: 116117, MacCambridge 2005: 15 He received a three-year contract at $20,000 ($) per year, and transacted a sale of his stake in the Steelers to Rooney, Lyons: 114 albeit for a price Bell did not construe was full-value. Lyons: 166167 He was then immediately placed at the center of a controversy wherein the owners denied Dan Reeves permission to relocate the Cleveland Rams to Los Angeles. MacCambridge 2005: 1516; cf. Davis 2005: 201202, Yost: 5758: Lyons: 117118 Bell moderated a settlement, and, as a result, the Los Angeles Rams were formed. As a precondition to the Rams leasing the Los Angeles Coliseum, they signed Kenny Washington, which marked the beginning of the end of racial segregation on the field, but also caused "'all hell to break loose'" amidst the owners. Rathet; Brown: 210 

The drawing up of a regular season schedule had been a perennial source of contention among the NFL owners since the league's inception. Willis: 302, 303, 308, 371, 383 The crux of the problem was the scheduling of games meant weighing the interest of owners who, early in the season, wanted their franchises to confront teams that drew the largest crowds, versus owners who wanted to play the weaker franchises to pad their team's win-loss record. Yost: 61; cf. Sullivan: 26. The resultant impasse coerced the owners, in 1946, to confer upon Bell the sole discretion in developing the league's schedule. MacCambridge 2005: 40; cf. Maule: 242, Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 248 He utilized this responsibility to, early in the season, pit the weaker teams against other weak teams, and the strong teams against other strong teams. Sullivan: 26; Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 248 His goal was to augment game attendances by keeping the difference in team standings to a minimum as deep into the season as possible. 

On the eve of the 1946 championship game, Bell was notified that Merle Hapes and Frank Filchock of the New York Giants had been implicated in a bribing scandal. ; cf. Coenen: 127, Peterson: 159160, MacCambridge 2005: 48, Pervin: 15, Lyons: 130 Filchock was sanctioned by Bell to play in the game but Hapes was suspended. Lyons: 130131; cf. Pervin: 16, Davis 2005 p. 207 At the next NFL owners' meeting, Bell was worried the repercussions from this event would lead to his firing. However he was pleasantly surprised to learn that his contract would be elevated to five years at $30,000 per year. Lyons: 129 Reinvigorated with renewed support, he persuaded the owners to allow him to put sudden-death overtime into the playoffs. Lyons: 289; cf. DeVito: 83, Willis: 301, Maule: 242 

Subsequently, he wrote an anti-gambling resolution into the league constitution, Lyons: 131132; cf: Bell Planning Campaign to Kill Gambling which empowered him with the ability to permanently ban any NFL associated personnel for betting on a game or for withholding information on a game being possibly fixed. Lyons: 203204; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 4849 Furthermore, to obstruct gamblers from getting inside information, he secreted the names of officials he would assign to games, and he directed each team to promulgate a precursory injury report which listed anyone who might not participate in a game. Lyons: 134135; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 4849 Eventually, he lobbied to get every state in the US to criminalize the fixing of sporting events Lyons: 142 and put employees on the payroll of the NFL to investigate potential betting scams. Yost: 60; cf. Daley: 193 

====AAFC-NFL merger (19481950)====
The NFL's struggle against the AAFC generated stress on wages, Lyons: 129; cf. Davis 2005: 203204 attendance, Coenen: 125126 marketing, Coenen: 125 and by 1949, it had prevented the NFL for showing a profit for three consecutive years. Lyons: 171 Bell and representatives from both leagues met to attempt a merger, but their efforts were fruitless. Piascik: 125; cf. Lyons: 146 In an unrelated matter, he apprised the owners that attendance records had shown televising games locally had a negative impact on the sale of home tickets. Coenen: 154 Nevertheless, he actualized the NFL's first television contract Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 290 the 1949 championship game. Lyons: 156157 Simultaneously, he dealt with a lawsuit from Bill Radovich, who had been blacklisted for leaving the Lions and gaining employment with the AAFC. Lyons and the New York Times incorrectly list Radovich for playing with the Los Angeles Seals. U.S. House Committee III, 1957, pp. 27782779; cf. Piascik: 27, Carrol with Gersham, Neft, and Thorn: 1197, Lyons: 154 Bell and the owners were advised by John C. Jr. that this lawsuit was potentially not winnable, and the ramifications from the outcome of the case weighed heavily on Bell. Lyons: 154155 

One of the primary impediments in an AAFC-NFL merger was the supposed violation of "territorial rights" claimed by Marshall. Eventually, Bell gathered enough support to effectuate a compromise with the AAFC. Davis 2005: 229 In late 1949, the leagues merged, Lyons: 150, 163; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 52 and Bell would stay on as commissioner with his contract extended from five to ten years Lyons: 147 as three AAFC teams (the Cleveland Browns, San Francisco 49ers, and Baltimore Colts) were subsumed. Seeking to capitalize on the publicity of the residual rivalry, he utilized "exquisite dramatic" and business sense and allocated the 1950 opening game to a contest between the 1949 champion Eagles versus the perennial AAFC champion Browns. Peterson: 191192; cf: Brown with Clary: 197 Feeling financially secure after the merger, he purchased his first home for himself and his family in Narberth, Pennsylvania. 

====Marketing of the NFL (19501956)====
In 1950, Bell originated a blackout rule into the NFL which forbid all teams to televise their home games within a 75 mile radius of their stadium - except for the Rams. Coenen: 154; cf. Davis 2005: 259260, 266, 268269, LaBlanc p. 10. Consequently, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) opened an investigation into a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Coenen: 157. Ensuingly, the Rams attendance for 1950 dropped off by 50%, Peterson: 197; cf. Hessions: 45, MacCambridge 2005: 70 and this signaled a potential financial disaster. Rader: 8687 In 1951, he licensed the DuMont Television Network to air the championship games for the next five years, and he stipulated that teams were free to develop their own television contracts independently. ; cf. Pro Football and DuMont Sign a $475,000 TV Pact, MacCambridge 2005: 73, 480, Rader: 8687; contra: The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Lyons and Patton report the title game receipts were only $75,000 for the 1951 NFL Championship Game. Fans Rush for Tickets to NFL Game, Lyons: 179, Patton: 35 

However, preceding 1951 season, he reimposed the blackout rule on all teams in the league. Davis 2005: 271; cf. MacCambridge, 2005: 73 The DOJ filed suit over this and Bell publicly retorted, "You can't give fans a game for free on TV and also expect them to go to the ballpark"; nevertheless, the suit was ordered to trial for January 1952. Coenen: 157158 After the 1951 season ended, he gained unilateral control over the setting of a television strategy for the NFL. Rader: 86; cf. Peterson: 197 He negotiated a deal with DuMont, which granted it the rights to nationally broadcast one regular season game every week, ; cf. Lyons: 196 and he directed that the income from this contract was to be shared equally between all the teams. Coenen; 156, 162; cf. Lyons: 196 In the DOJ's case, the judge ruled that the blackout policy was legal, but both Bell, and the franchises collectively, were enjoined from negotiating a TV contract; Patton: 55; cf. Peterson: 198, Lyons: 199200 Bell was ecstatic. Rader: 86 Later that year, Bell forced one of the owners of the Cleveland Browns to sell all of his shares in the team after Bell determined the owner had bet on Browns' football games. Brown with Clary: 230232 Although he hated to fly, Patton: 48 at some indeterminate point, he visited the training camps of every team and lectured on the danger gamblers posed to the league. U.S. House Committee III, 1957, p. 2587; cf. Summerall with Levin: 3637 

Bell authorized a Pro Bowl to be held at the end of each season in order to showcase the talents of the best players. Brown with Clary: 214 But in the early 1950s, on the field activities sometimes denigrated to borderline assault and battery Ratterman; with Deindorfer: 125 with teams' star players being viciously targeted by opposing players. ; cf. Piascik: 155 He answered charges the league was too savage by saying, "'I have never seen a maliciously dirty football player in my life and I don't believe there are any.'" Nevertheless, he ordered broadcasts to follow a strict rule of conduct whereby TV announcers would not be permitted to criticize the game, and neither fights, nor injuries, could be televised by virtue in his belief that announcers were "'salesman for professional football [and] we do not want kids believing that engaging in fights is the way to play football.'" King: 37; cf. I Don't Believe There Is Dirty Football 

Bell was criticized for censoring TV broadcasts, a charge he dismissed as not pertinent because he believed he was not impeding the print media but only advertising a product. Lyons: 282 After CBS and NBC gained the rights to broadcast the games in 1956, Patton: 37; cf Rader: 87 he advised the franchises to avoid criticizing the games or the officials, and forewarned that TV would give "'us our greatest opportunity to sell the NFL and everyone must present to the public the greatest games ... combined with the finest sportsmanship.'" Maraniss: 168169 This relationship with television was the beginning of the NFL's rise to becoming America's most popular sport. Lomax: 16 

====Compromise with the NFLPA (19561957)====
In Radovich v. National Football League, the Supreme Court ruled in Radovich's favor and declared the NFL was subject to antitrust laws, Coenen: 182; cf. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 293 and the implication was that the legality of the draft and reserve clause were dubious. Coenen: 182; cf. Lyons: 255256 Bell pressed a case in the media that the NFL should be exempted from antitrust regulations and proffered the league was a sport and not a business. Lyons: 261 He invited an investigation from Congress with respect to the court's ruling. The House Judiciary committee, chaired by Emanuel Cellerwho believed the draft was illegal and should be abolished, convened in July 1957 to discuss the ramifications of the Radovich decision. Carroll: 199 Red Grange and Bell testified at the committee's solicitation and argued the draft was essential to the sport's success. U.S. House Committee III, 1957, p. 2596; cf. Carroll: 199 Representatives of the NFLPA contradicted these statements and said the draft and the reserve clause were anti-labor, and it seemed as if Congress was going to accept their position. Faced with Congressional opposition, Bell formally recognized the NFLPA and declared he would negotiate with its representatives. 

However, Bell was speaking only for himself and without the auspices of the owners. Rooney; Halaas and Masich: 78 At the next owners' meeting, Rooney admonished they either had to recognize the NFLPA or remove Bell as commissioner. Rooney; Halaas and Masich, 2007, p. 78. In order to do this, they had to agree in a vote that required a super-majority. Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 294; cf. U.S. House Committee III, 1957, p. 2580a-2580at Bell unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the owners to permit the NFLPA to act as a bargaining agent for the players. Staudohar, 1986, 63; cf. Oriard: 57 However, he did reach a compromise with the owners to get them to acquiesce to some of the NFLPA's requests for salary standards and health benefits. 

====Final days (19581959) ====
For the 1958 season, the durations of timeouts was extended from 60 to 90 seconds Gifford; with Richmond: 121; cf. Maule: 245 and Bell mandated officials call a few TV timeouts during each game  a change which triggered criticism from sportswriters. Powers: 84 The 1958 championship game became the first NFL championship game decided in overtime Gifford uses literary license when he writes "The overtime rule had been instituted for this game ..." p. 210 Gifford; with Richmond: 207208, 210, 214 and it was considered to be the greatest football game ever played. ; cf. Gifford; with Richmond: 230 The game further increased football's marketability to television advertising, Patton: 41 and the drama associated with overtime was the catalyst. Powers: 88; cf. Gifford; with Richmond: 213 Years later, after witnessing Bell openly crying after the game, Raymond Berry attributed it to Bell's realization of the impact the game would have on the prevalence of the sport. Gifford; with Richmond: 229; cf. Greatest Game: Remembering '58 NFL finale, The Man Who Modernized Pro Football 

The death of Mara in February 1959 unsettled Bell and he experienced a heart attack later that month. Lyons: 308 He converted to Catholicism in the summer of 1959 because of the lifelong urging of his wife, Mara's death, and his enduring friendship with Rooney, Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 311 a practicing Catholic. Rooney; Halaas and Masich: 26; cf. Ruck; Patterson, and Weber: 84 Bell was advised by his doctor to avoid going to football games, to which he quipped, "I'd rather die watching football than in my bed with my boots off." Bell and his children attended an Eagles game at Franklin Field in October 1959. Lyons: 275 The Eagles held complimentary box seats for him and guests to watch the game, but he preferred to buy his own tickets and sit with the other fans. Sitting behind the end zone during the fourth quarter of the game, he suffered a heart attack and passed away later that day. Other authors alternately list his age at death (e.g., Ruck p. 313, Lyons p. 306) and his date of death (Lyons p. 306). 

Afterwards, he was remembered as "a man of buoyant joviality, with a rough and ready wit, laughter and genuine humility and honesty, clearly innocent of pretense and [pretension]." His funeral was held at Narberth's St. Margaret Roman Catholic Church and Monsignor Cornelius P. Brennan delivered the eulogy, as close friends and admirers attended the mass. Lyons: 312 Dominic Olejniczak and all the extant owners of the NFL franchises were pallbearers. ; cf. Lyons: 311312 Bell was interred at Cavalry Cemetery in West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania. Lyons: 311312 

==Legacy and honors==
Bell was inducted into the Professional Football Hall of Fame, Lyons: 315 the Penn Athletics Hall of Fame, the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame, and Haverford's Athletic Hall of Fame. The Maxwell Football Club, which he founded in 1937, Rooney; Halaas and Masich: 238 has presented the best NFL player of the year with the Bert Bell Award since 1959. ; cf. Lyons: 314 The Bert Bell Benefit Bowl was exhibited in his honor from 1960 through 1969. 

Though his career spanned the desegregation and reintegration of the NFL, as an owner, he never had an African American on any of his teams, but Bert Jr. believed the mere discussion of whether his father was prejudiced was absurd. Bell's handling of the merger with the AAFC was acclaimed as a personal triumph. MacCambridge 2005: 53; cf. Brown with Clary:194 Although he did not have the wherewithal to prevent the wholesale betting on games, Oriard: 13; cf. Gifford with Richmond: 29, Brown with Clary: 230232 he was proactive in ensuring games were not tampered with by gamblers, Lyons: 131132; cf. MacCambridge 2005: 4849 and he created the foundation of the contemporary NFL anti-gambling policy. Yost: 6061 

Bell was criticized as being too strict with his refusal to let sold-out games to be televised locally. ; cf. Coenen: 167, Detroit Free Press Nevertheless, his balancing of television broadcasts against protecting game attendance made the NFL the "healthiest professional sport in America", and he was the "leading protagonist in pro football's evolution into America's major sport." Ruck; Patterson and Weber: 222 He had understood that the league needed a cooperative television contract with revenue-sharing, but he failed to overcome the obstacles to achieve it. Patton: 5253; cf. Herskowitz Spreading the wealth rings a Bell He was portrayed by sportswriters as ensuring the owners treated the players fairly, Riger with Maule: 9 and his decision to recognize the NFLPA in the face of adversity from owners was a "master stroke" in thwarting Congressional intervention. After he initiated terms for a pension plan with the players in 1959, little progress was made with the NFLPA, Berry deprecates the importance of the NFL's agreement to a pension plan with the owners in 1959. Berry; with Gould and Staudohar, 1986, p. 96. Staudohar writes: "In 1959 the [NFLPA] achieved another breakthrough when it persuaded the owners to provide a pension plan for the players." Staudohar, 1986, p. 63. however, the first players' pension plan-the Bert Bell National Football League Retirement Plan, was approved in 1962. 

Bell's implementation of the draft did not show immediate results, Coenen: 90; cf. MacCambridge 2005,: 41 but it was "the single greatest contributor to the [league]'s prosperity" in its first eighty-four years. Yost: 55 His original version of the draft was later ruled unconstitutional, Staudohar: 7981; cf. Smith v. Pro Football, Inc., 420 F. Supp. 738, 593 F. 2d 1173 (1978) but his anchoring of the success of the league to competitive balance has been "hailed by contemporaries and sports historians". Coenen: 89 Bell had often said, "[o]n any given Sunday, any team in the NFL can beat any other team." Lyons: 287; cf. MacCambridge 2005, 107 

==Published works==
* Bell, Bert, "The Money Game." Liberty Magazine, XIII (November 28, 1936), pp. 5960.
* Bell, Bert, "Offensive Football." Popular Football, (Winter 1941), p. 111.
* Bell, Bert, "This is Commissioner Bell Speaking." Pro Football Illustrated, XII (1952), pp. 6063.
* Bell, Bert; with Martin, Paul, "Do the Gamblers Make a Sucker Out of You?." Saturday Evening Post, CCXXI (November 6, 1948), p. 28.
* Bell, Bert; with Pollock, Ed, "Let's Throw Out the Extra Point." Sport, XV (October 1953), p. 2425. Smith: 156 
* Bell, Bert (1957). The Story of Professional Football in Summary. Bala Cynwyd, PA: National Football League.

==References==

==Bibliography==

===Primary materials===
* Lyons, Robert S. (2010). On Any Given Sunday, A Life of Bert Bell. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-59213-731-2

===Secondary materials===
* When Pride Still Mattered, A Life of Vince Lombardi, by David Maraniss, 1999, ISBN 978-0-618-90499-0
* Organized Professional Team Sports: Part 1. United States House Committee on the Judiciary I, Subcommittee on Antitrust (1957).
* Organized Professional Team Sports: Part 3. United States House Committee on the Judiciary III, Subcommittee on Antitrust (1957).
* 
* Algeo, Matthew (2006). Last Team Standing. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81472-3
* Berry, Robert C.; with Gould, William B. and Staudohar, Paul D. (1986). Labor Relations in Professional Sports. Dover, MA: Auburn House Pub. Co. ISBN 0-86569-137-1
* Brown, Paul; with Clary, Jack (1979). PB, the Paul Brown Story. New York: Atheneum.
* Carroll, Bob; with Gershman, Michael, Neft, David, and Thorn, John (1999). Total Football:The Official Encyclopedia of the National Football League. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-270174-6
* Carroll, John M. (1999). Red Grange and the Rise of Modern Football. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02384-6
* Claassen, Harold (Spike) (1963). The History of Professional Football. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Coenen, Craig R. (2005). From Sandlots to the Super Bowl: The National Football League, 19201967. Knoxville, TN: The University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 1-57233-447-9
* Daley, Arthur (1963). Pro Football's Hall of Fame. New York: Grosset and Dunlap.
* Danzig, Allison (1956). The History of American Football: Its Great Teams, Players, and Coaches. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Davis, Jeff (2005). Papa Bear, The Life and Legacy of George Halas. New York: McGraw-Hill ISBN 0-07-146054-3
* DeVito, Carlo (2006). Wellington: the Maras, the Giants, and the City of New York. Chicago: Triumph Books. ISBN 978-1-57243-872-9
* Didinger, Ray; with Lyons, Robert S. (2005). The Eagles Encyclopedia. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 1-59213-449-1
* Gifford, Frank; with Richmond, Peter (2008). The Glory Game: How the 1958 NFL Championship Changed Football Forever. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-171659-1
* Herskowitz, Mickey (1990). The Golden Age of Pro Football. Dallas: Taylor Publishing Company. ISBN 0-87833-751-2
* Hession, Joseph (1987). The Rams: Five Decades of Football. San Francisco: Foghorn Press. ISBN 0-935701-40-0
* Hibner, John Charles (1993). The Rose Bowl, 19021929. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, Inc. Publishers. ISBN 0-89950-775-1
* King, Joe (1958). Inside Pro Football. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* Layden, Elmer; with Snyder, Ed (1969). It Was a Different Game: The Elmer Layden Story. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall, Inc.
* LaBlanc, Michael L.; with Ruby, Mary K. (1994). Professional Sports Team Histories: Football. Detroit: Gale Research Inc. ISBN 0-8103-8861-8
* Levy, Alan H. (2003). Tackling Jim Crow, Racial Segregation in Professional Football. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co., Inc. ISBN 0-7864-1597-5
* Littlewood, Thomas B. (1990). Arch: A Promoter, not a Poet: The Story of Arch Ward. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press. ISBN 0-8138-0277-6
* 
* MacCambridge, Michael (2005). America's Game. New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-307-48143-6
* MacCambridge, Michael (2009). ESPN College Football Encyclopedia: The Complete History of the Game. New York: ESPN Books, Inc. ISBN 1-4013-3703-1
* Marquis, Albert Nelson (1934). Who's Who in America: A Biographical Dictionary of Notable Living Men and Women of the United States, Vol., 18, 19341935, Two Years. Chicago: The A. N. Marquis Company.
* Maule, Tex (1964). The Game; The Official Picture History of the National Football League. New York: Random House
* Oriard, Michael (2007). Brand NFL: Making and Selling America's Favorite Sport. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3142-7
* Patton, Phil (1984). Razzle-Dazzle: The Curious Marriage of Television and Professional Football. Garden City, NY: The Dial Press. ISBN 0-385-27879-9
* Paul, William Henry (1974). The Gray-Flannel Pigskin: Movers and Shakers of Pro Football. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
* Pervin, Lawrence A. (2009). Football's New York Giants. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7864-4268-3
* Peterson, Robert W. (1997). Pigskin: The Early Years of Pro Football. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-507607-9
* Piascik, Andy (2007). The Best Show in Football: The 19461955 Cleveland Browns. Lanham, MD: Taylor Trade Publishing. ISBN 978-1-58979-360-6
* Powers, Ron (1984). Supertube: The Rise of Television Sports. New York: Coward-McCann. ISBN 0-698-11253-9
* Rader, Benjamin G. (1984). In its Own Image: How Television Has Transformed Sports. New York: The Free Press. ISBN 0-02-925700-X
* Rathet, Mike; with Smith, Don R. (1984). Their Deeds and Dogged Faith. New York: Balsam Press. ISBN 0-917439-02-3
* Ratterman, George; with Deindorfer, Robert G. (1962). Confessions of a Gypsy Quarterback; Inside the Wacky World of Pro Football. New York: Coward-McCann, Inc.
* Riger, Robert; with Maule, Tex (1960). The Pros. New York: Simon and Schuster.
* Rooney, Dan; with Halaas, David F. and Masich, Andrew E. (2007). My 75 Years with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the NFL. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-7867-2603-5
* Rothe, Anna; with Prodrick, Elizabeth (1951). "Bert Bell" in Current Biography: Who's News and Why 1950. New York: The H.W. Wilson Company.
* Ruck, Rob; with Patterson, Maggie Jones and Weber, Michael P. (2010). Rooney: A Sporting Life. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2283-0
* Smith, Myron J. Jr. (1993). Professional Football: The Official Pro Football Hall of Fame Bibliography. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-28928-X
* Staudohar, Paul D. (1986). The Sports Industry and Collective Bargaining. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press. ISBN 0-87546-117-4
* Sullivan, George (1968). Pro Football's All Time Greats. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.
* Summerall, Pat; with Levin, Michael (2010). Giants: What I Learned about Life from Vince Lombardi and Tom Landry. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-470-90908-9
* Umphlett, Wiley Lee (1992). Creating the Big Game: John W. Heisman and the Invention of American Football. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-28404-0
* Westcott, Rich (2001). A Century of Philadelphia Sports. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 1-56639-861-4
* Whittingham, Richard (2002). What a Game They Played: An Inside Look at the Golden Era of Pro Football. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8032-9819-4
* Williams, Pete (2006). The Draft: A Year Inside the NFL's Search for Talent. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-35438-1
* Willis, Chris (2010). The Man Who Built the National Football League: Joe F. Carr. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-7669-9
* Yost, Mark (2006). Tailgating, Sacks and Salary Caps. Chicago: Kaplan Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4195-2600-8

==Further reading==
* Lower Merion Historical Society (2000). The first 300 : the amazing and rich history of Lower Merion. Ardmore, Pa. : The Society

==External links==

* 



[[Bob Costas]]

Robert Quinlan "Bob" Costas (born March 22, 1952) is an American sportscaster, on the air for NBC Sports television since the early 1980s. He has been prime-time host of nine Olympic games. He also does play-by-play for MLB Network and hosts an interview show called Studio 42 with Bob Costas.

==Early life==
Bob Costas was born in the borough of Queens in New York City, the son of Jayne (Quinlan), of Irish descent, and John George Costas, an electrical engineer of Greek descent. His father's family roots are from the island of Chios in the Aegean Sea. Database (undated). "Bob Costas Biography (1952)". filmreference.com. Retrieved August 5, 2012. In the documentary television series Baseball (1994), directed by Ken Burns, Costas indicated that he had a very poor relationship with his father, but did not go into specifics. He grew up in Commack, New York, graduating from Commack High School South.

Following high school, Costas majored in communications and rhetorical studies at Syracuse University, before dropping out of school. Later, he received an honorary degree from its S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications. 

==Broadcasting career==

===Early career===
Costas' sportscasting career began while attending Syracuse University, serving as an announcer for the Syracuse Blazers minor-league hockey team playing in the Eastern Hockey League and North American Hockey League.

He started his professional career at KMOX radio in St. Louis, Missouri, calling play-by-play for the Spirits of St. Louis of the American Basketball Association in 1974. He also called Missouri Tigers basketball and co-hosted KMOX's Open Line call-in program.

He was a prominent contributor to the ABA book Loose Balls: The Short, Wild Life of the American Basketball Association. He is extensively quoted on many topics. The book includes his reflections of ABA life during his tenure as radio voice of the Spirits of St. Louis.

Costas later did play-by-play for Chicago Bulls broadcasts on WGN-TV during the 19791980 NBA season. Database (undated). "WGN Channel 9 Chicago Bulls Basketball With Bob Costas (Promo, 1979)". The Museum of Classic Chicago Television. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Database (undated). "WGN Channel 9 Chicago Bulls Vs. Seattle Supersonics (Opening, 1979)". The Museum of Classic Chicago Television. Retrieved August 5, 2012. He was also employed by CBS Sports as a regional CBS NFL and CBS NBA announcer from 1976 to 1979, after which he moved to NBC.

===NBC Sports===
When Costas was first hired by NBC, Don Ohlmeyer, who at the time ran the network's sports division, told the then 28-year-old Costas that he looked like a 14-year-old (a story that Costas would recite during an appearance on Late Night with Conan O'Brien when O'Brien commented about Costas' apparent inability to "age" normally). Ohlmeyer presumably based his reaction on Costas' modest stature (Costas is 5' 4" in height) and boyish, babyfaced appearance.

Costas has been an in-studio host for NBC's National Football League coverage and a play-by-play man for National Basketball Association and Major League Baseball coverage. Costas has teamed with Isiah Thomas and Doug Collins for NBA telecasts (from 19972000). For baseball telecasts, he teamed with Sal Bando (1982), Tony Kubek (from 19831989), and Joe Morgan and Bob Uecker (from 19942000). Before becoming the studio host for The NFL on NBC in 1984, Costas did play-by-play of NFL games with analyst Bob Trumpy.

Since 2001 Costas has been the co-host of the Kentucky Derby. Since 1995 Costas has also hosted NBC's coverage of the U.S. Open golf tournament. 

In 2009 he hosted Bravo's coverage of the 2009 Kentucky Oaks. [http://www.nt2099.com/J-ENT/news/american-entertainment/ladies-first-bravo-at-the-kentucky-derby-airs-on-bravo-friday-may-1-at-5-pm-etpt/ ] 

With the introduction of the NBC Sports Network, Costas also became the host of the new monthly interview program Costas Tonight. 

====Olympics====
Costas has frontlined many Olympics broadcasts for NBC. They include the Olympics in Barcelona in 1992, Atlanta in 1996, Sydney in 2000, Salt Lake City in 2002, Athens in 2004, Turin in 2006, Beijing in 2008, Vancouver in 2010, London in 2012, and Sochi in 2014. He discusses his work on the Olympic telecasts extensively in a book by Andrew Billings entitled Olympic Media: Inside the Biggest Show on Television. A personal influence on Costas has been legendary ABC Sports broadcaster Jim McKay, who hosted many Olympics for ABC from the 1960s to the 1980s. (June 7, 2008). "Legendary Broadcaster McKay Dies TV Sports Journalist Known for Hosting 'Wide World of Sports' and Olympics". NBC Sports. Retrieved July 31, 2012. 

During the 1992 Barcelona and 1996 Atlanta Opening Ceremonies, Costas' remarks on China's teams' possible drug use caused an uproar among the American Chinese and international communities. Thousands of dollars were raised to purchase ads in The Washington Post and Sunday The New York Times, featuring an image of the head of a statue of Apollo and reading: "Costas Poisoned Olympic Spirit, Public Protests NBC". However, Costas' comments were made subsequent to the suspension of Chinese coach Zhou Ming after seven of his swimmers were caught using steroids in 1994. Further evidence of Chinese athletes' drug use came in 1997 when Australian authorities confiscated 13 vials of Somatropin, a human growth hormone, from the bag of Chinese swimmer Yuan Yuan upon her arrival for the 1997 World Swimming Championships. At the World Championships, four Chinese swimmers tested positive for the banned substance Triamterene, a diuretic used to dilute urine samples in order to mask the presence of anabolic steroids. Including these failed drug tests, 27 Chinese swimmers were caught using performance enhancing drugs from 1990 through 1997; more than the rest of the world combined. 

Along with that of co-host Meredith Vieira and Matt Lauer, Costas' commentary of the 2012 Summer Olympics Opening Ceremonies came under fierce criticism, with Costas being described as making "a series of jingoistic remarks, including a joke about Idi Amin when Uganda's team appeared" Adams, Guy (July 30, 2012). "As America Succeeds at the Games, Back Home All the Talk Is About #NBCfail Host Bob Costas Made a Series of Jingoistic Remarks, Including a Joke About Idi Amin When Uganda's Team Appeared". The Independent. Retrieved August 1, 2012. and the combined commentary as being "ignorant" and "banal". Huff, Steve (July 28, 2012). "NBC's Broadcast of the Olympics Opening Ceremony Was the Worst We Cringed". The New York Observer. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Holmes, Linda (July 27, 2012). "The Opening Ceremonies in London: From the Industrial Revolution to Voldemort". NPR. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Keller, Emma G. (July 28, 2012). "NBC Lambasted Over Banal Butchering of Opening Ceremony And Rightly So Tim Berners-Lee? Who's That? Madagascar? Oh, Like the Kids Movie! If You're Going To Make Us Wait Hours To Watch the Ceremony Live, NBC, the Least You Could Have Done Is Keep Quiet". Olympics2012 (blog of The Guardian). Retrieved August 1, 2012. 

Costas later appeared on Conan O'Brien's talk show and criticized his employer for its decision to air a preview of the upcoming series Animal Practice over a performance by The Who during the London closing ceremonies. "So here is the balance NBC has to consider: The Who, 'Animal Practice.' Roger Daltrey, Pete Townshend -- monkey in a lab coat. I'm sure you'd be the first to attest, Conan, that when it comes to the tough calls, NBC usually gets 'em right," Costas said, alluding at the end to O'Brien's involvement in the 2010 Tonight Show conflict. Porter, Rick. (September 13, 2012). "'Conan': Bob Costas not a fan of NBC's Olympic closing ceremony coverage". Zap2it. Retrieved September 16, 2012. 

An eye infection Costas had at the start of the 2014 Winter Olympics forced him, on February 11, 2014, to cede his Olympic hosting duties to Matt Lauer (two nights) and Meredith Vieira (one night), the first time someone other than Costas hosted a primetime Olympics broadcast since CBS's broadcast of the 1998 Games (in which Jim Nantz was the primetime host) http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1955944-bob-costas-eye-infection-forces-host-to-be-temporarily-replaced-by-matt-lauer?utm_source=cnn.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=editorial&hpt=hp_c4 and the first time Costas has not done so at all since the 1988 Summer Olympics (Bryant Gumbel was the primetime host for NBC's 1988 Summer Olympics coverage, while Costas hosted the late night portions). http://www.nbcolympics.com/news/matt-lauer-fill-bob-costas-nbcs-olympic-primetime-show?ctx=att-olympic-news-desk 

====Major League Baseball====
One of his most memorable broadcasts occurred on June 23, 1984 (in what would go down in baseball lore as "The Sandberg Game"). Costas, along with Tony Kubek, was calling the Saturday baseball Game of the Week from Chicago's Wrigley Field. The game between the Chicago Cubs and St. Louis Cardinals in particular was cited for putting Ryne Sandberg (as well as the 1984 Cubs in general, who would go on to make their first postseason appearance since 1945) "on the map". In the ninth inning, the Cubs, trailing 98, faced the premier relief pitcher of the time, Bruce Sutter. Sandberg, then not known for his power, slugged a home run to left field against the Cardinals' ace closer. Despite this dramatic act, the Cardinals scored two runs in the top of the tenth. Sandberg came up again in the tenth inning, facing a determined Sutter with one man on base. Sandberg then shocked the national audience by hitting a second home run, even farther into the left field bleachers, to tie the game again. The Cubs went on to win in the 11th inning. The Top 20 Cub HR Of All Time - #4 Ryne Sandberg 6/23/1984 - Bleed Cubbie Blue. When Sandberg hit that second home run, Costas said, "Do you believe it?!" The Cardinals' Willie McGee hit for the cycle in the same game.

While broadcasting Game 4 of the 1988 World Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and Oakland Athletics on NBC, Costas angered many members of the Dodgers (especially the team's manager, Tommy Lasorda) by commenting before the start of the game that the Dodgers quite possibly were about to put up the weakest-hitting lineup in World Series history. That comment ironically fired up the competitive spirit of the Dodgers. Later (while being interviewed by NBC's Marv Albert), after the Dodgers had won Game 4 (en route to a 41 series victory), Lasorda sarcastically suggested that the MVP of the 1988 World Series should be Bob Costas.

Besides calling the 1989 American League Championship Series for NBC, Costas also filled-in for a suddenly ill Vin Scully, who had come down with laryngitis, for Game 2 of the 1989 National League Championship Series. Game 2 of the NLCS occurred on Thursday, October 5, which was an off day for the ALCS. NBC then decided to fly Costas from Toronto to Chicago to substitute for Scully on Thursday night. Afterwards, Costas flew back to Toronto, where he resumed work on the ALCS the next night.

Bob Costas anchored NBC's pre- and post-game shows for NFL broadcasts and the pre and post-game shows for numerous World Series and Major League Baseball All-Star Games during the 1980s (the first being for the 1982 World Series). Costas did not get a shot at doing play-by-play (as the games on NBC were previously called by Vin Scully) for an All-Star Game until 1994 and a World Series until 1995 (when NBC split the coverage with ABC under "The Baseball Network" umbrella), when NBC regained Major League Baseball rights after a four year hiatus (when the broadcast network television contract moved over to CBS, exclusively). It was not until 1997 when Costas finally got the chance to do play-by-play for a World Series from start to finish. Costas ended up winning a Sports Emmy Award for Outstanding Sports Personality, Play-by-Play.

In 1999 Costas teamed with his then-NBC colleague Joe Morgan to call two weekday night telecasts for ESPN. The first was on Wednesday, August 25 with Detroit Tigers playing against the Seattle Mariners. The second was on Tuesday, September 21 with the Atlanta Braves playing against the New York Mets.

====National Basketball Association====
When NBC gained the NBA network contract from CBS in 1990, Costas hosted the telecasts and was teamed in the studio with ex-Lakers coach Pat Riley. He also hosted the studio program Showtime and did play-by-play for the 1991 All-Star Game. In 1997 Costas began a three-year stint as the lead play-by-play man for The NBA on NBC. NBC enlisted Costas' services after they were forced to (temporarily) remove Marv Albert from their broadcasts due to lingering personal and legal problems at the time. Costas stepped aside following the 2000 NBA Finals in favor of a returning Marv Albert. Costas returned to call some games of the 2002 NBA Playoffs after Albert was injured in a car accident two days before the playoffs began.

While this, in essence, ended his active role on the NBA on NBC program (by this point, Hannah Storm and briefly Ahmad Rashd had replaced Costas on studio anchoring duties), Costas would return to do play-by-play for selected playoff games. Costas also co-anchored (with Hannah Storm) NBC's NBA Finals coverage in 2002, which was their last to-date.

====National Football League====
In 2006 Costas returned to studio hosting duties on The NFL on NBC (under the Football Night in America banner), which was returning after a near ten-year hiatus. Costas last hosted NFL telecasts for NBC in 1992.

Costas is nicknamed "Rapping Roberto" by New York City's Daily News sports media columnist Bob Raissman. Al Michaels also called him "Rapping Roberto" during the telecast between the Indianapolis Colts and the New York Giants on September 10, 2006, in response to Costas calling him "Alfalfa". 

====National Hockey League====
Costas hosted NBC's coverage of the 2008, 2009, and the 2010 NHL Winter Classic. NHL.com  2008 NHL Winter Classic He was scheduled to host coverage of the 2011 event as well but, due to the game's postponement, Costas only hosted pre-game coverage before leaving to go to Seattle for his duties with NBC's NFL coverage the next night. He hosted the event in 2012 as well as a post-game edition of NHL Live on NBC Sports Network.

===Talk show hosting===
Costas also hosted the syndicated radio program Costas Coast to Coast from 19861996, which was later revived as Costas on the Radio. Costas on the Radio, which ended its three-year run on May 31, 2009, aired on 200 stations nationwide each weekend and syndicated by the Clear Channel owned Premiere Radio Networks. Like Later, Costas' radio shows have focused on a wide variety of topics and have not been limited to sports discussion.

Costas hosted Later with Bob Costas on NBC from 1988 until 1994. This late night show created by Dick Ebersol, coming on at 1:30 a.m. as the third program in NBC's nightly lineup after The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson and Late Night with David Letterman, was something of a break from the typical TV talk show format of the era, featuring Costas and a single guest having a conversation for the entire half hour, without a band, opening monologue or studio audience. On several occasions, Costas held the guest over for multiple nights, and these in-depth discussions won Costas much praise for his interviewing skills. The show was taped in GE Building's studios 3B or 8H at the Rockefeller Plaza, with Costas interviewing the guest for 45 minutes to an hour before turning the material over to editors who condensed it down to 22 minutes plus commercial breaks. . More popular guests were given two or three part interviews that ran consecutive nights. In August 1991, Mel Brooks became the only guest for four consecutive nights in the series' history.

In June 2005, Costas was named by CNN president Jonathan Klein as a regular substitute anchor for Larry King's Larry King Live for one year. Costas, as well as Klein, have said that Costas was not trying out for King's position on a permanent basis. Nancy Grace was also named a regular substitute host for the show. 

On August 18, 2005, Costas refused to host a Larry King Live broadcast where the subject was missing teenager Natalee Holloway. Costas said he had no hard feelings about the subject, but that he was uncomfortable with it. 

Since October 2011, Costas is a correspondent for Rock Center with Brian Williams. He gained acclaim for his November 2011 live interview of former Pennsylvania State University assistant coach Jerry Sandusky concerning charges of sexual abuse of minors, in which Sandusky called in by telephone to deny the charges. 

Costas currently hosts a monthly talk show Costas Tonight on NBC Sports Network. 

===HBO Sports===
In 2001, Costas was hired by HBO to host a 12-week series called On the Record with Bob Costas. Database (undated). 'On the Record with Bob Costas' (2001)". Internet Movie Database. On the Record with Bob Costas was similar to the format of the old Later program as they both concentrated on in-depth interviews.

In 2002 Costas began a stint as co-host of HBO's long-running series Inside the NFL. Costas remained host of Inside the NFL through the end of the 2007 NFL season. He hosted the show with Cris Collinsworth and former NFL legends Dan Marino and Cris Carter. The program aired each week during the NFL season.

In 2005 On the Record with Bob Costas was revamped to become Costas Now, a monthly show that would focus more on sports and air year-round in a 9 p.m. ET/PT time slot. Costas Now was more akin to HBO's Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel.

Costas left HBO to sign with MLB Network in February 2009.

===MLB Network===
Costas agreed to become a contributor to MLB Network. At the channel's launch on January 1, 2009, he hosted the premiere episode of All Time Games, a presentation of the recently discovered kinescope of Game 5 of the 1956 World Series. During the episode, he held a forum with Don Larsen, who pitched MLB's only postseason perfect game during that game, and Yogi Berra, who caught the game.

Costas joined the network full-time on February 3, 2009. He hosts a regular interview show titled MLB Network Studio 42 with Bob Costas as well as special programming, and provides play-by-play for select live Thursday Night Baseball games. Press release (February 3, 2009). "Bob Costas Joins MLB Network Costas Returns to Baseball To Host Special Programs, Contribute to On-Air Game Telecasts MLB Network To Be Exclusive Cable Home of 19-Time Emmy Winner". MLB.com. Retrieved August 5, 2012. 

===Other appearances===
Costas provided significant contributions to the Ken Burns, PBS mini series Baseball as well as its follow-up The 10th Inning. He also appears in another PBS film, A Time for Champions, produced by St. Louis' Nine Network of Public Media. 

==Interests==

===Love of baseball===
Costas is a devoted baseball fan. He's been suggested as a potential commissioner and wrote Fair Ball: A Fan's Case for Baseball in 2000. For his 40th birthday, then Oakland Athletics manager Tony La Russa allowed Costas to manage the club during a spring training game. The first time Costas visited baseball legend Stan Musial's St. Louis eatery, he left a $3.31 tip in homage to Musial's lifetime batting average (.331). Costas delivered the eulogy at Mickey Mantle's funeral. In eulogizing Mantle, Costas described the baseball legend as "a fragile hero to whom we had an emotional attachment so strong and lasting that it defied logic". Costas has even carried a 1958 Mickey Mantle baseball card in his wallet. Costas also delivered the eulogy for Musial after his death in early 2013.

Costas has been fairly outspoken about his disdain for Major League Baseball instituting a wild card. Costas believes that it diminishes the significance of winning a divisional championship. He prefers a system in which winning the wild card puts a team at some sort of disadvantage, as opposed to on an equal level with teams by which they were outplayed over a 162 game season. Or, as explained in his book Fair Ball, have only the three division winners in each league go to the postseason, with the team with the best record receiving a bye into the League Championship Series. Once, on the air on HBO's Inside the NFL, he mentioned that the NFL regular season counted for something, but baseball's was beginning to lose significance.

Costas serves as a member of the advisory board of the Baseball Assistance Team, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization dedicated to helping former Major League, Minor League, and Negro League players through financial and medical difficulties.

===Political views===

====George W. Bush====

On May 26, 2007, Costas discussed the presidency of George W. Bush on his radio show, stating that Bush's presidency had "tragically failed" and considered it "overwhelmingly evident, if you're honest about it, even if you're a conservative Republican, if you're honest about it, this is a failed administration." Costas on the Radio, May 26, 2007. The following summer, Costas would interview Bush during the president's appearance at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. 

==Controversies==

===Gun control controversy===
During a segment on the Sunday Night Football halftime show on December 2, 2012, Costas paraphrased a report by Fox Sports columnist Jason Whitlock in regards to Jovan Belcher's murder-suicide the day prior, stating that the United States' gun culture was causing more domestic disputes to result in death, and that Belcher and his girlfriend would not have died had he not possessed a gun. 

Critics interpreted his remarks as support for gun control, resulting in mostly negative reactions. Many (including former Republican Presidential candidates Mike Huckabee and Herman Cain) felt that Costas should not have used a program typically viewed as entertainment to publicize political views on sensitive topics, Lou Dobbs criticized his remarks for supporting the abolishment of the Second Amendment by quoting a sports writer, while Andrew Levy remarked that he had been given a civics lecture by someone who had "gotten rich thanks in part to a sport that destroys mens bodies and brains." However, liberal reporter Erik Wemple of The Washington Post praised Costas for speaking out for gun control on the broadcast, feeling that the incident's connection to the NFL provided him with an obligation to acknowledge the incident during the halftime show, stating that "the things that players do affect the public beyond whether their teams cover the point spread. And few cases better exemplify that dynamic as powerfully as the Belcher incident." 

During the following week, Costas defended his remarks in an appearance on MSNBC's program The Last Word with Lawrence O'Donnell, where he stated that the remarks were related to the country's gun culture, and not about gun control as critics had inferred. While he did not call for an outright ban on guns, Costas did suggest that more regulation be placed on America's gun culture: 
"Now, do I believe that we need more comprehensive and more sensible gun control legislation? Yes I do. That doesn't mean repeal the Second Amendment. That doesn't mean a prohibition on someone having a gun to protect their home and their family. It means sensible and more comprehensive gun control legislation. But even if you had that, you would still have the problem of what Jason Whitlock wrote about, and what I agree with. And that is a gun culture in this country." 

===Commenting on Russia and Vladimir Putin during the 2014 Winter Olympics===
During his coverage of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Costas was criticized by some members of the media, including Michelle Malkin and Glenn Beck for praising Vladimir Putins role in defusing tensions between various western countries, Syria, and Iran. Feldman, Josh (February 14, 2014) "OReilly, Goldberg Defend Bob Costas from Conservative Critics over NBC Putin Coverage" Mediaite. Retrieved February 22, 2014 Fahri, Paul (February 22, 2014) "Great views but not the full picture" The Washington Post, pages C1 and C3. Retrieved February 22, 2014 Beck, along with U.S. Senators John McCain and Marco Rubio, also criticized Costas characterization of Soviet communism as a "pivotal experiment" as opposed to saying that the Soviet Unions history was largely one of oppression. Several media commentators, including Bill OReilly and Bernard Goldberg, defended Costas remarks as factually correct and pointed out that Costas had also voiced considerable criticism of both Russia and Putin while broadcasting from Sochi. During an interview on Fox News Goldberg said "... the idea that Costas somehow portrayed Vladimir Putin as a benign figure is ridiculous." O'Reilly, Bill (February 14, 2014) "Politics and the Olympics" Fox News Channel - The O'Reilly Factor. Retrieved February 22, 2014 Costas defended himself on O'Reilly's broadcast on March 3 reiterating he criticized Putin immediately preceding the statements that were questioned. Costas also indicated that Senator McCain issued an apology to him after he heard the full segment in context. 

==Personal life==
Costas was married from 1983 to 2001 to Carole "Randy" Randall Krummenacher. They had two children, son Keith (born 1986) and daughter Taylor (born 1989). Costas once jokingly promised Minnesota Twins center fielder Kirby Puckett that, if he was batting over .350 by the time his child was born, he would name the baby Kirby. Kirby was hitting better than .350, but Bob's son initially was not given a first (or second) name of Kirby. After Puckett reminded Costas of the agreement, the birth certificate was changed to "Keith Michael Kirby Costas". On March 12, 2004, Costas married his second wife, Jill Sutton. Costas resides in St. Louis, Missouri.

Costas's children have also won Sports Emmys; Keith has won two as an associate producer on MLB Network's MLB Tonight THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF TELEVISION ARTS & SCIENCES ANNOUNCES WINNERS OF THE 33rd ANNUAL SPORTS EMMY AWARDS and Taylor as an associate producer on NBC's coverage of the 2012 Summer Olympics. 

==Awards and honors==
Costas has won eight National Sportcaster of the Year awards from the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association. He was inducted into that organization's Hall of Fame in 2012. He has also won four Sportscaster of the Year awards from the American Sportscasters Association and nearly twenty Sports Emmy Awards for outstanding sports announcing.

In 1999 he was a recipient of the Curt Gowdy Media Award from the Basketball Hall of Fame, which is awarded to members of the electronic and print media for outstanding contributions to the sport.

In 1995 he received a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame. 

In 2000 he won a TV Guide Award for Favorite Sportscaster. 

He was selected as the Dick Schaap Award for Outstanding Journalism recipient in 2004.

In 2006 he was also awarded an honorary doctorate in humane letters from Loyola College in Maryland.

In 2012 he was awarded the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism.

He is an honorary trustee of Webster University, a private college located in Webster Groves, Missouri. He is a frequent supporter of the school, to include numerous radio commercials.

He is also an honorary board member of the Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation.

==In popular culture==
Apart from his normal sportscasting duties, Costas has also presented periodic sports blooper reels, and announced dogsled and elevator races, on Late Night with David Letterman.

In 1985 Costas appeared on the The War to Settle the Score, a pre-WrestleMania program that the World Wrestling Federation aired on MTV.

In 1993 Costas hosted the "pregame" show for the final episode of Cheers. Costas once appeared on the television program, NewsRadio, as himself. He hosted an award show and later had some humorous encounters with the crew of WNYX. Costas also once appeared as a guest on the faux talk show cartoon Space Ghost Coast to Coast.

Costas has been impersonated several times by Darrell Hammond on Saturday Night Live. Darrell Hammond impersonation on Bob Costas Costas was "supposed" to appear in the fourth season premiere of Celebrity Deathmatch (ironically titled "Where is Bob Costas?") as a guest-commentator, but about halfway through the episode it was revealed that John Tesh had killed him before the show to take his place. Tesh had been widely criticized for his gymnastics coverage during the 1996 Olympics, but by no one more than Costas.

In 1994 Costas appeared as the play-by-play announcer for the World Series (working alongside Tim McCarver) in the movie The Scout. In 1998 he appeared as himself along with his rival/counterpart Al Michaels (who now works for NBC) from ABC in the movie BASEketball. In 2006, Costas voiced the animated character Bob Cutlass, a race announcer, in the movie Cars. He also appeared as himself in the 2001 movie Pootie Tang, where he remarks that he saw "the longest damn clip ever".

In 2002 Costas was the play-by-play announcer, alongside Harold Reynolds, for Triple Play 2002 during the ballgame for PlayStation 2 and Xbox.

Costas has been alluded to in popular music. The songs "Mafioso" by Mac Dre, "We Major" by Domo Genesis, "The Last Huzzah" by Mr. Muthafuckin eXquire all refer to Costas. He was also mentioned in a Ludacris song after Costas mentioned the rapper on the late night talk show Last Call with Carson Daly.

On June 13, 2008, Costas appeared on MSNBC's commercial-free special coverage of Remembering Tim Russert (1950~2008).

On February 11, 2010, Stephen Colbert jokingly expressed his desire to stab Costas at the upcoming 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. Costas later made a cameo appearance on the February 25, 2010 edition of Colbert's show.

On January 30, 2009, Costas guest-starred as himself on the television series Monk in an episode titled "Mr. Monk Makes the Playoffs"'. He mentions to Captain Stottlemeyer about how Adrian Monk once helped him out of a problem several years ago with regards to a demented cat salesman. He apparently sold Costas a cat that allegedly tried to kill him with a squeeze toy (in fact, when he signs off, he says "The cat was definitely trying to kill me").

Costas guest-voiced as himself in 2010 Simpsons episode, "Boy Meets Curl", when Homer and Marge make the U.S. Olympic curling team. Costas also guest-voiced as himself on the Family Guy episode "Patriot Games"and "Turban Cowboy" in an interview with Peter after he wins the Boston Marathon by hitting everyone with his car.

Costas' voice appeared in the 2011 documentary film Legendary: When Baseball Came to the Bluegrass, which detailed the humble beginnings of the Lexington Legends, a minor league baseball team located in Lexington, Kentucky.

In January 2013, Costas appeared as himself in Go On episode, "Win at All Costas" with Matthew Perry, where Ryan King auditions with him for a TV Show.

In June 2013, Costas provided the voice of "God" in the Monty Python musical "Spamalot" at The Muny Repertory in St.Louis.

==Memorable calls==

==Career timeline==

*19741976: Spirits of St. Louis Play-by-play, KMOX radio
*1976-1981: Missouri Tigers men's basketball Play-by-play, KMOX radio
*19761979: NFL on CBS Play-by-play
*19791980: Chicago Bulls Play-by-play, WGN-TV
*19801983: NFL on NBC Play-by-play
*19831989: MLB on NBC #2 play-by-play
*19841992, 2006present: NFL on NBC Studio Host HBO: Costas Now 
*19881994: Later Host 
*1990-1997, 2002: NBA on NBC Studio Host
*1992present: Summer Olympics Primetime Host 
*19942000: MLB on NBC Lead play-by-play
*19972000: NBA on NBC Lead play-by-play
*20012009: On the Record with Bob Costas and Costas Now Host 
*2002present: Winter Olympics Primetime Host
*20022008: Inside the NFL Host 
*2008present: AMP Energy NHL Winter Classic Host 
*2009present: MLB Network Studio 42 with Bob Costas Host, Thursday Night Baseball Play-by-play

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 



[[Bamberg]]

Bamberg Cathedral
The Schlenkerla, one of Bamberg's famous breweries and taverns.
Alte Hofhaltung (Old Palace).

Bamberg () is a town in Bavaria, Germany, located in Upper Franconia on the river Regnitz close to its confluence with the river Main. Its historic city center is a listed UNESCO world heritage site.

== History ==
During the post-Roman centuries of Germanic migration and settlement, the region afterwards included in the Diocese of Bamberg was inhabited for the most part by Slavs. The town, first mentioned in 902, grew up by the castle (Babenberch) which gave its name to the Babenberg family. On their extinction it passed to the Saxon house. The area was Christianized chiefly by the monks of the Benedictine Fulda Abbey, and the land was under the spiritual authority of the Diocese of Wrzburg.

In 1007, Holy Roman Emperor Henry II made Bamberg a family inheritance, the seat of a separate diocese. The emperor's purpose in this was to make the Diocese of Wrzburg less unwieldy in size and to give Christianity a firmer footing in the districts of Franconia, east of Bamberg. In 1008, after long negotiations with the Bishops of Wrzburg and Eichsttt, who were to cede portions of their dioceses, the boundaries of the new diocese were defined, and Pope John XVIII granted the papal confirmation in the same year. Henry II ordered the building of a new cathedral, which was consecrated May 6, 1012. The church was enriched with gifts from the pope, and Henry had it dedicated in honor of him. In 1017 Henry also founded Michaelsberg Abbey on the Michaelsberg ("Mount St. Michael"), near Bamberg, a Benedictine abbey for the training of the clergy. The emperor and his wife Cunigunde gave large temporal possessions to the new diocese, and it received many privileges out of which grew the secular power of the bishop. Pope Benedict VIII during his visit to Bamberg (1020) placed the diocese in direct dependence on the Holy See. For a short time Bamberg was the centre of the Holy Roman Empire. Henry and Cunigunde were both buried in the cathedral.

From the middle of the 13th century onward the bishops were princes of the Empire and ruled Bamberg, overseeing the construction of monumental buildings. In 1248 and 1260 the see obtained large portions of the estates of the Counts of Meran, partly through purchase and partly through the appropriation of extinguished fiefs. The old Bishopric of Bamberg was composed of an unbroken territory extending from Schlsselfeld in a northeasterly direction to the Franconian Forest, and possessed in addition estates in the Duchies of Carinthia and Salzburg, in the Nordgau (the present Upper Palatinate), in Thuringia, and on the Danube. By the changes resulting from the Reformation, the territory of this see was reduced nearly one half in extent. Since 1279 the Coat of arms of the city of Bamberg in form of a seal is known.

The witch trials of the 17th century claimed about one thousand victims in Bamberg, reaching a climax between 1626 and 1631, under the rule of Prince-Bishop Johann Georg II Fuchs von Dornheim. The famous Drudenhaus (witch prison), built in 1627, is no longer standing today; however, detailed accounts of some cases, such as that of Johannes Junius, remain. 

In 1647, the University of Bamberg was founded as Academia Bambergensis. Bambrzy (Ger. Posen Bambergers)  German Poles are descendants of settlers from the area near Bamberg, who settled in villages around Posen in the years 17191753. In 1759, the possessions and jurisdictions of the diocese situated in Austria were sold to that state. When the secularization of church lands took place (1802) the diocese covered 3305 km2 and had a population of 207,000. Bamberg thus lost its independence in 1802, becoming part of Bavaria in 1803.

Bamberg was first connected to the German rail system in 1844, which has been an important part of its infrastructure ever since. After a communist uprising took control over Bavaria in the years following World War I, the state government fled to Bamberg and stayed there for almost two years before the Bavarian capital of Munich was retaken by Freikorps units (see Bavarian Soviet Republic). The first republican constitution of Bavaria was passed in Bamberg, becoming known as the Bamberger Verfassung (Bamberg Constitution).

In February 1926 Bamberg served as the venue for the famous Bamberg Conference, convened by Adolf Hitler in his attempt to foster unity and to stifle dissent within the young NSDAP. Bamberg was chosen for its location in Upper Franconia, reasonably close to the residences of the members of the dissident northern Nazi faction but still within Bavaria. See generally See also 

In 1973, the town celebrated the 1000th anniversary of its founding.

=== Historic population ===

 Year Population 
 1818 17,000 
 1885 31,521 
 1905 45,308 

== Geography ==
Bamberg is located in Franconia, 63 km north of Nuremberg by railway and 101 km east of Wrzburg, also by rail. It is situated on the Regnitz river, 3 km before it flows into the Main river.

Its geography is shaped by the Regnitz and by the foothills of the Steigerwald, part of the German uplands. From northeast to southwest, the town is divided into first the Regnitz plain, then one large and several small islands formed by two arms of the Regnitz (Inselstadt), and finally the part of town on the hills, the "Hill Town" (Bergstadt).

===The seven hills of Bamberg===
Bamberg extends over seven hills, each crowned by a beautiful church. This has led to Bamberg being called the "Franconian Rome"  although a running joke among Bamberg's tour guides is to refer to Rome instead as the "Italian Bamberg". The hills are Cathedral Hill, Michaelsberg, Kaulberg/Obere Pfarre, Stefansberg, Jakobsberg, Altenburger Hill and Abtsberg.

===Climate===
Climate in this area has mild dfferences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year round. The Kppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "climate classification#GROUP C: Mild Temperate/mesothermal climates|Cfb]" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate). Climate Summary for Bamberg 

== Sights ==
The Bamberger Reiter.
Michaelsberg Abbey
Rathaus, details

The Old Town of Bamberg is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, primarily because of its authentic medieval appearance. The city established a documentation centre in 2005 to support World Heritage activities.
Some of the main sights are:

* Bamberg Cathedral (1237), with the tombs of emperor Henry II and Pope Clement II
* Alte Hofhaltung, residence of the bishops in the 16th and 17th centuries
* Neue Residenz, residence of the bishops after the 17th century
* Old Town Hall (1386), built in the middle of the Regnitz River, accessible by two bridges
* Klein-Venedig ("Little Venice"), a colony of picturesque fishermen's houses from the 19th century along one side of the river Regnitz.
* Michaelsberg Abbey, built in the 12th century on one of Bamberg's "Seven Hills"
* Altenburg, castle, former residence of the bishops

Cathedral

The cathedral is a late Romanesque building with four grand towers. It was founded in 1004 by the emperor Henry II, finished in 1012 and consecrated on May 6, 1012. It was later partially destroyed by fire in 1081. The new cathedral, built by Saint Otto of Bamberg, was consecrated in 1111 and in the 13th century received its present late-Romanesque form.

The cathedral is 94 m long, 28 m broad, 26 m high, and the four towers are each about 81 m high. Of its many historic works of art may be mentioned the magnificent marble tomb of the founder and his wife, considered the masterpiece of the sculptor Tilman Riemenschneider, and carved between 1499 and 1513. Another treasure of the cathedral is an equestrian statue known as the Bamberg Horseman (). This statue, possibly belonging to the emperor Conrad III, most likely dates to approximately 1200. The statue also serves as a symbol of the city.

Neue Residenz

The Neue Residenz (New Palace) (16981704) was initially occupied by the prince-bishops, and from 1864 to 1867 by the deposed King Otto of Greece. The magnificent Rosengarten (Rose Garden) offers excellent views of the city.

Altenburg

Bamberg Altenburg

The Altenburg is located at the highest of Bamberg's seven hills. It was mentioned for the first time in 1109. [http://www.roadstoruins.com/altenburg.htm ] Between 1251 and 1553 it was the residence of Bamberg's bishops. Destroyed in 1553 by Albert Alcibiades, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach, it was used, after scanty repairs, only as a prison, and increasingly decayed.

In 1801 doctor A. F. Marcus bought the castle and completely repaired it. His friend, the famous German writer E.T.A. Hoffmann, who was very impressed by the building, lived there for a while. The next owner, Anton von Greifenstein, founded in 1818 an association to save the castle. This society still maintains the whole property today. The Altenburg serves as a high-class restaurant and has a beautiful view.

Other sights

Other noteworthy churches are the Jakobskirche, an 11th-century Romanesque basilica; the St. Martinskirche; the Marienkirche or Obere Pfarrkirche (13201387), which has now been restored to its original pure Gothic style. The Michaelskirche, 12th-century Romanesque (restored), on the Michaelsberg, was formerly the church of the Benedictine Michaelsberg Abbey secularized in 1803 and now contains the Brgerspital, or almshouse, and the museum and municipal art collections.

Of the bridges connecting the sections of the lower town, a very interesting one is the Obere Brcke, completed in 1455. Halfway across this, on an island, is the Rathaus or City Hall (rebuilt 1744-1756). The royal lyceum, formerly a Jesuit college, contains notable collections and the royal library of over 300,000 volumes. The picturesque Old Palace (Alte Hofhaltung) was built in 1591 on the site of an old residence of the counts of Babenberg. Noteworthy among the monuments of the town is the Maximilian fountain (1880), with statues of King Maximilian I of Bavaria, the emperor Henry II and his wife, Conrad III and Saint Otto, bishop of Bamberg. 

=== Beer ===
Bamberg is known for its smoked Rauchbier and is home to nine breweries, Brauerei Fssla, Brauerei Greifenklau, Brauerei Heller-Trum (Schlenkerla), Brauerei Kaiserdom, Keesmann Bru, Klosterbru, Mahrs Bru and Brauerei Spezial, and one brewpub, Ambrusianum. Every August there are five days "Sandkerwa" - a big beer kirmess. Sandkerwa Bamberg (german) 

== Education ==
The University of Bamberg, named Otto-Friedrich University, offers higher education in the areas of social science, business studies and the humanities, and is attended by more than 10,000 students. The University of Applied Sciences Bamberg offers higher education in the areas of Public Health. Bamberg is also home to eight secondary schools called Gymnasiums:
* Clavius-Gymnasium
* Dientzenhofer-Gymnasium
* Eichendorff-Gymnasium
* E.T.A. Hoffmann-Gymnasium
* Franz-Ludwig-Gymnasium
* Kaiser-Heinrich-Gymnasium
* Maria-Ward-Gymnasium
* Theresianum
There are also numerous other institutes for primary, secondary, technical, vocational and adult education.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Railway ===
The InterCityExpress main line #28 (Munich - Nuremberg - Leipzig - Berlin / Hamburg) runs through Bamberg station on the NurembergBamberg and the BambergHof lines. To Munich the train journey takes less than two hours. It takes about four hours to reach Berlin as of 2007, although the NurembergErfurt high-speed railway is currently being constructed through the Thuringian mountains and should shorten the journey time considerably.

East-west connections are poorer. Bamberg is connected to other towns in eastern Upper Franconia such as Bayreuth, Coburg, and Kronach via the BambergHof line with trains usually running at least every hour. Connections on the WrzburgBamberg line to the west are hourly regional trains to Wrzburg, which is fully connected to the ICE network. Tourists arriving at Frankfurt International Airport need to change trains in Wrzburg to connect to Bamberg or take a detour via Nuremberg.

=== Motorways ===
Bamberg is not near any of the major (i.e. single-digit) Autobahns. But it is nevertheless well connected to the network: the A70 from Schweinfurt (connecting to the A7 there) to Bayreuth (connecting to the A9) runs along the northern edge of the town. The A73 on the eastern side of town connects Bamberg to Nuremberg (connecting to the A9) and Thuringia, ending at Suhl.

=== Air transport ===
Bamberg is served by Bamberg-Breitenau Airfield. At "Flugplatz Bamberg-Breitenau" are operating mostly public aircraft, although it is classified as a military airport (IATA-Code: ZCD, ICAO-Code: ETEJ). 
It is also possible to charter public flights to and from this airport. 
Most international tourists who travel by plane arrive at Frankfurt International Airport or Munich Airport. The nearest bigger airport is Nuremberg Airport which can be reached within half an hour by car or one hour by train and subway.

=== Water transport ===
Both the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal and its predecessor, the Ludwig Canal, begin near Bamberg. The Ludwig Canal was opened in 1846 but closed in 1950 after damage during the second world war. With the completion of the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal in 1992, uninterrupted water transport was again made possible between the North Sea and the Black Sea.

=== Local transport ===
Local transport within Bamberg relies exclusively on buses. More than 20 routes connect the outlying quarters and some villages in the vicinity to the Central Bus Station. In addition, there are several "Night Lines" (the last of these, though, tend to run around midnight) and some Park and Ride lines from parking lots on the periphery to the town centre. A short-lived tram system existed in the 1920s.

=== Military Bases ===
Bamberg has been an important base for the Bavarian, German and now American military stationed at Warner Barracks. Warner Barracks, as a non-enduring U.S. military base, has been slated for complete closure in the fall of 2014. The last remaining battalion on the Warner Barracks base is the 54th Engineer Battalion, which will case its colors in June 2014. Upon base closure, the base property will be returned to the German national government.

== Politics ==
Bamberg is an independent city. Its town council (Stadtrat) and its Lord Mayor (Oberbrgermeister) are elected every six years, though not in the same year. Thus, the last municipal election for the town council was in 2008, for the Lord Mayor in 2012. As an exception to the six-year term, the term starting in 2012 will take eight years to synchronize the elections with those in the remainder of bavaria.

As of the elections of 2 March 2008, the 44 member-town-council comprises 15 CSU councillors, 10 SPD councillors, 7 Green councillors, 5 councillors of the Bamberger Brger-Block and 3 of the Freie Whler (Free Voters), both local political movements. These five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a caucus. In addition, there are 2 councillors of the Bamberger Realisten and one of the FDP and the far-right Republicans (Germany), making them ineligible for caucus status.

=== Lords Mayor since 1945 ===

 Years Mayor Party 
 19451958 Luitpold Weegmann CSU 
 19581982 Theodor Mathieu CSU 
 19821994 Paul Rhner CSU 
 19942006 Herbert Lauer Independent 
 2006Present Andreas Starke SPD 

== International relations ==

=== Twin towns  Sister cities ===
Bamberg is twinned with:
* Bedford, United Kingdom
* Esztergom, Hungary
* Feldkirchen, Austria
* Prague, Czech Republic
* Rodez, France
* Villach, Austria
* Fredonia, New York, United States
* Nagaoka, Niigata, Japan

== Famous residents ==
* , (1789 in Bamberg;  1870 in Berlin), tenor
* Wilhelm Batz, Luftwaffe, ace
* Claudia Ciesla, actress
* Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg (19071944), German officer - July 20 Plot attempt to assassinate German dictator Adolf Hitler
* Pope Clement II, bishop of Bamberg from 1040 to 1046
* Christopher Clavius, (15381612), mathematician and astronomer
* Conrad III of Germany, king of Germany
* Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, philosopher
* Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor
* E. T. A. Hoffmann, author and composer
* Paul Maar, writer and illustrator
* Willy Messerschmitt (18981978), aircraft designer Flugzeugbau Messerschmitt GmbH
* Ida Noddack-Tacke, chemist and physicist; she discovered element 75 Rhenium
* Mike Rose, painter, set designer and writer
* Karl Friedrich Gottlob Wetzel, writer and illustrator 
* Curt Echtermeyer, also known as Curt Bruckner (18961971), painter

== Gallery ==

Image:BambergAltesRathaus.jpg|Old Town Hall
Image:Bamberg-altes-rathaus.jpg|Old Town Hall with both bridges
Image:Bamberg Klein-Venedig I.jpg|close look on "Little Venice"
Image:Bamberg Klein Venedig.jpg|"Little Venice"
Image:Pfarrkirche St. Martin.jpg|St Martin and Green Market
Image:Bamberg Neue Residenz.jpg|Neue Residenz (the "New Residence" of the prince-bishops)
Image:Rose Garden 2.JPG|The Rose Garden at the Neue Residenz
Image:Bamberg-NeueResidenz1-Asio.JPG|Rose Garden detail
Image:Bamberg-Jakobskirche.JPG|Church of St Jacob
Image:Bamberg Rooftops.JPG|Bamberg roof tops from the Rose Garden in Bamberg
File:Bamberger Hrnla.JPG|Bamberger Hrnla, an old potato variety from Franconia 

== See also ==
* Bamberg State Library
* Bamberg Symphony Orchestra
* Rintfleisch-Pogrom

== References ==

* 
* JewishEncyclopedia

== External links ==

* Official website
* info for visitors
* Schlenkerla Brewery website
* Bamberg travel information 
* Bamberg beer, official website
* Bamberg beer guide
* US Army garrison Bamberg
* Description on the UNESCO World Heritage website
* Images from Bamberg

 



[[Black cow]]

Black Cow can refer to either:

* A cow that is black.
* A Root Beer Float or Coke float.
* An alcoholic drink (sometimes referred to as a Black Cow #2) featuring Kahla, half-and-half, and Coca-Cola.
* A brand of British vodka distilled from fermented whey.
* A 1977 song by Steely Dan on the Aja album, referring to the ice cream soda.
* A candy, a Sugar Daddy bar covered in chocolate.



[[Bloody Mary]]

Bloody Mary may refer to:

== Food ==
* Bloody Mary (cocktail)

== Personalities ==
* Mary I of England, Queen of England and Ireland
* Bloody Mary (folklore), a ghost said to appear in mirrors when a person repeats her name in front of the mirror and turn three times

== Literature ==
* Bloody Mary (South Pacific), a character in a book
* Bloody Mary (DC Comics), a fictional extraterrestrial vampire
* Bloody Mary (Helix), a comic book
* Bloody Mary (Marvel Comics), a fictional telekinetic supervillain

== Animals ==
* Mary (elephant), or Bloody Mary or Murderous Mary, an elephant that was infamously publicly hanged

== Film and television ==
* "Bloody Mary" (South Park), an episode of the television series South Park
* "Bloody Mary" (Supernatural), an episode of the television series Supernatural
* , a 2005 horror film
* Bloody Mary (film), a 2006 horror film
* The Legend of Bloody Mary, a 2008 horror film
* Dead Mary, a 2007 horror film, called Bloody Mary in Japan
* The Bloody Mary Show, a British comedy horror web series
* Bloody Mary (TV movie), a 2002 horror television film
* Bloody Mary 3D, a 2011 horror film in 3D
* MARy, a 2008 horror film, aka Bloody Mary
* Bloody Mary (short), a 2004 horror short
* Bloody Mary Christmas, a 2010 comedy short
* Mary, Mary, Bloody Mary, a 1975 drama film
* The Twisted Tale of Bloody Mary, a 2008 drama film
* , a 1965 adventure film
* Blody Mary (1996 film), a 1996 comedy film
* "Scary Mary", a 2011 two part episode of R.L. Stine's The Haunting Hour

== Music ==
* "Bloody Mary" (The Alice Rose song)
* "Bloody Mary" (Lady Gaga song),
* Un Blodymary, an album by Las Ketchup
** "Un Blodymary" (song), the title track of the album
* "Bloody Mary (Nerve Endings)", a song by Silversun Pickups



[[Bill Mumy]]

Charles William "Bill" Mumy, Jr. (; born February 1, 1954), is an American actor, musician, pitchman, instrumentalist, voice-over artist, and a figure in the science-fiction community.

The red-headed Mumy came to prominence in the 1960s as a child actor, when he was credited as Billy Mumy. His most notable role was in the 1960s CBS sci-fi television series Lost in Space, where he played Will Robinson, the youngest of three children of Professor John and Dr. Maureen Robinson (played by Guy Williams and June Lockhart, respectively) and friend of the pompous and nefarious Dr. Zachary Smith (played by Jonathan Harris). "Danger, Will Robinson!"a line frequently spoken by the character of the Robot (voiced by Dick Tufeld)has become an iconic phrase in sci-fi culture.

He later appeared as lonely teenager Sterling North in the 1969 Disney film Rascal with Steve Forrest. He was cast as Teft in the 1971 film Bless the Beasts and Children. In the 1990s, he had the role of Lennier in the syndicated sci-fi TV series Babylon 5, and also served as narrator of A&E Network's Emmy Award-winning series Biography. He is also notable for his musical career, as a solo artist and as half of the duo Barnes & Barnes.

==Early life and career==
Mumy was born in San Gabriel, the son of the former Muriel Gertrude Gould and Charles William Mumy, Sr., a cattle rancher. He began his professional career at age six, and has worked on more than four hundred television episodes, eighteen films, various commercials, and scores of voice-over work, as well as a musician, songwriter, recording artist and writer.

==Television and film career==
Among Mumy's earliest television roles was as 6-year-old Willy in the 1960 episode "Donald's Friend" of the NBC family drama television series, National Velvet, starring Lori Martin as an aspiring thoroughbred rider.

Mumy appeared in CBS's original Twilight Zone (1959 to 1964). In the episode "It's a Good Life" (November 1961), he played a child who terrorizes his town with psychic powersa role he later reprised along with his daughter Liliana Mumy in the It's Still a Good Life episode of the second revival series. He also had a cameo in the remake of "It's a Good Life" in the 3rd segment of . Mumy also played young Pip, a boy who enjoyed playing with his father but was frequently ignored, in the episode "In Praise of Pip" (September 1963), and Billy Bayles, a boy who talks to his dead grandmother through a toy telephone, in the episode "Long Distance Call" (March 1961). He also wrote the story for the episode Found and Lost in the second Twilight Zone revival.

Mumy was in an episode on the Jack Benny Program in S13/EP12 (1962) called "Jack and the Crying Cab Driver".

Mumy in the Alfred Hitchcock Presents episode Bang! You're Dead, 1961
In 1961, Billy was cast on CBS's Alfred Hitchcock Presents television series in "The Door Without a Key." The same episode features John Larch, who played his father on the Twilight Zones episode of "It's a Good Life." The same year, Mumy starred as little Jackie in the episode Bang! You're Dead. It featured actress Marta Kristen, who would later play his sister Judy on Lost in Space.

Mumy was cast as Mark Murdock in the 1962 episode "Keep an Eye on Santa Claus" of the ABC drama series Going My Way, starring Gene Kelly as a Roman Catholic priest in New York City and loosely based on the 1944 Bing Crosby film of the same name. His fellow guest stars were Cloris Leachman, Steve Brodie and Frank McHugh. 

In 1963, at the age of eight, young Mumy appeared in Jack Palance's ABC circus drama The Greatest Show on Earth, loosely based on a former Charlton Heston film. He was further cast in 1963 as Miles, a parentless boy, in the Perry Mason episode "The Case of the Shifty Shoebox." He portrayed Freddy in the 1963 episode "End of an Image" on the NBC modern western series Empire, starring Richard Egan as rancher Jim Redigo.

In 1964, he was cast as Richard Kimble's nephew in ABC's The Fugitive in the 15th episode entitled "Home Is The Hunted"; as Barry in the NBC medical drama The Eleventh Hour episode "Sunday Father"; as himself three times in the ABC sitcom The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet; in the Disney film For the Love of Willadena; and as a troubled orphan taken home with Darrin and Samantha Stephens in the episode "A Vision of Sugarplums" of ABC's fantasy sitcom Bewitched (December 1964).

Mumy was reportedly the first choice to portray Eddie Munster in the 1964 CBS situation comedy The Munsters, but his parents objected because of the extensive makeup requirements. The role instead went to Butch Patrick. Mumy did appear in one episode as a friend of Eddie's. In 1965, he guest starred on an episode of NBC's I Dream of Jeannie "Whatever Became Of Baby Custer?" as a neighborhood kid who witnesses Jeannie's magic.

In 1971, Mumy was cast in Bless the Beasts and Children, in which he played Teft, the leader of a group of misfit teenaged boys at a summer camp who resolved to save a heard of bison from hunters.

In 1973, he played a musician friend of Cliff DeYoung in the TV movie Sunshine, and later reprised the role in Sunshine Christmas and in the TV series Sunshine.

In 1974, he played Nick Butler in the pilot episode of NBC's The Rockford Files.

He is perhaps best known for his role as Will Robinson on the CBS science fiction television series Lost in Space (19651968), as well as for his role as ambassadorial aide Lennier in the syndicated series Babylon 5 (19941998). Mumy has garnered praise from the science fiction fandom for his portrayal of these two characters.

In 1996, he was a writer and co-creator of Space Cases, a Nickelodeon television show with themes similar to Lost in Space.

He played a Starfleet member in the episode "The Siege of AR-558" (November 1998), where he assists Ezri Dax in turning cloaked Dominion mines against an army of Jem'Hadar. To Mumy's delight, his character was human this time; as Lennier, he had always appeared in prosthetic makeup.

Mumy can be seen more recently in a 2006 episode of Crossing Jordan and in the Sci Fi original film A.I. Assault.

==Voice-over career==
Mumy has narrated over 50 episodes of the Arts & Entertainment Channel's Biography series, as well as hosting and narrating several other documentaries and specials for A & E, Animal Planet network, The Sci-Fi Channel, and E!. His voice acting talents can be heard on animated shows like Ren and Stimpy, Scooby-Doo, , Steven Spielberg's Animaniacs, Little Wizard Adventures, The Oz Kids and Disney's Buzz Lightyear of Star Command and Doc McStuffins. He has also been heard in dozens of national commercials for businesses such as Farmers Insurance, Ford, Bud Ice, Blockbuster, Twix, Oscar Mayer and McDonald's.

==Music==
Mumy is an accomplished musician who plays guitar, bass, keyboards, banjo, mandolin, harmonica and percussion. Among his various musical credits, he has written and recorded songs with America, toured with Shaun Cassidy, and played in Rick Springfield's band in the film Hard to Hold. He also created the band The Be Five with other Babylon 5 actors, and fronts another band called Seduction of the Innocent. 
 

Mumy has released a number of solo CDs, including Dying to Be Heard, In the Current, Pandora's Box, After Dreams Come True, Los Angeles Times and Ghosts, as well as nine albums with partner Robert Haimer as Barnes and Barnes. Their most famous hit is the song "Fish Heads", which was named as one of the top 100 videos of all time by Rolling Stone magazine. The Jenerators are a blues-rock band based in Los Angeles, CA featuring Tom Hebenstreit on vocals, electric guitars and keyboards; Mumy on vocals, acoustic and electric guitars, harmonica, keyboards and percussion; Gary Stockdale on vocals and bass; Miguel Ferrer on vocals, percussion and drums; David Jolliffe on guitar, percussion and vocals; and Chris Ross on drums and percussion. In 2012, Mumy released a Byrds-tribute song, "When Roger Was Jim".

Mumy also produces and hosts 'The Real Good Radio Hour', a weekly series on KSAV Internet Radio focusing on various styles of music and the artists who pioneered them. http://www.ksav.org/index.php/programs/realgoodradiohour 

== Friendship with Jonathan Harris ==
At age 11, in 1965, Mumy began working with Jonathan Harris on Lost in Space, and the two became close friends, both on and off set. He would also spend time with Harris' family when not working on "Space" or taking a hiatus from the show. In 1996, Mumy and Harris were reunited at a Walt Disney convention in Orlando, Florida. Mumy worked again with Harris on the 1998 retrospective special Lost In Space: Forever, where they reprised their roles in a scene written by Mumy (with Harris rewriting his lines). This occurred the year after the rest of the cast (including both Mumy & Harris) stated in a TV Guide article that the Sci Fi Channel planned to do a Lost in Space marathon while promoting a new movie. Harris was to appear in the planned TV movie, Lost in Space: The Journey Home, but died before production started in 2002; the production was subsequently cancelled. Mumy read the eulogy at Harris' funeral and was asked to narrate an account of his longtime friend's life on A&E Biography that year. During a 2010 interview on Blog Talk Radios Lessons Learned, Rick Tocquigny was asked if Mumy was a Jonathan Harris fan before they appeared together on Lost in Space. Tocquigny said that at age 5, Mumy was too young to watch his mentor's show The Third Man which would have been aired late at night, but that he was old enough to see The Bill Dana Show (which also starred Harris's real-life best friend Don Adams). After that, Mumy was indeed a Harris fan, having seen reruns of The Third Man. He was also a fan of Guy Williams, who would play his father on Lost in Space, due to Williams' TV portrayals of Zorro. 

On June 14, 2006, Mumy got to work with Harris one last time, though posthumously. Years before he passed away, Harris recorded voice work for the animated short The Bolt Who Screwed Christmas, narrating the film and playing the part of The Bolt. As a tribute to Harris, writer director John Wardlaw added a scene to the film that reunited Lost in Space cast members Bill Mumy, Marta Kristen and Angela Cartwright as the animated Ratchett family. http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/cultist/2011/07/the_bolt_who_screwed_christmas.php 

In May 2013, eleven years after the death of Mumy's acting mentor in November 2002, Mumy commented on his connection between the familiar actor (Harris) and the unfamiliar actor's (Mumy) on- and off-screen connection on Lost in Space. "Yes we did. Indeed, dear boy. Dont you forget it." Mumy also added, "Well, yeah. I never really had too many uncomfortable moments working with any actor. I was comfortable working with most everybody. Its just the more that Jonathan and I did together, the more he changed the character. He really changed the character of Dr. Smith himself. He really turned him from a snarling saboteur villain to this bumbling insulting kook. The more he played it for comedy, the more Irwin Allen liked it. The show really went the way that Jonathan led it. But we had great chemistry together, and we never had a bad day. We were always prepared, as was Bobby May who was inside the robot. When we had our work to doand I think this is a very big reason the way it wenttheyd get us done in a couple of takes. Nobody screwed up. It was easier for the crew and it was easier for us, and people seemed to like it." http://popcultureaddict.com/interviews/billmumy/ 

== Personal life ==
He currently lives in Hollywood Hills, California, with his wife, Eileen, and their two child-actor children, Seth and Liliana.

==Selected filmography==

Mumy in Dear Brigitte, 1965

 Year Title Role 
 1960 The Wizard of Baghdad Aladdin (uncredited) 
 1961 Tammy Tell Me True Neil Bateman (uncredited) 
 1961 Twilight Zone:\"It's a Good Life\" Anthony Fremont 
 1962 Sammy the Way out Seal Petey Loomis 
 1962 House Guest Tony Mitchell 
 1963 A Child is Waiting Boy counting Jean's pearls 
 1963 A Ticklish Affair Alex Martin 
 1963 Palm Springs Weekend 'Boom Boom' Yates 
 1964 For the Love of Willadean Freddy Gray 
 1965 Dear Brigitte Erasmus Leaf 
 1965 Googie Miller 
 196568 Lost in Space Will Robinson 
 1968 Wild in the Streets Boy 
 1969 Rascal Sterling North 
 1971 Bless the Beasts and Children Teft 
 1973 Papillon Lariot 
 1980 Fish Heads Art Barnes 
 1983 Tim (Segment #3) 
 1984 Hard to Hold Keyboard Player 
 1991 The Flash Roger Braintree 
 1991 Captain America Young General Fleming 
 1992 Double Trouble Bob 
 199498 Babylon 5 Lennier 
 1995 Three Wishes Neighbor 
 1996 The Oz Kids Underground Adventure Voice of Sam 
 1997 The Oz Kids The Monkey Prince Voice of Sam 
 1997 The Weird Al Show UPS guy 
 1998 Kellin 
 2004 Himself 
 2005 (Direct to DVD) Voice of Bud (Amy's father) 
 2006 A.I. Assault Army guy 
 2009 The Bolt Who Screwed Christmas (Theatrical Short) Voice of Tiny Tap / Knob Ratchett 
 2013present Bravest Warriors (Web Series) 3 episodes; Voice of Beth's father 

==References==

== External links ==

* 
* 
* Bill Mumy interviews on Outsight Radio Hours
* 
* 



[[House of Bonaparte]]

The House of Bonaparte was an imperial and royal European dynasty founded by Napoleon I in 1804, a French military leader who rose to notability out of the French Revolution and transformed the French Republic into the First French Empire within five years of his coup d'tat. Napoleon turned the Grande Arme against every major European power and dominated continental Europe through a series of military victories during the Napoleonic Wars. He installed members of his family on the thrones of client states, founding the dynasty.

The House of Bonaparte formed the Imperial House of France during the French Empire together with some non-Bonaparte family members. In addition to holding the title of Emperor of the French, the Bonaparte dynasty held various other titles and territories during the Napoleonic Wars, including their ancestral Kingdom of Italy, the Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of Westphalia, the Kingdom of Holland and the Kingdom of Naples. The dynasty was in a position of power for around a decade until the Napoleonic Wars began to take their toll. Making very powerful enemies such as Austria, United Kingdom, Russia and Prussia, as well as royalist (particularly Bourbon) restorational movements in France, Spain, the Two Sicilies and Sardinia, the dynasty eventually collapsed under its own weight.

During the reign of Napoleon I, the Imperial Family consisted of the Emperor's immediate relations  his wife, son, siblings and some other close relatives, namely Joachim Murat, Joseph Fesch and Eugne de Beauharnais.

Between the years 1852 and 1870 there was a Second French Empire, again a member of the Bonaparte dynasty would rule; Napoleon III the son of Louis Bonaparte. However after the Franco-Prussian War, the dynasty was again ousted from the Imperial Throne. Since that time there has been a series of pretenders, supporters of the Bonaparte family's claim to the Throne of France are known as Bonapartists. Current head Jean-Christophe, Prince Napolon is ironically from a Bourbon mother.

==Italian Origins==
The Bonaparte (originally Buonaparte) family were from minor Italian nobility who held most of their property in the hill town of San Miniato near Florence, Italy. The name derives from Italian, buona, "good" and parte, "part" or "side".

After settling in Florence the family enjoyed a relationship with the then ruling Medici family. Jacopo Buonaparte was a friend and advisor to Medici Pope Clement VII. Jacopo was also a witness to and wrote an account of the sack of Rome, which is one of the most important historical documents recounting that event. Jacopo Bonaparte: Sac de Rome. crit EN 1527 par Jacques Bonaparte. Tmoin oculaire, hrsgg. by Bonaparte, Napolon Louis, Florenz 1850 Two of Jacopo's nephews, Pier Antonio Buonaparte and Giovanni Buonaparte, however, took part in the 1527 Medici rebellion, after which they were banished from Florence and later were restored by Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence. Jacopo's brother Benedetto Buonaparte maintained political neutrality. Joshua F. Drake, The Part-books of a Florentine Ex-Patriate: new light on Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale Ms. Magl. XIX 1647, Early Music (OUP), Vol. 33, no. 4 (Oct. 2005), pp. 639646. 

The family later separated into two branches; One stayed in San Miniato, and the other moved to Sarzana. Buonaparte-Sarzana, Nobili di Sarzana had been compelled to leave Florence due to the defeat of the Ghibellines. A member of the Sarzana branch and ancestor to Napoleon, Francesco Buonaparte came to Corsica in 16th century and the island was in Genoese possession.

The Buonaparte tomb lies in the Church of San Francesco in San Miniato.

The last member of the Italian branches was a canon named Gregoire Bonaparte, who died in 1803 leaving Napoleon as heir. 

==Imperial House of France==
Napoleon Crossing the Alps (1801), by Jacques-Louis David.
Imperial coat of arms
The Four Napoleons
Napoleon is the most prominent name associated with the Bonaparte family because he conquered much of the Western world during the early part of the 19th century. He was elected as First Consul of France on 10 November 1799 with the help of his brother, Lucien Bonaparte, and president of the Council of Five Hundred at Saint-Cloud. He was crowned Emperor of the French and ruled from 18041814, 1815.

Following his conquest of most of Western Europe, Napoleon I made his elder brother Joseph (17681844) king first of Naples (18061808) and then of Spain (18081813), his third brother Louis (17781846) King of Holland (18061810) (subsequently forcing his abdication after his failure to subordinate Dutch interests to those of France) and his youngest brother Jrme Bonaparte (17841860) King of Westphalia, the short-lived realm created from some of the states of northwestern Germany (18071813).

Napoleon's son Napolon Franois Charles Joseph (18111832) was created King of Rome (18111814) and was later styled Napolon II by loyalists of the dynasty, though he only ruled for two weeks after his father's abdication. Louis-Napolon (18081873), son of Louis, was President of France in 18481852 and Emperor in 18521870, reigning as Napoleon III; his son, Napolon, Prince Imperial (18561879) died fighting the Zulus in Natal, South Africa. With his death, the family lost much of its remaining political appeal, though claimants continue to assert their right to the imperial title. A political movement for Corsican independence surfaced in the 1990s which included a Bonapartist restoration in its programme.

==Crowns held by the family==

===Emperors of the French===
*Napoleon I (18041814, 1815), also King of Italy (18051814) and Emperor in Elba (18141815)
*Napoleon II (1815), styled King of Rome from birth, but never reigned
*Napoleon III (18521870)

===Kings of Holland===
*Louis I (18061810)
*Louis II (1810), also Grand Duke of Berg (18091813)

===King of Naples===
*Joseph I (18061808)

===King of Westphalia===
*Jrme I (18071813)

===King of Spain===
*Joseph I (18081813)

===Grand Duchess of Tuscany===
* Elisa Bonaparte (18091814)

==The family tree==

Carlo-Maria (Ajaccio, 1746Montpellier, 1785) married Maria Letizia Ramolino (Ajaccio, 1750Rome, 1836) in 1764. He was a minor official in the local courts. They had eight children:

#Joseph Bonaparte (Corte, 1768Florence, 1844), King of Naples, then King of Spain, married Julie Clary, sister of Napoleon's childhood sweetheart, Dsire, who was to become the wife of General Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte (later Charles XIV of Sweden)
#*Julie Josphine Bonaparte (17961796)
#*Znade Laetitia Julie Bonaparte (18011854)
#*Charlotte Napolone Bonaparte (18021839)
#Napolon (I) Bonaparte (17691821) Emperor of the French
#*Napolon (II) Franois Joseph Charles Bonaparte (18111832), Prince Imperial, King of Rome, Prince of Parma, son of Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria (of the Habsburg dynasty), Empress consort, then Duchess of Parma
# Lucien Bonaparte (17751840) Roman Prince of Canino and Musignano
#*3 daughters with first wife, Christine Boyer:
#**Charlotte Christine Bonaparte (17951865), married Prince Mario Gabrielli
#**Victoire Gertrude Bonaparte (17971797)
#**Christine Charlotte Alexandrine Egypta Bonaparte (17981847), married Count Arvid Posse, then married Lord Dudley Stuart
#*10 children with second wife, Alexandrine de Bleschamp:
#**Charles Lucien Jules Laurent Bonaparte (18031857), ornithologist and politician married Princess Znade Bonaparte (18011854)
#***Joseph Lucien Charles Napolon Bonaparte (18241865)
#***Alexandrine Gertrude Znade Bonaparte (18261828)
#***Lucien Louis Joseph Napolon (Cardinal) Bonaparte (18281895)
#***Julie Charlotte Pauline Znade Laetitia Dsire Bartholome Bonaparte (18301900)
#***Charlotte Honorine Josphine Pauline Bonaparte (18321901)
#***Lonie Stphanie Elise Bonaparte (18331839)
#***Marie Dsire Eugnie Josphine Philomne Bonaparte (18351890)
#***Augusta Amlie Maximilienne Jacqueline Bonaparte (18361900)
#***Napolon Charles Grgoire Jacques Philippe Bonaparte (18391899)
#****Znade Victoire Eugnie Bonaparte (18601862)
#****Marie Lonie Eugnie Mathilde Jeanne Julie Znade Bonaparte (18701947)
#****Eugnie Laetitia Barbe Caroline Lucienne Marie Jeanne Bonaparte (18721949)
#***Bathilde Alose Lonie Bonaparte (18401861)
#***Albertine Marie Thrse Bonaparte (18421842)
#***Charles Albert Edmond Bonaparte (18431847)
#**Laetitia Christine Bonaparte (18041871)
#**Joseph Lucien Bonaparte (18061807)
#**Jeanne Adlade Bonaparte (18071829)
#**Paul Marie Bonaparte (18081827)
#**Louis Lucien Bonaparte (18131891)
#**Pierre Napolon Bonaparte (18151881)
#***Roland Bonaparte (18581924) married Marie Blanc
#****Princess Marie Bonaparte (18821962) married Prince George of Greece
#***Princess Jeanne Bonaparte (18611910)
#**Antoine Lucien Bonaparte (18161877)
#**Alexandrine Marie Bonaparte (18181874)
#**Constance Marie Bonaparte (18231876)
# Maria-Anna Elisa Bonaparte (17771820), Grand-Duchess of Tuscany, married Flix Bacciochi Levoy, Prince of Lucca
#* Marie-Laetitia Bonaparte Bacciochi Levoy
#Louis Bonaparte (17781846), King of Holland, married Hortense de Beauharnais, Napoleon's stepdaughter
#*Napolon Charles Bonaparte (18021807)
#*Napolon Louis Bonaparte (18041831)
#*Charles Louis Napolon (III) Bonaparte (18081873) Emperor of the French, married Maria Eugenia Ignacia Augustina Palafox de Guzmn Portocarrero y Kirkpatrick
#**Napolon Eugne Louis John Joseph Bonaparte, Prince Imperial (18561879)
#Maria Paola or Marie Pauline Bonaparte (17801825) Princess and Duchess of Guastalla, married in 1797 to French General Charles Leclerc and later married Camillo Borghese, 6th Prince of Sulmona.
# Maria Annunziata Caroline Bonaparte (17821839) married Joachim Murat, Marshal of France, Grand Duke of Berg, then King of Naples
#*Prince Achille Murat (18011847), married Catherine Willis Gray (18031867), great-grandniece of George Washington.
#*Prince Napolon Lucien Charles Murat (16 May 180310 April 1878), married Caroline Georgina Fraser (18101879).
#**5 Children, including:
#**Prince Louis Napolon Murat (Paris, December 22, 1851  Paris, September 22, 1912), married in Odessa, 23 November 1873 Eudoxia Mikhailovna Somova (Kharkov, February 17, 1850Nice, May 6, 1924), related to Orest Somov, and had issue now extinct in male line (great-grandfather of actor Ren Auberjonois)
#Jrme Bonaparte (17841860), King of Westphalia
#*1 child from first marriage, to Betsy Patterson of Baltimore:
#*Jrme Napolon Bonaparte (18051870), married Susan May Williams
#**2 sons:
#**Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte II (18301893), married Caroline Le Roy Appleton Edgar
#***Louise-Eugnie Bonaparte (18731923), married in 1896 Count Adam Carl von Moltke-Huitfeld (18641944)
#***Jerome Napolon Charles Bonaparte II (18781945), married Blanche Pierce Stenbeigh: no posterity
#**Charles Joseph Bonaparte (18511921), U.S. Attorney General married Ellen Channing Day
#*3 children from second marriage, to Princess Catharina of Wrttemberg, including:
#*Jrme Napolon Charles Bonaparte I (18141847)
#*Mathilde Laetitia Wilhelmine Bonaparte (18201904), married Anatoly Nikolaievich Demidov, 1st Prince of San Donato: no posterity
#*Napolon Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte, Prince Napolon (18221891), called Plon-Plon married Princess Marie Clothilde of Savoy daughter of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy
#**Napolon Victor Jrme Frdric Bonaparte, Prince Napolon (18621926) married Princess Clmentine of Belgium
#***Marie Clotilde Eugnie Alberte Laetitia Genevive Bonaparte (19121996) married Count Serge de Witt
#***Louis Jrme Victor Emmanuel Lopold Marie Bonaparte, Prince Napolon (19141997), married Alix de Foresta
#****Charles Marie Jrme Victor Bonaparte, Prince Napolon (born 1950)
#*****Two children from first marriage, to Princess Batrice of Bourbon-Two Sicilies of the Bourbon family:
#*****Caroline Marie Constance Bonaparte (Princess Caroline Napolon) (born 1980)
#*****Jean-Christophe Louis Ferdinand Albric Bonaparte, Prince Napolon (born 1986)
#*****1 child and 1 adopted child from second marriage, to Jeanne-Franoise Valliccioni (born 1958):
#*****Sophie Catherine Bonaparte (born 1992)
#*****Anh Latitia Bonaparte (born 1998, adopted)
#****Catherine Elisabeth Albrique Marie Bonaparte (born 1950)
#****Laure Clmentine Genevive Bonaparte (born 1952)
#****Jrme Xavier Marie Joseph Victor Bonaparte (Prince Jrme Napolon) (born 1957)
#**Napolon Louis Joseph Jrme Bonaparte (18641932) Russian General
#**Marie Laetitia Eugnie Catherine Adlade Bonaparte (18661926) married Prince Amedeo of Savoy, Duke of Aosta

==Bonaparte arms==
The arms of the Bonaparte family were: Gules two bends sinister between two mullets or. In 1804 Napoleon I changed the arms to Azure an imperial eagle or. The change applied to all members of his family except for his brother Lucien and his nephew, the son from Jerome's first marriage.

File:Blason fam fr Bonaparte ornamented.svg|Armoiries de Charles-Marie Bonaparte. 
File:Grandes Armes Impriales (1804-1815)2.svg|Arms of Napoleon I and Napoleon II, as Emperor of the French.
File:Grand Coat of Arms of Joseph Bonaparte as King of Spain2.svg|Arms of Joseph Bonaparte, King of Spain.
File:Coat of Arms of Lucien Bonaparte, Roman Prince of Canino.svg|Arms of Lucien Bonaparte, Prince of Canino and Musignano.
File:Coat of Arms of the Kingdom of Holland (1808).svg|Arms of Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland.
File:Grandes Armes Jrme Bonaparte (1784-1860) 2.svg|Arms of Jrme Bonaparte, King of Westphalia.

==2011 DNA research==
According to a study in 2011, Napoleon Bonaparte, and therefore all the Bonaparte (males only), belonged to haplogroup E1b1b1c1* (E-M34*). This haplogroup, rare in Europe, has its highest concentration in Ethiopia and in the Near East (Jordan, Yemen). According to the authors of the study, "Probably Napolon also knew his remote oriental patrilineal origins, because Francesco Buonaparte (the Giovanni son), who was a mercenary under the orders of the Genoa Republic in Ajaccio in 1490, was nicknamed The Maure of Sarzane ". Haplogroup of the Y Chromosome of Napolon the First, Lucotte 2011 

==Living Members==

The headship of the family is in dispute between Charles, Prince Napolon, born 1950, great-great-grandson of Jrme Bonaparte by his second marriage; and his son Jean-Christophe, Prince Napolon (born 1986) who was appointed heir in the will of his grandfather Louis, Prince Napolon. The only other male member of the family is Charles' recently married brother, Prince Jrme Napolon (born 1957). There are no remaining descendants in the male line from any other of Napoleon's brothers. There are, however, numerous descendants of Napoleon's illegitimate, but recognized son Walewski from his union with Marie, Countess Walewski. Of these include the Wattier family and its union with the Bonaparte family. The later descendants were the Peschongs and Herrs. A descendant of Napoleon's sister Caroline Bonaparte is actor Ren Auberjonois.

==See also==
* History of France
* History of Spain
* History of Italy
* History of the Netherlands
* Line of succession to the French throne (Napoleonic)
* Napoleon (disambiguation)
* Timeline of the Napoleonic era

==References==

==External links==
* Paul Theroff, Bonaparte descendants (includes female-line and illegitimate descendants)
* The coat of arms of the Tuscan branch of Bonaparte family in State Archives of Florence

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

|-

House of Bonaparte



[[Beta sheet]]

The  sheet (also -pleated sheet) is the second form of regular secondary structure in proteins. It is less common than the alpha helix. Beta sheets consist of beta strands connected laterally by at least two or three backbone hydrogen bonds, forming a generally twisted, pleated sheet. A beta strand (also  strand) is a stretch of polypeptide chain typically 3 to 10 amino acids long with backbone in an almost fully extended conformation. The higher-level association of  sheets has been implicated in formation of the protein aggregates and fibrils observed in many human diseases, notably the amyloidoses such as Alzheimer's disease.
 An example of a 4-stranded antiparallel  sheet fragment from a crystal structure of the enzyme catalase (PDB file 1GWE at 0.88 resolution). a) Front view, showing the antiparallel hydrogen bonds (dotted) between peptide NH and CO groups on adjacent strands. Arrows indicate chain direction, and electron density contours outline the non-H atoms. O atoms are red balls, N atoms are blue, and H atoms are omitted for simplicity; sidechains are shown only out to the first sidechain C atom (green). b) Edge-on view of the central two  strands in a, showing the righthanded twist and the pleat of Cs and sidechains that alternately stick out in opposite directions from the sheet.

==History==
The first  sheet structure was proposed by William Astbury in the 1930s. He proposed the idea of hydrogen bonding between the peptide bonds of parallel or antiparallel extended  strands. However, Astbury did not have the necessary data on the bond geometry of the amino acids in order to build accurate models, especially since he did not then know that the peptide bond was planar. A refined version was proposed by Linus Pauling and Robert Corey in 1951.

==Structure and orientation==

 Illustration of the hydrogen bonding patterns, represented by dotted lines, in an antiparallel beta sheet. Oxygen atoms are colored red and nitrogen atoms colored blue. Illustration of the hydrogen bonding patterns, represented by dotted lines, in a parallel beta sheet. Oxygen atoms are colored red and nitrogen atoms colored blue. 

===Geometry===
The majority of  strands are arranged adjacent to other strands and form an extensive hydrogen bond network with their neighbors in which the N-H groups in the backbone of one strand establish hydrogen bonds with the C=O groups in the backbone of the adjacent strands. In the fully extended  strand, successive side chains point straight up, then straight down, then straight up, etc. Adjacent  strands in a  sheet are aligned so that their C atoms are adjacent and their side chains point in the same direction. The "pleated" appearance of  strands arises from tetrahedral chemical bonding at the C atom; for example, if a side chain points straight up, then the bond to the must point slightly downwards, since its bond angle is approximately 109.5. The pleating causes the distance between and to be approximately 6 , rather than the 7.6  (2  3.8 ) expected from two fully extended trans peptide virtual bonds. The "sideways" distance between adjacent C atoms in hydrogen-bonded  strands is roughly 5  
 Ramachandran (,) plot of about 100,000 high-resolution datapoints, showing the broad, favorable region around the conformation typical for -sheet residues.
However,  strands are rarely perfectly extended; rather, they exhibit a twist due to the chirality of their component amino acids. The energetically preferred dihedral angles near (, ) = (135, 135) (broadly, the upper left region of the Ramachandran plot) diverge significantly from the fully extended conformation (, ) = (180, 180). The twist is often associated with alternating fluctuations in the dihedral angles to prevent the individual  strands in a larger sheet from splaying apart. A good example of a strongly twisted -hairpin can be seen in the protein BPTI.

The side chains point outwards from the folds of the pleats, roughly perpendicularly to the plane of the sheet; successive residues point outwards on alternating faces of the sheet.

===Hydrogen bonding patterns===
Because peptide chains have a directionality conferred by their N-terminus and C-terminus,  strands too can be said to be directional. They are usually represented in protein topology diagrams by an arrow pointing toward the C-terminus. Adjacent  strands can form hydrogen bonds in antiparallel, parallel, or mixed arrangements.

In an antiparallel arrangement, the successive  strands alternate directions so that the N-terminus of one strand is adjacent to the C-terminus of the next. This is the arrangement that produces the strongest inter-strand stability because it allows the inter-strand hydrogen bonds between carbonyls and amines to be planar, which is their preferred orientation. The peptide backbone dihedral angles (, ) are about (140, 135) in antiparallel sheets. In this case, if two atoms and are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded  strands, then they form two mutual backbone hydrogen bonds to each other's flanking peptide groups; this is known as a close pair of hydrogen bonds.

In a parallel arrangement, all of the N-termini of successive strands are oriented in the same direction; this orientation may be slightly less stable because it introduces nonplanarity in the inter-strand hydrogen bonding pattern. The dihedral angles (, ) are about (120, 115) in parallel sheets. It is rare to find less than five interacting parallel strands in a motif, suggesting that a smaller number of strands may be unstable, however it is also fundamentally more difficult for parallel -sheets to form because strands with N and C termini aligned necessarily must be very distant in sequence. There is also evidence that parallel -sheet may be more stable since small amyloidogenic sequences appear to generally aggregate into -sheet fibrils composed of primarily parallel -sheet strands, where one would expect anti-parallel fibrils if anti-parallel was more stable.

In parallel -sheet structure, if two atoms and are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded  strands, then they do not hydrogen bond to each other; rather, one residue forms hydrogen bonds to the residues that flank the other (but not vice versa). For example, residue may form hydrogen bonds to residues and ; this is known as a wide pair of hydrogen bonds. By contrast, residue may hydrogen-bond to different residues altogether, or to none at all.

Finally, an individual strand may exhibit a mixed bonding pattern, with a parallel strand on one side and an antiparallel strand on the other. Such arrangements are less common than a random distribution of orientations would suggest, suggesting that this pattern is less stable than the anti-parallel arrangement, however bioinformatic analysis always struggles with extracting structural thermodynamics since there are always numerous other structural features present in whole proteins. Also proteins are inherently constrained by folding kinetics as well as folding thermodynamics, so one must always be careful in concluding stability from bioinformatic analysis.

The hydrogen bonding of  strands need not be perfect, but can exhibit localized disruptions known as beta bulges.

The hydrogen bonds lie roughly in the plane of the sheet, with the peptide carbonyl groups pointing in alternating directions with successive residues; for comparison, successive carbonyls point in the same direction in the alpha helix.

===Amino acid propensities===
Large aromatic residues (Tyr, Phe and Trp) and -branched amino acids (Thr, Val, Ile) are favored to be found in  strands in the middle of  sheets. Interestingly, different types of residues (such as Pro) are likely to be found in the edge strands in  sheets, presumably to avoid the "edge-to-edge" association between proteins that might lead to aggregation and amyloid formation. It is also suggested that the dipole moments in parallel -sheets, whose direction is from C-terminal (partially negative) to N-terminal (partially positive) may influence the propensity of certain residues (like Lys and Arg) for the caps of this structure. 

==Common structural motifs==
Representation of a beta hairpin
Greek-key motif in protein structure.
A very simple structural motif involving  sheets is the  hairpin, in which two antiparallel strands are linked by a short loop of two to five residues, of which one is frequently a glycine or a proline, both of which can assume the unusual dihedral-angle conformations required for a tight turn. However, individual strands can also be linked in more elaborate ways with long loops that may contain alpha helices or even entire protein domains.

===Greek key motif===
The Greek key motif consists of four adjacent antiparallel strands and their linking loops. It consists of three antiparallel strands connected by hairpins, while the fourth is adjacent to the first and linked to the third by a longer loop. This type of structure forms easily during the protein folding process. Tertiary Protein Structure and Folds: section 4.3.2.1. From Principles of Protein Structure, Comparative Protein Modelling, and Visualisation It was named after a pattern common to Greek ornamental artwork (see meander (art)).

===The -&alpha;- motif===
Due to the chirality of their component amino acids, all strands exhibit a "right-handed" twist evident in most higher-order  sheet structures. In particular, the linking loop between two parallel strands almost always has a right-handed crossover chirality, which is strongly favored by the inherent twist of the sheet. This linking loop frequently contains a helical region, in which case it is called a -- motif. A closely related motif called a --- motif forms the basic component of the most commonly observed protein tertiary structure, the TIM barrel.

Beta-meander motifPortion of outer surface Protein A of Borrelia burgdorferi complexed with a murine monoclonal antibody.

===-meander motif===
A simple supersecondary protein topology composed of 2 or more consecutive antiparallel -strands linked together by hairpin loops. SCOP: Fold: WW domain-like PPS '96 - Super Secondary Structure This motif is common in -sheets and can be found in several structural architectures including -barrels and -propellers.

Psi-loop motifPortion of Carboxypeptidase A.

===Psi-loop motif===
The psi-loop, -loop, motif consists of two antiparallel strands with one strand in between that is connected to both by hydrogen bonds. There are four possible strand topologies for single -loops as cited by Hutchinson et al. (1990). This motif is rare as the process resulting in its formation seems unlikely to occur during protein folding. The -loop was first identified in the aspartic protease family. 

==Structural architectures of proteins with beta-sheets==
Beta-sheets are present in all-, + and / domains according to Structural Classification of Proteins and in many peptides or small proteins with poorly defined overall architecture. All- domains may form  barrels,  sandwiches,  prisms,  propellers, and -helices.

==Structural topology==
The topology of a  sheet describes the order of hydrogen-bonded  strands along the backbone. For example, the flavodoxin fold has a five-stranded, parallel  sheet with topology 21345; thus, the edge strands are  strand 2 and  strand 5 along the backbone. Spelled out explicitly,  strand 2 is H-bonded to  strand 1, which is H-bonded to  strand 3, which is H-bonded to  strand 4, which is H-bonded to  strand 5, the other edge strand. In the same system, the Greek key motif described above has a 4123 topology. The secondary structure of a  sheet can be described roughly by giving the number of strands, their topology, and whether their hydrogen bonds are parallel or antiparallel.

 sheets can be open, meaning that they have two edge strands (as in the flavodoxin fold or the immunoglobulin fold) or they can be closed beta barrels (such as the TIM barrel). -Barrels are often described by their stagger or shear. Some open  sheets are very curved and fold over on themselves (as in the SH3 domain) or form horseshoe shapes (as in the ribonuclease inhibitor). Open  sheets can assemble face-to-face (such as the beta-propeller domain or immunoglobulin fold) or edge-to-edge, forming one big  sheet.

==Dynamic features==

Beta-sheets in proteins may carry out low-frequency accordion-like motion as observed by the Raman spectroscopy and analyzed with the quasi-continuum model. 

==Parallel  helices==
 End-view ribbon schematic of a 3-sided, lefthanded  helix protein (PDB file 1QRE).
A  helix is formed from repeating structural units consisting of two or three short  strands linked by short loops. These units "stack" atop one another in a helical fashion so that successive repetitions of the same strand hydrogen-bond with each other in a parallel orientation. See the beta helix article for further information.
In lefthanded  helices, the strands themselves are quite straight and untwisted; the resulting helical surfaces are nearly flat, forming a regular triangular prism shape, as shown for the 1QRE archaeal carbonic anhydrase at right. Other examples are the lipid A synthesis enzyme LpxA and insect antifreeze proteins with a regular array of Thr sidechains on one face that mimic the structure of ice. 
 End-view ribbon schematic of a 3-sided, righthanded  helix protein (PDB file 2PEC).
Righthanded  helices, typified by the pectate lyase enzyme shown at left or P22 phage tailspike protein, have a less regular cross-section, longer and indented on one of the sides; of the three linker loops, one is consistently just two residues long and the others are variable, often elaborated to form a binding or active site. 
A two-sided  helix (right-handed) is found in some bacterial metalloproteases; its two loops are each six residues long and bind stabilizing calcium ions to maintain the integrity of the structure, using the backbone and the Asp side chain oxygens of a GGXGXD sequence motif. This fold is called a beta-roll in the SCOP classification.

== sheets in pathology==
Some proteins that are disordered or helical as monomers, such as amyloid  (see amyloid plaque) can form -sheet-rich oligomeric structures associated with pathological states. The amyloid  protein's oligomeric form is implicated as a cause of Alzheimer's. Its structure has yet to be determined in full, but recent data suggest that it may resemble an unusual two-strand  helix. 

The side chains from the amino acid residues found in a  sheet structure may also be arranged such that many of the adjacent sidechains on one side of the sheet are hydrophobic, while many of those adjacent to each other on the alternate side of the sheet are polar or charged (hydrophilic), SHUGUANG ZHANG, TODD HOLME, CURTIS LOCKSHIN, AND ALEXANDER RICH. PNAS April 15, 1993 vol. 90 no. 8 3334-3338 which can be useful if the sheet is to form a boundary between polar/watery and nonpolar/greasy environments.

==See also==
*Folding (chemistry)
*Tertiary structure
* helix
*Collagen helix
*Foldamers

==References==

==Further reading==
*Cooper, J. "Super Secondary Structure - Part II", May 31, 1996. Accessed May 25, 2007.
*Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) "Open-sided Beta-meander", October 20, 2006. Accessed May 31, 2007.

==External links==
*NetSurfP - Secondary Structure and Surface Accessibility predictor
*Interactive model of an anti-parallel  sheet (plug-in required)
*Interactive model of a parallel  sheet (plug-in required)
*Animated details of -pleated sheet
*Monooxygenase



[[Beryl]]

:"Beril" and "Heliodor" redirect here. For the character in Tolkien's legendarium, see House of Bor. For the given names, see Beryl (given name) or Heliodorus (given name). For the Sailor Moon villain, see Queen Beryl. For other uses, see Beryl (disambiguation).

In geology, beryl is a mineral composed of beryllium aluminium cyclosilicate with the chemical formula Be3Al2(SiO3)6. The hexagonal crystals of beryl may be very small or range to several meters in size. Terminated crystals are relatively rare. Pure beryl is colorless, but it is frequently tinted by impurities; possible colors are green, blue, yellow, red, and white.

==Etymology==
The name beryl is derived (via Latin: beryllus, Old French: beryl, and Middle English: beril) from Greek  beryllos which referred to a "precious blue-green color-of-sea-water stone"; from Sanskrit vaidrya(): "brought from Vidra" (originally lapis lazuli) akin to Prakrit verulia, veluriya ("beryl"). The German word brille (eyeglasses) is also derived from Sanskrit vaidurya. Olivelle, Patrick (2006), Between the Empires, Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE, page 463, Oxford University Press. The term was later adopted for the mineral beryl more exclusively. 

==Deposits==
Beryl of various colors is found most commonly in granitic pegmatites, but also occurs in mica schists in the Ural Mountains, and limestone in Colombia. Beryl is often associated with tin and tungsten ore bodies. Beryl is found in Europe in Norway, Austria, Germany, Sweden (especially morganite), Ireland and Russia, as well as Brazil, Colombia, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa, the United States, and Zambia. US beryl locations are in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Idaho, Maine, New Hampshire, North Carolina, South Dakota and Utah.

New England's pegmatites have produced some of the largest beryls found, including one massive crystal from the Bumpus Quarry in Albany, Maine with dimensions 5.5 by with a mass of around 18 metric tons; it is New Hampshire's state mineral. , the world's largest known naturally occurring crystal of any mineral is a crystal of beryl from Malakialina, Madagascar, 18 meters long and 3.5 meters in diameter, and weighing 380,000 kilograms. G. Cressey and I. F. Mercer, (1999) Crystals, London, Natural History Museum, page 58 

==Varieties==

===Aquamarine and maxixe===
Aquamarine
Aquamarine (from , "water of the sea") is a blue or turquoise variety of beryl. It occurs at most localities which yield ordinary beryl. The gem-gravel placer deposits of Sri Lanka contain aquamarine. Clear yellow beryl, such as that occurring in Brazil, is sometimes called aquamarine chrysolite. The deep blue version of aquamarine is called maxixe. Maxixe is commonly found in the country of Madagascar. Its color fades to white when exposed to sunlight or is subjected to heat treatment, though the color returns with irradiation.

The pale blue color of aquamarine is attributed to Fe2+. The Fe3+ ions produce golden-yellow color, and when both Fe2+ and Fe3+ are present, the color is a darker blue as in maxixe. Decoloration of maxixe by light or heat thus may be due to the charge transfer Fe3+ and Fe2+. Dark-blue maxixe color can be produced in green, pink or yellow beryl by irradiating it with high-energy particles (gamma rays, neutrons or even X-rays). 
 
In the United States, aquamarines can be found at the summit of Mt. Antero in the Sawatch Range in central Colorado. In Wyoming, aquamarine has been discovered in the Big Horn Mountains, near Powder River Pass. In Brazil, there are mines in the states of Minas Gerais, Esprito Santo, and Bahia, and minorly in Rio Grande do Norte. The mines of Colombia, Zambia, Madagascar, Malawi, Tanzania and Kenya also produce aquamarine.

The largest aquamarine of gemstone quality ever mined was found in Marambaia, Minas Gerais, Brazil, in 1910. It weighed over 110 kg, and its dimensions were 48.5 cm long and 42 cm in diameter. The largest cut aquamarine gem is the Dom Pedro aquamarine, now housed in the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History. 

===Emerald===

Rough emerald on matrix
Emerald refers to green beryl, colored by trace amounts of chromium and sometimes vanadium. The word "emerald" comes (via Middle English: Emeraude, imported from Old French: smeraude and Medieval Latin: Esmaraldus) from Latin smaragdus from Greek smaragdos   ("green gem"), its original source being a Semitic word izmargad () or the Sanskrit word, marakata (), meaning "green". Most emeralds are highly included, so their brittleness (resistance to breakage) is classified as generally poor.

Emeralds in antiquity were mined by the Egyptians and in Austria, as well as Swat in northern Pakistan. A rare type of emerald known as a trapiche emerald is occasionally found in the mines of Colombia. A trapiche emerald exhibits a "star" pattern; it has raylike spokes of dark carbon impurities that give the emerald a six-pointed radial pattern. It is named for the trapiche, a grinding wheel used to process sugarcane in the region. Colombian emeralds are generally the most prized due to their transparency and fire. Some of the most rare emeralds come from three main emerald mining areas in Colombia: Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor. Fine emeralds are also found in other countries, such as Zambia, Brazil, Zimbabwe, Madagascar, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan and Russia. In the US, emeralds can be found in Hiddenite, North Carolina. In 1998, emeralds were discovered in the Yukon.

Emerald is a rare and valuable gemstone and, as such, it has provided the incentive for developing synthetic emeralds. Both hydrothermal and flux-growth synthetics have been produced. The first commercially successful emerald synthesis process was that of Carroll Chatham. Gemology Project The other large producer of flux emeralds was Pierre Gilson Sr., which has been on the market since 1964. Gilson's emeralds are usually grown on natural colorless beryl seeds which become coated on both sides. Growth occurs at the rate of 1 mm per month, a typical seven-month growth run producing emerald crystals of 7 mm of thickness. Nassau, K., 1980, Gems Made By Man, Gemological Institute of America, ISBN 0-87311-016-1 The green color of emeralds is attributed to presence of Cr3+ ions. 

Golden beryl
Heliodor

===Golden beryl and heliodor===
Golden beryl can range in colors from pale yellow to a brilliant gold. Unlike emerald, golden beryl has very few flaws. The term "golden beryl" is sometimes synonymous with heliodor (from Greek hlios   "sun" + dron   "gift") but golden beryl refers to pure yellow or golden yellow shades, while heliodor refers to the greenish-yellow shades. The golden yellow color is attributed to Fe3+ ions. Both golden beryl and heliodor are used as gems. Probably the largest cut golden beryl is the flawless 2054 carat stone on display in the Hall of Gems, Washington, D.C., United States 

===Goshenite===
Goshenite
Colorless beryl is called goshenite. The name originates from Goshen, Massachusetts where it was originally discovered. Since all these color varieties are caused by impurities and pure beryl is colorless, it might be tempting to assume that goshenite is the purest variety of beryl. However, there are several elements that can act as inhibitors to color in beryl and so this assumption may not always be true. The name goshenite has been said to be on its way to extinction and yet it is still commonly used in the gemstone markets. Goshenite is found to some extent in almost all beryl localities. In the past, goshenite was used for manufacturing eyeglasses and lenses owing to its transparency. Nowadays, it is most commonly used for gemstone purposes and also considered as a source of beryllium. 

The gem value of goshenite is relatively low. However, goshenite can be colored yellow, green, pink, blue and in intermediate colors by irradiating it with high-energy particles. The resulting color depends on the content of Ca, Sc, Ti, V, Fe, and Co impurities. 

===Morganite===
Morganite
Morganite, also known as "pink beryl", "rose beryl", "pink emerald", and "cesian (or caesian) beryl", is a rare light pink to rose-colored gem-quality variety of beryl. Orange/yellow varieties of morganite can also be found, and color banding is common. It can be routinely heat treated to remove patches of yellow and is occasionally treated by irradiation to improve its color. The pink color of morganite is attributed to Mn2+ ions. 
 
Pink beryl of fine color and good sizes was first discovered on an island on the coast of Madagascar in 1910. It was also known, with other gemstone minerals, such as tourmaline and kunzite, at Pala, California. In December 1910, the New York Academy of Sciences named the pink variety of beryl "morganite" after financier J. P. Morgan. 
 
On October 7, 1989, one of the largest gem morganite specimens ever uncovered, eventually called "The Rose of Maine," was found at the Bennett Quarry in Buckfield, Maine, US. The crystal, originally somewhat orange in hue, was 23 cm long and about 30 cm across, and weighed (along with its matrix) just over 50 lb. The Rose of Maine, image, The Rose of Maine at the site of its discovery 

===Red beryl===
Red beryl
Red beryl (also known as "red emerald" or "scarlet emerald") is a red variety of beryl. It was first described in 1904 for an occurrence, its type locality, at Maynard's Claim (Pismire Knolls), Thomas Range, Juab County, Utah. MinDat  Red beryl Carl Ege, Utah Geological Survey The old synonym "bixbite" is deprecated from the CIBJO, because of the risk of confusion with the mineral bixbyite (also named after the mineralogist Maynard Bixby). The dark red color is attributed to Mn3+ ions. 

Red beryl is very rare and has only been reported from a handful of locations including: Wah Wah Mountains, Beaver County, Utah; Paramount Canyon and Round Mountain, Sierra County, New Mexico, although the latter locality does not often produce gem grade stones; Mindat Red Beryl Page and Juab County, Utah. The greatest concentration of gem-grade red beryl comes from the Ruby-Violet Claim in the Wah Wah Mountains of the Thomas range of mid-western Utah, discovered in 1958 by Lamar Hodges, of Fillmore, Utah, while he was prospecting for uranium. Prices for top quality natural red beryl can be as high as $10,000 per carat for finished stones. Red beryl has been known to be confused with pezzottaite, a gemstone that has been found in Madagascar and more recently Afghanistan  although cut gems of the two varieties can be distinguished from their difference in refractive index, and rough crystals can be easily distinguished by differing crystal systems(pezzottaite trigonal, red beryl hexagonal). "Bixbite"  The Gemstone List 

While gem beryls are ordinarily found in pegmatites and certain metamorphic stones, red beryl occurs in topaz-bearing rhyolites. It is formed by crystallizing under low pressure and high temperature from a pneumatolitic phase along fractures or within near-surface miarolitic cavities of the rhyolite. Associated minerals include bixbyite, quartz, orthoclase, topaz, spessartine, pseudobrookite and hematite. 

==See also==
* Chrysoberyl
* List of minerals

==References==

* Hurlbut, Cornelius S.; Klein, Cornelis, 1985, Manual of Mineralogy, 20th ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York ISBN 0-471-80580-7
* Sinkankas, John, 1994, Emerald & Other Beryls, Geoscience Press, ISBN 0-8019-7114-4

==External links==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*



[[Basel]]

Augusta Raurica.
1493 woodcut of the City of Basel, from the Nuremberg Chronicle.
Basel (; ) In the national languages of Switzerland the city is also known as Ble (French), Basilea (Italian) and Basilea (Romansh) is Switzerland's third most populous city (behind Zrich and Geneva) with about 195,000 inhabitants. Basel Population, February 2014 Located where the Swiss, French and German borders meet, Basel also has suburbs in France and Germany. In 2011, the Basel agglomeration was the third largest in Switzerland with a population of 500,600 in 74 municipalities in Switzerland and an additional 53 in neighboring countries (municipal count as of 2000). The tri-national metropolitan area has around 830,000 inhabitants in 226 municipalities. 

Located in northwest Switzerland on the river Rhine, Basel functions as a major industrial centre for the chemical and pharmaceutical industry. The Basel region, culturally extending into German Baden-Wrttemberg and French Alsace, reflects the heritage of its three states in the modern Latin name: "Regio TriRhena". It has the oldest university of the Swiss Confederation (1460). Basel is German-speaking. The local variant of the Swiss German dialects is called Basel German.

Basel is among the most important cultural centres of Switzerland. The city comprises a large number of theatres and many museums, including the Museum of Fine Arts, the world's oldest art collection accessible to the public. In addition the Theater Basel was chosen in 1999 as the best stage for German-language performances and in 2009 & 2010 as "Opera of the Year" by German Opera Magazine "Opernwelt". Basel: culture pure basel-virtuell.ch. Retrieved on 2010-03-24 

==History==

=== Early history ===
During the days of the Roman Empire, the settlement of Augusta Raurica was founded 10 to upstream of present Basel, and a castle was built on the hill overlooking the river where the Basel Mnster now stands. But even older Celtic settlements (including a vitrified fort) have been discovered recently in the area predating the Roman castle.

The town of Basel was called Basilea or Basilia in Latin (from Ancient Greek Basileia,  meaning kingship) and this name is documented from 374 AD. The Encyclopedia Americana, Grolier Incorporated 1999, p.308, 

The Magyars destroyed Basel in 917, and later burnt down the monasteries of St. Gallen and Rheinau. Their incursions only ended when they were routed by the German king Otto I in 955. 

Since the donation by Rudolph III of Burgundy Wood, 285-286, 313 of the Moutier-Grandval Abbey and all its possessions to Bishop Adalbero II in 999 till the Reformation, Basel was ruled by prince-bishops (see Bishop of Basel, The New Encyclopdia Britannica, Encyclopdia Britannica, 1993, p.659 whose memory is preserved in the crosier shown on the Basel coat-of-arms  see above).

===Prince-Bishopric of Basel===

In 1019 the construction of the cathedral of Basel (known locally as the Mnster) began under German Emperor Heinrich II. Franz Kugler, Kleine Schriften und Studien zur Kunstgeschichte, 1853, p. 486 
In 12251226 the Bridge over the Rhine was constructed by Bishop Heinrich von Thun and lesser Basel (Kleinbasel) founded as a bridgehead to protect the bridge. The bridge was largely funded by Basel's Jewish community which had settled there a century earlier. Habicht, Peter, Basel - A Center at the Fringe (Basel: Christoph Merian Verlag, 2006) pp. 43, 55, 70, 79. For many centuries to come Basel possessed the only permanent bridge over the river "between Lake Constance and the sea".

The Bishop also allowed the furriers to found a guild in 1226. Eventually about 15 guilds were established in the 13th century. They increased the town's, and hence the bishop's, reputation, influence, and income from the taxes and duties on goods in Basel's expanding market. 

In 1347 the plague came to Europe but did not reach Basel until June 1349. The guilds, asserting that the Jews were responsibleseveral had been tortured and confesseddemanded they be executed, which the Council did in January 1349, except for a few who escaped to Alsace. The council then forbade Jews in Basel for 200 years, except that their money was helpful in rebuilding after the Basel earthquake of 1356 which destroyed much of the city along with a number of castles in the vicinity. The city offered courts to nobles as an alternative to rebuilding their castles, in exchange for the nobles' military protection of the city.

In 1412 (or earlier) the well-known guesthouse Zum Goldenen Sternen was established.
Basel became the focal point of western Christendom during the 15th century Council of Basel (14311449), including the 1439 election of antipope Felix V.
In 1459 Pope Pius II endowed the University of Basel where such notables as Erasmus of Rotterdam and Paracelsus later taught. At the same time the new craft of printing was introduced to Basel by apprentices of Johann Gutenberg.

The Schwabe publishing house was founded in 1488 by Johannes Petri and is the oldest publishing house still in business. Johann Froben also operated his printing house in Basel and was notable for publishing works by Erasmus. Josef Nadler, Literaturgeschichte der deutschen Schweiz, Grethlein 1932 In 1495, Basel was incorporated in the Upper Rhenish Imperial Circle; the Bishop of Basel was added to the Bench of the Ecclesiastical Princes. In 1500 the construction of the Basel Mnster was finished. In 1521 so was the bishop. The Council, under the supremacy of the guilds, explained that henceforth they would only give allegiance to the Swiss Confederation, to whom the bishop appealed but in vain. 

===As a member state in the Swiss Confederacy===
Map of Basel in 1642, engraved by Matthus Merian, oriented with SW at the top and NE at the bottom.
The city had remained neutral through the Swabian War of 1499 despite being plundered by soldiers on both sides. The Treaty of Basel ended the war and granted the Swiss confederates exemptions from the emperor Maximillian's taxes and jurisdictions, separating Switzerland de facto from the Holy Roman Empire. Rappard, William, Collective Security in Swiss Experience 12911948 (London, 1948) p. 85 ff 

On 9 June 1501 Basel joined the Swiss Confederation as its eleventh canton. Karl Strupp, Wrterbuch Des Vlkerrechts, De Gruyter 1960, p.225 It was the only canton that had been asked to join, not the other way round. Basel had a strategic location, good relations with Strasbourg and Mulhouse, and control of the corn imports from Alsace, whereas the Swiss lands were becoming overpopulated and had few resources. For its part, Basel secured the military help of the other cantons when threatened, and some protection for its rural subjects outside its walls. A provision of the Charter accepting Basel required that in conflicts among the other cantons it was to stay neutral and offer its services for mediation. Habicht, Peter, Basel - A Center at the Fringe (Basel 2006) p. 65 ff Bonjour, Edgar et al. A short History of Switzerland (Oxford, 1952) p. 139 ff 

In 1503 the new bishop Christoph von Utenheim refused to give Basel a new constitution whereupon, to show its power, the city began the construction of a new city hall. 

In 1529 the city became Protestant under Oecolampadius and the bishop's seat was moved to Porrentruy. The bishop's crook was however retained as the city's coat of arms.

The first edition of Christianae religionis institutio (Institutes of the Christian Religion  John Calvin's great exposition of Calvinist doctrine) was published at Basel in March 1536. Geoffrey Rudolph Elton, Harold Fullard, Henry Clifford Darby, Charles Loch Mowat, The New Cambridge Modern History, 1990, p. 113 

In 1544, Johann von Brugge a rich Dutch Protestant refugee was given citizenship and lived respectfully until his death in 1556 then buried with honors. His body was exhumed and burnt at the stake in 1559 after it was discovered that he was the Anabaptist David Joris. 

In 1543 De humani corporis fabrica, the first book on human anatomy, was published and printed in Basel by Andreas Vesalius (15141564). The Illustrations from the Works of Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, Courier Dover Publications 1973, p.30 

There are indications Joachim Meyer, author of the influential 16th century martial arts text Kunst des Fechten ("The Art of Fencing") came from Basel. In 1662 the Amerbaschsches Kabinett was established in Basel as the first public museum of art. Its collection became the core of the later Basel Museum of Art.

===Modern history===
In 1792 the Republic of Rauracia, a revolutionary French client republic, was created. It lasted until 1793. Heinrich Zschokke, Emil Zschokke, The History of Switzerland, for the Swiss People, S. Low, Son & Co. 1855, p.253 After three years of political agitation and a short civil war in 1833 the disadvantaged countryside seceded from the Canton of Basel, forming the half canton of Basel-Landschaft. Heinrich Trler, Marcel Godet, Victor Attinger, Historisch-biographisches Lexikon der Schweiz, 1934, p.307 

On July 3, 1874 Switzerland's first zoo (the Zoo Basel) opened its doors in the south of the city towards Binningen.

==Basel as international meeting place==
Basel has often been the site of peace negotiations and other international meetings. The Treaty of Basel (1499) ended the Swabian War. Two years later Basel joined the Swiss Confederation. The Peace of Basel in 1795 between the French Republic and Prussia and Spain ended the First Coalition against France during the French Revolutionary Wars. In more recent times, the World Zionist Organization held its first congress in Basel on September 3, 1897. Because of the Balkan Wars, the Second International held an extraordinary congress at Basel in 1912. In 1989, the Basel Convention was opened for signature with the aim of preventing the export of hazardous waste from wealthy to developing nations for disposal.

==Geography==
Basel has an area, , of 23.91 km2. Of this area, 0.95 km2 or 4.0% is used for agricultural purposes, while 0.88 km2 or 3.7% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 20.67 km2 or 86.4% is settled (buildings or roads), 1.45 km2 or 6.1% is either rivers or lakes. Swiss Federal Statistical Office-Land Use Statistics 2009 data accessed 25 March 2010 

Of the built up area, industrial buildings made up 10.2% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 40.7% and transportation infrastructure made up 24.0%. Power and water infrastructure as well as other special developed areas made up 2.7% of the area while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 8.9%. Out of the forested land, all of the forested land area is covered with heavy forests. Of the agricultural land, 2.5% is used for growing crops and 1.3% is pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water. 

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is In Silber ein schwarzer Baselstab. Flags of the World.com accessed 18-April-2011 

==Climate==
Basel has an average of 121.4 days of rain or snow per year and on average receives 778 mm of precipitation. The wettest month is June during which time Basel receives an average of 87 mm of rain or snow. During this month there is precipitation for an average of 10.9 days. The month with the most days of precipitation is May, with an average of 12.6, but with only 84 mm of rain or snow. The driest month of the year is February with an average of 49 mm of precipitation over 9.4 days. , the Basel/Binningen weather station elevation is 316 meters above sea level. 

==Transport==
Basel's airport is set up for airfreight; heavy goods reach the city and the heart of continental Europe from the North Sea by ship along the Rhine. The main European routes for the highway and railway transport of freight cross in Basel. The outstanding location benefits logistics corporations, which operate globally from Basel. Trading firms are traditionally well represented in the Basel Region.

===Port===
The Rhine in Basel
Basel has Switzerland's only cargo port, through which goods pass along the navigable stretches of the Rhine and connect to ocean-going ships at the port of Rotterdam.

===Air transport===
EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg is operated jointly by two countries, France and Switzerland, although the airport is located completely on French soil. The airport itself is split into two architecturally independent sectors, one half serving the French side and the other half serving the Swiss side; prior to Schengen there was a customs point at the middle of the airport so that people could "emigrate" to the other side of the airport.

===Railways===
Basel Bahnhof SBB, self-proclaimed "world's first international railway station."
Basel has long held an important place as a rail hub. Three railway stations  those of the German, French and Swiss networks  lie within the city (although the Swiss (Basel SBB) and French (Ble SNCF) stations are actually in the same complex, separated by Customs and Immigration facilities). Basel Badischer Bahnhof is on the opposite side of the city. Basel's local rail services are supplied by the Basel Regional S-Bahn. The largest goods railway complex of the country is located just outside the city, spanning the municipalities of Muttenz and Pratteln. The new highspeed ICE railway line from Karlsruhe to Basel was completed in 2008 while phase I of the TGV Rhin-Rhne line, opened in December 2011, has reduced travel time from Basel to Paris to about 3 hours. SNCF website, TGV Lyria 9218 accessed 14 May 2012 

===Roads===
Basel is located on the A3 motorway.

Within the city limits, five bridges connect greater and lesser Basel, from upstream to downstream:
* Schwarzwaldbrcke (built 1972)
* Wettsteinbrcke (current structure built 1998, original bridge built 1879)
* Mittlere Brcke (current structure built 1905, original bridge built 1225 as the first bridge to cross the Rhine River)
* Johanniterbrcke (built 1967)
* Dreirosenbrcke (built 2004, original bridge built 1935)

===Ferries===
A somewhat anachronistic yet still widely used system of ferry boats links the two shores. There are four ferries, each situated approximately midway between two bridges. Each is attached by a cable to a block that rides along another cable spanning the river at a height of 20 or 30 metres. To cross the river, the ferryman orients the boat around 45 from the current so that the current pushes the boat across the river. This form of transportation is therefore completely hydraulically driven, requiring no outside energy source.

===Public transport===
Basel tram network
Basel tram
Basel has an extensive public transportation network serving the city and connecting to surrounding suburbs, including a large tram network. The green-colored local trams and buses are operated by the Basler Verkehrs-Betriebe (BVB). The yellow-colored buses and trams are operated by the Baselland Transport (BLT), and connect areas in the nearby half-canton of Baselland to central Basel. The BVB also shares commuter bus lines in cooperation with transit authorities in the neighboring Alsace region in France and Baden region in Germany. The Basel Regional S-Bahn, the commuter rail network connecting to suburbs surrounding the city, is jointly operated by SBB, SNCF and DB.

===Border crossings===
Basel is located at the meeting point of France, Germany and Switzerland; because it is so near other countries and is beyond the Jura Mountains, many within the Swiss military reportedly believe that the city is indefensible during wartime. It has numerous road and rail crossings between Switzerland and the other two countries. With Switzerland joining the Schengen Area on December 12, 2008, immigration checks were no longer carried out at the crossings. However, Switzerland did not join the EU customs regime and customs checks are still conducted at or near the crossings.

France-Switzerland (from east to west)
*Road crossings (with French road name continuation)
**Kohlenstrasse (Avenue de Ble, Huningue). This crossing replaces the former crossing Hningerstrasse further east.
**Elssserstrasse (Avenue de Ble, Saint-Louis)
**Autobahn A3 (A35 autoroute, Saint-Louis)
**EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg  pedestrian walkway between the French and Swiss sections on Level 3 (departures) of airport.
**Burgfelderstrasse (Rue du 1er Mars, Saint Louis)

*Railway crossing
**Basel SBB railway station

Germany-Switzerland (clockwise, from north to south)
*Road crossings (with German road name continuation)
**Hiltalingerstrasse (Zollstrae, Weil am Rhein). A tram line extension to Weil am Rhein is currently under construction along this road. Due to open December 2012. Startseite 
**Autobahn A2 (Autobahn A5, Weil am Rhein)
**Freiburgerstrasse (Baslerstrae, Weil am Rhein)
**Weilstrasse, Riehen (Haupstrae, Weil am Rhein)
**Lrracherstrasse, Riehen (Baslerstrae, Stetten, Lrrach)
**Inzlingerstrasse, Riehen (Riehenstrae, Inzlingen)
**Grenzacherstrasse (Hrnle, Grenzach-Wyhlen)

*Railway crossing
**Between Basel SBB and Basel Badischer Bahnhof  Basel Badischer Bahnhof, and all other railway property and stations on the right bank of the Rhine belong to DB and are classed as German customs territory. Immigration and customs checks are conducted at the platform exit tunnel for passengers leaving trains here.

Additionally there are many footpaths and cycle tracks crossing the border between Basel and Germany.

A panoramic view of Basel, looking North from the Mnster tower over Kleinbasel (smaller Basel). The blue tower in the centre, the Messeturm, was Switzerland's tallest building 2003-10; the bridge on the extreme right is the Wettsteinbrcke, Basel's second oldest bridge but recently replaced by a new structure. The first bridge on the left is the Mittlere Brcke (Middle or Central Bridge), the oldest bridge in Basel.

==Demographics==
Basel has a population () of . , 32.3% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Swiss Federal Statistical Office - Superweb database - Gemeinde Statistics 1981-2008 accessed 19 June 2010 Over the last 10 years (19992009 ) the population has changed at a rate of -0.3%. It has changed at a rate of 3.2% due to migration and at a rate of -3% due to births and deaths. Swiss Federal Statistical Office accessed 18-April-2011 

Most of the population () speaks German (129,592 or 77.8%), with Italian being second most common (9,049 or 5.4%) and French being third (4,280 or 2.6%). There are 202 people who speak Romansh. 

Of the population in the municipality 58,560 or about 35.2% were born in Basel and lived there in 2000. There were 1,396 or 0.8% who were born in the same canton, while 44,874 or 26.9% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 53,774 or 32.3% were born outside of Switzerland. 

In there were 898 live births to Swiss citizens and 621 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 1,732 deaths of Swiss citizens and 175 non-Swiss citizen deaths. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 834 while the foreign population increased by 446. There were 207 Swiss men and 271 Swiss women who emigrated from Switzerland. At the same time, there were 1756 non-Swiss men and 1655 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 278 and the non-Swiss population increased by 1138 people. This represents a population growth rate of 0.9%. 

, there were 70,502 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 70,517 married individuals, 12,435 widows or widowers and 13,104 individuals who are divorced. STAT-TAB Datenwrfel fr Thema 40.3 - 2000 accessed 2 February 2011 

 the average number of residents per living room was 0.59 which is about equal to the cantonal average of 0.58 per room. In this case, a room is defined as space of a housing unit of at least 4 m2 as normal bedrooms, dining rooms, living rooms, kitchens and habitable cellars and attics. About 10.5% of the total households were owner occupied, or in other words did not pay rent (though they may have a mortgage or a rent-to-own agreement). Urban Audit Glossary pg 17 

, there were 86,371 private households in the municipality, and an average of 1.8 persons per household. There were 44,469 households that consist of only one person and 2,842 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 88,646 households that answered this question, 50.2% were households made up of just one person and there were 451 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 20,472 married couples without children, 14,554 married couples with children There were 4,318 single parents with a child or children. There were 2,107 households that were made up of unrelated people and 2,275 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing. 

 there were 5,747 single family homes (or 30.8% of the total) out of a total of 18,631 inhabited buildings. There were 7,642 multi-family buildings (41.0%), along with 4,093 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (22.0%) and 1,149 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (6.2%). Of the single family homes 1090 were built before 1919, while 65 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single family homes (3,474) were built between 1919 and 1945. Federal Statistical Office STAT-TAB - Datenwrfel fr Thema 09.2 - Gebude und Wohnungen accessed 28 January 2011 

 there were 96,640 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 35,958. There were 11,957 single room apartments and 9,702 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 84,675 apartments (87.6% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 7,916 apartments (8.2%) were seasonally occupied and 4,049 apartments (4.2%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 2.6 new units per 1000 residents. 

 the average price to rent an average apartment in Basel was 1118.60 Swiss francs (CHF) per month (US$890, 500, 720 approx. exchange rate from 2003). The average rate for a one room apartment was 602.27 CHF (US$480, 270, 390), a two room apartment was about 846.52 CHF (US$680, 380, 540), a three room apartment was about 1054.14 CHF (US$840, 470, 670) and a six or more room apartment cost an average of 2185.24 CHF (US$1750, 980, 1400). The average apartment price in Basel was 100.2% of the national average of 1116 CHF. Swiss Federal Statistical Office-Rental prices 2003 data accessed 26 May 2010 The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0.74%. 

==Historical population==
The historical population is given in the following chart:
 Swiss Federal Statistical Office STAT-TAB Bevlkerungsentwicklung nach Region, 1850-2000 accessed 29 January 2011 

Colors=
 id:lightgrey value:gray(0.9)
 id:darkgrey value:gray(0.8)
ImageSize = width:960 height:210
PlotArea = height:150 left:100 bottom:50 right:100
AlignBars = justify
DateFormat = x.y
Period = from:0 till:220000
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
AlignBars = justify
ScaleMajor = gridcolor:darkgrey increment:40000 start:0
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:lightgrey increment:8000 start:0
PlotData=
 color:yellowgreen width:40 mark:(line,white) align:center
 bar:1850 from:start till:27844 text:"27,844"
 bar:1860 from:start till:38692 text:"38,692"
 bar:1870 from:start till:44868 text:"44,868"
 bar:1880 from:start till:61737 text:"61,737"
 bar:1888 from:start till:71131 text:"71,131"
 bar:1900 from:start till:109161 text:"109,161"
 bar:1910 from:start till:132276 text:"132,276"
 bar:1920 from:start till:135976 text:"135,976"
 bar:1930 from:start till:148063 text:"148,063"
 bar:1941 from:start till:162105 text:"162,105"
 bar:1950 from:start till:183543 text:"183,543"
 bar:1960 from:start till:206746 text:"206,746"
 bar:1970 from:start till:212857 text:"212,857"
 bar:1980 from:start till:182143 text:"182,143"
 bar:1990 from:start till:178428 text:"178,428"
 bar:2000 from:start till:166558 text:"166,558"

==Economy==
Basler Messeturm
Children's hospital in Basel
, Basel had an unemployment rate of 4.2%. , there were 18 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 9 businesses involved in this sector. 34,645 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 1,176 businesses in this sector. 120,130 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 8,908 businesses in this sector. There were 82,449 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 46.2% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 130,988. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 13, of which 10 were in agriculture and 4 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 33,171 of which 24,848 or (74.9%) were in manufacturing, 10 were in mining and 7,313 (22.0%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 97,804. In the tertiary sector; 12,880 or 13.2% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 11,959 or 12.2% were in the movement and storage of goods, 6,120 or 6.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, 4,186 or 4.3% were in the information industry, 10,752 or 11.0% were the insurance or financial industry, 13,695 or 14.0% were technical professionals or scientists, 6,983 or 7.1% were in education and 16,060 or 16.4% were in health care. Swiss Federal Statistical Office STAT-TAB Betriebszhlung: Arbeitssttten nach Gemeinde und NOGA 2008 (Abschnitte), Sektoren 1-3 accessed 28 January 2011 

, there were 121,842 workers who commuted into the municipality and 19,263 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net importer of workers, with about 6.3 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving. About 23.9% of the workforce coming into Basel are coming from outside Switzerland, while 1.0% of the locals commute out of Switzerland for work. Swiss Federal Statistical Office - Statweb accessed 24 June 2010 Of the working population, 49.2% used public transportation to get to work, and 18.7% used a private car. 

An annual Federal Swiss trade fair (Mustermesse) takes place in Kleinbasel on the right bank of the Rhine. Other important trade shows include "BaselWorld" (watches and jewelry), Art Basel, Orbit and Cultura.

The Swiss chemical industry operates largely from Basel, and Basel also has a large pharmaceutical industry. Novartis, Chen, Aric. "Going to Basel." The New York Times. 11 June 2006. Retrieved on 12 January 2010. Syngenta, Ciba Specialty Chemicals, Welcome to Ciba Clariant, Anna Blint: Clariant clareant. The beginnings of a specialty chemicals company, Campus Verlag, Frankfurt am Main/New York 2012, ISBN 978-3-593-39374-2. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basilea Pharmaceutica and Actelion are headquartered there. Pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals have become the modern focus of the city's industrial production.

Banking is extremely important to Basel:
* UBS AG maintains central offices in Basel, "UBS AG in Basel, Aeschenvorstadt 1." (PDF version) UBS AG. Retrieved on 2 July 2010. 
* The Bank for International Settlements is located within the city and is the central banker's bank. The bank is controlled by a board of directors, which is composed of the elite central bankers of 11 different countries (US, UK, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Sweden).
:According to the BIS, "The choice of Switzerland for the seat of the BIS was a compromise by those countries that established the BIS: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. When consensus could not be reached on locating the Bank in London, Brussels or Amsterdam, the choice fell on Switzerland. An independent, neutral country, Switzerland offered the BIS less exposure to undue influence from any of the major powers. Within Switzerland, Basel was chosen largely because of its location, with excellent railway connections in all directions, especially important at a time when most international travel was by train." 
:Created in May 1930, the BIS is owned by its member central banks, which are private entities. No agent of the Swiss public authorities may enter the premises without the express consent of the bank. The bank exercises supervision and police power over its premises. The bank enjoys immunity from criminal and administrative jurisdiction, as well as setting recommendations which become standard for the world's commercial banking system.
* Basel is also the location of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which is distinct from the BIS. It usually meets at the BIS premises in Basel. Responsible for the Basel Accords (Basel I and Basel II), this organization fundamentally changed Risk Management within its industry.

Basel has Switzerland's second tallest building (Basler Messeturm / 105m) and Switzerland's tallest tower (St. Chrischona TV tower / 250m).

Swiss International Air Lines, the national airline of Switzerland, is headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg in Saint-Louis, Haut-Rhin, France, near Basel. "Facts and figures." Swiss International Air Lines. Retrieved on 13 June 2009. "Plan interactif." Saint-Louis (Haut-Rhin). Retrieved on 25 September 2009. "Swiss International Air Lines Basel." Swiss International Air Lines. Retrieved on 24 September 2009. Prior to the formation of Swiss International Air Lines, the regional airline Crossair was headquartered near Basel. "Location." Crossair. Retrieved on 13 June 2009. 

==Quarters==
Basel is subdivided into 19 quarters (Quartiere). The municipalities of Riehen and Bettingen, outside the city limits of Basel, are included in the canton of Basel-City as rural quarters (Landquartiere).

 Quartier Area Population March 2012 Canton of Basel-Stadt Statistics, MS Excel document  Bevlkerung nach Wohnviertel im Mrz 2012 accessed 3 May 2012 Population Density people/km2 
 Altstadt Grossbasel (central Grossbasel) 37.63 2,044 
 Vorstdte (Suburbs) 89.66 4,638 
 Am Ring 90.98 10,512 
 Breite 68.39 8,655 
 St. Alban 294.46 10,681 
 Gundeldingen 123.19 18,621 
 Bruderholz 259.61 9,006 
 Bachletten 151.39 13,330 
 Gotthelf 46.62 6,784 
 Iselin 109.82 16,181 
 St. Johann 223.90 18,560 
 Altstadt Kleinbasel (central Kleinbasel) 24.21 2,276 
 Clara 23.66 4,043 
 Wettstein 75.44 5,386 
 Hirzbrunnen 305.32 8,676 
 Rosental 64.33 5,180 
 Mattus 59.14 16,056 
 Klybeck 91.19 7,234 
 Kleinhningen 136.11 2,772 
 City of Basel 2275.05 
 Bettingen 222.69 
 Riehen 1086.10 
 Canton of Basel-City 3583.84 

==Religion==
From the , 41,916 or 25.2% were Roman Catholic, while 39,180 or 23.5% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 4,567 members of an Orthodox church (or about 2.74% of the population), there were 459 individuals (or about 0.28% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 3,464 individuals (or about 2.08% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 1,325 individuals (or about 0.80% of the population) who were Jewish, and 12,368 (or about 7.43% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 746 individuals who were Buddhist, 947 individuals who were Hindu and 485 individuals who belonged to another church. 52,321 (or about 31.41% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 8,780 individuals (or about 5.27% of the population) did not answer the question. 

==Main sights==
The red sandstone Mnster, one of the foremost late-Romanesque/early Gothic buildings in the Upper Rhine, was badly damaged in the great earthquake of 1356, rebuilt in the 14th and 15th century, extensively reconstructed in the mid-19th century and further restored in the late 20th century. Basel Mnster website - Architecture 20th century accessed 4 May 2012 A memorial to Erasmus lies inside the Mnster. The City Hall from the 16th century is located on the Market Square and is decorated with fine murals on the outer walls and on the walls of the inner court.

Basel is also host to an array of buildings by internationally renowned architects. These include the Beyeler Foundation by Renzo Piano, or the Vitra complex in nearby Weil am Rhein, composed of buildings by architects such as Zaha Hadid (fire station), Frank Gehry (design museum), Alvaro Siza Vieira (factory building) and Tadao Ando (conference centre). Basel also features buildings by Mario Botta (Jean Tinguely Museum and Bank of International settlements) and Herzog & de Meuron (whose architectural practice is in Basel, and who are best known as the architects of Tate Modern in London). The city received the Wakker Prize in 1996.

 Basel Munster Mnsterplatz Rathaus, Basel's Town Hall 

===Heritage sites===
Basel features a great number of heritage sites of national significance. 

These include the entire Old Town of Basel as well as the following buildings and collections: 

;Churches and monasteries: Old Catholic Prediger Church, Bischofshof with Collegiate church at Rittergasse 1, Domhof at Mnsterplatz 1012, Former Carthusian House of St Margarethental, Catholic Church of St Antonius, Lohnhof (Former Augustinians Collegiate Church), Mission 21, Archive of the evangelischen Missionswerks Basel, Mnster (Cathedral), Reformed Elisabethenkirche, Reformed Johanneskirche, Reformed Leonhardskirche (former Augustinians Abbey), Reformed Martinskirche, Reformed Pauluskirche, Reformed Peterskirche, Reformed St. Albankirche with cloister and cemetrery, Reformed Theodorskirche, Synagoge at Eulerstrasse 2

;Secular buildings: Badischer Bahnhof (Train Station) with Fountain, Bank for International Settlements, Blaues Haus (Reichensteinerhof) at Rheinsprung 16, Bruderholzschul House at Fritz-Hauser-Strasse 20, Brunschwiler House at Hebelstrasse 15, Bandesbahnhof SBB (Train Station), Brgerspital, Caf Spitz (Merianflgel), Coop Schweiz Company's Central Archive, Depot of the Archologischen Bodenforschung des Kantons, Former Gallizian Paper Mill and Swiss Museum of Paper, Former Klingental-Kaserne with Klingental Church, Fasnachtsbrunnen (Fountain), Feuerschtzenhaus (Fire Station) at Schtzenmattstrasse 56, Fischmarktbrunnen (fountain), Geltenzunft at Marktplatz 13, Gymnasium (School) am Kohlenberg (St Leonhard), Hauptpost (Main Post Office), House zum Raben at Aeschenvorstadt 15, Hohenfirstenhof at Rittergasse 19, Holsteinerhof at Hebelstrasse 30, Mittlere Rhein Brcke (Mid-Rhine Bridge) Music Hall at Steinenberg 14, Ramsteinerhof at Rittergasse 7 and 9, Rathaus (Town Hall), Rundhof Building of the Schweizerischen Mustermesse, Safranzunft at Gerbergasse 11, Sandgrube at Riehenstrasse 154, Schlsschen (Manor House) Gundeldingen, Schnes Haus and Schner Hof at Nadelberg 6, Wasgenring Schoolhouse, Seidenhof with painting of Rudolf von Habsburg, Spalenhof at Spalenberg 12, Spiesshof at Heuberg 7, City Walls, Townhouse (formerly Post Office) at Stadthausgasse 13 / Totengsslein 6, Weisses House at Martinsgasse 3, Wildtsches House at Petersplatz 13, House Zum Neuen Singer at Speiserstrasse 98, Wolfgottesacker at Mnchensteinerstrasse 99, Zerkindenhof at Nadelberg 10

;Archaeological sites: the Celtic Settlement at Gasfabrik, Mnsterhgel and Old City (Late La Tne and medieval settlement)

;Museums, archives and collections: Anatomical Museum of the University Basel, Berri-Villen and Museum of Ancient Art and Ludwig Collection, Former Franciscan Barefoot Order Church and Basel Historical Museum, Company Archive of Novartis, House zum Kirschgarten which is part of the Basel Historical Museum, Historic Archive Roche and Industrial Complex Hoffmann-La Roche, Jewish Museum of Switzerland, Caricature & Cartoon Museum Basel, Karl Barth-Archive, Kleines Klingental (Lower Klingen Valley) with Museum Klingental, Art Museum with Copperplate Collection, Natural History Museum of Basel and the Museum of Cultures Basel, Museum of Culture and Natural History, Museum of Modern Art Basel with the E. Hoffmann collection, St. Alban-Rheinweg 60, Museum Jean Tinguely Basel, Music Museum, Pharmacy Historical Museum of the Universitt Basel, Poster Collection of the Schule fr Gestaltung (School for Design), Swiss Business Archives, Sculpture Hall,Sports Museum of Switzerland, Archives of the Canton of Basel-Stadt, UBS AG Corporate Archives, University Library with manuscripts and music collection, Zoologischer Garten

File:Museum der Kulturen 2008-03-30.jpg|Natural History Museum
File:Basler Munster.jpg|Basel Mnster
File:Mittlere Brcke.jpg|Mittlere Rhein Brcke (Mid-Rhine Bridge)
File:Basler Kunstmuseum.jpg| Kunstmuseum Basel
File:Haus zum Kirschgarten 2008-03-30.jpg|House zum Kirschgarten
File:Basel Barfsserkirche Inneres 11-05-2008.jpg| Former Franciscan Barefoot Order Church
File:Basle Bahnhof Trainstation Switzerland.jpg|Basel SBB railway station
File:Antikenmuseum Basel 2008-03-30.jpg|Berri-Villen and Antikenmuseum Basel
File:BankIntZahlungsausgleich.jpg|Bank for International Settlements
File:Basel, straatzicht Steinenberg-Sankt Alban Graben foto3 2013-07-27 09.48.jpg|Steinenberg-Sankt Alban Graben

==Education==
The law and economy faculty of the University of Basel
Inauguration ceremony of the University of Basel, 1460

Basel hosts Switzerland's oldest university, the University of Basel, dating from 1460. Erasmus, Paracelsus, Daniel Bernoulli, Leonhard Euler, Jacob Burckhardt, Friedrich Nietzsche and Karl Barth worked here.

In 2007, the ETH Zrich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zrich) established the Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering (D-BSSE) in Basel. The creation of the D-BSSE was driven by a Swiss-wide research initiative SystemsX, and was jointly supported by funding from the ETH Zrich, the Swiss Government, the Swiss University Conference (SUC) and private industry. 

Basel is renowned for various scientific societies, as the Entomological Society of Basel (Entomologische Gesellschaft Basel, EGB), which celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2005. EGB website-Wer sind wir accessed 14 may 2012 

Basel counts several International Schools including academia International School, cole Franaise de Ble, Freies Gymnasium Basel, Gymnasium am Mnsterplatz, Schweizerisch-italienische Primarschule "Sandro Pertini", Swiss International School (Basel), International School of Basel in the neighbouring canton of Baselland and the Black Forest Academy in Germany.

In Basel about 57,864 or (34.7%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 27,603 or (16.6%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a Fachhochschule). Of the 27,603 who completed tertiary schooling, 44.4% were Swiss men, 31.1% were Swiss women, 13.9% were non-Swiss men and 10.6% were non-Swiss women. 

, there were 5,820 students in Basel who came from another municipality, while 1,116 residents attended schools outside the municipality. 

Basel is home to at least 65 libraries. Some of the largest include; the Universittsbibliothek Basel (main university library), the special libraries of the Universitt Basel, the Allgemein Bibliotheken der GGG Basel, the Library of the Pdagogische Hochschule, the Library of the Hochschule fr Soziale Arbeit and the Library of the Hochschule fr Wirtschaft. There was a combined total () of 8,443,643 books or other media in the libraries, and in the same year a total of 1,722,802 items were loaned out. Swiss Federal Statistical Office, list of libraries accessed 14 May 2010 

==Politics==
Geo-politically, the city of Basel functions as the capital of the Swiss half-canton of Basel-Stadt, though several of its suburbs are located in the half-canton of Basel-Landschaft or the canton of Aargau. A few outer suburbs are even located in France and Germany.

In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SP which received 37.1% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SVP (18.08%), the Green Party (12.97%) and the FDP (10.99%). In the federal election, a total of 51,012 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 51.4%. Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Nationalratswahlen 2007: Strke der Parteien und Wahlbeteiligung, nach Gemeinden/Bezirk/Canton accessed 28 May 2010 

==Energy==
Basel is at the forefront of a national vision to more than halve energy use in Switzerland by 2050. In order to research, develop and commercialise the technologies and techniques required for the country to become a '2000 Watt society', a number of projects have been set up since 2001 in the Basel metropolitan area. These including demonstration buildings constructed to MINERGIE or Passivhaus standards, electricity generation from renewable energy sources, Geothermal project shakes Basel again and vehicles using natural gas, hydrogen and biogas. The Basel pilot region of the 2000 Watt Society 

A hot dry rock geothermal energy project was cancelled in 2009 since it caused induced seismicity in Basel.

==Notable people born or resident in Basel==

*Chiara Banchini (born 1946), violinist and conductor.
*Tilo Wolff (born 1972), industrial producer, vocalist and keyboards (Hall of Sermon, Lacrimosa, Snakeskin)
*Ana Ivanovi (born 1987), tennis player.
*Karl Barth (18861968), Reformed Protestant theologian.
*Shemsi Beqiri (born 1986), kickboxer.
*Bernoulli family
**Daniel Bernoulli (17001782), mathematician.
**James Bernoulli (16541705), mathematician.
**Johann Bernoulli (16671748), mathematician.
*Peter Birkhuser (19111976), painter.
*Arnold Bcklin (1827-1901), painter
*Markus Brderlin (19582014), art historian, curator, writer and director of the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg.
*Gottlieb Burckhardt (18361907), psychiatrist, father of modern psychosurgery.
*Jacob Burckhardt (18181897), historian, theologian, philosopher.
*Florian Burkhardt (born 1974), composer, author.
*John Calvin (born 1509), minister.
*Arthur Cohn (born 1927), film producer.
*Jean Daetwyler (19071994), alphorn composer.
*Eren Derdiyok (born 1988), footballer.
*Erasmus (c.14661536), Biblical scholar, humanist, theologian.
*Leonhard Euler (17071783), mathematician.
*Roger Federer (born 1981), tennis player.
*John Foxe (15171587), English Protestant and Marian exile.
*Alexander Frei (born 1979), footballer.
*Katy French (19832007), model and socialite.
*Urs Graf (1485-possibly 1530), Renaissance print-maker and artist.
*Georg Friedrich Haas (born 1953), Austrian composer.
*Jakob Emanuel Handmann (17181781), painter.
*Johann Peter Hebel (17601826), poet and author.
*Albert Hofmann (19062008), chemist, discoverer of LSD.
*Hans Holbein the Younger (c. 1497- 1543) German painter and printmaker of the Renaissance.
*Agostino Imondi (1975), filmmaker
*Niels Kai Jerne (19111994), immunologist
*Carl Gustav Jung (18751961), psychiatrist.
*Lucius Munatius Plancus (c.87 BCc.15 BC), Basel's founder.
*Merian family
**Matthus Merian 15931650, engraver and publisher.
**Christoph Merian (18001858), banker and businessman.
*Joachim Meyer (c.1537?1571), fencer and author.
*Friedrich Nietzsche (18441900), German philosopher.
*arko Dolinar (19202003), Croatian scientist and table tennis player
*Paracelsus (14931541), scientist.
*Ricco (19151972), painter.
*Leonhard Thurneysen (15311596), alchemist.
*Dieter Roth (1930-1998), artist.
*Paul Sacher (19061999), conductor, archivist and musical patron
*Frithjof Schuon (19071998), religious philosopher.
*Adrian Sieber (born 1972), singer.
*Hopkinson Smith (born 1946), American lutenist.
*Andreas Vesalius (1446), pioneering anatomist.
*Gustav Bertha (Gordon Bell) (born 1969), singer-songwriter.
*Hakan Yakin (born 1977), footballer.
*Alice Eckenstein (18901984), Swiss child rescuer in occupied Belgium during WW I.
*Andreas Lscher (born 1961), architect, professor and author
*Caroline Jaden Stussi, actress

==Sport==
Basel has a reputation in Switzerland as a successful sporting city. The football club FC Basel continues to be successful and in recognition of this the city was one of the Swiss venues for the 2008 European Championships, as well as Geneva, Zrich and Bern. The championships were jointly hosted by Switzerland and Austria. BSC Old Boys and Concordia Basel are the other football teams in Basel.

Among the most popular sports in Switzerland is Ice hockey. Basel is home to the EHC Basel who play in the Swiss National League B. They play their home games at the St. Jakob Arena.

Basel features a large football stadium that has been awarded four stars by UEFA, a modern ice hockey hall, and an admitted sports hall.

A large indoor tennis event takes place in Basel every October. Some of the best ATP-Professionals play every year at the Swiss Indoors, including Switzerland's biggest sporting hero and frequent participant Roger Federer, a Basel native who describes the city as "one of the most beautiful cities in the world".

==Culture==
"Switzerland protecting Strasbourg" by Bartoldi
Basel has a thriving cultural life. (In 1997, it contended to become the "European Capital of Culture", though the honor went instead to Thessaloniki) Basel is the home of the Schola Cantorum Basiliensis, founded in 1933, a worldwide centre for research on and performance of music from the Medieval through the Baroque eras. Theater Basel presents a busy schedule of plays in addition to being home to the city's opera and ballet companies. Basel is home to the largest orchestra in Switzerland, the Sinfonieorchester Basel. It is also the home of the Kammerorchester Basel, which is recording the complete symphonies of Ludwig van Beethoven for the Sony label led by its music director Giovanni Antonini. The Schola Cantorum and the Basler Kammerorchester were both founded by the conductor Paul Sacher who went on to commission works by many leading composers. The Paul Sacher Foundation, opened in 1986, houses a major collection of manuscripts, including the entire Igor Stravinsky archive.
The baroque orchestras La Cetra and Capriccio Basel are also based in Basel. In May 2004, the fifth European Festival of Youth Choirs (Europisches Jugendchorfestival, or EJCF) choir festival opened: this Basel tradition started in 1992. Host of this festival is the local Basel Boys Choir.

===Events===
The carnival of the city of Basel (Basler Fasnacht) is a major cultural event in the year. The carnival is the biggest in Switzerland and attracts large crowds every year, despite the fact that it starts at exactly four in the morning (Morgestraich) on a winter Monday. The Fasnacht asserts Basel's Protestant history by commencing the revelry five days after Ash Wednesday and continuing day and night for exactly 72 hours. Almost all study and work in the old city cease. Dozens of fife and drum clubs parade in medieval guild tradition with fantastical masks and illuminated lanterns, eventually yielding to other loud and irreverent festivity. Basel is also host to the Basel Tattoo and a number of fairs.

===Media===
Basler Zeitung ("BaZ"), TagesWoche and bz Basel are the local newspapers. The local TV Station is called telebasel.

===Cuisine===
There are a number of culinary specialties originating in Basel, including Basler Lckerli cookies and Mssmogge candies.

===Zoo===
the Antelope House at Zoo Basel
Zoo Basel is, with over 1.7 million visitors per year, Besucherrekord beim Zolli. Basler Zeitung, published 2012-2-23 the most visited tourist attraction in Basel and the second most visited tourist attraction in Switzerland. Zolli beliebt. 20min.ch, published 2009-2-23 

Established in 1874, Zoo Basel is the oldest zoo in Switzerland and, by number of animals, the largest. Through its history, Zoo Basel has had several breeding successes, such as the first worldwide Indian rhinoceros birth Erffnung des Panzernashornhauses. Zoo Basel, written 2006-09-26, retrieved 2009-12-3 and Greater flamingo hatch in a zoo. These and other achievements led Forbes Travel to rank Zoo Basel as one of the fifteen best zoos in the world in 2008. Forbes Travel. GetListy, retrieved 2010-3-26 

Despite its international fame, Basel's population remains attached to Zoo Basel, which is entirely surrounded by the city of Basel. Evidence of this is the millions of donations money each year, as well as Zoo Basel's unofficial name: locals lovingly call "their" zoo "Zolli" by which is it known throughout Basel and most of Switzerland.

===Museums===
Kunstmuseum
Tinguely Museum
The Basel museums cover a broad and diverse spectrum of collections with a marked concentration in the fine arts. They house numerous holdings of international significance. The over three dozen institutions yield an extraordinarily high density of museums compared to other cities of similar size and draw over one million visitors annually.

Constituting an essential component of Basel culture and cultural policy, the museums are the result of closely interwoven private and public collecting activities and promotion of arts and culture going back to the 16th century. The public museum collection was first created back in 1661 and represents the oldest public collection in continuous existence. Since the late 1980s, various private collections have been made accessible to the public in new purpose-built structures that have been recognized as acclaimed examples of avant-garde museum architecture.

*Antikenmuseum Basel und Sammlung Ludwig Ancient cultures of the mediterranean museum 
*Augusta Raurica Roman open-air museum 
*Basel Paper Mill () 
*Beyeler Foundation (Foundation Beyeler) Beyeler Museum (Fondation Beyeler)
*Botanical Garden Basel One of the oldest botanical gardens in the world
*Caricature & Cartoon Museum Basel () 
*Dollhouse Museum () 
*Historical Museum Basel () 
*Kunsthalle Basel Modern and contemporary art museum 
*Kunstmuseum Basel Upper Rhenish and Flemish paintings, drawings from 1400 to 1600 and 19th- to 21st-century art 
*Monteverdi Automuseum 
*Museum of Cultures Basel () Large collections on European and non-Europeancultural life 
*Museum of Contemporary Art Art from the 1960s up to the present 
*Music Museum () of the Basel Historic Museum
*Natural History Museum of Basel () 
*Pharmazie-Historisches Museum der Universitt Basel 
*Puppenhausmuseum  a museum houring the largest teddy bear collection in Europe.
*Schaulager Modern and contemporary art museum 
*Swiss Architecture Museum () 
*Tinguely Museum Life and work of the major Swiss iron sculptor Jean Tinguely 
*Vitra Design Museum Museum in Weil am Rhein near Basel 

==See also==

*Basel German (language)

==Notes==

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography

*
* Basel-Stadt | Statistik (in German). Official government website. http://www.statistik-bs.ch/
* Gossman, Lionel. Basel in the Age of Burckhardt: A Study in Unseasonable Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. ISBN 0-226-30498-1.
* Gossman, Lionel. Orpheus Philologus: Bachofen versus Mommsen on the Study of Antiquity. American Philosophical Society, 1983. ISBN 1-4223-7467-X.
* Kearney, Shirley. Basel: A Cultural Experience. Spalentor Verlag, ISBN 3-908142-23-7, ISBN 978-3-908142-23-2.
* Wood, Susan, The Proprietary Church in the Medieval West, 2006, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0198206976, 9780198206972, google books

==External links==

*Official Website
*Official tourism site
*Rhine Online: an English language guide to Basel, the Alsace and Baden Wuerrtemberg
*EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg, Basel-Mulhouse Airport
*Overview of museums in Basel or basel museums
*Portrait of Basel's tramways
*Basel Tourism & Hotels
*Interview with Theodora Vischer, director of the Schaulager in Basel, Switzerland
*Website for expats moving to or living in Basel
*Website of the regional television of Basel - Enjoy daily news and stories about Baselcity, Baselland and the green Fricktal and Laufental, together with its citizens

 
 

 



[[Black Russian]]

The Black Russian is a cocktail of vodka and coffee liqueur. It contains either three parts vodka and two parts coffee liqueur, per the Kahla bottle's label, or five parts vodka to two parts coffee liqueur, per IBA specified ingredients. Traditionally the drink is made by pouring the vodka over ice cubes or cracked ice in an old-fashioned glass, followed by the coffee liqueur. 

This combination first appeared in 1949, and is ascribed to Gustave Tops, a Belgian barman, who created it at the Hotel Metropole in Brussels in honor of Perle Mesta, then U.S. ambassador to Luxembourg. The cocktail owes its name to the use of vodka, a typical Russian spirit, and the blackness of the coffee liqueur.

==Variations==
* Dirty Black Russian, Tall Black Russian, Australian Black Russian or Colorado Bulldog: served in a highball glass and topped up with Cola. 
* Black Magic: served with a dash of lemon juice and a lemon twist to garnish. 
* Irish Russian or Smooth Black Russian: served with a head of Guinness stout. 
* Brown Russian: served in a highball glass and topped with Ginger Ale. 
* Peri's Black Russian: served in a high ball glass with vanilla vodka rather than plain, topped with coke
* Vader: served with Jgermeister.
*California Russian: served with a shot of Triple Sec and a slice of orange.

==See also==
* White Russian, which adds a dairy ingredient (cream or milk) to the drink

==References==



[[BRP]]

BRP can mean:
* Bachelor of Resource and Environmental Planning
* Baloch Republican Party, a Baloch nationalist political party in Pakistan
* Basic Role-Playing
* Business Recovery Plan, another name for a disaster recovery plan
* Bilingual Review Press, a publishing house affiliated with Arizona State University
* Bombardier Recreational Products
* Brief reactive psychosis
* British Racing Partnership, a defunct British motor racing team
* Blue Ridge Parkway
* Bathroom Privileges
* Barko ng Republika ng Pilipinas or Bapor ng Republika ng Pilipinas (English: Ship of the Republic of the Philippines), the prefix of Philippine Navy ship names
* Brigada Ramona Parra
* Balance Responsible Party, organisation that plans and achieves an hourly balance between the supply and withdrawal of electricity
*brioche-purl stitch, a kind of stitch in brioche knitting



[[Bunnies & Burrows]]

Bunnies & Burrows (B&B) is a role-playing game (RPG) inspired by the novel Watership Down. GURPS Bunnies & Burrows (1992), Steve Jackson Games, ISBN 978-1-55634-237-0 Published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976, the game centered on intelligent rabbits. It introduced several innovations to role-playing game design, being the first game to allow players to have non-humanoid roles, and the first to have detailed martial arts and skill systems. Fantasy Games Unlimited published a second edition of the game in 1982, and the game was modified and republished by Steve Jackson Games as an official GURPS supplement in 1992.

As rabbits, player characters are faced with dangers mirroring those in the real world. The only true "monsters" in the game are humans, but there are many predators and natural hazards. The characters' position in the food chain promotes an emphasis on role-playing and problem solving over combat.

==History==

Originally published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976, only two years after the first role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons was published, this edition is now long out of print. The game was inspired by Richard Adams' fantasy novel Watership Down, and the players were given the opportunity to take on the role of rabbits. As such, the game emphasized role-playing over combat for, according to Steffan O'Sullivan, "You're playing a rabbit, after all  how much combat do you want to do?" The poor production values provided a barrier to the acceptance of the game. The art, by Charles Loving, was "sketchy and of poor quality", while the document as a whole gave the appearance of having been typewritten. 

Building on this first edition, in 1979, B. Dennis Sustare wrote "Different Worlds Present the World of Druid's Valley: A Bunnies & Burrows Campaign" in Different Worlds, a magazine published by Chaosium. It detailed how to combine the world of Bunnies & Burrows with other fantasy worlds. This was followed by the mini-adventure "The Jackrabbits' Lair", written by Daniel J. Maxfield, in Pegasus, a magazine published by Judges Guild. 

A second edition of Bunnies & Burrows was printed in 1982 by Fantasy Games Unlimited, although the continuing popularity of the first edition is evidenced by how it was still being actively played in 2008. 

During a rise of "retro" games in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Steve Jackson Games entered negotiations with Dennis Sustare and Scott Robinson, the current owners of the Bunnies & Burrows copyright, to publish an official GURPS supplement. In 1988, O'Sullivan wrote an unofficial conversion of Bunnies & Burrows to GURPS while the negotiations continued. He indicated that he hoped to one day work on the official supplement. GURPS Bunnies & Burrows was published in 1992. 

The setting also had an unofficial conversion in 2004 to be used in Risus: The Anything RPG by Boyd Mayberry under their "Rules for Free Fan-Supplements and Articles". 

==Gameplay==

Bunnies & Burrows was the first role-playing game to allow for non-humanoid play. In addition, it was also the first role-playing game to have detailed martial arts rules (known as "Bun Fu") and the first attempt at a skill system. For its time, the game was considered "light years" ahead of the Original Dungeons & Dragons. 

Players of Bunnies & Burrows take the role of rabbits as their player characters. Interaction with many different animal species is part of normal gameplay. Humans, whose thought processes and motivations are completely alien, are the only monster to be encountered. 

Bunnies & Burrows has the advantage of offering players an intuitive grasp of relative dangers and appropriate actions not possible in game worlds that are substantially fictional. For example, a player is told their character is confronted with a fox. There is an immediate intuition on the amount of peril a rabbit is facing. Although player characters are substantially weaker than many of the dangers they face, the game is one of the first to encourage problem solving and outwitting obstacles, rather than out-fighting them. 

The mechanics of the role-playing game system were created specifically for Bunnies & Burrows, common at the time of its original publishing. It features eight abilities and eight classes. The task resolution system is based on rolls of percentile dice. Although newer systems have updated game mechanics significantly, the ideas presented in Bunnies & Burrows created the framework for modern role-playing games. 

==Reception==
Although the game had "incredible role-playing potential", the concept of role-playing rabbits can be viewed as bizarre, and as such at least one commentator believes that "most people thought it was stupid" when it was first released. This view is mirrored by Lev Lafayette, who, when describing his first exposure to the game, says "Oh, how we laughed. 'Who on earth would want to roleplay a rabbit?', we mocked. 'What's the point? You can't do anything!'". 

==Publications==

===Books===
*Bunnies & Burrows (1976), Fantasy Games Unlimited
*Bunnies & Burrows (Second edition) (1982), Fantasy Games Unlimited

===Articles===
*Different Worlds Present the World of Druid's Valley: A Bunnies & Burrows Campaign (B. Dennis Sustare, 1979). Different Worlds, Chaosium
*The Jackrabbits' Lair (Daniel J. Maxfield). Pegasus, Judges Guild

==See also==

==References==



[[Bundaberg Rum]]

Bundaberg Rum is a dark rum produced in Bundaberg, Australia. It is often referred to as "Bundy".
The Bundaberg Distilling Company owns its own cola-producing facility, which supplies the cola for its ready-to-drink Bundaberg Rum and Cola products.

==History==

Bundaberg Rum originated because the local sugar mills had a problem with what to do with the waste molasses after the sugar was extracted (it was heavy, difficult to transport and the costs of converting it to stock feed were rarely worth the effort). Sugar men first began to think of the profits that could be made from distilling. The vital meeting was held at the Royal Hotel on 1 August 1885, W M C Hickson served as the chairman, and other notables in attendance included all the big sugar mill owners of that time, W G Farquhar, F L Nott,S McDougall, T Penny, S H Bravo and A H Young, all to become the first directors of the Company. They started with a capital of 5,000 pounds. Information from 'Bundy A Centenary History' by Keith Dunstan. 

The Bundaberg Distilling Company began its operations in 1888.

Bundaberg rum was first produced in 1889, production ceased from 1907 to 1914 and from 1936 to 1939 after fires, the second of which caused rum from the factory to spill into the nearby Burnett River. Julia Robinson. Voices of Queensland: words from the sunshine state. Oxford University Press, 2001. 

H T Christsen Pty Ltd operated their own Bundaberg Rum bottling plant in Bourbong Street, Bundaberg at the rear of their large grocery and hardware business in the centre of town. The spirit was sold at UP and OP strength from their business. Spokesperson for the original family, Mr Rod Patch, recalls the origins of the shape of the current "Bundy Bottle". It originated from the Bushells Coffee Chicory bottle that Bundaberg folks sold to his grandfather at the firm for one penny a bottle, after which they were washed and filled with the famous spirit. The shape remains the same but the capacity has been increased to the current 700ml. Patch's great grandfather, Hans Truval Christsen, a Danish immigrant from Copenhagen and his son Frederick Christsen had an employment policy of employing staff from the Salvation Army faith in the rum bottling process as they were less likely to be tempted to sample the spirit. The Christsen family supported settlement farming families through hard times and these good deeds were acknowledged with the naming of Christsen Park at Bargara Beach.

In 1961, the company introduced the polar bear as its unusual choice of mascot, to imply that the rum could ward off the coldest chill. 

In 2000, the Bundaberg Rum company and distillery were sold to British company Diageo. Diago Press Release  Diageo acquires Bundaberg Rum from Bundaberg Sugar Group Ltd via Just-Drinks 

==Distillery==
Visitors Centre & Big Bundy Bottle
The Bundaberg Rum distillery is open to visitors for tours of the facility. There is also a museum which offers free samples of Bundaberg Rum products for visitors.

==Sponsorship==
Bundaberg Rum is a major sponsor of the Australian Wallabies rugby union team and also sponsors the Bundaberg Rum Rugby Series. Bundaberg is also a sponsor of the NSW Waratahs. Sponsors & Partners  NSW Rugby Archived on 24 January 2009 Bundaberg Rum sponsored the rugby league ANZAC Test till 2009. Bundaberg Rum signed a 5 year deal with the NRL to be the official dark rum of the NRL. They are also the naming-rights sponsor of NRL Friday Night Football.

==Recognitions==
Bundaberg Rum has been distinguished with numerous awards. In 2011, Bundaberg Rum's Master Distillers' Collective rum was launched, with the first three releases, the 10 Year Old, Port Barrel and Golden Reserve, winning awards in the global stage. 

==Advertising==

Bundaberg Rum has also been criticised for targeting its advertising towards young people and boys, through television commercials during NRL broadcasts, and other promotions. ABC Radio National, 3 Nov 2002 Program: Background briefing Archived on 31 March 2009 Community Alcohol Action Network (CAAN) 'Grogwatch' Archived on 20 August 2006 The Bundaberg Rum Bear advertisements first appeared in 1994. They were designed to soften rum's aggressive image (below) and broaden its appeal from the traditional older male drinker to a more sociable audience. Greg Alder, Creative Director, Leo Burnett Connaghan & May, Bundaberg Rum advertising agency They have been cited as one of the favourite ads among Australia's youth. B&T Magazine, 20 December 2004 Story: "Young adults are a paradox for marketers" 

==Associations with aggressive drinkers==
Bundaberg Rum has been labelled the drink for yobbos, Bundy drinkers 'not yobs'  The Age, 7 March 2005 after some bars reported that "bundy drinkers are a lot louder, and more disruptive than other patrons." In 2005, four bars in Brisbane banned the rum products, claiming it makes drinkers aggressive and attracts the wrong crowd. "They will abuse bar staff, half a dozen a night, normally gangs of blokes, the marketing is directed at yobbos," one bar owner told The Age newspaper. The Bundaberg Rum Distillery admitted it was aware its brand had a reputation of being associated with aggression, and said it may change its advertising to dispel its "yobbo" image. Bundy fights yobbo claims - B&T Magazine, 15 March 2005 

==See also==

*Alcohol Advertising
*ANZAC Test
*Beenleigh Rum
*List of rum producers
*1936 Bundaberg distillery fire

==References==

==External links==
* Bundaberg Rum  official website
* Diageo  parent company



[[Ben Nevis]]

Ben Nevis (, ) is the highest mountain in the British Isles. Standing at 1344 m above sea level, it is located at the western end of the Grampian Mountains in the Lochaber area of the Scottish Highlands, close to the town of Fort William.

The mountain is a popular destination, attracting an estimated 100,000 ascents a year, around three-quarters of which use the Pony Track from Glen Nevis. 
The 700 m cliffs of the north face are among the highest in the United Kingdom, providing classic scrambles and rock climbs of all difficulties for climbers and mountaineers. They are also the principal locations in the UK for ice climbing.

The summit, which is the collapsed dome of an ancient volcano, features the ruins of an observatory which was continuously staffed between 1883 and 1904. The meteorological data collected during this period are still important for understanding Scottish mountain weather. C. T. R. Wilson was inspired to invent the cloud chamber after a period spent working at the observatory.

== Etymology ==
"Ben Nevis" is an Anglicisation of the Scottish Gaelic name "Beinn Nibheis". "Beinn" is the most common Gaelic word for "mountain", "Nibheis" is variously understood, though the word is commonly translated as "malicious" or "venomous". Butterfield, The High Mountains, p. 96 An alternative interpretation is that "Beinn Nibheis" derives from "beinn namh-bhathais", from "namh" "heavens, clouds" and "bathais" "top of a man's head". One translation would therefore be "the mountain with its head in the clouds", though "mountain of Heaven" is also frequently given. 

As is common for many Scottish mountains, it is known both to locals and visitors as simply "the Ben". 

== Geography ==
Ben Nevis forms a massif with its neighbour to the northeast, Crn Mr Dearg, to which it is linked by the Crn Mr Dearg Arte. Ordnance Survey Landranger 41. Both mountains are among the nine in Scotland over 4000 ft; Aonach Beag and Aonach Mr are also on the Nevis massif. Ben Macdui, Braeriach, Cairn Toul, Sgor an Lochain Uaine and Cairn Gorm are in the Cairngorms.

Western flank of the Nevis massif; from Sgrr Dhmhnuill
The western and southern flanks of Ben Nevis rise 1200 m in about 2 km from the floor of Glen Nevis  the longest and steepest hill slope in Britain W. H. Murray, The Companion Guide to the West Highlands of Scotland  with the result that the mountain presents an aspect of massive bulk on this side. To the north, by contrast, cliffs drop some 600 m to Coire Leis. This corrie contains the Charles Inglis Clark Memorial Hut (known as the CIC Hut), a private mountain hut located at 680 m above sea level, owned by the Scottish Mountaineering Club and used as a base for the many climbing routes on the mountain's north face.

In addition to the main 1344 m summit, Ben Nevis has two subsidiary "tops" listed in Munro's Tables, both of which are called Crn Dearg ("red hill"). The higher of these, at 1221 m, is situated to the northwest, and is often mistaken for Ben Nevis itself in views from the Fort William area. The other Crn Dearg (1,020 m) juts out into Glen Nevis on the mountain's southwestern side. A lower hill, Meall an t-Suidhe (711 m), is located further west, forming a saddle with Ben Nevis which contains a small loch, Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe. The popular tourist path from Glen Nevis skirts the side of this hill before ascending Ben Nevis' broad western flank.

=== Geology ===
Ben Nevis is all that remains of a Devonian volcano that met a cataclysmic end in the Carboniferous period around 350 million years ago. Evidence near the summit shows light coloured granite (which had cooled in subterranean chambers several kilometres beneath the surface) lies among dark basaltic lavas (that only form on the surface). The two lying side-by-side is evidence the huge volcano collapsed in on itself creating an explosion comparative to Thera (2nd millennium BC) or Krakatoa (1883). 
The mountain is now all that remains of the imploded inner dome of the volcano. 
Its form has been extensively shaped by glaciation. 
 

Research has shown igneous rock from the Devonian period (around 400 million years ago) intrudes into the surrounding metamorphic schists; the intrusions take the form of a series of concentric ring dikes. The innermost of these, known as the Inner Granite, constitutes the southern bulk of the mountain above Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe, and also the neighbouring ridge of Crn Mr Dearg; Meall an t-Suidhe forms part of the Outer Granite, which is redder in colour. The summit dome itself, together with the steep northern cliffs, are composed of andesite and basaltic lavas. McKirdy, Alan Gordon, John & Crofts, Roger (2007) Land of Mountain and Flood: The Geology and Landforms of Scotland. Edinburgh. Birlinn. Pages 1146. Gillen, Con (2003) Geology and landscapes of Scotland. Harpenden. Terra. Page 80. 

=== Climate ===
The steep south face of Ben Nevis from Sgurr a' Mhim
Ben Nevis' altitude, maritime location and topography frequently lead to cool and cloudy weather conditions, which can pose a danger to ill-equipped walkers. According to the observations carried out at the summit observatory from 18831904, fog was present on the summit for almost 80% of the time between November and January, and 55% of the time in May and June. The average winter temperature was around -5 C, and the mean monthly temperature for the year was -0.5 C. Murray, Companion Guide, p. 221 In an average year the summit sees 261 gales, and receives 4350 mm of rainfall, compared to only 2050 mm in nearby Fort William, 840 mm in Inverness and 580 mm in London. Rainfall on Ben Nevis is about twice as high in the winter as it is in the spring and summer. Snow can be found on the mountain almost all year round, particularly in the gullies of the north face  with the higher reaches of Observatory Gully holding snow until September most years and sometimes until the new snows of the following season.

== History ==
Ben Nevis viewed from Neptune's Staircase

The first recorded ascent of Ben Nevis was made on 17 August 1771 by James Robertson, an Edinburgh botanist, who was in the region to collect botanical specimens. Another early ascent was in 1774 by John Williams, who provided the first account of the mountain's geological structure. John Keats climbed the mountain in 1818, comparing the ascent to "mounting ten St. Pauls without the convenience of a staircase". Hodgkiss, The Central Highlands, p. 117 It was not until 1847 that Ben Nevis was confirmed by the Ordnance Survey as the highest mountain in Britain and Ireland, ahead of its rival Ben Macdhui.

The summit observatory was built in the summer of 1883, and would remain in operation for 21 years. The first path to the summit was built at the same time as the observatory and was designed to allow ponies to carry up supplies, with a maximum gradient of one in five. The opening of the path and the observatory made the ascent of the Ben increasingly popular, all the more so after the arrival of the West Highland Railway in Fort William in 1894. Around this time the first of several proposals was made for a rack railway to the summit, none of which came to fruition. 

In 2000, the Ben Nevis Estate, comprising all of the south side of the mountain including the summit, was bought by the Scottish conservation charity the John Muir Trust.

== Ascent routes ==
An old postcard view showing the path up Ben Nevis
The 1883 Pony Track to the summit (also known as the Ben Path, the Mountain Path or the Tourist Route) remains the simplest and most popular route of ascent. It begins at Achintee on the east side of Glen Nevis about 2 km from Fort William town centre, at around 20 metres above sea level. Bridges from the Visitor Centre and the youth hostel now allow access from the west side of Glen Nevis. Butterfield, The High Mountains, p. 97 The path climbs steeply to the saddle by Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe (also known as the 'Halfway Lake') at 570 m, then ascends the remaining 700 metres up the stony west flank of Ben Nevis in a series of zig-zags. The path is regularly maintained but running water, uneven rocks and loose scree make it hazardous and slippery in places. Thanks to the zig-zags, the path is not unusually steep apart from in the initial stages, but inexperienced walkers should be aware that the descent is relatively arduous and wearing on the knees.

The CMD Arte under deep snow in spring, from the summit of Crn Mr Dearg
A route popular with experienced hillwalkers starts at Torlundy, a few miles north-east of Fort William on the A82 road, and follows the path alongside the Allt a' Mhuilinn. It can also be reached from Glen Nevis by following the Pony Track as far as Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe, then descending slightly to the CIC Hut. The route then ascends Crn Mr Dearg and continues along the Crn Mr Dearg Arte ("CMD Arte") before climbing steeply to the summit of Ben Nevis. This route involves a total of 1,500 metres of ascent and requires modest scrambling ability and a head for heights. Butterfield, The High Mountains, p. 98 In common with other approaches on this side of the mountain, it has the advantage of giving an extensive view of the cliffs of the north face, which are hidden from the Pony Track. 

It is also possible to climb Ben Nevis from the Nevis Gorge car park at Steal at the head of the road up Glen Nevis, either by the south-east ridge or via the summit of Crn Dearg (south-west). These routes require mild scrambling, are shorter and steeper than the Pony Track, and tend only to be used by experienced hill walkers.

The summit survival shelter (centre) atop the ruined observatory. The squat summit cairn (right) has a trig point.
== The summit ==
The summit of Ben Nevis comprises a large stony plateau of about 40 ha. (Subscription required for full access.) The highest point is marked with a large, solidly built cairn atop which sits an Ordnance Survey trig point. The summit is the highest ground for over 400 miles (644 kilometres), before the Scandinavian Mountains in western Norway are reached, which contain many peaks higher than Ben Nevis. The summit is much higher than the Faroe Islands, Belgium, the Netherlands as well as the rest of the British Isles.

The ruined walls of the observatory are a prominent feature on the summit. An emergency shelter has been built on top of the observatory tower for the benefit of those caught out by bad weather, and, although the base of the tower is slightly lower than the true summit of the mountain, the roof of the shelter overtops the trig point by several feet, making it the highest man-made structure in the UK. A war memorial to the dead of World War II is located next to the observatory.

On 17 May 2006, a piano that had been buried under one of the cairns on the peak was uncovered by the John Muir Trust, which owns much of the mountain. The piano is believed to have been carried up for charity by removal men from Dundee over 20 years earlier. 

The view from the UK's highest point is extensive. Under ideal conditions, it can extend to over 190 km, including such mountains as the Torridon Hills, Morven in Caithness, Lochnagar, Ben Lomond, Barra Head and to Knocklayd in County Antrim, Northern Ireland. Viewfinder Panoramas: North, South. Retrieved 25 November 2006. 

A undated photograph of the Ben Nevis observatory (1883-1904) and 'hotel' (hostel). The hotel began as a spare-room-for-hire within the observatory, and remained open until 1916.
=== Observatory ===
A meteorological observatory on the summit was first proposed by the Scottish Meteorological Society (SMS) in the late 1870s, at a time when similar observatories were being built around the world to study the weather at high altitude. In the summer of 1881, Clement Lindley Wragge climbed the mountain daily to make observations (earning him the nickname "Inclement Rag"), leading to the opening on 17 October 1883 of a permanent observatory run by the SMS. The building was manned full-time until 1904, when it was closed due to inadequate Government funding. The twenty years' worth of readings still provide the most comprehensive set of data on mountain weather in Great Britain. 

In September 1894, C. T. R. Wilson was employed at the observatory for a couple of weeks, as temporary relief for one of the permanent staff. During this period, he witnessed a Brocken spectre and glory, caused by the sun casting a shadow on a cloud below the observer. He subsequently tried to reproduce these phenomena in the laboratory, resulting in his invention of the cloud chamber, used to detect ionising radiation. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQ5xYJU4k1g&list=PLD8B65A38DC22D432&index=5&feature=plpp_video 

== Navigation and safety ==
View south-west from the summit in early April. When the cliff edges are corniced, accurate navigation is critical.
Ben Nevis' popularity, climate and complex topography contribute to a high number of mountain rescue incidents. In 1999, for example, there were 41 rescues and four fatalities on the mountain. Some accidents arise over difficulties in navigating to or from the summit, especially in poor visibility. The problem stems from the fact that the summit plateau is roughly kidney-shaped, and surrounded by cliffs on three sides; the danger is particularly accentuated when the main path is obscured by snow. Two precise compass bearings taken in succession are necessary to navigate from the summit cairn to the west flank, from where a descent can be made on the Pony Track in relative safety. 

In the late 1990s, Lochaber Mountain Rescue Team erected two posts on the summit plateau, to assist walkers attempting the descent in foggy conditions. These posts were subsequently cut down by climbers, sparking controversy in mountaineering circles on the ethics of such additions. Critics argued that cairns and posts are an unnecessary man-made intrusion into the natural landscape, which create a false sense of security and could lessen mountaineers' sense of responsibility for their own safety. Supporters of navigational aids pointed to the high number of accidents that occurred on the mountain (between 1990 and 1995 alone there were 13 fatalities, although eight of these were due to falls while rock climbing rather than navigational error), the long tradition of placing such aids on the summit, and the potentially life-saving role they could play. A series of solidly-constructed cairns currently (September 2009) marks the upper reaches of the Pony Track.

== Climbing on Ben Nevis ==
Major features of the north face summit region.
The north face of Ben Nevis is riven with buttresses, ridges, towers and pinnacles, and contains many classic scrambles and rock climbs. It is of major importance for British winter climbing, with many of its routes holding snow often until late April. It was one of the first places in Scotland to receive the attention of serious mountaineers, with a descent of Tower Ridge in 1892 the earliest documented climbing expedition on the Ben. Hodgkiss, The Central Highlands, p. 119 (It was not climbed from bottom to top for another two years). The Scottish Mountaineering Club's Charles Inglis Clark hut was built below the north face in Coire Leis in 1929. Because of its remote location, it is said to be the only genuine alpine hut in Britain. It remains popular with climbers, especially in winter.

Tower Ridge is the longest of the north face's four main ridges, with around 600 metres of ascent. It is not technically demanding (its grade is Difficult), and most pitches can be tackled unroped by competent climbers, but it is committing and very exposed. Castle Ridge (Moderate), the northernmost of the main ridges, is an easier scramble, while Observatory Ridge (Very Difficult), Hodgkiss, The Central Highlands, p. 126 the closest ridge to the summit, is "technically the hardest of the Nevis ridges in summer and winter". Between the Tower and Observatory Ridges are the Tower and Gardyloo Gullies; the latter takes its name from the cry of "garde  l'eau" (French for "watch out for the water") formerly used in Scottish cities as a warning when householders threw their slops (and worse) out of a tenement window into the street. The gully's top wall was the refuse pit for the now-disused summit observatory. The North-east Buttress (Very Difficult) is the southernmost and bulkiest of the four ridges; it is as serious as Observatory Ridge but not as technically demanding, mainly because an "infamous" rock problem, the 'Man-trap', can be avoided on either side.

A temperature inversion around Crn Dearg Buttress and Castle Corrie.
The north face contains dozens of graded rock climbs along its entire length, with particular concentrations on the Crn Dearg Buttress (below the Munro top of Crn Dearg NW) and around the North-east Buttress and Observatory Ridge. Classic rock routes include Rubicon Wall on Observatory Buttress (Severe)  whose second ascent in 1937, when it was considered the hardest route on the mountain, is described by W. H. Murray in Mountaineering in Scotland W. H. Murray (1962). Mountaineering in Scotland. London: J. M. Dent.  and, on Crn Dearg, Centurion and The Bullroar (both HVS), Torro (E2), and Titan's Wall (E3), these four described in the SMC's guide as among "the best climbs of their class in Scotland". 

Many seminal lines were recorded before the First World War by pioneering Scottish climbers like J N Collie, Willie Naismith, Harold Raeburn, and William and Jane Inglis Clark. Other classic routes were put up by G. Graham Macphee, Dr James H. B. Bell and others between the Wars; these include Bell's 'Long Climb', at 1400 ft reputedly the longest sustained climb on the British mainland. In summer 1943 conscientious objector Brian Kellett made a phenomenal seventy-four repeat climbs and seventeen first ascents including fourteen solos, returning in 1944 to add fifteen more new lines, eleven solo, including his eponymous HVS on Gardyloo buttress. Much more recently, an extreme and as-yet ungraded climb on Echo Wall was completed by Dave MacLeod in 2008 after two years of preparation. 

An ice-climber exiting Number Five Gully (450m I). Tower Gap can be discerned in the background.
The north face is also one of Scotland's foremost venues for winter mountaineering and ice climbing, and holds snow until quite late in the year; in a good year, routes may remain in winter condition until mid-spring. Most of the possible rock routes are also suitable as winter climbs, including the four main ridges; Tower Ridge, for example, is grade IV on the Scottish winter grading system, having been upgraded in 2009 by the Scottish Mountaineering Club after requests by the local Mountain Rescue Team, there being numerous benightments and incidents every winter season. Probably the most popular ice climb on Ben Nevis Hodgkiss, The Central Highlands, p. 130 is The Curtain (IV,5) on the left side of the Crn Dearg Buttress. At the top end of the scale, Centurion in winter is a grade VIII,8 face climb.

In February 1960 James R. Marshall and Robin Clark Smith recorded six major new ice routes in only eight days including Orion Direct (V,5 400m); this winter version of Bell's Long Climb was "the climax of a magnificent week's climbing by Smith and Marshall, and the highpoint of the step-cutting era." 

== Ben Nevis Race ==
1979 Ben Nevis Race
1979 Ben Nevis Race
The history of hill running on Ben Nevis dates back to 1895. William Swan, a barber from Fort William, made the first recorded timed ascent up the mountain on or around 27 September of that year, when he ran from the old post office in Fort William to the summit and back in 2 hours 41 minutes. 
The following years saw several improvements on Swan's record, but the first competitive race was held on 3 June 1898 under Scottish Amateur Athletic Association rules. Ten competitors ran the course, which started at the Lochiel Arms Hotel in Banavie and was thus longer than the route from Fort William; the winner was 21-year-old Hugh Kennedy, a gamekeeper at Tor Castle, who finished (coincidentally with Swan's original run) in 2 hours 41 minutes. 

Regular races were organised until 1903, when two events were held; these were the last for 24 years, perhaps due to the closure of the summit observatory the following year. The first was from Achintee, at the foot of the Pony Track, and finished at the summit; It was won in just over an hour by Ewen MacKenzie, the observatory roadman. The second race ran from new Fort William post office, and MacKenzie lowered the record to 2 hours 10 minutes, a record he held for 34 years. 

The Ben Nevis Race has been run in its current form since 1937. It now takes place on the first Saturday in September every year, with a maximum of 500 competitors taking part. It starts and finishes at the Claggan Park football ground on the outskirts of Fort William, and is 14 km long with 1340 m of ascent. Due to the seriousness of the mountain environment, entry is restricted to those who have completed three hill races, and runners must carry waterproofs, a hat, gloves and a whistle; anyone who has not reached the summit after two hours is turned back. As of 2010 the records have stood unbroken since 1984, when Kenny Stuart and Pauline Haworth of Keswick Athletic Club won the men's and the women's races with times of 1:25:34 and 1:43:25 respectively. The Ben Nevis Race. Retrieved 30 October 2010. 

== Environmental issues ==
Path to the CIC Hut alongside the Allt a' Mhuilinn
Ben Nevis' popularity and high profile have led to concerns in recent decades over the impact of humans on the fragile mountain environment. These concerns contributed to the purchase of the Ben Nevis Estate in 2000 by the John Muir Trust, a Scottish charity dedicated to the conservation of wild places. The Estate covers 1700 ha of land on the south side of Ben Nevis and the neighbouring mountains of Crn Mr Dearg and Aonach Beag, including the summit of Ben Nevis. 

The John Muir Trust is one of nine bodies represented on the main board of the Nevis Partnership. Founded in 2003, the Partnership, which also includes representatives from local government, Glen Nevis residents and mountaineering interests, works to "guide future policies and actions to safeguard, manage and where appropriate enhance the environmental qualities and opportunities for visitor enjoyment and appreciation of the Nevis area". Its projects include path repairs and improvements and the development of strategies for visitor management.

One of the Nevis Partnership's more controversial actions has concerned the large number of memorial plaques placed by individuals, especially around the summit war memorial. Many people believe that the proliferation of such plaques is inappropriate, and in August 2006 the Nevis Partnership declared an intention to eventually remove these plaques (after making efforts to return them to their owners), as part of a wider campaign to clean up the mountain. 

In 2005, the amount of litter on the Pony Track was highlighted by national media, including BBC Radio 5 Live. Robin Kevan, a retired social worker from mid-Wales who is known as "Rob the Rubbish" for his efforts to clean up the countryside, then drove to Ben Nevis and cleaned the mountain himself, resulting in much media coverage and a concerted clean-up effort. 

The Glen Nevis Centre have introduced a booking and charging system to groups undertaking ascents of Ben Nevis. The charge is being disputed. 

== Ben Nevis Distillery ==
The Ben Nevis Distillery is a single malt whisky distillery at the foot of the mountain, located by Victoria Bridge to the north of Fort William. Founded in 1825 by John McDonald (known as "Long John"), it is one of the oldest licensed distilleries in Scotland, and is a popular visitor attraction in Fort William. The water used to make the whisky comes from the Allt a' Mhuilinn, the stream that flows from Ben Nevis' northern corrie. "Ben Nevis" 80/- organic ale is, by contrast, brewed in Bridge of Allan near Stirling. 

==Other uses==
Ben Nevis was the name of a White Star Line packet ship which in 1854 carried the group of immigrants who were to become the Wends of Texas. At least another eight vessels have carried the name since then. Miramar Ship Index: Search results for "Ben Nevis" 

A mountain in Svalbard is also named Ben Nevis, after the Scottish peak. It is 922 meters high, and located south of the head of Raudfjorden, Albert I Land, in the northwestern part of the island of Spitsbergen. 

== See also ==

* National Three Peaks Challenge
* The Remarkables, New Zealand  mountain range containing a peak also called Ben Nevis.
* Northwest Spitsbergen National Park includes a mountain called Ben Nevis. Its height is 918 metres and it is located at Northwest Spitsbergen National Park
* Scottish Highlands

== References ==
;Notes

;Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Nevis Partnership  Environmental and visitor management in the Nevis area
* Panorama from the peak of Ben Nevis (Google Maps)
* Computer generated digital panoramas from Ben Nevis: North South index
* Ben Nevis Webcam at Fort William Online
* The Ben Nevis Race (official website)
* Navigation on Ben Nevis Advice for people walking up Ben Nevis  available as leaflet in the town.
* Ben Nevis  the long way round. The Ben via the CMD ridge
* Ben Nevis. Munros Table. Scottish Mountaineering Club.



[[Bipolar I disorder]]

Bipolar I disorder (BP-I; pronounced "type one bipolar disorder") is a bipolar spectrum disorder characterized by at least one manic or mixed episode. Bipolar I disorder sometimes occurs along with episodes of hypomania or major depression as well. It is a type of bipolar disorder, and conforms to the classic concept of manic-depressive illness, which can include psychosis during mood episodes. The difference with bipolar II disorder is that the latter requires that the individual must never have experienced a full manic episode - only less severe hypomanic episode(s). Berk, M. & Dodd, S. (2005). Bipolar II disorder: a review. Bipolar Disorders,7, 11-21 

==Diagnostic criteria==
The essential feature of bipolar I disorder is a clinical course characterized by the occurrence of one or more manic episodes or mixed episodes (DSM-IV-TR, 2000). Often, individuals have had one or more major depressive episodes. One episode of mania is sufficient enough to make the diagnosis of bipolar disorder, the patient may or may not have history of major depressive disorder. Episodes of substance-induced mood disorder due to the direct effects of a medication, or other somatic treatments for depression, drug abuse, or toxin exposure, or of mood disorder due to a general medical condition need to be excluded before a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder can be made. In addition, the episodes must not be better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder or superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or a psychotic disorder not otherwise specified.

== Treatment ==

===Medical assessment===
Routine medical assessments are often prescribed to rule-out or identify a somatic cause for bipolar I symptoms. These tests can include ultrasounds of the head, x-ray computed tomography (CAT scan), electroencephalogram, HIV test, full blood count, thyroid function test, liver function test, urea and creatinine levels and if patient is on lithium, lithium levels are taken. Drug screening includes recreational drugs, particularly synthetic cannabinoids, and exposure to toxins.

===Medication===
Mood stabilizers are often used as part of the treatment process.
# Lithium, the mainstay in the management of bipolar disorder, but it has a narrow therapeutic range and typically requires monitoring
# Anticonvulsants, such as sodium valproate, carbamazepine or lamotrigine
# Antipsychotics, such as quetiapine, risperidone, olanzapine or aripiprazole
# Electroconvulsive therapy, a psychiatric treatment in which seizures are electrically induced in anesthetized patients for therapeutic effect

Some antidepressants have been found to precipitate a manic episode.

===Patient education===
Information on the condition, importance of regular sleep patterns, routines and eating habits and the importance of compliance with medication as prescribed. Behavior modification through counselling can have positive influence to help reduce the effects of risky behavior during the manic phase.

==DSM-IV-TR General diagnosis codes==

 Dx Code # Disorder Description 
 296.0x Bipolar I disorder Single manic episode 
 296.40 Bipolar I disorder Most recent episode hypomanic 
 296.4x Bipolar I disorder Most recent episode manic 
 296.6x Bipolar I disorder Most recent episode mixed 
 296.5x Bipolar I disorder Most recent episode depressed 
 296.7 Bipolar I disorder Most recent episode unspecified 
 

==Proposed revisions in diagnostic criteria for DSM-5==
The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) is to be released in May 2013. There are several proposed revisions to occur in the diagnostic criteria of Bipolar I Disorder and its subtypes. For Bipolar I Disorder 296.40 Most Recent Episode Hypomanic and 296.4x Most Recent Episode Manic, the proposed revision includes the following specifiers: with Psychotic Features, with Mixed Features, with Catatonic Features, with Rapid Cycling, with Anxiety (mild to severe), with Suicide Risk Severity, with Seasonal Pattern, and with Postpartum Onset. Bipolar I Disorder 296.5x Most Recent Episode Depressed will include all of the above specifiers plus the following: with Melancholic Features and with Atypical Features. The categories for specifiers will be removed in DSM-5 and part A will add or there are at least 3 symptoms of Major Depression of which one of the symptoms is depressed mood or anhedonia. For Bipolar I Disorder 296.7 Most Recent Episode Unspecified, the listed specifiers will be removed. 
 
The criteria for manic and hypomanic episodes in parts A & B will be edited. Part A will include and present most of the day, nearly every day, and part B will include and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior. These criteria as defined in the DSM-IV-TR have created confusion for clinicians and need to be more clearly defined. 

There have also been proposed revisions to part B of the diagnostic criteria for a Hypomanic Episode, which is used to diagnose For Bipolar I Disorder 296.40, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic. Part B lists "inflated self-esteem, flight of ideas, distractibility, and decreased need for sleep" as symptoms of a Hypomanic Episode. This has been confusing in the field of child psychiatry because these symptoms closely overlap with symptoms of ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder). 

Note that many of the above changes are still under active consideration and are not definite. For more information regarding proposed revisions to the DSM-5, please visit their website at dsm5.org. For a helpful guide to understanding the DSM-IV, please visit their website at dsmiv.net.

==ICD-10 diagnostic criteria==
* F31 Bipolar Affective Disorder
* F31.6 Bipolar Affective Disorder, Current Episode Mixed
* F30 Manic Episode
* F30.0 Hypomania
* F30.1 Mania Without Psychotic Symptoms
* F30.2 Mania With Psychotic Symptoms
* F32 Depressive Episode
* F32.0 Mild Depressive Episode
* F32.1 Moderate Depressive Episode
* F32.2 Severe Depressive Episode Without Psychotic Symptoms
* F32.3 Severe Depressive Episode With Psychotic Symptoms

== See also ==
* Bipolar disorder
* Bipolar disorders research
* Bipolar II disorder
* Bipolar NOS
* Cyclothymia
* Borderline personality disorder
* Creativity and bipolar disorder
* Detailed listing of DSM-IV-TR bipolar disorder diagnostics codes
* Emotional dysregulation
* International Society for Bipolar Disorders
* List of people believed to have been affected by bipolar disorder
* Oppositional defiance disorder
* Seasonal affective disorder

==References==

==External links==
* National Bipolar Foundation
* Latest bipolar news and research via MedWorm
* Helping Friends and Family with Bipolar Disorder



[[Bacardi]]

Bacardi Limited (English: ; ; ) is the largest privately held, family-owned spirits company in the world. Originally known for its eponymous Bacardi white rum, it now has a portfolio of more than 200 brands and labels. Founded in 1862, and family-owned for seven generations, Bacardi employs 6,000 people, manufactures at 27 facilities in 16 markets on four continents, with sales in more than 150 countries. Bacardi Limited refers to the Bacardi group of companies, including Bacardi International Limited. The company sells in excess of 200 million bottles per year. The company's sales in 2007 were US$5.5 billion, up from $4.9 billion in 2006.

Bacardi Limited is headquartered in Hamilton, Bermuda, and has a 16-member board of directors led by the original founder's great-great grandson, Facundo L. Bacard.

==History==
===Early history===
Facundo Bacard Mass, a Catalan wine merchant, was born in Sitges, Catalonia, Spain, in 1814, and emigrated to Cuba in 1830. During this period, rum was cheaply made and not considered a refined drink, and rarely sold in upmarket taverns. Facundo began attempting to "tame" rum by isolating a proprietary strain of yeast still used in Bacardi production. This yeast gives Bacardi rum its flavour profile. After experimenting with several techniques he hit upon filtering the rum through charcoal, which removed impurities. In addition to this, Facundo aged the rum in white oak barrels, which had the effect of mellowing the drink. The final product was the first clear, or "white" rum in the world.

Moving from the experimental stage to a more commercial endeavour, he and his brother Jos set up a Santiago de Cuba distillery they bought in 1862; which housed a still made of copper and cast iron. In the rafters of this building lived fruit bats  the inspiration for the Bacardi bat logo. Our heritage: the early years from the company's corporate website 

The 1880s and 90s were turbulent times for Cuba and the company. Emilio Bacardi, Don Facundo's eldest son, was repeatedly imprisoned and was exiled from Cuba for having fought in the rebel army against Spain in the Cuban War of Independence. 

Emilio's brothers, Facundo and Jos, and his brother-in-law Henri (Don Enrique) Schueg, remained in Cuba with the difficult task of sustaining the company during a period of war. The women in the family were exiled in Kingston, Jamaica. After the Cuban War of Independence and the US occupation of Cuba, "The Original Cuba Libre" and the Daiquiri were both born using Bacardi rum. In 1899 US General Leonard Wood appointed Emilio Bacardi Mayor of Santiago de Cuba.
The Bacardi Building in Havana, Cuba

In 1912, Emilio Bacardi travelled to Egypt, where he purchased a mummy (still on display) for the future Emilio Bacardi Moreau Municipal Museum in Santiago de Cuba. In Santiago, his brother Facundo M. Bacard continued to manage the company along with Schueg, who began the company's international expansion by opening bottling plants in Barcelona (1910) and New York City (1915). Bacardi Limited: Our Heritage  Havana and Beyond. Retrieved 10 May 2011. The New York plant was soon shut down due to Prohibition, yet during this time Cuba became a hotspot for US tourists.

In 1922 Emilio opened a new distillery in Santiago. In 1930 Schueg opened the Art Deco Bacardi building in Havana and the third generation of the Bacard family entered the business. Facundito Bacard was known to have invited Americans (still subject to Prohibition) to "Come to Cuba and bathe in Bacardi rum." A new product was introduced: Hatuey beer.
The "Cathedral of Rum" at the Bacardi distillery in Catao, Puerto Rico, near San Juan

Bacardi's transition into an international brand was due mostly to Schueg's "business genius"; Schueg "branded Cuba as the home of rum, and Bacardi as the king of rums" and expanded overseas, first to Mexico (1931), then to Puerto Rico (1936), under the brand name Ron Bacardi. (Ron is the Spanish word for rum). Post-Prohibition production in Puerto Rico enabled rum to be sold tariff-free in the US. Rum and Revolution an August 2008 review of Bacardi and the Long Fight for Cuba (ISBN 978-0-670-01978-6) from The Washington Post He then expanded to the United States (1944). 

During World War II, the company was led by Schueg's son-in-law Jos "Pepin" Bosch. Pepin founded Bacardi Imports in New York City, and became Cuba's Minister of the Treasury in 1949.

===Cuban Revolution===
Portuondo and other Bacard family members initially supported the Cuban revolutionaries, including Fidel Castro and the broader M-26-7 movement: Bosch personally donated tens of thousands of dollars to the movement, and acted as an intermediary between the revolutionaries and the CIA to assuage the latter's concerns. Family members, employees, and facilities were put to use by the movement and the company supported the revolution publicly with advertisements and parties. But their support turned to opposition as the pro-Soviet Che Guevara wing of the movement began to dominate and as Castro turned against their interests.

The Bacard family (and hence the company) maintained a fierce opposition to Fidel Castro's revolution in Cuba in the 1960s. In his book, Bacardi, The Hidden War (ISBN 978-0745318738), Hernando Calvo Ospina outlines the political element to the family's money. Ospina describes how the Bacardi family and Company left Cuba after the Castro regime confiscated the Companys Cuban assets on 15 October 1960; in particular, in nationalizing and banning all private property on the island as well as all bank accounts. However, due to concerns over the previous Cuban leader Fulgencio Batista the company had started foreign branches a few years prior to the revolution; the Company moved the ownership of the Company's trademarks, assets and proprietary formulas out of the country to the Bahamas prior to the revolution as well as constructing plants in Puerto Rico and Mexico after Prohibition to save import taxes for rum being imported to the US. This helped the company survive after the communist government confiscated without compensation all Bacardi assets in the country. 

Ospina also explains the close ties Bacard family members had to the US political elite as well as organizations of state such as the CIA. The family funded various Cuban exile organizations such as CANF.

More recently, Bacardi lawyers were influential in the drafting of the 1996 Helms-Burton Act which sought to extend the scope of the United States embargo against Cuba. The Helms-Burton Act from thinkquest.org In 1999, Otto Reich, a lobbyist in Washington on behalf of Bacardi, drafted section 211 of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Appropriations Act, FY1999 (), a bill that became known as the Bacardi Act. Section 211 denied trademark protection to products of Cuban businesses expropriated after the Cuban revolution, a provision keenly sought by Bacardi. The act was aimed primarily at the Havana Club brand in the US. The brand was created by the Jos Arechabala company and confiscated without compensation in the Cuban revolution. The Havana Club trademark had been registered by the Cuban government in the United States without permission of the rightful owners. Ann Louise Bardach: Cuba Confidential. Penguin books 2002. p.131 The new law invalidated the trademark registration. Section 211 has been challenged unsuccessfully by the Cuban government and the European Union in US courts; however, the act has been ruled illegal by the WTO (August 2001). The US Congress has yet to re-examine the matter.

===Bacardi and Cuba today===
Bacardi drinks are not found in Cuba today. The main brand of rum in Cuba is Havana Club, produced by a company that was confiscated and nationalized by the government during the revolution. Bacardi later bought the brand from the original owners, the Arechabala family. The Cuban government, in partnership with the French company Pernod Ricard, sells its Havana Club products internationally, except for the United States and its territories. Bacardi created Havana Club rum based on the original recipe from the Arechabala family, manufactures it in Puerto Rico, and sells it in Florida. Bacardi continues to fight in the courts, attempting to legalize their own Havana Club trademark outside the United States. Caribbean Business: Bacardi wins round in Havana Club fight Retrieved 30 May 2011. Drinks now made in the former Cuban Bacardi distillery are sold in Cuba under the name Caney.

Despite having no production facilities in Cuba today, Bacardi in the UK has recently decided to re-emphasize its Cuban heritage, primarily for commercial reasons. Facing increased competition in the rum market from the now international brand Havana Club, the company concluded that it was important for sales to associate its rum with Cuba. TV advertisements with slogans of 'Welcome to the Latin Quarter' are but one example of this. In 1998, under the distinctive bat logo, the phrase "company founded in Santiago de Cuba in 1862" was added.

Bacardi has faced criticism and legal problems for supposedly attempting to encourage consumers to believe that they were purchasing rum made in Cuba, rather than just marking its heritage. Bacardi adverts in Spain, since 1966, had described a popular combination of rum and Coke as "rum and coke". However, after 1998, it began to describe the drink as Cuba Libre  literally translated as "Free Cuba", which is the original name of the drink and what it is mostly called in Latin America. In this instance, Bacardi faced a legal ruling from the Spanish Association of Advertising Users which forced the company to stop the advert. They concluded that it could "mislead the viewer as to the true nature of the product", as the advert contained so much Caribbean imagery, one might conclude it came from Cuba. Ospina p. 79 

The Bacardi Building in Havana is regarded as one of the finest Art Deco buildings in Latin America. "Edificio Bacard (Ciudad de la Habana)", EcuRed (Cuban state-filtered wiki) 

===Chalk's Ocean Airways Flight 101===
On 19 December 2005 Chalk's Ocean Airways Flight 101 from Fort Lauderdale, Florida to Bimini, Bahamas, with an unscheduled stop at Watson Island, Miami, crashed off Miami Beach, Florida. Sergio Danguillecourt, a member of the board of directors of Bacardi Ltd and a great-great-grandson of the rum company's founder Don Facundo Bacard i Mass, and his wife Jacqueline Kriz Danguillecourt were on board. There were no survivors.

===2012 OSHA investigation===
In August 2012, a temporary worker at the company's Jacksonville, Florida bottling subsidiary, Bicardi Bottling, was fatally injured while servicing a palletizer machine. After conducting an investigation, the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) determined that Bacardi was in violation of several safety regulations, including two willful violations. Bacardi Bottling was fined $192,000 by OSHA. 

==Brands==
Bacardi Limited has made numerous acquisitions to diversify away from the eponymous Bacardi rum brand. In 1993, Bacardi merged with Martini & Rossi, the Italian producer of Martini vermouth and sparkling wines, creating the Bacardi-Martini group.

In 1998, the company acquired Dewar's scotch, including Royal Brackla and Bombay Sapphire gin from Diageo for $2 billion. Bacardi acquired the Cazadores tequila brand in 2002 and in 2004 purchased Grey Goose, a French made vodka, from Sidney Frank for $2 billion. In 2006 Bacardi Limited purchased New Zealand vodka brand 42 Below.

Other associated brands include the US version of Havana Club, Drambuie Scotch whisky liqueur, DiSaronno Amaretto, Eristoff vodka, B&B and Bndictine liqueurs.

==Awards==
In its 150 year history, Bacardi rum has more than 550 awards for quality and product profile, making it the worlds most awarded rum. Emblems of gold medals and the Spanish Coat of Arms awarded during the formative years of the business appear on the bottle.

Bacardi rums have been entered for a number of international spirit ratings awards. Several Bacardi spirits have performed notably well. Bacardi 8, for example, received two gold medals and a silver medal from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2008 and 2010. In addition, it received the International High Quality Trophy at Monde Selection's World Quality Selections in 2010, and a Grand Gold Medal in 2011. Bacardi Gold, Bacardi 8, and Bacardi Reserva Limitada were also awarded International High Quality Trophy awards at the 2010 Monde Selections World Quality Selections. However, it should be noted that these awards are non-competitive, and only products that pay to enter are assessed.

Proof66, a website that aggregates professional ratings from the Beverage Testing Institute and other professional rating organizations, places Bacardi Reserva Limitada, Bacardi 1873 Solera, and Bacardi 8 in the First Tier or Top 10th percentile of all rated spirits. Proof66 Summary Page for Bacardi Reserva Limitada Proof66 Summary Page for Bacardi 1873 Ron Solera Proof66 Summary Page for Bacardi Ron Reserva 8-Year 

==Hemingway connection==
Ernest Hemingway lived in Cuba from 1939 until shortly after the Cuban revolution. He lived at Finca Viga, in the small town of San Francisco de Paula, located very close to Bacardis Modelo Brewery for Hatuey Beer in Cotorro, Havana.

In 1954, Compaa Ron Bacardi S.A. threw Hemingway a party when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature  soon after the publication of his novel The Old Man and the Sea (1952)  in which he honored the company by mentioning its Hatuey beer. Hemingway also mentioned Bacardi and Hatuey in his novels To Have and Have Not (1937) and For Whom the Bell Tolls (1940). Guillermo Cabrera Infante wrote an account of the festivities for the periodical Cicln, titled El Viejo y la marca (The Old Man and the Brand). In his account he described how "on one side there was a wooden stage with two streamers  Hatuey beer and Bacardi rum  on each end and a Cuban flag in the middle. Next to the stage was a bar, at which people crowded, ordering daiquiris and beer, all free. A sign at the event read "Bacardi rum welcomes the author of The Old Man and the Sea".

In his article The Old Man and the Daiquiri, Wayne Curtis writes about how Hemingways "home bar also held a bottle of Bacardi rum." Hemingway wrote in Islands in the Stream "...this frozen daiquir, so well beaten as it is, looks like the sea where the wave falls away from the bow of a ship when she is doing thirty knots." 

==United States headquarters==

The Bacardi building on Biscayne Boulevard, Miami, the US headquarters of Bacardi

In 1964 Bacardi opened its new US headquarters in Miami, Florida. Cuban-exiled architect Enrique Gutierrez created a building that was hurricane-proof, using a system of steel cables and pulleys which allow the building to move slightly in the event of a strong shock. The steel cables are anchored into the bedrock and extend through marble-covered shafts up to the top floor, where they are led over large pulleys. Outside, on both sides of the eight-story building, more than 28,000 tiles painted and fired by Brazilian artist Francisco Brennard, depicting abstract blue flowers, were placed on the walls according to the artist's exact specifications.

In 1972, the Company commissioned the square building in the plaza. Architect Ignacio Carrera-Justiz used cantilevered construction, a style invented by Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright observed how well trees with taproots withstood hurricane force winds. The building, raised 47 feet off the ground around a central core, features four massive walls, made of sections of inch-thick hammered glass mural tapestries, designed and manufactured in France. The design came from a painting by German artist Johannes M. Dietz.

In 2006, Bacardi USA leased a 15-story headquarters complex in Coral Gables, Florida. Bacardi had employees in seven buildings across Miami-Dade County at the time. "Bacardi USA to take over BK's planned Coral Gables headquarters." South Florida Business Journal. Tuesday 8 May 2007. Retrieved on 2 October 2009. 

Bacardi vacated its former headquarters buildings on Biscayne Boulevard in Midtown Miami. Miami citizens began a campaign to label the buildings as "historic". University of Miami professor of architecture Allan Schulman said "Miami's brand is its identity as a tropical city. The Bacardi buildings are exactly the sort that resonate with our consciousness of what Miami is about". "Miami weighs preserving iconic Bacardi buildings." Associated Press at New York Daily News. Tuesday 7 April 2009. Retrieved 3 October 2009. In 2007 Chad Oppenheim, the head of Oppenheim Architecture + Design, described the Bacardi buildings as "elegant, with a Modernist combined with a local flavour." Rousseau, Bryant. "In Conversation: Chad Oppenheim." Businessweek. 27 June 2007. 2. Retrieved on 3 October 2009. 

The current American headquarters is at 2701 LeJeune Road in Coral Gables. "Bacardi USA Announces New Headquarters in South Florida." Retrieved 18 October 2010. The 300 employees occupy 230000 sqft of leased office space. "Bacardi USA Marks Opening of State-of-the Art South Florida Headquarters." Retrieved 18 October 2010. 

==Mexico City buildings==
Bacardi had architects Ludwig Mies Van Der Rohe and Felix Candela design office buildings and a bottling plant for them in Mexico City during the 1950s. The building complex was added to the tentative list of UNESCO's World Heritage Site list on 20 November 2001. 

==References==

==External links==
*
*  official company site
*Map of Distillery in Puerto Rico from Google Maps

*


[[Black and Tans]]

A Black and Tan in Dublin, smoking and carrying a Lewis gun, February 1921

The Black and Tans () Focal.ie - Dictionary of Irish Terms were a force of Temporary Constables recruited to assist the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) during the Irish War of Independence. Improving the law Enforcement-Intelligence Community Relationship. National Defense Intelligence College, Washington, DC. June 2007. p.120 The force was the brainchild of Winston Churchill, then British Secretary of State for War, McCaffrey, Carmel. In Search of Ireland's Heroes. 2006.p 233 and was recruited in Great Britain in late 1919 (although it contained Irish members also). Padraig Og O Ruairc, Blood on the Banner, The Republican Struggle in Clare, pp. 332333 Thousands, many of them British World War I veterans, answered the British government's call for recruits. Their role was to help the RIC maintain control and fight the Irish Republican Army (IRA), the army of the Irish Republic. The nickname "Black and Tans" arose from the colour of the improvised khaki uniforms they initially wore. The Black and Tans became infamous for their attacks on civilians and civilian property.

The Black and Tans are often confused with the Auxiliary Division, a counter-insurgency unit of the RIC made up of former British officers. However, sometimes the term "Black and Tans" is used to cover both of these groups. 

==Foundation==
The late 19th and early 20th centuries in Ireland were dominated by Irish nationalists' pursuit of Home Rule from the United Kingdom. The issue of Home Rule was shelved with the outbreak of World War I, and in 1916 Irish republicans staged the Easter Rising against British rule in an attempt to establish a republic. Growing support amongst the Irish populace for the republican Sinn Fin political party saw it win 73 out of 105 seats in the Irish general election, 1918. In January, 1919, Sinn Fin established themselves as the First Dil, which then declared an independent Irish Republic. http://www.oireachtas.ie/parliament/about/history/ They also declared the Irish Republican Army (IRA) the official army of the state, which in the same month began the Irish War of Independence. This focused primarily on attacks on the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) and the British Army in Ireland.

In September 1919 Lloyd George, who was British Prime Minister at the time, outlawed the Dil and augmented the British Army presence in Ireland, In Search of Ireland's Heroes Carmel McCaffrey. Ivan R. Dee. p 231 starting work on the next Home Rule Act.

In January 1920, the British government started advertising in British cities for men willing to "face a rough and dangerous task", helping to boost the ranks of the RIC in policing an increasingly anti-British Ireland. There was no shortage of recruits, many of them unemployed First World War army veterans, and by November 1921 about 9,500 men had joined. This sudden influx of men led to a shortage of RIC uniforms, and the new recruits were issued with khaki army uniforms (usually only trousers) and dark green RIC or blue British police surplus tunics, caps and belts. These uniforms differentiated them from the Army and the Regular RIC, and gave rise to the force's nickname: Christopher O'Sullivan wrote in the Limerick Echo on 25 March 1920 that, meeting a group of recruits on a train at Limerick Junction, the attire of one reminded him of the Scarteen Hunt, whose "Black and Tans" nickname derived from the colouration of its Kerry Beagles. Ennis comedian Mike Nono elaborated the joke in Limerick's Theatre Royal, and the nickname soon took hold, persisting even after the men received full RIC uniforms.

The new recruits received three months' hurried training, and were rapidly posted to RIC barracks, mostly in Dublin, Munster and eastern Connacht. The first men arrived on 25 March 1920. The British government also raised another unit, the Auxiliary Division of the constabulary, known as the Auxiliaries or Auxies, consisting of ex-army officers. The Black and Tans aided the Auxiliaries in the British government's attempts to break both the IRA and the Dil.

==Conduct in Ireland==

A group of Black and Tans and Auxiliaries outside the London and North Western Hotel in Dublin following an attack by the IRA, April 1921

The behaviour of the Black and Tans at the time has been recorded in first-hand accounts. The quasi-military nature of both the Black and Tans and the Auxiliaries placed them in tandem in the eyes of the civilians and the IRA. For example, a statement by Timothy O'Connell of Dunmanway given at the time describes his arrest and treatment by the 'Tans' or 'Auxies'.
The Statement is headed: Interrogation and Treatment of republican suspects by the British Auxiliary Forces, 'Black and Tans', January 1921.

:I happened to be in bed in a friends house when someone downstairs shouted Tans. I hopped out of bed and had a look through the upstairs windowsI could see two lorries stopped by the road about a hundred yards away...

:On Monday morning shortly afterwards, I was called out along with two other prisoners, the Barrett Brothers of Coppeen. Three lorries were lined up, each full of Auxies. We were ordered on board, one of us on each lorry and were told that if one shot was fired at the lorries all three of us would be shot immediately. The first stop was the military barracks at Bandon, which had been attacked the previous night. We were ordered off the lorries and kicked through the gate. Then the Auxies told the military that they had arrested us on the road, and gave it to be understood that we had taken part in the attack on the previous night...We were ordered to strip off our clothes and stand under the showers. Then the cold water taps were turned on and the water was almost freezing. We had to stand under the jets of cold water until we were almost lifeless, and the military didnt "pull any punches" during the proceedings so that we emerged from the showers with more black eyes. Irish Historical Documents since 1800, edited by Alan O'Day. Gill and MacMillan. p.169 

Temporary Constables were paid the relatively good wage of 10 shillings (half a pound) Sterling, a day plus full board and lodging. With minimal police training, their main role was to increase the strength of police posts, where they functioned as sentries, guards, escorts for government agents, reinforcement to the regular police, and crowd control, and they mounted a determined counter-insurgency campaign. They and the Auxies became known as Tudor's Toughs after the police commander, Major-General Sir Henry Hugh Tudor. They were viewed by Republicans as an army of occupation because of these duties. They soon gained a reputation for brutality, Don't be too tragic about Ireland - The Guardian, October 12, 1921 as the RIC campaign against the IRA and Sinn Fin members was stepped up and police reprisals for IRA attacks were condoned by the government. Ireland's War of Independence: The chilling story of the Black and Tans - The Independent, 21 April 2006 

Alexander Will, RIC Record from Forfar in Scotland, was the first Temporary Constable to die in the conflict. He was killed during an IRA attack on the RIC barracks in Rathmore, County Kerry, on 11 July 1920.

The Black and Tans were not subject to strict discipline in their early months in Ireland and as a result, their deaths at the hands of the IRA in 1920 were often repaid with arbitrary reprisals against the civilian population. In the summer of 1920, the Black and Tans burned and sacked many small towns and villages in Ireland, beginning with Tuam in County Galway in July 1920 and also including Trim, Balbriggan, Knockcroghery, Thurles and Templemore amongst many others. In November 1920, the Tans "besieged" Tralee in revenge for the IRA abduction and killing of two local RIC men. They closed all the businesses in the town and let no food in for a week. In addition they shot dead three local people. On 14 November, the Tans were suspected of abducting and murdering a Roman Catholic priest, Fr. Michael Griffin, in Galway, his body was found in a bog in Barna a week later. Finally, the Black and Tans sacked Cork city, on the night of 11 December 1920, destroying a large part of the city centre.

In January 1921, the British Labour Commission produced a report on the situation in Ireland which was highly critical of the government's security policy. It said the government, in forming the Black and Tans, had "liberated forces which it is not at present able to dominate". However, since 29 December 1920, the British government had sanctioned "official reprisals" in Ireland  usually meaning burning property of IRA men and their suspected sympathisers. Taken together with an increased emphasis on discipline in the RIC, this helped to curb the random atrocities the Black and Tans committed since March 1920 for the remainder of the war, if only because reprisals were now directed from above rather than being the result of a spontaneous desire for revenge.

However, many of the activities popularly attributed to the Black and Tans may have been committed by the Auxiliary Division; and some were committed by Irish RIC men. For instance, Toms Mac Curtain, the Mayor of Cork, was assassinated in March 1920 by local RIC men and the shooting dead of 13 civilians at Croke Park on Bloody Sunday was also carried out by the RIC although a small detachment of Auxiliaries were also present. But most Republicans did not make a distinction, and "Black and Tans" was often used as a catch-all term for all police and army groups.

The actions of the Black and Tans alienated public opinion in both Ireland and Great Britain. Their violent tactics encouraged the Irish public to increase their covert support of the IRA, while the British public pressed for a move towards a peaceful resolution. Edward Wood MP, better known as the future Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax, rejected force and urged the British government to make an offer to the Irish "conceived on the most generous lines". Lord Birkenhead, Halifax (Hamish Hamilton, 1965), p. 122. Sir John Simon MP, another future Foreign Secretary, was also horrified at the tactics being used. Lionel Curtis, writing in the imperialist journal The Round Table, wrote: "If the British Commonwealth can only be preserved by such means, it would become a negation of the principle for which it has stood". Lionel Curtis, The Round Table, Vol. XI, No. 43 (June 1921), p. 505. The King, senior Anglican bishops, MPs from the Liberal and Labour parties, Oswald Mosley, Jan Smuts, the Trades Union Congress and parts of the press were increasingly critical of the actions of the Black and Tans. Mahatma Gandhi said of the British peace offer: "It is not fear of losing more lives that has compelled a reluctant offer from England but it is the shame of any further imposition of agony upon a people that loves liberty above everything else". Lawrence James, The Rise and Fall of the British Empire (Abacus, 1998), p. 384. 

About 7,000 Black and Tans served in Ireland in 1920&ndash;22. More than one-third of them died or left the service before they were disbanded along with the rest of the RIC in 1922, an extremely high wastage rate, and well over half received government pensions. A total of 404 members of the Royal Irish Constabulary died in the conflict and more than 600 were wounded but it is not clear how many of these were pre-war RIC men and how many were Black and Tans or Auxiliaries.

Those who returned to civilian life sometimes had problems re-integrating. At least two former Black and Tans were hanged for murder in Britain and another wanted for murder committed suicide before the police could arrest him. The Black and Tans - Bennet, Richard - 1959, Page 222 

==Legacy==
Due to the ferocity of the Tans' behaviour in Ireland and the atrocities committed, feelings continue to run high regarding their actions. "Black and Tan" or "Tan" remains a pejorative term for the British in Ireland, and they are still despised by many in Ireland. The term can still stir bad reactions because of their remembered brutality. http://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/nike-forced-to-run-like-hell-away-over-black-and-tan-trainer-branding-187151.html One of the most famous Irish Republican songs is Dominic Behan's "Come out Ye Black and Tans". The Irish War of Independence is sometimes referred to as the "Tan War" or "Black-and-Tan War." This term was preferred by those who fought on the anti-Treaty side in the Irish Civil War and is still used by Republicans today. The "Cogadh na Saoirse" medal, awarded since 1941 by the Irish government to IRA veterans of the War of Independence, bears a ribbon with two vertical stripes in black and tan. 1919 - 1921 War of Independence 

==References==

==External links==
* BBC News Northern Ireland 1917-20 The Road to Partition posted March 18, 1999
* "The Black & Tans and Auxiliaries in Ireland, 1920-1921: Their Origins, Roles and Legacy", by John Ainsworth, 2001
* Account of the Burning of Abbeydorney, Co. Kerry
* British Security Policy in Ireland, 1920-1921 Ainsworth, John S. (2001) Australian Journal of Irish Studies, 1. pp. 176190
* Black & Tans in Galway (first hand account and photos)
* Sean Broderick and the Black & Tans (first hand account and photos from Galway)
* Father Michael Griffin (first hand account and photos from Galway)



[[Bunsen burner]]

A Bunsen burner, named after Robert Bunsen, is a common piece of laboratory equipment that produces a single open gas flame, which is used for heating, sterilization, and combustion. 
The gas can be natural gas (which is mainly methane) or a liquefied petroleum gas, such as propane, butane, or a mixture of both.

== History ==
When the University of Heidelberg hired Robert Bunsen in 1852, the authorities promised to build him a new laboratory building. Heidelberg had just begun to install coal-gas street lighting, so the new laboratory building was also supplied with gas. The laboratory required heating from the gas as well as illumination. For heating, it was desirable to maximize the temperature and minimize the luminosity. Previous laboratory lamps left much to be desired regarding economy and simplicity, as well as the quality of the flame for a burner lamp.

While his building was still under construction late in 1854, Bunsen suggested certain design principles to the university's mechanic, Peter Desaga, and asked him to construct a prototype. (Similar principles had been used in an earlier burner design by Michael Faraday as well as in a device patented in 1856 by the gas engineer R W Elsner.) The Bunsen/Desaga design succeeded in generating a hot, sootless, non-luminous flame by mixing the gas with air in a controlled fashion before combustion. Desaga created slits for air at the bottom of the first cylindrical burner, the flame igniting at the top. By the time the building opened early in 1855, Desaga had made fifty of the burners for Bunsen's students. Bunsen published a description two years later, and many of his colleagues soon adopted the design. Bunsen burners are now used in laboratories all around the world. 

==Operation==
Bunsen burner flames depend on air flow in the throat holes (on the burner side, not the needle valve for gas flow): 1. air hole closed (safety flame used for lighting or default), 2. air hole slightly open, 3. air hole half open, 4. hole almost fully open (roaring blue flame).
The device in use today safely burns a continuous stream of a flammable gas such as natural gas (which is principally methane) or a liquefied petroleum gas such as propane, butane, or a mixture of both.

The hose barb is connected to a gas nozzle on the laboratory bench with rubber tubing. Most laboratory benches are equipped with multiple gas nozzles connected to a central gas source, as well as vacuum, nitrogen, and steam nozzles. The gas then flows up through the base through a small hole at the bottom of the barrel and is directed upward. There are open slots in the side of the tube bottom to admit air into the stream via the venturi effect, and the gas burns at the top of the tube once ignited by a flame or spark. The most common methods of lighting the burner are using a match or a spark lighter.

The amount of air mixed with the gas stream affects the completeness of the combustion reaction. Less air yields an incomplete and thus cooler reaction, while a gas stream well mixed with air provides oxygen in an equimolar amount and thus a complete and hotter reaction. The air flow can be controlled by opening or closing the slot openings at the base of the barrel, similar in function to the choke in a carburettor.

If the collar at the bottom of the tube is adjusted so more air can mix with the gas before combustion, the flame will burn hotter, appearing blue as a result. If the holes are closed, the gas will only mix with ambient air at the point of combustion, that is, only after it has exited the tube at the top. This reduced mixing produces an incomplete reaction, producing a cooler but brighter yellow which is often called the "safety flame" or "luminous flame". The yellow flame is luminous due to small soot particles in the flame which are heated to incandescence. The yellow flame is considered "dirty" because it leaves a layer of carbon on whatever it is heating. When the burner is regulated to produce a hot, blue flame it can be nearly invisible against some backgrounds. The hottest part of the flame is the tip of the inner flame, while the coolest is the whole inner flame. Increasing the amount of fuel gas flow through the tube by opening the needle valve will increase the size of the flame. However, unless the airflow is adjusted as well, the flame temperature will decrease because an increased amount of gas is now mixed with the same amount of air, starving the flame of oxygen.

The burner will often be placed on a suitable heatproof mat to protect the laboratory bench surface.

==Variants==
Other burners based on the same principle exist. The most important alternatives to the Bunsen burner are:
* Teclu burner  The lower part of its tube is conical, with a round screw nut below its base. The gap, set by the distance between the nut and the end of the tube, regulates the influx of the air in a way similar to the open slots of the Bunsen burner. The Teclu burner provides better mixing of air and fuel and can achieve higher flame temperatures than the Bunsen burner. 
* Meker burner  The lower part of its tube has more openings with larger total cross-section, admitting more air and facilitating better mixing of air and gas. The tube is wider and its top is covered with a wire grid. The grid separates the flame into an array of smaller flames with a common external envelope, and also prevents flashback to the bottom of the tube, which is a risk at high air-to-fuel ratios and limits the maximum rate of air intake in a conventional Bunsen burner. Flame temperatures of up to 1100 - are achievable if properly used. The flame also burns without noise, unlike the Bunsen or Teclu burners. 

==References==

== External links ==

* A history of the Bunsen Burner.
* 



[[Blue whale]]

The blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus) is a marine mammal belonging to the baleen whales (Mysticeti). At 30 m in length and 170 tonne or more in weight, it is the largest existing animal and the heaviest that ever existed. 

Long and slender, the blue whale's body can be various shades of bluish-grey dorsally and somewhat lighter underneath. There are at least three distinct subspecies: B. m. musculus of the North Atlantic and North Pacific, B. m. intermedia of the Southern Ocean and B. m. brevicauda (also known as the pygmy blue whale) found in the Indian Ocean and South Pacific Ocean. B. m. indica, found in the Indian Ocean, may be another subspecies. As with other baleen whales, its diet consists almost exclusively of small crustaceans known as krill. 

Blue whales were abundant in nearly all the oceans on Earth until the beginning of the twentieth century. For over a century, they were hunted almost to extinction by whalers until protected by the international community in 1966. A 2002 report estimated there were 5,000 to 12,000 blue whales worldwide, located in at least five groups. More recent research into the Pygmy subspecies suggests this may be an underestimate. Before whaling, the largest population was in the Antarctic, numbering approximately 239,000 (range 202,000 to 311,000). There remain only much smaller (around 2,000) concentrations in each of the eastern North Pacific, Antarctic, and Indian Ocean groups. There are two more groups in the North Atlantic, and at least two in the Southern Hemisphere.

==Taxonomy==

Blue whales are rorquals (family Balaenopteridae), a family that includes the humpback whale, the fin whale, Bryde's whale, the sei whale, and the minke whale. The family Balaenopteridae is believed to have diverged from the other families of the suborder Mysticeti as long ago as the middle Oligocene (28 Ma ago). It is not known when the members of those families diverged from each other.

The blue whale is usually classified as one of eight species in the genus Balaenoptera; one authority places it in a separate monotypic genus, Sibbaldus, but this is not accepted elsewhere. DNA sequencing analysis indicates that the blue whale is phylogenetically closer to the sei whale (Balaenoptera borealis) and Bryde's whale (Balaenoptera brydei) than to other Balaenoptera species, and closer to the humpback whale (Megaptera) and the gray whale (Eschrichtius) than to the minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata and Balaenoptera bonaerensis). If further research confirms these relationships, it will be necessary to reclassify the rorquals.

There have been at least 11 documented cases of blue/fin hybrid adults in the wild. Arnason and Gullberg describe the genetic distance between a blue and a fin as about the same as that between a human and a gorilla. Researchers working off Fiji believe they photographed a hybrid humpback/blue whale. Amazing Whale Facts Archive. Whale Center of New England (WCNE). Retrieved on 2008-02-27. 

The first published description of the blue whale comes from Robert Sibbald's Phalainologia Nova (1694). In September 1692, Sibbald found a blue whale that had stranded in the Firth of Fortha male 78 ft-longwhich had "black, horny plates" and "two large apertures approaching a pyramid in shape". 

The specific name musculus is Latin and could mean "muscle", but it can also be interpreted as "little mouse". Carl Linnaeus, who named the species in his seminal Systema Naturae of 1758, would have known this and may have intended the ironic double meaning. Herman Melville called this species sulphur-bottom in his novel Moby-Dick due to an orange-brown or yellow tinge on the underparts from diatom films on the skin. Other common names for the blue whale have included Sibbald's rorqual (after Sibbald, who first described the species), the great blue whale and the great northern rorqual. These names have now fallen into disuse. The first known usage of the term blue whale was in Melville's Moby-Dick, which only mentions it in passing and does not specifically attribute it to the species in question. The name was really derived from the Norwegian blhval, coined by Svend Foyn shortly after he had perfected the harpoon gun; the Norwegian scientist G. O. Sars adopted it as the Norwegian common name in 1874. 

Authorities classify the species into three or four subspecies: B. m. musculus, the northern blue whale consisting of the North Atlantic and North Pacific populations, B. m. intermedia, the southern blue whale of the Southern Ocean, B. m. brevicauda, the pygmy blue whale found in the Indian Ocean and South Pacific, Ichihara T. (1966). The pygmy blue whale B. m. brevicauda, a new subspecies from the Antarctic in Whales, dolphins and porpoises Page(s) 79113. and the more problematic B. m. indica, the great Indian rorqual, which is also found in the Indian Ocean and, although described earlier, may be the same subspecies as B. m. brevicauda. 

==Description and behaviour==
A blue whale lifting its tail flukes
Adult blue whale
The blue whale has a long tapering body that appears stretched in comparison with the stockier build of other whales. The head is flat, U-shaped and has a prominent ridge running from the blowhole to the top of the upper lip. The front part of the mouth is thick with baleen plates; around 300 plates (each around one metre (3.2 ft) long) hang from the upper jaw, running 0.5 m back into the mouth. Between 70 and 118 grooves (called ventral pleats) run along the throat parallel to the body length. These pleats assist with evacuating water from the mouth after lunge feeding (see feeding below).

The dorsal fin is small, ranging in height from 8 - (usually 20 -) and averaging about 28 cm. It is visible only briefly during the dive sequence. Located around three-quarters of the way along the length of the body, it varies in shape from one individual to another; some only have a barely perceptible lump, but others may have prominent and falcate (sickle-shaped) dorsals. When surfacing to breathe, the blue whale raises its shoulder and blowhole out of the water to a greater extent than other large whales, such as the fin or sei whales. Observers can use this trait to differentiate between species at sea. Some blue whales in the North Atlantic and North Pacific raise their tail fluke when diving. When breathing, the whale emits a spectacular vertical single-column spout up to 12 m, typically 9 m. Its lung capacity is 5,000 litres (1320 U.S. gallons). Blue whales have twin blowholes shielded by a large splashguard. 

The flippers are 3 - long. The upper sides are grey with a thin white border; the lower sides are white. The head and tail fluke are generally uniformly grey. The whale's upper parts, and sometimes the flippers, are usually mottled. The degree of mottling varies substantially from individual to individual. Some may have a uniform slate-grey color, but others demonstrate a considerable variation of dark blues, greys and blacks, all tightly mottled. 

Blue whales can reach speeds of 50 km/h over short bursts, usually when interacting with other whales, but 20 km/h is a more typical traveling speed. When feeding, they slow down to 5 km/h.

Blue whales most commonly live alone or with one other individual. It is not known how long traveling pairs stay together. In locations where there is a high concentration of food, as many as 50 blue whales have been seen scattered over a small area. They do not form the large, close-knit groups seen in other baleen species.

View of a blue whale and its bow wave, showing the blowhole

===Size===
The blow of a blue whale
The small dorsal fin of this blue whale is just visible on the far left.
The blue whale is the largest animal ever known to have lived. By comparison, the largest known dinosaur of the Mesozoic Era was Argentinosaurus, which is estimated to have weighed up to 90 metric ton, about half the weight of a blue whale.

Blue whales are difficult to weigh because of their size. As is the case with most large whales targeted by whalers, adult blue whales have never been weighed whole, but cut up into manageable pieces first. This caused an underestimate of the total weight of the whale, due to the loss of blood and other fluids. As a whole, blue whales from the Northern Atlantic and Pacific appear to be smaller on average than those from sub-Antarctic waters. Nevertheless, measurements between 150 - were recorded of animals up to 27 m in length. The weight of an individual 30 m long is believed by the American National Marine Mammal Laboratory (NMML) to be in excess of 180 metric ton. The largest blue whale accurately weighed by NMML scientists to date was a female that weighed 177 metric ton. 

There is some uncertainty about the biggest blue whale ever found, as most data came from blue whales killed in Antarctic waters during the first half of the twentieth century, which were collected by whalers not well-versed in standard zoological measurement techniques. The heaviest whale ever recorded weighed in at approximately 190 MT. The longest whales ever recorded were two females measuring 33.6 and, although in neither of these cases was the piecemeal weight gathered. The longest whale measured by scientists at the NMML was a 29.9 m, female caught in the Antarctic by Japanese whalers in 194647. Lieut. Quentin R. Walsh, USCG, while acting as whaling inspector of the factory ship Ulysses, verified the measurement of a 30 m pregnant blue whale caught in the Antarctic in the 193738 season. Capelotti, P.J. (ed.), Quentin R. Walsh. 2010. The Whaling Expedition of the Ulysses, 193738, p. 28. The longest reported in the North Pacific was a 27.1 m female taken by Japanese whalers in 1959, and the longest reported in the North Atlantic was a 28.1 m female caught in the Davis Strait. 

Due to its large size, several organs of the blue whale are the largest in the animal kingdom. A blue whale's tongue weighs around 2.7 metric ton and, when fully expanded, its mouth is large enough to hold up to 90 metric ton of food and water. Despite the size of its mouth, the dimensions of its throat are such that a blue whale cannot swallow an object wider than a beach ball. Blue Planet: Frozen seas (BBC documentary) Its heart weighs 600 kg and is the largest known in any animal. A blue whale's thoracic aorta is estimated to be 23 cm in diameter. During the first seven months of its life, a blue whale calf drinks approximately 400 l of milk every day. Blue whale calves gain weight quickly, as much as 90 kg every 24 hours. Even at birth, they weigh up to 2700 kgthe same as a fully grown hippopotamus. Blue whales have relatively small brains, only about 6.92 kg , about 0.007% of its body weight. Tinker, Whales of the World (1988, p. 76). The blue whale penis is the largest penis of any living organism. The reported average length varies but is usually mentioned to have an average penis length of 8 ft to 10 ft. 
A blue whale skull measuring 19 ft in the collections of the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History

===Other===
Blue whales were considered relatively less active on water surfaces, but they breach. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVM2PoYSMKQ 
Adults can be active especially when they are involved in mating competitions as they usually demonstrate and repeat head-slaps and lunging for long time. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26khXLbWwBA https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E_vYKg1U92Y Calves tend to be more playful on water surface than adults.

As the populations recover and newer generations get more used to being with humans, their approaches to shores are becoming more obvious. http://karenandjimsexcellentadventure.blogspot.jp/2011/10/blue-whale.html Off Chile, it is normal for whales to enter into narrow fiords either for feeding or resting. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3xAdJDiilk&list=PL1AE4DB201A50A009 Blue whales are known to make larger, mixed groups with other rorquals on occasions such as for feeding or traveling with Fin whales https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KqE9pNdTQW0. retrieved on 13-05-2014 and Sei whales, Bryde's whales, Humpback whales. Recently, a mixed group of Blue, Fin, and Sei on migrations near Azores and a forging ground for all three species were discovered off Puerto Lopez, Ecuador. https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=ms.695391450482607.695391467149272.695391283815957.695391343815951.695391430482609.bps.a.695391270482625.1073741925.109925212362570&type=1. retrieved on 13-05-2014 

===Feeding===
Blue whales feed almost exclusively on krill, though they also take small numbers of copepods. The species of this zooplankton eaten by blue whales varies from ocean to ocean. In the North Atlantic, Meganyctiphanes norvegica, Thysanoessa raschii, Thysanoessa inermis and Thysanoessa longicaudata are the usual food; in the North Pacific, Euphausia pacifica, Thysanoessa inermis, Thysanoessa longipes, Thysanoessa spinifera, Nyctiphanes symplex and Nematoscelis megalops; and in the Southern Hemisphere, Euphausia superba, Euphausia crystallorophias, Euphausia valentini, and Nyctiphanes australis.

An adult blue whale can eat up to 40 million krill in a day. Afp.google.com Hunted, rammed, poisoned, whales may die from heartbreak too The whales always feed in the areas with the highest concentration of krill, sometimes eating up to 3600 kg of krill in a single day. The daily energy requirement of an adult blue whale is in the region of 1.5 million kilocalories. Piper, Ross (2007), Extraordinary Animals: An Encyclopedia of Curious and Unusual Animals, Greenwood Press. Their feeding habits are seasonal. Blue whales gorge on krill in the rich waters of the Antarctic before migrating to their breeding grounds in the warmer, less-rich waters nearer the equator. The blue whale can take in up to 90 times as much energy as it expends, allowing it to build up considerable energy reserves. Michael Marhsall. Blue whale feeding methods are ultra-efficient. New Scientist, December 2010. Andy Coghlan. Migrating blue whales rediscover 'forgotten' waters. New Scientist, May 2009 J. A. Goldbogen1, J. Calambokidis, E. Oleson3, J. Potvin, N. D. Pyenson, G. Schorr2 and R. E. Shadwick (2011). Mechanics, hydrodynamics and energetics of blue whale lunge feeding: efficiency dependence on krill density. Journal of Experimental Biology 214, 131-146. 

Because krill move, blue whales typically feed at depths of more than 100 m during the day and only surface-feed at night. Dive times are typically 10 minutes when feeding, though dives of up to 20 minutes are common. The longest recorded dive is 36 minutes. The whale feeds by lunging forward at groups of krill, taking the animals and a large quantity of water into its mouth. The water is then squeezed out through the baleen plates by pressure from the ventral pouch and tongue. Once the mouth is clear of water, the remaining krill, unable to pass through the plates, are swallowed. The blue whale also incidentally consumes small fish, crustaceans and squid caught up with krill. 

===Life history===
A blue whale calf with its mother
Mating starts in late autumn and continues to the end of winter. Little is known about mating behaviour or breeding grounds. Females typically give birth once every two to three years at the start of the winter after a gestation period of 10 to 12 months. The calf weighs about 2.5 metric ton and is around 7 m in length. Blue whale calves drink 380570 litres (100150 U.S. gallons) of milk a day. Blue whale milk has an energy content of about 18,300 kJ/kg (4,370 kcal/kg). Olav T. Oftedal1 (1997). Lactation in Whales and Dolphins: Evidence of Divergence Between Baleen- and Toothed-Species. pg 224 The calf is weaned after six months, by which time it has doubled in length. Sexual maturity is typically reached at five to ten years of age. In the Northern Hemisphere, whaling records show that males averaged 20  and females 21  at sexual maturity, while in the Southern Hemisphere it was 22.6 and, respectively. Evans, Peter G. H. (1987). The Natural History of Whales and Dolphins. Facts on File. In the Northern Hemisphere, as adults, males averaged 24 m and females 25 m, while in the Southern Hemisphere males averaged 25 m and females 26.5 m. In the North Pacific, photogrammetric studies have shown blue whale adults today average 21.6 m, with a maximum of over 24.4 m Gilpatrick, James W., and Wayne L. Perryman. (2008). "Geographic variation in external morphology of North Pacific and Southern Hemisphere blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus)". J. Cetacean Res. Manage. 10 (1): 921.  although a 26.5 m female stranded near Pescadero, California in 1979. Blue whale skeleton at Seymour Center at Long Marine Lab 

Scientists estimate that blue whales can live for at least 80 years, but since individual records do not date back into the whaling era, this will not be known with certainty for many years. The longest recorded study of a single individual is 34 years, in the eastern North Pacific. (Sears 1998) The whales' only natural predator is the orca. Studies report that as many as 25% of mature blue whales have scars resulting from orca attacks. The mortality rate of such attacks is unknown.

Blue whale strandings are extremely uncommon, and, because of the species' social structure, mass strandings are unheard of. William Perrin and Joseph Geraci. "Stranding" pp 11921197 in Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals (Perrin, Wursig and Thewissen eds) When strandings do occur, they can become the focus of public interest. In 1920, a blue whale washed up near Bragar on the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland. It had been shot by whalers, but the harpoon had failed to explode. As with other mammals, the fundamental instinct of the whale was to try to carry on breathing at all costs, even though this meant beaching to prevent itself from drowning. Two of the whale's bones were erected just off a main road on Lewis and remain a tourist attraction. 

===Vocalizations===

Estimates made by Cummings and Thompson (1971) suggest the source level of sounds made by blue whales are between 155 and 188 decibels when measured relative to a reference pressure of one micropascal at one metre. All blue whale groups make calls at a fundamental frequency between 10 and 40 Hz; the lowest frequency sound a human can typically perceive is 20 Hz. Blue whale calls last between ten and thirty seconds. Blue whales off the coast of Sri Lanka have been repeatedly recorded making "songs" of four notes, lasting about two minutes each, reminiscent of the well-known humpback whale songs. As this phenomenon has not been seen in any other populations, researchers believe it may be unique to the B. m. brevicauda (pygmy) subspecies.

The reason for vocalization is unknown. Richardson et al. (1995) discuss six possible reasons: 

# Maintenance of inter-individual distance
# Species and individual recognition
# Contextual information transmission (for example feeding, alarm, courtship)
# Maintenance of social organization (for example contact calls between females and males)
# Location of topographic features
# Location of prey resources

==Population and whaling==

===Hunting era===

Blue whale populations have declined dramatically due to commercial whaling.
Blue whale skeleton at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa, Ontario

Blue whales are not easy to catch or kill. Their speed and power meant that they were rarely pursued by early whalers, who instead targeted sperm and right whales. In 1864, the Norwegian Svend Foyn equipped a steamboat with harpoons specifically designed for catching large whales. Although it was initially cumbersome and had a low success rate, Foyn perfected the harpoon gun, and soon several whaling stations were established on the coast of Finnmark in northern Norway. Because of disputes with the local fishermen, the last whaling station in Finnmark was closed down in 1904.

Soon, blue whales were being hunted off Iceland (1883), the Faroe Islands (1894), Newfoundland (1898), and Spitsbergen (1903). In 190405 the first blue whales were taken off South Georgia. By 1925, with the advent of the stern slipway in factory ships and the use of steam-driven whale catchers, the catch of blue whales, and baleen whales as a whole, in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic began to increase dramatically. In the 193031 season, these ships caught 29,400 blue whales in the Antarctic alone. By the end of World War II, populations had been significantly depleted, and, in 1946, the first quotas restricting international trade in whales were introduced, but they were ineffective because of the lack of differentiation between species. Rare species could be hunted on an equal footing with those found in relative abundance.

Arthur C. Clarke, in his 1962 book Profiles of the Future, was the first prominent intellectual to call attention to the plight of the blue whale. He mentioned its large brain and said, "we do not know the true nature of the entity we are destroying." Clarke, Arthur C. Profiles of the Future; an Inquiry into the Limits of the Possible. New York: Harper & Row, 1962 

Blue whale hunting was banned in 1966 by the International Whaling Commission, and illegal whaling by the Soviet Union finally halted in the 1970s, by which time 330,000 blue whales had been caught in the Antarctic, 33,000 in the rest of the Southern Hemisphere, 8,200 in the North Pacific, and 7,000 in the North Atlantic. The largest original population, in the Antarctic, had been reduced to 0.15% of their initial numbers. 

===Population and distribution today===
A blue whale set against the backdrop of the Azores
A blue whale's tail fluke with the Santa Barbara Channel Islands in the background

Since the introduction of the whaling ban, studies have failed to ascertain whether the conservation reliant global blue whale population is increasing or remaining stable. In the Antarctic, best estimates show a significant increase at 7.3% per year since the end of illegal Soviet whaling, but numbers remain at under 1% of their original levels. It has also been suggested that Icelandic and Californian populations are increasing but these increases are not statistically significant. The total world population was estimated to be between 5,000 and 12,000 in 2002, although there are high levels of uncertainty in available estimates for many areas. 

The IUCN Red List counts the blue whale as "endangered" as it has since the list's inception. In the United States, the National Marine Fisheries Service lists them as endangered under the Endangered Species Act. The largest known concentration, consisting of about 2,800 individuals, is the northeast Pacific population of the northern blue whale (B. m. musculus) subspecies that ranges from Alaska to Costa Rica, but is most commonly seen from California in summer. Blue Whale (Balaenoptera musculus): Eastern North Pacific Stock (NOAA Stock Reports, 2009), p. 178. Infrequently, this population visits the northwest Pacific between Kamchatka and the northern tip of Japan.

====North Atlantic====
In the North Atlantic, two stocks of B. m. musculus are recognised. The first is found off Greenland, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia and the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. This group is estimated to total about 500. The second, more easterly group is spotted from the Azores in spring to Iceland in July and August; it is presumed the whales follow the Mid-Atlantic Ridge between the two volcanic islands. Beyond Iceland, blue whales have been spotted as far north as Spitsbergen and Jan Mayen, though such sightings are rare. Scientists do not know where these whales spend their winters. The total North Atlantic population is estimated to be between 600 and 1,500. Off Ireland, the first ever confirmed sightings were made in 2008, http://www.wildlifeextra.com/go/news/ireland-blue-whales723.html#cr since then Porcupine Seabight has been regarded as a prominent habitat for the species along with Fin Whales.

====North Pacific====

The Californian population seems to be recolonizing slowly in the former habitats off British Columbia and in the Gulf of Alaska. As the population grows, whales in this population seem to be adapting more to near-shore waters and to human vessels.

Almost nothing is known about the central and western populations. Of the populations that once existed off coastal Japan, the last recorded confirmed stranding was in the 1950s. Marine Mammal Stranding DB_record_detail Some scientists regard that historical populations off Japan were driven to extinction by whaling activities, mostly from the Kumanonada Sea off Wakayama, in Tosa Bay, and in the Sea of Hyga. Nowadays, possible vagrants from either eastern or offshore populations are observed on very rare occasions off Kushiro. http://blog.goo.ne.jp/s38050018k/e/6ce4cb0af909e237f42c958dab8b8b55 There were also small, but constant catch records around the Korean Peninsula and in the coastal waters of the Sea of Japan although this species is considered not to enter into marginal seas, such as the Sea of Okhotsk, on usual migrations. Whales were known to migrate further north to eastern Kamchatka, the Gulf of Anadyr and the Commander Islands. Only three sightings were made between 1994 and 2004 in Russia. Chernyagina A.A., Burdin A.M., Artyuhin Y.B., Danilin D.D., Lobkova L.E., Tokranov A.M., Artyuhin Y.B., Gerasimov N., Lobkov E.G., Zagrebelnyi S.V., Nicanor A.P., Fil V.I., Shulezhko T.S., Chernyagina O.A., Gimelbrant D.E., Kirichenko V.E., Selivanov O., 2013 -    -    . ISBN 9785961002164. Kamchatka Branch FGBUN Pacific Institute of Geography. Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky: Kamchatpress. Retrieved on 9 June 2014 Historically, wintering grounds existed off the Hawaiian Archipelago, Northern Mariana Islands, Bonin Islands and Ryukyu Islands, Philippines, Taiwan, Zhoushan Archipelago, and coastal China, such as in Daya Bay, Leizhou Peninsula, and Hainan Island.

====Southern Hemisphere====
In the Southern Hemisphere, there appear to be two distinct subspecies, B. m. intermedia, the Antarctic blue whale, and the little-studied pygmy blue whale, B. m. brevicauda, found in Indian Ocean waters. The most recent surveys (midpoint 1998) provided an estimate of 2,280 blue whales in the Antarctic. (of which fewer than 1% are likely to be pygmy blue whales). Estimates from a 1996 survey show that 424 pygmy blue whales were in a small area south of Madagascar alone, thus it is likely that numbers in the entire Indian Ocean are in the thousands. If this is true, the global numbers would be much higher than estimates predict. 

Several congregating grounds are recently confirmed in Oceania, such as on Perth Canyon off Rottnest Island, waters of Great Australian Bight off Portland, and in South Taranaki Bight. Both species of Southern Blues and Pygmy Blues use waters off Western Australia, and coastal areas of eastern North Island of New Zealand, from Northland waters such as in the Bay of Islands and Hauraki Gulf in north to Bay of Plenty in the south as breeding and calving grounds by some females, and as migratory colliders (very close to shore in the NZ region http://www.wadedoak.com/_disc1/0000154e.htm ). At least for whales off southern and Western Australia and some others are known to migrate into tropic coastal waters in Indonesia, http://www.powerboat-world.com/index.cfm?Nid=59148&ntid=57&subid=72276&nlid=458744&tbl=Subs&pwd=j6o2ut Philippines, http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/video/77783/24oras/24oras-blue-whale-namataan-sa-bohol and off East Timor http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/12/31/us-whales-timor-idUSTRE4BU0LD20081231 (animals in Philippines may or may not originate from North Pacific populations as whales regularly appear off Bohol, north of the Equator http://largemarinevertebratesproject.blogspot.jp/2012/04/spotting-big-blue.html http://www.lamave.org/media/ ).

====Subspecies' distribution====
A fourth subspecies, B. m. indica, was identified by Blyth in 1859 in the northern Indian Ocean, but difficulties in identifying distinguishing features for this subspecies led to it being used as a synonym for B. m. brevicauda, the pygmy blue whale. Records for Soviet catches seem to indicate that the female adult size is closer to that of the Pygmy Blue than B. m. musculus, although the populations of B. m. indica and B. m. brevicauda appear to be discrete, and the breeding seasons differ by almost six months. 

Migratory patterns of these subspecies are not well known. For example, pygmy blue whales have been recorded in the northern Indian Ocean (Oman, Maldives and Sri Lanka), where they may form a distinct resident population. In addition, the population of blue whales occurring off Chile and Peru may also be a distinct population. Some Antarctic blue whales approach the eastern South Atlantic coast in winter, and occasionally, their vocalizations are heard off Peru, Western Australia, and in the northern Indian Ocean. In Chile, the Cetacean Conservation Center, with support from the Chilean Navy, is undertaking extensive research and conservation work on a recently discovered feeding aggregation of the species off the coast of Chiloe Island in the Gulf of Corcovado(Chilo National Park), where 326 blue whales were spotted in 2007. In this regions, it is normal for blue whales to enter Fiords. Whales also reach southern Los Lagos, such as off Caleta Zorra, live along with other rorquals.

Efforts to calculate the blue whale population more accurately are supported by marine mammologists at Duke University, who maintain the Ocean Biogeographic Information SystemSpatial Ecological Analysis of Megavertebrate Populations (OBIS-SEAMAP), a collation of marine mammal sighting data from around 130 sources. The data for the blue whale, along with a species profile, may be found here 

===Threats other than hunting===
A blue whale surfaces off Santa Cruz Island in the Channel Islands.
Blue whales stop producing foraging D calls once a mid-frequency sonar is activated, even though the sonar frequency range (18 kHz) far exceeds their sound production range (25100 Hz). 
Due to their enormous size, power and speed, adult blue whales have virtually no natural predators. There is one documented case in National Geographic Magazine of a blue whale being attacked by orcas off the Baja California Peninsula; although the orcas were unable to kill the animal outright during their attack, the blue whale sustained serious wounds and probably died as a result of them shortly after the attack. Up to a quarter of the blue whales identified in Baja bear scars from orca attacks. 

Blue whales may be wounded, sometimes fatally, after colliding with ocean vessels, as well as becoming trapped or entangled in fishing gear. The ever-increasing amount of ocean noise, including sonar, drowns out the vocalizations produced by whales, which makes it harder for them to communicate. Blue whales stop producing foraging D calls once a mid-frequency sonar is activated, even though the sonar frequency range (18 kHz) far exceeds their sound production range (25100 Hz). Human threats to the potential recovery of blue whale populations also include accumulation of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) chemicals within the whale's body. 

With global warming causing glaciers and permafrost to melt rapidly and allowing a large amount of fresh water to flow into the oceans, there are concerns that if the amount of fresh water in the oceans reaches a critical point, there will be a disruption in the thermohaline circulation. (subscription required); see also Considering the blue whale's migratory patterns are based on ocean temperature, a disruption in this circulation, which moves warm and cold water around the world, would be likely to have an effect on their migration. The whales summer in the cool, high latitudes, where they feed in krill-abundant waters; they winter in warmer, low latitudes, where they mate and give birth. 

The change in ocean temperature would also affect the blue whale's food supply. The warming trend and decreased salinity levels would cause a significant shift in krill location and abundance. 

==Museums==
The Exhibition Lab's blue whale at the American Museum of Natural History.

Blue whale skeleton, outside the Long Marine Laboratory at the University of California, Santa Cruz

The Natural History Museum in London contains a famous mounted skeleton and life-size model of a blue whale, which were both the first of their kind in the world, but have since been replicated at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Similarly, the American Museum of Natural History in New York City has a full-size model in its Milstein Family Hall of Ocean Life. A juvenile blue whale skeleton is installed at the New Bedford Whaling Museum in New Bedford, Massachusetts.

The Aquarium of the Pacific in Long Beach, California features a life-size model of a mother blue whale with her calf suspended from the ceiling of its main hall. The Beaty Biodiversity Museum at the University of British Columbia, Canada, houses a display of a blue whale skeleton (skull is cast replica) directly on the main campus boulevard. A real skeleton of a blue whale at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa was also unveiled in May 2010. 

The Museum of Natural History in Gothenburg, Sweden contains the only stuffed blue whale in the world. There one can also find the skeleton of the whale mounted beside the whale.

The Melbourne Museum features a skeleton of the pygmy blue whale.

The North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences in Raleigh, North Carolina features a mounted skeleton of a blue whale which visitors can view from both the first and second floors.

The Tokyo National Museum in Ueno Park displays a life-sized model of a blue whale in the front. Several other institutions such as Tokai University and Taiji Whale Museum hold skeleton of skeleton model of Pygmy blue whales, while several churches and buildings in western Japan including Nagasaki Prefecture display jawbone of captured animals as a gate.

==Whale-watching==
Blue whales may be encountered (but rarely) on whale-watching cruises in the Gulf of Maine and are the main attractions along the north shore of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and in the Saint Lawrence estuary. Blue whales can also be seen off Southern California, starting as early as March and April, with the peak between July and September. More whales have been observed close to shore along with Fin whales.

In Chile, the Alfaguara project combines conservation measures for the population of blue whales feeding off Chilo Island with whale watching and other ecotourism activities that bring economic benefits to the local people. 
Whale-watching, principally blue whales, is also carried out south of Sri Lanka. Whales are widely seen along the coast of Chile and Peru near the coast, occasionally making mixed groups with FIn, Sei, and Bryde's whales. There are also many areas without decent whale watching programs such as around Caleta Zorra.

In Australia, Pygmy Blue and Antarctic Blue whales have been observed from various tours in almost all the coastlines of the continent. Among these, tours with sightings likely the highest rate are on west coast such as in Geographe Bay Blue Whales arrive in Geographe Bay and in southern bight off Portland. Portland - Heli-Explore Whale Watching - South West - Outside Melbourne For later, special tours to observe Pygmy blues by helicopters are organized. HeliExplore - YouTube 

In New Zealand, whales have been seen in many areas close to shore, most notably at Northland coast, Hauraki Gulf, Bay of Plenty, http://www.gettyimages.co.jp/detail/photo/blue-whale-feeding-near-shore-new-zealand-high-res-stock-photography/91275736 off South Taranaki Bight, in Cook Strait and off Kaikoura with remarkably increasing sighting trends in recent years https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10151231146592439&set=a.10151189441912439.475676.80046347438&type=3&src=https%3A%2F%2Fscontent-a.xx.fbcdn.net%2Fhphotos-ash3%2Ft1.0-9%2F521574_10151231146592439_335296166_n.jpg&size=800%2C438 with some whales started staying in the same area near the shore for several days. Blue whale sightings of Kaikoura excite tourists | Stuff.co.nz 
Similar approaches with Portland's case to use helicopters was once attempted in South Taranaki Bight, but seemingly been cancelled according to considerations. No Whale Watch Likely Here | Stuff.co.nz 

==See also==
* List of whale and dolphin species
* List of whale vocalizations

==Footnotes==

==References==

* pp. 8993.
* 
* 
* 
* NOAA Fisheries, Office of Protected Resources Blue whale biology & status

==External links==

* Photographs and movies from ARKive
* Photographs from the New Bedford Whaling Museum *of "Kobo", a blue whale skeleton
* Blue whale vocalizations  Cornell Lab of OrnithologyBioacoustics Research Program
* Blue whale movies, text in French
* World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)  species profile for the blue whale
* BBC News  Great whales
* Blue whale video clips and news from the BBC  BBC Wildlife Finder
* 
* Balaenoptera musculus



[[Bolsheviks]]

Bolshevik Party meeting. Sitting (from left): Avel Enukidze, Mikhail Kalinin, Nikolai Bukharin, Mikhail Tomsky, Mikhail Lashevich, Lev Kamenev, Yevgeni Preobrazhensky, Leonid Serebryakov, Vladimir Lenin and Alexei Rykov.
Boris Kustodiev's 1920 painting "Bolshevik"

The Bolsheviks, originally also Ushakov's Explanatory Dictionary of Russian Language, article "" Bolshevists Dictionaries define the word "Bolshevist" both as a synonym to "Bolshevik" and as an adherent of Bolshevik policies. or Bolsheviki (; derived from bol'shinstvo, "majority", literally meaning "one of the majority") were a faction of the Marxist Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) which split apart from the Menshevik faction Derived from men'shinstvo, "minority", which comes from men'she, "less". The split occurred at the Second Party Congress in 1903. at the Second Party Congress in 1903. 

The Bolsheviks were the majority faction in a crucial vote, hence their name. They ultimately became the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. After the split, the Bolshevik party was designated as RSDLP(b) (Russian: ()), where "b" stands for "Bolsheviks". Shortly after coming to power in November 1917 the party changed its name to the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (()) and was generally known as the Communist Party after that point, however, it was not until 1952 that the party formally dropped the word "Bolshevik" from its name. (See Congress of the CPSU article for the timeline of name changes.) The Bolsheviks came to power in Russia during the October Revolution phase of the Russian Revolution of 1917, and founded the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic which would later become the chief constituent of the Soviet Union in 1922.

The Bolsheviks, founded by Vladimir Lenin and Alexander Bogdanov, were by 1905 a major organization consisting primarily of workers under a democratic internal hierarchy governed by the principle of democratic centralism, who considered themselves the leaders of the revolutionary working class of Russia. Their beliefs and practices were often referred to as Bolshevism.

== History of the split ==

In the 2nd Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, held in Brussels and London during August 1903, Lenin and Julius Martov disagreed over the membership rules. Lenin wanted members "who recognise the Party Programme and support it by material means Robert Service, Lenin a biography, p. 154. and by personal participation in one of the party's organisations." Julius Martov suggested "by regular personal assistance under the direction of one of the party's organisations."
Lenin advocated limiting party membership to a smaller core of active members, as opposed to "card carriers" who might only be active in party branches from time to time or not at all. This active base would develop the cadre, a core of "professional revolutionaries", consisting of loyal communists who would spend most of their time organising the party toward a mass revolutionary party capable of leading a workers' revolution against the Tsarist autocracy.

A main source of the factions could be directly attributed to Lenins extreme stubbornness. It was obvious at early stages in Lenins revolutionary practices that he would not be willing to concede on any party policy that conflicted with his own predetermined ideas. It was the loyalty that he had to his own self envisioned utopia that caused the party split. He was seen even by fellow party members as being so narrow minded that he believed that there were only two types of people Friend and enemy-those who followed him, and all the rest. Leon Trotsky who was Lenins fellow revolutionists, though they had differing views as to how the revolution and party should be handled, compared Lenin in 1904 to the French revolutionists Robespierre. Lenins view of politics as verbal and ideological warfare and his inability to accept criticism even if it came from his own dedicated followers was the reason behind this accusation.

The root of the split was centered on a book that Lenin wrote while serving a sentence of exile titled What is to be Done? The book was published in 1902 in Germany and of course strict censorship in Russia prevented its legal publication and distribution. One of the main points presented in Lenins writing addressed that the revolution can only truly be achieved by the strong leadership of one person or a very select few over the masses. After the revolution resulted in a successful overthrow of the government this individual driving force must release power to allow socialism to fully encompass the nation. Lenin also believed that revolutionary leaders must fully dedicate their entire life to the cause in order to be successful. Lenin felt that if professional revolutionaries did not maintain control over the workers they would lose sight of the partys objective and sell out to oppositionists beliefs or abandon the revolution entirely. This vision Lenin had of the socialists intelligentsia showed that he was not a complete supporter of the Marxist theory which also created some party unrest. For example Lenin agreed with the Marxist belief of eliminating social classes, but in his utopian society there would still be visible distinctions between those in politics and the common worker. Through moral disagreement to unfair worker treatment and loyalty to a completely classless society Lenins variations were met with internal party discontent. Although the party split of Bolsheviks and Mensheviks would not become official until 1903, the differences originally began to surface as early as 1902 with the publication of Lenins What is to be Done? Through the influence of the book Lenin also crushed another group of revolutionists known as Economists. The fundamental difference between Lenin and the economists was that they were pushing for economic reform while leaving the government somewhat intact, and they also failed to recognize the importance of uniting the working population with their cause. 

Other than the debate between Lenin and Julius Martov; Lenin felt membership should require support of the Party program, financial contributions, and finally involvement in a Party organization whereas Martov didnt see the need for joining Party organizations, internal unrest also rose over the structure that was best suited for Soviet power. As discussed in What Must be Done? Lenin firmly believed that a rigid political structure was needed to effectively initiate a formal revolution. This idea was met with opposition from his once close followers including; Julius Martov, Geogry Plekhanov, Leon Trotsky, and Pavel Axelrod. Geogry Plekhanov and Lenins major dispute arose addressing the topic of nationalizing land or leaving it for private use. Lenin wanted to nationalize to aid in collectivization. Plekhanov thought worker motivation would remain higher if individuals were able to maintain their own property. Those who opposed Lenin and wanted to continue on a Marxists path towards complete socialism and disagreed with his strict party membership guidelines became known as softs while Lenin supporters became known as hards. 

The base of active and experienced members would be the recruiting ground for this professional core. Sympathizers would be left outside and the party would be organised based on the concept of democratic centralism. Martov, until then a close friend of Lenin, agreed with him that the core of the party should consist of professional revolutionaries, but argued that party membership should be open to sympathizers, revolutionary workers and other fellow travelers.

The two had disagreed on the issue as early as MarchMay 1903, but it was not until the Congress that their differences became irreconcilable and split the party. See Israel Getzler. Martov: A Political Biography of a Russian Social Democrat, Cambridge University Press, 2003 (first edition 1967), ISBN 0-521-52602-7 p.78 Although at first the disagreement appeared to be minor and inspired by personal conflicts, for example, Lenin's insistence on dropping less active editorial board members from Iskra or Martov's support for the Organizing Committee of the Congress which Lenin opposed, the differences quickly grew and the split became irreparable.

===Origins of the name===
The two factions were originally known as "hard" (Lenin's supporters) and "soft" (Martov's supporters). Soon, however, the terminology changed to "Bolsheviks" and "Mensheviks", from the Russian "bolshinstvo" (majority) and "menshinstvo" (minority). On the other hand, Martov's supporters won the vote concerning the question of party membership. Neither Lenin nor Martov had a firm majority throughout the Congress as delegates left or switched sides. At the end, the Congress was evenly split between the two factions.

From 1907 on, English language articles sometimes used the term "Maximalist" for "Bolshevik" and "Minimalist" for "Menshevik", which proved confusing since there was also a "Maximalist" faction within the Russian Socialist-Revolutionary Party in 19041906 (which after 1906 formed a separate Union of Socialists-Revolutionaries Maximalists) and then again after 1917. See tienne Antonelli, Bolshevik Russia, A.A. Knopf, 1920, tr. by Charles A. Carroll, 307pp.: "the term "Maximalist" rather widely used as a translation for "Bolshevik" is historically false." (p.59) 

=== Composition of the party ===
The average party member was very young. In 1907, 22% of Bolsheviks were under 20, 37% were 20-24 and 16% were 25-29. By 1905, 62% of the members were industrial workers (3% of the population in 1897 Abraham Ascher, The Revolution of 1905, p. 4. ). Tony Cliff, Lenin and the Revolutionary Party, p. 37. 22% of Bolsheviks were gentry (1.7% of the total population), 38% were uprooted peasants, compared with 19% and 26% for the Mensheviks. In 1907 78.3% of the Bolsheviks were Russian and 10% were Jewish (34% and 20% for the Mensheviks).
Total membership was 8,400 in 1905, 13,000 in 1906 and 46,100 by 1907 (8,400, 18,000, 38,200 respectively for the Mensheviks). By 1910 both factions together had fewer than 10,000 members. Richard Pipes, The Russian Revolution, pp. 364-5. 

===Beginning of the 1905 Revolution (19031905)===
The two factions were in a state of flux in 190304 with many members changing sides. The founder of Russian Marxism, Georgy Plekhanov, who was at first allied with Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks, parted ways with them by 1904. Leon Trotsky at first supported the Mensheviks, but left them in September 1904 over their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition to a reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks. He remained a self-described "non-factional social democrat" until August 1917 when he joined Lenin and the Bolsheviks as their positions assembled and he came to believe that Lenin was right on the issue of the party.

All but one member of the Central Committee were arrested in Moscow in early 1905. The remaining member, with the power of appointing a new one, was won over by the Bolsheviks. Tim McDaniel, Autocracy, capitalism, and revolution in Russia, p. 246. 

The lines between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks hardened in April 1905 when the Bolsheviks held a Bolsheviks-only meeting in London, which they called the Third Party Congress. The Mensheviks organised a rival conference and the split was thus formalised.

The Bolsheviks played a relatively minor role in the 1905 Revolution, and were a minority in the St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers' Deputies led by Trotsky. The less significant Moscow Soviet, however, was dominated by the Bolsheviks. These soviets became the model for those formed in 1917.

===The Mensheviks ("The minority") (19061907)===

As the Russian Revolution of 1905 progressed, Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and smaller non-Russian social democratic parties operating within the Russian Empire attempted to reunify at the Fourth (Unification) Congress of the RSDLP held at Folkets hus, Norra Bantorget in Stockholm, April 1906. When the Mensheviks struck an alliance with the Jewish Bund, the Bolsheviks found themselves in a minority.

However, all factions retained their respective factional structure and the Bolsheviks formed the Bolshevik Centre, the de facto governing body of the Bolshevik faction within the RSDLP. At the Fifth Congress held in London in May 1907, the Bolsheviks were in the majority, but the two factions continued functioning mostly independently of each other.

===Split between Lenin and Bogdanov (19081910)===
Tensions had existed between Lenin and Bogdanov as early as 1904: Lenin had fallen out with Nikolai Valentinov, after the later had introduced him to Ernst Mach's Empiriocriticism, a viewpoint that Bogdanov had been exploring and developing as Empiriomonism. Having worked as co-editor with Plekhanov on Zayra he had come to agree with the latter's rejection of Bogdanov's Empiriomonism. With the defeat of the revolution in mid-1907 and the adoption of a new, highly restrictive election law, the Bolsheviks began debating whether to boycott the new parliament known as the Third Duma. Lenin, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev and others argued for participating in the Duma while Alexander Bogdanov, Anatoly Lunacharsky, Mikhail Pokrovsky and others argued that the social democratic faction in the Duma should be recalled. The latter became known as recallists ("otzovists" in Russian). A smaller group within the Bolshevik faction demanded that the RSDLP central committee should give its sometimes unruly Duma faction an ultimatum, demanding complete subordination to all party decisions. This group became known as "ultimatists" and was generally allied with the recallists.

With most Bolshevik leaders either supporting Bogdanov or undecided by mid-1908 when the differences became irreconcilable, Lenin concentrated on undermining Bogdanov's reputation as a philosopher. In 1909 he published a scathing book of criticism entitled Materialism and Empiriocriticism (1909), First published in Moscow in May 1909 by Zveno Publishers, available online. assaulting Bogdanov's position and accusing him of philosophical idealism. See Alan Woods. Bolshevism: The Road to Revolution, Wellred Publications, 1999, ISBN 1-900007-05-3 Part Three: The Period of Reaction available online. In June 1909, Bogdanov proposed the formation of Party Schools as "Proletarian Universities" at a Bolshevik mini-conference in Paris organised by the editorial board of the Bolshevik magazine Proletary in June 1909. However this was not accepted and Lenin tried to expel him from the Bolshevik faction. English language excerpts from the resolution are quoted in A Documentary History of Communism in Russia, ed. Robert V. Daniels, UPNE, 1993, ISBN 0-87451-616-1 p. 33. Bogdanov was then involved with setting up Vpered, which ran the Capri Party School from August to December 1909. 

===Final attempt at party unity (1910)===
With both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks weakened by splits within their ranks and by Tsarist repression, they were tempted to try to re-unite the party. In January 1910, Leninists, recallists and various Menshevik factions held a meeting of the party's Central Committee in Paris. Kamenev and Zinoviev were dubious about the idea, but were willing to give it a try under pressure from "conciliator" Bolsheviks like Victor Nogin.

One of the more underlying reasons that aided in preventing any reunification of the party was the Russian police. The police were able to infiltrate both parties inner circles by sending in spies who then reported on the opposing partys intentions and hostilities. This allowed the tensions to remain high between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. In turn it prevented them from uniting under common ground which could have possibly sped up the entire revolution.

Lenin was firmly opposed to any re-unification, but was outvoted within the Bolshevik leadership. The meeting reached a tentative agreement and one of its provisions made Trotsky's Vienna-based Pravda a party-financed 'central organ'. Kamenev, Trotsky's brother-in-law, was added to the editorial board from the Bolsheviks, but the unification attempts failed in August 1910 when Kamenev resigned from the board amid mutual recriminations.

===Forming a separate party (1912)===

Left to right: Leon Trotsky, Vladimir Lenin, and Lev Kamenev
The factions permanently broke off relations in January 1912 after the Bolsheviks organised a Bolsheviks-only Prague Party Conference and formally expelled Mensheviks and recallists from the party. As a result, they ceased to be a faction in the RSDLP and instead declared themselves an independent party, called Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (bolsheviks) - or RSDLP(b). Unofficially the Party has been referred to as the "Bolshevik Party". Throughout the century, the Party adopted a number of different names. In 1918, RSDLP(b) became (All-)Russian Communist Party (bolsheviks) and remained so until 1925. From 1925-52 the name was All-Union Communist Party (bolsheviks), and from 1952-1991 Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

As the party split became permanent and politically recognized in 1912 due to an all Bolshevik meeting of Congress further divisions became evident. One of the most notable differences was how each faction decided to fund its revolution. The Mensheviks decided to fund their revolution through membership dues while Lenin often resorted to much more drastic measures since he required a higher budget. One of the common methods the Bolsheviks used was committing bank robberies, one of which in 1907 resulted in the party gaining over 250,000 rubbles which is the equivalent of about $125,000. Bolsheviks were in constant need of money because Lenin practiced his beliefs exercised in his writings that revolutions must be led by individuals who devote their entire life to the cause. To compensate he awarded them with salaries for their sacrifice and dedication. This measure was taken to help ensure that the revolutionists stayed focused on their duties and motivated them to perform their jobs. Lenin also used the party money to print and copy pamphlets which were distributed in cities and at political rallies in attempts to expand their operations. This was an obvious difference between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks party beliefs. Both factions also managed to gain funds simply by receiving donations from wealthy supporters.

Further differences in party agendas became evident as the beginning of World War I loomed near. Stalin was especially eager for the start of the war, hoping that it would turn into a war between classes or essentially a Russian Civil War. This desire for war was fueled by Lenins vision that the workers and peasants would resist joining the war effort, and therefore be more compelled to join the socialist movement. Through the increase in support Russia would then be forced to withdraw from the Allied Powers in order to resolve her internal conflict. Unfortunately for the Bolsheviks, Lenins assumptions were incorrect and despite his and the partys attempts to push for a civil war through involvement in two conferences in 1915 and 1916 in Switzerland the party remained in the minority in calling for the ceasefire by the Russian Army in World War I. 
 
Although the Bolshevik leadership decided to form a separate party, convincing pro-Bolshevik workers within Russia to follow suit proved difficult. When the first meeting of the Fourth Duma was convened in late 1912, only one out of six Bolshevik deputies, Matvei Muranov, (another one, Roman Malinovsky, was later exposed as an Okhrana secret police agent) voted to break away from the Menshevik faction within the Duma on 15 December 1912. Robert B. McKean, St. Petersburg Between the Revolutions: workers and revolutionaries, June 1907-February 1917, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1990, pp. 140-1. The Bolshevik leadership eventually prevailed and the Bolsheviks formed their own Duma faction in September 1913.

One final difference between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks was simply how ferocious and tenacious the party was willing to be in order to achieve its goals. Lenin was open minded to retreating on political ideas if he saw the guarantee of long term gains benefiting the party. This practice was commonly seen trying to recruit peasants and uneducated workers by promising them how glorious life would be after the revolution. His approach was land seizure for the peasants and national self-determination for the minorities- as nothing more than temporary concessions. 

In 1952, at the 19th Party Congress, according to Stalin's suggestion, the Bolshevik party was renamed the Communist Party of Soviet Union.

==Derogatory usage of "Bolshevik"==
"Down with Bolshevism. Bolshevism brings war and destruction, hunger and death", anti-Bolshevik propaganda, Germany, 1919.

"Bolo" was used as derogatory expression for Bolsheviks used by British service personnel in the North Russian Expeditionary Force which intervened against the Red Army during the Russian Civil War. North Russian Expeditionary Force 1919, Scrapbook Diary, Photographs, Mementoes accessed 14 June 2012 Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels and other Nazi leaders used it in reference to the worldwide political movement coordinated by the Comintern. (Collins Mini Dictionary, 1998) During the days of the Cold War in the United Kingdom, labour union leaders and other leftists were sometimes derisively described as "Bolshies". The usage is roughly equivalent to the term "Commie", "Red" or "pinko" in the United States during the same period. The term "Bolshie" later became a slang term for anyone who was rebellious, aggressive or truculent. 

==See also==
*Democratic centralism
*Left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks
*Leninism
*October Revolution
*Old Bolshevik
*Soviet Revolutionary Communists (Bolsheviks)
*Vladimir Lenin

===Related terms===
*Marxism-Leninism
*Trotskyism

===Non-Russian/Soviet groups having used the name "Bolshevik"===
*Bangladesh: Maoist Bolshevik Reorganisation Movement of the Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party
*India: Bolshevik Party of India
*India/Sri Lanka: Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma
*India: Revolutionary Socialist Party (Bolshevik)
*Mexico: Bolshevik Communist Party
*Senegal: Bolshevik Nuclei
*Sri Lanka: Bolshevik Samasamaja Party

==References==

==External links==

*Bolshevism, the Road to Revolution, by Alan Woods
*Chronology of the Bolshevik Party World History Database
*The Bolsheviks and Workers Control, by Maurice Brinton
* by Bertrand Russell, November 1920
*Twenty Years in Underground Russia: Memoirs of a Rank-and-File Bolshevik, by Cecilia Bobrovskaya

 



[[Battle of wiecino]]

The Battle of wiecino (named for the village of wiecino, near arnowiec Lake, northern Poland) also called the Battle of arnowiec or in German Battle of Schwetz, took place on September 17, 1462 during the Thirteen Years' War. The Poles commanded by Piotr Dunin, consisting of some 2000 mercenaries decisively defeated the 2700 mercenaries of the Teutonic Knights commanded by Fritz Raweneck and Kaspar Nostyc. Auxiliary forces sent by duke Eric II of Pomerania, an ally of the Polish king, did not enter the battle.

==Polish forces==
The Polish forces consisted of the mercenaries hired by the Polish king, Casimir IV the Jagiellon and the city of Danzig (Gdask). This army included 1000 cavalry, of which 112 were heavy cavalry, and another 1000 of infantry. 1000 cavalry and 400 infantry were mercenaries hired by Polish king, while the rest were units from Danzig.

==Teutonic forces==
Most of the Teutonic army, under the command of Fritz Raweneck and Kaspar Nostyc, were mercenary soldiers gathered from the nearby castles Mewe (Gniew), Stargard (Starogard Gdaski), Nowe, Skarszewy and Kiszewy. This army totalled 1000 cavalry and 400 infantry. Raweneck also had the supply chain (tabors), cannons and up to 1300 auxiliary infantry of Pomeranian peasants, used mainly for fortification works.

==Battle==
The battle started in the evening. Adopting a relatively new tactic, Polish units built a fortified camp on the Hussite model consisting of wagons linked by a chain surrounded by a deep ditch (tabor). The units of Raveneck and his subordinate, Kaspar Nostyc (commander from Conitz (Chojnice) also created a tabor. Piotr Dunin decided not to wait for the enemy and attacked first, setting infantry with crossbows on the left, defended by cavalry between the tabor and the coast of the nearby lake of Rogonica. Raveneck placed cavalry in front of his tabor, and infantry behind it, without any strategic plan. The first phase of the battle was started by a charge of Polish heavy cavalry under Pawe Jasieski. Fierce fighting continued for three hours and ended without a clear winner. After a short pause at midday, Teutonic units were able to push the Poles back; however, they found themselves under very heavy fire from crossbows of the Polish infantry, which caused huge losses and a withdrawal. During this fight Raveneck was wounded. He stopped his soldiers and tried to attack again, but this charge ended with a total defeat - Raveneck died and the rest of the cavalry surrendered or escaped. The Teutonic infantry tried to defend themselves at the tabor but its resistance was broken by a quick attack of Polish cavalry.

==Casualties==
The Teutonic Order's army lost around 1000 soldiers, including some 300 cavalrymen. Fifty soldiers were captured. The Teutonic commander was also killed in battle and was buried in the arnowiec chapter church.

The Poles lost just 100 soldiers, although 150 later died from their wounds. Among the dead on the Polish side was Maciej Hagen from Gdask. Piotr Dunin was wounded twice.

==Aftermath==
The direct result of the battle of wiecino was that the city of Danzig and Pomerania were freed from the danger of an attack by the Teutonic Order. As a result the royal and municipal armed forces could be used elsewhere in the war, mainly to protect the Vistula waterway and to capture the Teutonic held strongholds. This way that Teutonic forces in Prussia on the right bank of Vistula were cut off from supplies from Western Europe.

The psychological significance of the battle was that this was the first open field battle won by the royal forces, so it increased the morale of the Polish forces and lowered the morale of the Teutonic Knights. Many military historians say that the battle of wiecino was the turning point of the Thirteen Years' War, leading to the final Polish victory in 1466.

==External links==
* wiecino near arnowiec Lake
* Malbork Castle - Battle of wiecino

==References==
* Janusz Sikorski, Zarys historii wojskowoci powszechnej do koca wieku XIX. history of military operations till 1900, Wojskowy Instytut Historyczny, Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, Warszawa 1972. - description of the battle of wiecino: pp. 287288, map of the battle of wiecino: p. 288
* Janusz Sikorski (ed.), Wiesaw Majewski, Tadeusz Marian Nowak, Jerzy Teodorczyk, Polskie tradycje wojskowe. Tradycje walk obronnych z najazdami Niemcw, Krzyakw, Szwedw, Turkw i Tatarw X-XVII w. military traditions. Tradition of defence struggles with the invasions of the Germans, Teutonic Knights, Swedes, Turks and Tartars in 10th-17th centuries. Wojskowy Instytut Historyczny, Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej, Warszawa 1990. - description of the battle of wiecino: p. 127, map of the battle of wiecino: p. 114
* Stanisaw Herbst, Wojna Trzynastoletnia - O bitwie pod wiecinem. Thirteen Years' War - About the Battle of wiecino, Przegld Historyczno-Wojskowy, vol. 7: 1934/1935, issue 2, pp. 309311, reprinted in: Stanisaw Herbst, Potrzeba historii czyli o polskim stylu ycia. Wybr pism. Pastwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, Warszawa 1978
* K. Grski, Pomorze w dobie wojny trzynastoletniej. during the Thirteen Years' War, Pozna 1932 - description and 3 maps of the battle of wiecino: p. 308
* Marian Biskup, Druga faza wojny trzynastoletniej (1462-1466). phase of the Thirteen Years' War 1462-1466, in: Gerard Labuda (ed.), Historia Pomorza. of Pomerania, Wydawnictwo Poznaskie, Pozna 1972, - description of the battle of wiecino: p. 738
* wiecino, in: Ra Ostrowska, Izabela Trojanowska, Bedeker Kaszubski, Wydawcnictwo Morskie, Gdask 1974
* wiecino, in: Tadeusz Bolduan, Nowy bedeker kaszubski, Gdask 1997

Swiecino


[[Barney Bubbles]]

The original UK 45rpm single picture sleeve of Ian Dury and the Blockheads "Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick" designed by Barney Bubbles

Barney Bubbles (born Colin Fulcher, 30 July 1942  14 November 1983) was a radical English graphic artist whose work encompassed graphic design and music video direction. Bubbles, who also sketched and painted privately, is best known for his distinctive contribution to the design practices associated with the British independent music scene of the 1970s and 1980s. His record sleeves, laden with symbols and riddles, were his most recognisable output.

==Early life==
Fulcher was born in Tranmere Road, Whitton, Middlesex (now Greater London), in July 1942. He attended Isleworth Grammar School. In 1958 he embarked on a retail display course for a National Diploma in Design (NDD) at the art school of Twickenham College of Technology. Reasons To Be Cheerful: The Life & Work Of Barney Bubbles, Paul Gorman (Adelita 2008) ISBN 978-0-9552017-3-8 During his five years at the college Fulcher received a multi-disciplinary education that included training in cardboard design, display and packaging, exploited later in his record sleeve work.

==Career==

===Michael Tucker + Associates===
After leaving college in 1963 Fulcher worked as an assistant at the design company Michael Tucker + Associates in London. Reasons To Be Cheerful: The Life & Work Of Barney Bubbles, 2nd edition, Paul Gorman (Adelita 2010) ISBN 978-0-9552017-4-5 Its clients included Pirelli. In a rare interview in 1981 The Face: November 1981 Bubbles described Tucker's discipline as "very Swiss; very hard; unjustified; very grey. He taught me everything about typography." Tucker's studio produced the posters for Hugh Hudson's Pirelli-sponsored film The Tortoise & The Hare (1967), for which Fulcher designed the poster lettering on a freelance basis. 

===The Conran Group===
In May 1965 Fulcher was recruited by The Conran Group as senior graphic designer alongside Stafford Cliff, Virginia Clive-Smith and John Muggeridge. He produced a variety of commercial commissions for Conran, including the Norman-style archer logo for Strongbow cider and items for Conran's new homewares chain Habitat. Fulcher also established an association with Justin de Blank, a director at Conran, which blossomed when de Blank left to launch his own upmarket provisions company and restaurant business in 1968.

===A1 Good Guyz and other early activities===

Between 1965 and 1966 Fulcher organised happenings, parties and other events under the name A1 Good Guyz with two graduates of Twickenham Art College, David Wills and Roy Burge.

In 1967 Fulcher became known as Barney Bubbles, though he did not change his name by deed poll for several more years. The name came about when Fulcher was operating a light show that created a bubble effect by mixing oils and water on projection slides. These lightshows were for groups including The Gun and Quintessence at underground venues including The Roundhouse, Jim Haynes's Drury Lane Arts Lab, the Electric Cinema and Middle Earth.

With Wills, Bubbles undertook freelance design commissions, including a redesign of Motor Racing magazine and a recipe book for the English Egg Marketing Board. With a team of contributors Bubbles and Wills art-directed Oz magazine issue 12, dubbed The Tax Dodge Special and published in May 1968.

===Teenburger Designs===
The original UK LP sleeve of Brinsley Schwarz's Brinsley Schwarz (1970) designed by Barney Bubbles

Early in 1969 Bubbles took the lease on a three-storey building at 307 Portobello Road in Notting Hill Gate, West London. He converted the ground -floor space into a graphic art studio, which he named Teenburger Designs. With a business association established with two entrepreneurs, Edward Molton and Stephen Warwick, and with John Muggeridge from Conran serving briefly as an assistant, he set about working primarily for the music industry. His first record sleeve design was for Quintessence's LP In Blissful Company (1969). The gatefold sleeve design uses illustrations by Gopala on the front and back, and contains a monochrome glued-in booklet inside.

Teenburger also provided record sleeve designs for the bands Brinsley Schwarz and Red Dirt, as well as Vertigo artists such as Cressida, Gracious! and Dr Z, whose LP Three Parts To My Soul is particularly noted for its complex and colourful fold-out sleeve.

Following the closure of Teenburger in 1970 as a result of the disappearance of Molton and Warwick, Bubbles worked as the designer of the underground newspaper Friends (later renamed Frendz). Days in the Life: Voices from the English Underground, 1961-1971, Jonathon Green (Pimlico 1998) ISBN 978-0-7126-6665-7 

===Hawkwind (and other 1970s rock)===
The original UK LP sleeve of Hawkwind's X In Search of Space designed by Barney Bubbles

While he was working at Friends Bubbles formed an association with Hawkwind and became responsible for a run of their album sleeves, including X In Search of Space, Doremi Fasol Latido and Space Ritual. Bubbles engaged in many aspects of the group's visual identity, titling releases and designing posters, adverts, stage decoration and performance plans, some of which were adorned with mystical and mock-Teutonic insignia. In 1972 Bubbles produced the triple LP package Glastonbury Fayre. This comprised a six-panel fold-out card sleeve, two poster inserts, a booklet and a cut-out and build miniature pyramid, housed in a clear vinyl bag (with two sleeve variations and three label variations).

From 1973 onwards Bubbles increasingly avoided credits for his artwork, typically working anonymously or occasionally adopting alternative pseudonyms. During this period he designed album sleeves and additional material for such acts as The Sutherland Brothers, Kevin Coyne, Edgar Broughton Band, Chilli Willi and the Red Hot Peppers, Quiver, the Kursaal Flyers and Michael Moorcock and the Deep Fix.

In 1976 his design relationship with Hawkwind came to an end. It was rekindled once, in 1978, for the Hawklords spin-off, but otherwise continued only with design commissions for projects involving the band's saxophonist Nik Turner.

===Stiff, Radar and F Beat (and other punk and New Wave)===
The original UK LP sleeve of Carlene Carter's C'est C Bon designed by Barney Bubbles
Barney Bubbles joined Stiff Records as designer and art director early in 1977. With the label's co-founder Jake Riviera he generated a body of creative work that helped to secure Stiff's reputation as an exciting new independent label. Bubbles created sleeves for bands including The Damned, Elvis Costello, Ian Dury and Wreckless Eric. Often these were accompanied by quirky logos such as the face logo for Blockhead, advertisements and promotional items. The marketing of Elvis Costello's My Aim Is True included advertisements in three UK music papers from which a poster of Costello could be constructed, and the first 1,000 pressings contained an insert headed Help Us Hype Elvis, which, if completed and returned to Stiff, ensured that a friend would received a free copy.

When Riviera left Stiff in late 1977 Bubbles joined him at his new label Radar Records and later at Riviera's F-Beat Records. Bubbles created designs for artists such as Elvis Costello, Nick Lowe, Carlene Carter and Clive Langer & The Boxes.

Bubbles also maintained his freelance output, producing designs for Peter Jenner (Ian Dury and Billy Bragg's manager), and others, creating a prodigious output by working for such bands, musicians and performers as Vivian Stanshall, Generation X, Big Star, Johnny Moped, Whirlwind, Billy Bragg, Clover, The Sinceros, Roger Chapman, Phillip Goodhand-Tait, Dr. Feelgood, Inner City Unit and The Psychedelic Furs. As a result his work appeared on releases by labels such as Aura, Chiswick, Utility, Go! Discs, Epic, Charisma, CBS, Line Records, United Artists and Riddle Records. His signature style emerged as one that was colourful, playful, loaded with geometry, art-history and music-history references, jokes, cryptograms and symbols. The overriding appetite was for going against the grain of accepted design standards. His work is simultaneously complex in meaning and simple in its delivery. Examples include:

* Elvis Costello - This Year's Model, which was designed to have a deliberate miscropping so that the entire design was off-register;
* The Damned - Damned Damned Damned, a limited number of which were deliberately printed with a photo of Eddie and the Hot Rods on the back of the cover, rather than The Damned playing at The Roxy Club, and with an erratum sticker apologising for this "mistake", and on the front of the LP, on top of the original shrinkwrap, a red food-fight sticker saying 'Damned Damned', thus completing the LP's title when read underneath the band's name;
* Elvis Costello - Armed Forces, with an extended back panel consisting of folding flaps, postcards carrying the instruction DON'T JOIN (advice against joining the armed forces), and a message that these postcards had been die-cut from the rest of the sleeve;
* Ian Dury and the Blockheads - Do It Yourself, which was released in 28 sleeve variations, all of which were designs supplied by Crown Wallpaper.

===Music promo videos===
Barney Bubbles directed several videos, including The Specials' "Ghost Town", Squeeze's "Is That Love" and "Tempted", Elvis Costello's "Clubland" and "New Lace Sleeves", and Fun Boy Three's "The Lunatics (Have Taken Over the Asylum)". Two promos for the punk act Johnny Moped, "Incendiary Device" and "Darling Let's Have Another Baby", were never commercially released to broadcasters.

A good video can sell a record which might not do so well," Bubbles told Smash Hits magazine in 1982. https://secure.flickr.com/photos/51106326@N00/6442288427/in/set-72157628248724685/ "The record companies know that. I think Chrysalis would agree that The Specials Ghost Town video helped sales a good deal. This year I intend to make videos which are really inexpensive but really inventive. It can be done, you know."

===Other work===
In 1978 Barney Bubbles was responsible for the redesign of the weekly music paper the NME, including a new logo design (which is no longer in use). 

In 1979 Derek Boshier curated an exhibition entitled Lives at the Hayward Gallery, London. He commissioned Bubbles to design the catalogue and poster. Together with the photographer Chris Gabrin, Bubbles also exhibited a video and mixed-media installation in the exhibition.

In the early 1980s Bubbles created furniture designs, some of which were featured in The Face, November 1981.

In 1982 Bubbles conceived the album Ersatz, working primarily with Nik Turner and other musicians from Inner City Unit. The LP was released under the name of The Imperial Pompadours.

Bubbles painted privately, increasingly in the early 1980s.

==Death==
Barney Bubbles committed suicide in London on 14 November 1983 by gassing himself, trapping the fumes in a plastic bag he placed over his head. He had considerable personal and financial worries. His sleeves were being rejected by musicians, such as Elvis Costello, and by record companies, and he was being chased by the Inland Revenue for unpaid taxes dating back many years. No Sleep Till Canvey Island: The Great Pub Rock Revolution, Will Birch (Virgin Books 2000, 2003) ISBN 0-7535-0740-4 He suffered from bipolar disorder, Carol Clerk. Saga of Hawkwind, p.94. Omnibus Press, 2004, ISBN 1-84449-101-3. Ian Abrahams. Hawkwind: Sonic Assassins, p. 150. SAF Publishing Ltd, 2004, ISBN 0-946719-69-1 and experienced increasingly frequent bouts of depression and erratic behaviour: for example, close friends recall him lacerating his face with razorblades and making threats to kill. Mojo: Greatest Album Covers, 2006 He committed suicide on his late parents' wedding anniversary. 

==Influence and legacy==

The first exhibition dedicated to Barney Bubbles' work was held at London gallery Artomatic in 2001, and was curated by the art-design team Rebecca And Mike. http://showstudio.com/contributors/333 

A biography Reasons to be Cheerful: The Life & Work Of Barney Bubbles by Paul Gorman was published in 2008. The book was welcomed as a long-overdue recognition of Bubbles' achievements. http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/music/article132948.ece and selected by British music magazine Mojo as Book Of The Year. http://www.johncoulthart.com/feuilleton/2009/11/21/barney-ascendant/ 

A revised second edition of "Reasons To Be Cheerful" was published in October 2010 http://www.barneybubbles.com/blog/archives/4438 to coincide with Gorman's curation of the exhibition Process: The Working Practices of Barney Bubbles at London gallery Chelsea Space. 

In January 2012, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a documentary, In Search Of Barney Bubbles, written and produced by Mark Hodkinson. 

In summer 2012 Gorman curated "The Past The Present & The Possible", which presented 250 examples of Bubbles' finished artworks as part of the exhibition White Noise at the 23rd International Poster & Graphic Design Festival in Chaumont, France. http://www.cig-chaumont.com/fr/cig/page/festival-international-de-laffiche-et-du-graphisme/expositions/white-noise-quand-le-graphisme-fait-du-bruit 

Under the heading "Gnration Bubbles!", the cover and a 10-page feature in the July 2012 issue of French design magazine tapes were dedicated to the exhibition and Bubbles' influence over contemporary design practice. http://etapes.com/generation-bubbles 

===General and group exhibitions===
The work of Barney Bubbles has been featured in general and group exhibitions, including Destroy: Punk Graphic Design in Britain, held at London's Southbank Centre in 1998 and Communicate: British Independent Graphic Design since the Sixties, staged at the Barbican Centre in 2004. http://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=3729 

The Victoria and Albert Museum included Bubbles' works in the 2011 show Postmodernism: Style & Subversion 1970-1990, http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/postmodernism/postmodernism-about-the-exhibition// and the following year's British Design 1948-2012. http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-british-design/british-design-about-the-exhibition/ 

==References==

==External links==
* Barney Bubbles: Artist and Designer. Career overview by graphic designer John Coulthart.
* Barney Bubbles Blog Blog of the book Reasons To Be Cheerful: The Life & Work Of Barney Bubbles by Paul Gorman
* Brian Griffin on Barney Bubbles. Tribute by friend and photographer Brian Griffin.
* David Wills Tells Tales. Anecdotal Barney Bubbles blog by friend and fellow student, designer David Wills.
* In Search of Barney Bubbles, BBC Radio 4 Intimate documentary by Mark Hodkinson.
* Philm Freax: Barney Bubbles: In Memoriam. A memorial page by friend and photographer Phil Franks.
* Philm Freax: Friends: Barney Bubbles Includes Phil Franks' photos and text extracts from "Days In The Life: Voices from the English Underground 1961-'71" by Jonathon Green.
* Philm Freax: Hawkwind X-In Search of Space.



[[Blackridge, Pennsylvania]]

Blackridge is a community in eastern Allegheny County and is a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. This community consists of about 650 private homes built in 1920-1949, Blackridge Estates was and remains one of the area's largest residential communities.

Blackridge lies in the municipalities of Wilkinsburg, Penn Hills and Churchill. It maintains a Civic Association and a private park and swim club for residents.

Blackridge is defined as the territory bounded on the West by Graham Boulevard, on the South by William Penn Highway, on the East by Beulah Road and the Churchill Country Club property, from the Churchill Country Club property along Orlando Place to Atkinson Place, Atkinson Place to Pine Way, and Pine Way to Graham Boulevard, and shall include the properties fronting on both sides of said portions of Country Club Drive, Orlando Place, Atkinson Place and Pine Way.

==References==

==External links==
*Blackridge Civic Association
*Blackridge Garden Club
*Blackridge Swim Club



[[Basic English]]

Basic English is an English-based controlled language created by linguist and philosopher Charles Kay Ogden as an international auxiliary language, and as an aid for teaching English as a second language. Basic English is, in essence, a simplified subset of regular English. It was presented in Ogden's book Basic English: A General Introduction with Rules and Grammar (1930). Capitalised, BASIC is sometimes taken as an acronym that stands for British American Scientific International Commercial. Brutt-Griffler, Evans Davies, English and Ethnicity, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006 

Ogden's Basic, and the concept of a simplified English, gained its greatest publicity just after the Allied victory in the Second World War as a means for world peace. Although Basic English was not built into a program, similar simplifications have been devised for various international uses. Ogden's associate I. A. Richards promoted its use in schools in China. Time Magazine. Dec. 31, 1945. Education: Globalingo More recently, it has influenced the creation of Voice of America's Special English for news broadcasting, and Simplified English, another English-based controlled language designed to write technical manuals.

What survives today of Ogden's Basic English is the basic 850-word list used as the beginner's vocabulary of the English language taught worldwide, especially in Asia. Edmond H Weiss The Elements of International English Style, pp. 17-18, M. E. Sharpe, 2005 ISBN 978-0-7656-1572-5 

== Design principles ==
Ogden tried to simplify English while keeping it normal for native speakers, by specifying grammar restrictions and a controlled small vocabulary which makes an extensive use of paraphrasis. Most notably, Ogden allowed only 18 verbs, which he called "operators". His General Introduction says "There are no 'verbs' in Basic English", with the underlying assumption that, as noun use in English is very straightforward but verb use/conjugation is not, the elimination of verbs would be a welcome simplification. A good summary in Bill Templer: Towards a People's English: Back to BASIC in EIL Humanising Language Teaching. 

== Word lists ==
Ogden's word lists include only word roots, which in practice are extended with the defined set of affixes and the full set of forms allowed for any available word (noun, pronoun, or the limited set of verbs). See the list of words which are assumed and not counted for details. 

The 850 core words of Basic English are found in Wiktionary's Basic English word list. This core is theoretically enough for everyday life. However, Ogden prescribed that any student should learn an additional 150-word list for everyday work in some particular field, by adding a list of 100 words particularly useful in a general field (e.g., science, verse, business, etc.), along with a 50-word list from a more specialised subset of that general field, to make a basic 1000-word vocabulary for everyday work and life.

Moreover, Ogden assumed that any student already should be familiar with (and thus may only review) a core subset of around 200 "international" words. Ogden's "International Word" List - Alphabetic Therefore, a first-level student should graduate with a core vocabulary of around 1200 words. A realistic general core vocabulary could contain 2000 words (the core 850 words, plus 200 international words, and 1000 words for the general fields of trade, economics, and science). It is enough for a "standard" English level. Ogden's Basic English Next Steps Ogden's Basic English Combined Word Lists This 2000 words vocabulary represents "what any learner should know". At this level students could start to move on their own.

Basic English 2000 word list and VOA Special English 1500 word list is a dictionary for Simple English Wikipedia.

== Rules ==
See also: Basic English ordered wordlist from Simple English Wikipedia.

The word use of Basic English is similar to full English, but the rules are much simpler, and there are fewer exceptions. Not all meanings of each word are allowed.

Ogden's rules of grammar for Basic English help people use the 850 words to talk about things and events in a normal way. 

*Form plurals by appending an "S" on the end of the word. Where special rules are normally necessary, such as using "ES" or "IES", use them.
*There are two word endings to change each of the 150 adjectives: "-ER" and "-EST".
*There are two word endings to change the verb word endings, "-ING" and "-ED".
*Form adverbs from qualifiers by adding "-LY".
*Talk about amounts with "MORE" and "MOST". Use and know "-ER" and "-EST".
*Give adjectives a negative meaning with "UN-"
*Form questions with the opposite word order, and with "DO".
*Operators and pronouns conjugate as in normal English.
*Make combined words (compounds) from two nouns (for example "milkman") or a noun and a directive ("sundown").
*Measures, numbers, money, days, months, years, clock time, and international words are in English forms, e.g. Date/Time: 20 May 1972 at 21:00
*Where necessary, technical expressions or other terms required for the task at hand may be used and take on their local form.

== Criticism ==
Like all international auxiliary languages (or IALs), Basic English may be criticised as inevitably based on personal preferences, and thus, paradoxically, inherently divisive. Rick Harrison, Farewell to Auxiliary Languages Moreover, like all natural language based IALs, Basic is subject to criticism as unfairly biased towards the native speaker community. For instance, a sample quotation from the auxlang mailing list archives and another from noted linguist Robert A. Hall, Jr.. 

As a teaching aid for English as a Second Language, Basic English has been criticised for the choice of the core vocabulary and for its grammatical constraints. For instance, by proponents of Essential World English. See a summary of EWE for instance and, again, the linguist Robert A. Hall, Jr.. 

In 1944, readability expert Rudolf Flesch published an article in Harper's Magazine, "How Basic is Basic English?" in which he claimed, "It's not basic, and it's not English." The basic complaint was that the vocabulary is too restricted, and, as a result, the text ends up being awkward and more difficult than necessary. He also notes that the words in the Basic vocabulary were arbitrarily selected, and there have been no empirical studies showing that it makes language simpler. Flesch, R. F. "How Basic is Basic English?" Harper's Magazine, March 1944. pp. 339-343. 

== Literary references ==
In the novel The Shape of Things to Come, published in 1933, H. G. Wells depicted Basic English as the lingua franca of a new elite which after a prolonged struggle succeeds in uniting the world and establishing a totalitarian world government. In the future world of Wells' vision, virtually all members of humanity know this language.

From 1942 to 1944 George Orwell was a proponent of Basic English, but in 1945 he became critical of universal languages. Basic English later inspired his use of Newspeak in Nineteen Eighty-Four. 

Evelyn Waugh criticized his own 1945 novel Brideshead Revisited, which he had previously called his magnum opus, in the preface of the 1959 reprint: "It [World War II] was a bleak period of present privation and threatening disaster  the period of soya beans and Basic English  and in consequence the book is infused with a kind of gluttony, for food and wine, for the splendours of the recent past, and for rhetorical and ornamental language which now, with a full stomach, I find distasteful." . Full preface text available online. 

In his story "Gulf", science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein used a constructed language called Speedtalk, in which every Basic English word is replaced with a single phoneme, as an appropriate means of communication for a race of genius supermen. Heinlein, Robert A., "Gulf", in Assignment in Eternity, published by Signet Science Fiction (New American Library), 1953. Page 52-53: "It was possible to establish a one-to-one relationship with Basic English so that one phonetic symbol was equivalent to an entire word". 

== See also ==

* Readability
* Plain English
* Simplified English
* Special English
* International English
* General Service List
* Academic word list
* Bible in Basic English
* Controlled vocabulary
* Seaspeak
* Franais tirailleur, or Petit ngre, used in French colonial troops

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* I. A. Richards & Christine Gibson, Learning Basic English: A Practical Handbook for English-Speaking People, New York: W. W. Norton & Co. (1945)
*Basic English: A Protest, Joseph Albert Lauwerys, F. J. Daniels, Robert A. Hall Jr., London: Basic English Foundation, 1966. An answer to Robert A. Hall, Jr.'s criticism.

== External links ==

* Charles Kay Ogden, Basic English: A General Introduction with Rules and Grammar, London: Paul Treber
* Charles Kay Ogden, Basic English and Grammatical Reform, Cambridge: The Orthological Institute. (1937).
* How Basic is Basic English? Harper's Magazine article
* ogden.basic-english.org Ogden's books and wordlists online and several discussions.
* www.basic-english.org Ongoing project to support and update Ogden's Basic (with downloads).
* THE REFERENCE SHELF Vol. 17. No. 1 A discussion about Basic English, with supporters and critics.
* VOA News - Voice of America Special English - News Radio for English Learners
* Online tool which might help you to write Basic English texts - Detect words which are not in some dictionary. Ogden's Basic English dictionary list included.
* Essential World English - some criticisms of Basic English and suggestions for overcoming its problems



[[BND]]

BND may stand for:

* Bundesnachrichtendienst, German intelligence agency
* Bank of North Dakota
* Buy Nothing Day
* Brunei dollar (ISO currency code)
* BTEC National Diploma
* Brandon railway station, Brandon, Suffolk, England; National Rail station code BND
* Bulgarian New Democracy, a Bulgarian centre-right party.
* "BND", a song on No Doubt (No Doubt album)
* The Russian way of saying VID (company), A Russian TV Company.



[[Brass instrument]]

A trumpet, foreground, a piccolo trumpet behind, and a flugelhorn in background

A brass instrument is a musical instrument that produces sound by sympathetic vibration of air in a tubular resonator in sympathy with the vibration of the player's lips. Brass instruments are also called labrosones, literally meaning "lip-vibrated instruments". 

There are several factors involved in producing different pitches on a brass instrument. Slides, valves, crooks, or keys are used to change vibratory length of tubing, thus changing the available harmonic series, while the player's embouchure, lip tension and air flow serve to select the specific harmonic produced from the available series.

The view of most scholars (see organology) is that the term "brass instrument" should be defined by the way the sound is made, as above, and not by whether the instrument is actually made of brass. Thus one finds brass instruments made of wood, like the alphorn, the cornett, the serpent and the didgeridoo, while some woodwind instruments are made of brass, like the saxophone.

== Families ==
Modern brass instruments generally come in one of two families:
* Valved brass instruments use a set of valves (typically three or four but as many as seven or more in some cases) operated by the player's fingers that introduce additional tubing, or crooks, into the instrument, changing its overall length. This family includes all of the modern brass instruments except the trombone: the trumpet, horn (also called French horn), euphonium, and tuba, as well as the cornet, flgelhorn, tenor horn (alto horn), baritone horn, sousaphone, mellophone, and the saxhorn. As valved instruments are predominant among the brasses today, a more thorough discussion of their workings can be found below. The valves are usually piston valves, but can be rotary valves; the latter are the norm for the horn and are also prevalent on the tuba.
* Slide brass instruments use a slide to change the length of tubing. The main instruments in this category are the trombone family, though valve trombones are occasionally used, especially in jazz. The trombone family's ancestor, the sackbut, and the folk instrument bazooka are also in the slide family.

There are two other families that have, in general, become functionally obsolete for practical purposes. Instruments of both types, however, are sometimes used for period-instrument performances of Baroque or Classical pieces. In more modern compositions, they are occasionally used for their intonation or tone color.
* Natural brass instruments only play notes in the instrument's harmonic series. These include the bugle and older variants of the trumpet and horn. The trumpet was a natural brass instrument prior to about 1795, and the horn before about 1820. In the 18th century, makers developed interchangeable crooks of different lengths, which let players use a single instrument in more than one key. Natural instruments are still played for period performances and some ceremonial functions, and are occasionally found in more modern scores, such as those by Richard Wagner and Richard Strauss.
* Keyed or Fingered brass instruments used holes along the body of the instrument, which were covered by fingers or by finger-operated pads (keys) in a similar way to a woodwind instrument. These included the cornett, serpent, ophicleide, keyed bugle and keyed trumpet. They are more difficult to play than valved instruments.

=== Bore taper and diameter ===
Brass instruments may also be characterised by two generalizations about geometry of the bore, that is, the tubing between the mouthpiece and the flaring of the tubing into the bell. Those two generalizations are with regard to
* the degree of taper or conicity of the bore and
* the diameter of the bore with respect to its length.

==== Cylindricality vs. conicality ====
While all modern valved and slide brass instruments consist in part of conical and in part of cylindrical tubing, they are divided as follows:
* Cylindrical bore brass instruments are those in which approximately constant diameter tubing predominates. Cylindrical bore brass instruments are generally perceived as having a brighter, more penetrating tone quality compared to conical bore brass instruments. The trumpet, baritone horn and all trombones are cylindrical bore. In particular, the slide design of the trombone necessitates this.
* Conical bore brass instruments are those in which tubing of constantly increasing diameter predominates. Conical bore instruments are generally perceived as having a more mellow tone quality than the cylindrical bore brass instruments. The "British brass band" group of instruments fall into this category. This includes the flugelhorn, cornet, tenor horn (alto horn), horn, euphonium and tuba. Some conical bore brass instruments are more conical than others. For example, the flugelhorn differs from the cornet by having a higher percentage of its tubing length conical than does the cornet, in addition to possessing a wider bore than the cornet. In the 1910s and 1920s, the E.A. Couturier company built brass band instruments utilizing a patent for a continuous conical bore without cylindrical portions even for the valves or tuning slide.

==== Whole-tube vs. half-tube ====
The second division, based on bore diameter in relation to length, 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article on the Bombardon determines whether the fundamental tone or the first overtone is the lowest partial practically available to the player:

* Whole-tube instruments have larger bores in relation to tubing length, and can play the fundamental tone with ease and precision. The tuba and euphonium are examples of whole-tube brass instruments.
* Half-tube instruments have smaller bores in relation to tubing length and cannot easily or accurately play the fundamental tone. The second partial (first overtone) is the lowest note of each tubing length practical to play on half-tube instruments. The trumpet and horn are examples of half-tube brass instruments.

=== Other brass instruments ===
The instruments in this list fall for various reasons outside the scope of much of the discussion above regarding families of brass instruments.
* Alphorn (wood)
* Conch (shell)
* Didgeridoo (wood, Australia)
* Natural horn (no valves or slidesexcept tuning crook)
* Keyed bugle (keyed brass)
* Keyed trumpet (keyed brass)
* Serpent (keyed brass)
* Ophicleide (keyed brass)
* Shofar (animal horn)
* Vladimirskiy rozhok (wood, Russia)
* Vuvuzela (simple short horn, origins disputed but achieved fame or notoriety through many plastic examples in the 2010 World Cup)
* Lur

== Valves==

Piston valve
Rotary valve
Slide
Valves are used to change the length of tubing of a brass instrument allowing the player to reach the notes of various harmonic series. Each valve pressed diverts the air stream through additional tubing, individually or in conjunction with other valves. This lengthens the vibrating air column thus lowering the fundamental tone and associated harmonic series produced by the instrument. Designs exist, although rare, in which this behaviour is reversed, i.e., pressing a valve removes a length of tubing rather than adding one. One modern example of such an ascending valve is the Yamaha YSL-350C trombone, in which the extra valve tubing is normally engaged to pitch the instrument in Bb, and pressing the thumb lever removes a whole step to pitch the instrument in C. Valves require regular lubrication.

A core standard valve layout based on the action of three valves had become almost universal by (at latest) 1864 as witnessed by Arban's Method published in that year. The effect of a particular combination of valves may be seen in the table below. This table is correct for the core 3-valve layout on almost any modern valved brass instrument. The most common four-valve layout is a superset of the well-established 3-valve layout and is noted in the table, despite the exposition of four-valve and also five-valve systems (the latter used on the tuba) being incomplete in this article.

 Valve combination and effect on pitch Valve combination Effect on pitch Interval Tuning problems 
 2 1/2 step Minor second 
 1 1 step Major second 
 1+2 or 3 1 step Minor third Flat * 
 2+3 or 2 steps Major third Slightly sharp if 2+3 
 1+3 or 4 2 steps Perfect fourth Sharp * 
 1+2+3 or 2+4 3 steps Tritone Very sharp 
 1+4 3  steps Perfect fifth 
 1+2+4 or 3+4 4 steps Augmented fifth 
 2+3+4 4  steps Major sixth 
 1+3+4 5 steps Minor seventh 
 1+2+3+4 5  steps Major seventh 

: * Note that since valves lower the pitch, a valve that makes a pitch too low (flat) creates an interval wider than desired, while a valve that plays sharp creates an interval narrower than desired. Intonation deficiencies of brass instruments that are independent of the tuning or temperament system are inherent in the physics of the most popular valve design, which uses a small number of valves in combination to avoid redundant and heavy lengths of tubing Understanding Brass Instrument Intonation, University of Oklahoma Horn Studio (this is entirely separate from the slight deficiencies between Western music's dominant equal (even) temperament system and the just (not equal) temperament of the harmonic series itself). Since each lengthening of the tubing has an inversely proportional effect on pitch (Pitch of brass instruments), while pitch perception is logarithmic, there is no way for a simple, uncompensated addition of length to be correct in every combination when compared with the pitches of the open tubing and the other valves. http://www.phys.unsw.edu.au/jw/brassacoustics.html#valves 

For example, given a length of tubing equaling 100 inches when open, one may obtain the following tuning discrepancies:

 Valve combination and creation of pitch discrepancies Valve(s) Desired pitch Necessary valve length Component tubing length Difference Slide positions 
 Open tubing A/B 0\"   1 
 2 A 5.9\"   2 
 1 G/A 12.2\"   3 
 1+2 or 3 G 18.9\" 18.1\" 0.8\" 4 
 2+3 or F/G 25.9\" 24.8\" 1.1\" 5 
 1+3 or 4 E/F 33.5\" 31.1\" 2.4\" 6 or T 
 1+2+3 or 2+4 E/F 41.4\" 37\" 4.4\" 7 or T+2 
 1+4 D/E 45.7\" T+3 
 1+2+4 or 3+4 D 52.4\" T+4 
 2+3+4 C/D 58.3\" T+5 
 1+3+4 B/C 64.6\" T+6 
 1+2+3+4 B/C 70.5\" T+7 

Playing notes using valves (notably 1st + 3rd and 1st + 2nd + 3rd) requires compensation to adjust the tuning appropriately, either by the player's lip-and-breath control, via mechanical assistance of some sort, or, in the case of horns, by the position of the stopping hand in the bell. 'T' stands for trigger on a trombone.

=== Tuning compensation ===
The additional tubing for each valve usually features a short tuning slide of its own for fine adjustment of the valve's tuning, except when it is too short to make this practicable. For the first and third valves this is often designed to be adjusted as the instrument is played, to account for the deficiencies in the valve system.
Trumpet valve bypass (depressed)

In most trumpets and cornets, the compensation must be provided by extending the third valve slide with the third or fourth finger, and the first valve slide with the left hand thumb (see Trigger or throw below). This is used to lower the pitch of the 1-3 and 1-2-3 valve combinations. On the trumpet and cornet, these valve combinations correspond to low D, low C, low G, and low F, so chromatically, to stay in tune, one must use this method.

In instruments with a fourth valve, such as tubas, euphoniums, piccolo trumpets, etc. that valve lowers the pitch by a perfect fourth; this is used to compensate for the sharpness of the valve combinations 1-3 and 1-2-3 (4 replaces 1-3, 2-4 replaces 1-2-3). All three normal valves may be used in addition to the fourth to increase the instrument's range downwards by a perfect fourth, although with increasingly severe intonation problems.

When four-valved models without any kind of compensation play in the corresponding register, the sharpness becomes so severe that players must finger the note a half-step below the one they are trying to play. This eliminates the note a half-step above their open fundamental.

Manufacturers of low brass instruments may choose one or a combination of four basic approaches to compensate for the tuning difficulties, whose respective merits are subject to debate:

==== Compensation system ====
In the Compensation system, each of the first two (or three) valves has an additional set of tubing extending from the back of the valve. When the third (or fourth) valve is depressed in combination with another one, the air is routed through both the usual set of tubing plus the extra one, so that the pitch is lowered by an appropriate amount. This allows compensating instruments to play with accurate intonation in the octave below their open second partial, which is critical for tubas and euphoniums in much of their repertoire.

The compensating system was applied to horns to serve a different purpose. It was used to allow a double horn in F and B flat to ease playing difficulties in the high register. In contrast to the system in use in tubas and euphoniums, the default 'side' of the horn is the longer F horn, with secondary lengths of tubing coming into play when the first, second or third valves are pressed; pressing the thumb valve takes these secondary valve slides and the extra length of main tubing out of play to produce a shorter B-flat horn. A later "full double" design has completely separate valve section tubing for the two sides, and is considered superior, although rather heavier in weight.

==== Additional valves ====
Initially, compensated instruments tended to sound stuffy and blow less freely due to the air being doubled back through the main valves. In early designs, this led to sharp bends in the tubing and other obstructions of the air-flow. Some manufacturers therefore preferred adding more straight valves instead, which for example could be pitched a little lower than the 2nd and 1st valves and were intended to be used instead of these in the respective valve combinations. While no longer featured in euphoniums for decades, many professional tubas are still built like this, with five valves being common on CC- and BB-tubas and five or six valves on F-tubas.

Compensating double horns can also suffer from the stuffiness resulting from the air being passed through the valve section twice, but as this really only affects the longer F side, a compensating double can be very useful for a 1st or 3rd horn player, who uses the F side less.

==== Additional sets of slides on each valve ====
Another approach was the addition of two sets of slides for different parts of the range. Some euphoniums and tubas were built like this, but today, this approach has become highly exotic for all instruments except horns, where it is the norm, usually in a double, sometimes even triple configuration.

==== Trigger or throw ====
Some valved brass instruments provide triggers or throws that manually lengthen (or, less commonly, shorten) the main tuning slide, a valve slide, or the main tubing. These mechanisms alter the pitch of notes that are naturally sharp in a specific register of the instrument, or shift the instrument to another playing range. Triggers and throws permit speedy adjustment while playing.

Trigger is used in two senses:
* A trigger can be a mechanical lever that lengthens a slide when pressed in a contrary direction. Triggers are sprung in such a way that they return the slide to its original position when released.
* The term "trigger" also describes a device that lengthens certain brass instruments' main length of tubing to shift its range to another playing range, as with certain trombones.

A throw is a simple metal grip for the player's finger or thumb, attached to a valve slide. The general term "throw" can describe a u-hook, a saddle (u-shaped grips), or a ring (ring-shape grip) in which a player's finger or thumb rests. A player extends a finger or thumb to lengthen a slide, and retracts the finger to return the slide to its original position.

====Examples of instruments that use triggers or throws====

=====Trumpet or cornet=====
Triggers or throws are sometimes found on the first valve slide. They are operated by the player's thumb and are used to adjust a large range of notes using the first valve, most notably the player's written top line F, the A above directly above that, and the B above that. Other notes that require the first valve slide, but are not as problematic without it include the first line E, the F above that, the A above that, and the third line B.

Triggers or throws are often found on the third valve slide. They are operated by the player's fourth finger, and are used to adjust the lower D and C. Trumpets typically use throws, whilst cornets may have a throw or trigger.

=====Trombone=====
Trombone triggers are primarily but not exclusively Yamaha Catalog YSL-350C with ascending Bb/C rotor installed on the F-trigger, bass, and contrabass trombones Yamaha Catalog "Professional Trombones" to alter the length of tubing, thus making certain ranges and pitches more accessible.

=====Euphoniums=====
A euphonium occasionally has a trigger on valves other than 2 (especially 3), although many professional quality euphoniums, and indeed other brass band instruments, have a trigger for the main tuning slide. The Besson Prestige euphonium. 

=== Mechanism ===
The two major types of valve mechanisms are rotary valves and piston valves. The first piston valve instruments were developed just after the start of the 19th century. The Stlzel valve (invented by Heinrich Stlzel in 1814) was an early variety. In the mid 19th century the Vienna valve was an improved design. However many professional musicians preferred rotary valves for quicker, more reliable action, until better designs of piston valves were mass manufactured towards the end of the 19th century. Since the early decades of the 20th century, piston valves have been the most common on brass instruments except for the orchestral horn and the tuba. The Early Valved Horn by John Q. Ericson, Associate Professor of horn at Arizona State University See also the article Brass Instrument Valves.

==Sound production in brass instruments==
Because the player of a brass instrument has direct control of the prime vibrator (the lips), brass instruments exploit the player's ability to select the harmonic at which the instrument's column of air vibrates. By making the instrument about twice as long as the equivalent woodwind instrument and starting with the second harmonic, players can get a good range of notes simply by varying the tension of their lips (see embouchure).

Most brass instruments are fitted with a removable mouthpiece. Different shapes, sizes and styles of mouthpiece may be used to suit different embouchures, or to more easily produce certain tonal characteristics. Trumpets, trombones, and tubas are characteristically fitted with a cupped mouthpiece, while horns are fitted with a conical mouthpiece.

One interesting difference between a woodwind instrument and a brass instrument is that woodwind instruments are non-directional. This means that the sound produced propagates in all directions with approximately equal volume. Brass instruments, on the other hand, are highly directional, with most of the sound produced traveling straight outward from the bell. This difference makes it significantly more difficult to record a brass instrument accurately. It also plays a major role in some performance situations, such as in marching bands.

==Manufacture==
Traditionally the instruments are normally made of brass, polished and then lacquered to prevent corrosion. Some higher quality and higher cost instruments use gold or silver plating to prevent corrosion. A few specialty instruments are made from wood.

Alternatives to brass include other alloys containing significant amounts of copper or silver. These alloys are biostatic due to the oligodynamic effect, and thus suppress growth of molds, fungi or bacteria. Brass instruments constructed from stainless steel or aluminium have good sound quality but are rapidly colonized by microorganisms and become unpleasant to play.

Most higher quality instruments are designed to prevent or reduce galvanic corrosion between any steel in the valves and springs, and the brass of the tubing. This may take the form of desiccant design, to keep the valves dry, sacrificial zincs, replaceable valve cores and springs, plastic insulating washers, or nonconductive or noble materials for the valve cores and springs. Some instruments use several such features.

The process of making the large open end (bell) of a brass instrument is called metal beating. In making the bell of, for example, a trumpet, a person lays out a pattern and shapes sheet metal into a bell-shape using templates, machine tools, handtools, and blueprints. The maker cuts out the bell blank, using hand or power shears. He hammers the blank over a bell-shaped mandrel, and butts the seam, using a notching tool. The seam is brazed, using a torch and smoothed using a hammer or file. A draw bench or arbor press equipped with expandable lead plug is used to shape and smooth the bell and bell neck over a mandrel. A lathe is used to spin the bell head and to form a bead at the edge of bell head. Previously shaped bell necks are annealed, using a hand torch to soften the metal for further bending. Scratches are removed from the bell using abrasive-coated cloth.

==Ensembles==

Brass instruments are one of the major classical instrument families and are played across a range of musical ensembles.

Orchestras include a varying number of brass instruments depending on music style and era, typically:
*two to five trumpets
*two to eight horns
*two tenor trombones
*one bass trombone
*one tuba
** Baroque and classical period orchestras may include valveless trumpets or bugles, or have valved trumpets/cornets playing these parts, and they may include valveless horns, or have valved horns playing these parts.
** Romantic, modern, and contemporary orchestras may include larger numbers of brass including more exotic instruments.

Concert bands generally have a larger brass section than an orchestra, typically:
* four to seven trumpets 
* four to eight horns
* two to four trombones 
* one to two bass trombones
* two to three euphoniums or baritone horns
* two to three tubas

British brass bands are made entirely up of brass, mostly conical bore instruments. Typical membership is:
* one soprano cornet
* five to ten cornets
* one flugelhorn
* three to five tenor horns (alto horns)
* two baritone horns
* two to three tenor trombones
* one bass trombone
* two euphoniums
* two E tubas
* two B tubas

quintets are common small brass ensembles, a quintet typically contains:
* two trumpets
* one horn
* one trombone
* one tuba or bass trombone

Big Bands and other jazz bands commonly contain cylindrical bore brass instruments
* A Big band typically includes:
**three to five trumpets
**three or four tenor trombones and sometimes a bass trombone
* Smaller jazz ensembles may include a single trumpet or trombone soloist.

Mexican Bandas have:
* three trumpets
* three trombones
* two alto horns, also called "charchetas" and "saxores"
* one sousaphone, called "tuba"

Single brass instruments are also often used to accompany other instruments or ensembles such as an organ, or a choir.

==See also==
* Wind instruments
* Drum and bugle corps (modern)
* Pitch of brass instruments
* Horn section
* Brass Instrument Valves

==References==

==External links==

* Brass Instruments Information on individual Brass Instruments
* The traditional manufacture of brass instruments, a 1991 video (RealPlayer format) featuring maker Robert Barclay; from the web site of the Canadian Museum of Civilization.
* The Orchestra: A User's Manual  Brass
* Brassmusic.Ru  Russian Brass Community
* Acoustics of Brass Instruments from Music Acoustics at the University of New South Wales
* Early Valve designs, John Ericson
* 3-Valve and 4-Valve Compensating Systems, David Werden

 



[[Blood libel]]

Blood libel (also blood accusation) is an accusation Turvey, Brent E. Criminal Profiling: An Introduction to Behavioral Evidence Analysis, Academic Press, 2008, p. 3. "Blood libel: An accusation of ritual murder made against one or more persons, typically of the Jewish faith". Chanes, Jerome A. Antisemitism: A Reference Handbook, ABC-CLIO, 2004, pp. 3445. "Among the most serious of these manifestations, which reverberate to the present day, were those of the libels: the leveling of charges against Jews, particularly the blood libel and the libel of desecrating the host. Goldish, Matt. Jewish Questions: Responsa on Sephardic Life in the Early Modern Period, Princeton University Press, 2008, p. 8. "In the period from the twelfth to the twentieth centuries, Jews were regularly charged with blood libel or ritual murder that Jews kidnapped and murdered the children of Christians as part of a Jewish religious ritual." that Jews kidnapped and murdered the children of Christians to use their blood as part of their religious rituals during Jewish holidays. Zeitlin, S "The Blood Accusation" Vigiliae Christianae, Vol. 50, No. 2 (1996), pp. 117-124 Historically, these claimsalongside those of well poisoning and host desecrationhave been a major theme in European persecution of Jews. 

Blood libels typically say that Jews require human blood for the baking of matzos for Passover, although this element was allegedly absent in the earliest cases that claimed (the contemporary) Jews reenacted the crucifixion. The accusations often assert that the blood of children of Christians is especially coveted, and, historically, blood libel claims have been made to account for otherwise unexplained deaths of children. In some cases, the victim of human sacrifice has become venerated as a martyr, a holy figure around whom a martyr cult might arise. Three of these -- William of Norwich, Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln, Simon of Trentbecame objects of local cults and veneration, and in some cases were added to the General Roman Calendar, even though lacking official canonization in the Roman Catholic Church. One, Gavriil Belostoksky, was canonized by the Russian Orthodox Church.

In Jewish lore, blood libels were the impetus for the creation of the classic narrative: The Golem of Prague|Golem of Prague] by Rabbi Judah Loew ben Bezalel in the 16th century. Angelo S. Rappoport The Folklore of the Jews (London: Soncino Press, 1937)pp. 195-203 According to Walter Laqueur:
Altogether, there have been about 150 recorded cases of blood libel (not to mention thousands of rumors) that resulted in the arrest and killing of Jews throughout history, most of them in the Middle Ages. In almost every case, Jews were murdered, sometimes by a mob, sometimes following torture and a trial. Walter Laqueur (2006): The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times to the Present Day, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-530429-2. p.56 

==Actual Jewish practices regarding blood and sacrifice==

The supposed torture and human sacrifice alleged in the blood libels run contrary to the teachings of Judaism. According to the Bible, God commanded Abraham in the Binding of Isaac to sacrifice his son, but ultimately provided a ram as a substitute. The Ten Commandments in the Torah forbid murder. In addition, the use of blood (human or otherwise) in cooking is prohibited by the kosher dietary laws (kashrut). Blood from slaughtered animals may not be consumed, and must be drained out of the animal and covered with earth. () According to the book of Leviticus, blood from sacrificed animals may only be placed on the altar of the Great Temple in Jerusalem (which no longer existed at the time of the Christian blood libels). Furthermore, consumption of human flesh would violate kashrut. What is Kashrut; "Eating blood is forbidden. Blood is blood, whether it comes from a human being or an animal. In prohibiting the consumption of blood, the Torah seems to be concerned that it can excite a blood-lust in human beings and may desensitize us to the suffering of human beings when their blood is spilled."
 

While animal sacrifice was part of the practice of ancient Judaism, the Tanakh (Old Testament) and Jewish teaching portray human sacrifice as one of the evils that separated the pagans of Canaan from the Hebrews (, ). Jews were prohibited from engaging in these rituals and were punished for doing so (, , , ). In fact, ritual cleanliness for priests prohibited even being in the same room as a human corpse ().

==Origins==
Encyclopdia Britannica writes:
blood libel, also called blood accusation, the superstitious accusation that Jews ritually sacrifice the children of Christians at Passover to obtain blood for unleavened bread. It first emerged in medieval Europe in the 12th century and was revived sporadically in eastern and central Europe throughout the medieval and modern periods, often leading to the persecution of Jews. "Blood libel", Encyclopdia Britannica, 2012. 
Professor Israel Jacob Yuval of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem published an article in 1993 that argues that blood libel may have originated in the 12th century from Christian views of Jewish behavior during the First Crusade. Some Jews committed suicide and killed their own children rather than be subjected to forced conversions. Yuval investigated Christian reports of these events and found that they were greatly distorted with claims that if Jews could kill their own children they could also kill the children of Christians. Yuval rejects the blood libel story as a fantasy of some Christians which could not contain any elements of truth because of the precarious nature of the Jewish minority's existence in Christian Europe. Two Nations in Your Womb: Perceptions of Jews and Christians in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages by Israel J. Yuval; translated by Barbara Harshav and Jonathan Chipman, University of California Press, 2006 

==Notable instances==

There have been many blood libel accusations and trials of Jews, beginning in the 1st century and continuing through modern times. A few of them are discussed here.

===Antiquity===
There are two records of ancient stories about Jewish acts of sacrifice that have been linked to the later blood libel stories of the medieval era. The first is in the writings of the Graeco-Egyptian author Apion, who claimed that Jews sacrificed Greek victims in their temple. This accusation is known from Josephus' rebuttal of it in Against Apion. Apion states that when Antiochus Epiphanes entered the temple in Jerusalem, he discovered a Greek captive who told him he was being fattened for sacrifice. Every year, Apion claimed, the Jews would sacrifice a Greek and consume his flesh, at the same time swearing eternal hatred to Greeks. Louis H. Feldman, Jew and Gentile in the Ancient World:Attitudes and Interactions from Alexander to Justinian, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1993. pp.126-7. Apion's claim probably repeats ideas already in circulation as similar claims are made by Posidonius and Apollonius Molon in the 1st century BCE. Feldman, Louis H. Studies in Hellenistic Judaism, Brill, 1996, p. 293. 

The second story concerns the murder of a Christian boy by a group of Jewish youths. Socrates Scholasticus (fl. 5th Century) reported that some Jews in a drunken frolic bound a Christian child on a cross in mockery of the death of Christ and scourged him until he died. 

===Middle Ages===

The crucifixion of William of Norwich depicted on a rood screen in Holy Trinity church, Loddon, Norfolk
In England in 1144 Jews of Norwich were accused of ritual murder after a boy, William of Norwich, was found dead with stab wounds in the woods. William's hagiographer, Thomas of Monmouth, claimed that every year there is an international council of Jews at which they choose the country in which a child will be killed during Easter, because (he claimed) of a Jewish prophecy that states that the killing of a Christian child each year will ensure that the Jews will be restored to the Holy Land. In 1144 England was chosen, and the leaders of the Jewish community delegated the Jews of Norwich to perform the killing. They then abducted and crucified William. Paper on William of Norwich presented to the Jewish Historical Society of England by Raphael Langham; Langmuir, Gavin I (1996), Toward a Definition of Antisemitism, University of California Press, pp.216ff. The legend was turned into a cult, with William acquiring the status of martyr and pilgrims bringing offerings to the local church. This was followed by similar accusations in Gloucester (1168), Bury St Edmunds (1181) and Bristol (1183). In 1189, the Jewish deputation attending the coronation of Richard the Lionheart was attacked by the crowd. Massacres of Jews at London and York soon followed. In 1190 on March 16, 150 Jews were attacked in York and then massacred when they took refuge in the royal castle, where Clifford's Tower now stands, with some committing suicide rather than being taken by the mob. http://www.historyofyork.org.uk/themes/norman/the-1190-massacre The remains of 17 bodies thrown in a well in Norwich between the 12th and 13th century (5 that were shown by DNA testing to likely be members of a single Jewish family) were very possibly killed as part of one of these pogroms. Jews would later be expelled from all of England in 1290 and not allowed to return until 1655. In 1171, Blois was the site of a blood libel accusation against its Jewish community that led to 31 Jews (by some accounts 40) being burned to death. 

An early blood libel appears in Bonum Universale de Apibus ii. 29,  23, by Thomas of Cantimpr (a monastery near Cambray). Thomas wrote "It is quite certain that the Jews of every province annually decide by lot which congregation or city is to send Christian blood to the other congregations."
Thomas also believed that since the time when the Jews called out to Pontius Pilate, "His blood be on us, and on our children" (), they have been afflicted with hemorrhages:
A very learned Jew, who in our day has been converted to the (Christian) faith, informs us that one enjoying the reputation of a prophet among them, toward the close of his life, made the following prediction: 'Be assured that relief from this secret ailment, to which you are exposed, can only be obtained through Christian blood ("solo sanguine Christiano").' This suggestion was followed by the ever-blind and impious Jews, who instituted the custom of annually shedding Christian blood in every province, in order that they might recover from their malady.
Thomas added that the Jews had misunderstood the words of their prophet, who by his expression "solo sanguine Christiano" had meant not the blood of any Christian, but that of Jesusthe only true remedy for all physical and spiritual suffering.
Thomas did not mention the name of the "very learned" proselyte, but it may have been Nicholas Donin of La Rochelle, who in 1240 had a disputation on the Talmud with Yechiel of Paris, and who in 1242 caused the burning of numerous Talmudic manuscripts in Paris. It is known that Thomas was personally acquainted with this Nicholas.

The case of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln is mentioned by Chaucer, and thus has become well-known. A child of eight years, named Hugh, son of a woman named Beatrice, disappeared at Lincoln on 31 July 1255. His body was discovered on 29 August, covered with filth, in a pit or well belonging to a Jewish man named Copin or Koppin. On being promised by John of Lexington, a judge, who happened to be present, that his life should be spared, Copin is said to have confessed that the boy had been crucified by the Jews, who had assembled at Lincoln for that purpose. King Henry III, on reaching Lincoln at the beginning of October, refused to carry out the promise of John of Lexington, and had Copin executed and 91 of the Jews of Lincoln seized and sent up to London, where 18 of them were executed. The rest were pardoned at the intercession of the Franciscans (Jacobs, Jewish Ideals, pp. 192224).

At Pforzheim, Baden, the corpse of a seven-year-old girl was found in the river by fishermen. The Jews were suspected, and when they were led to the corpse, blood allegedly began to flow from the wounds; led to it a second time, the face of the child became flushed, and both arms were raised. In addition to these miracles, there was the testimony of the daughter of the wicked woman who had sold the child to the Jews. A regular judicial examination did not take place; it is probable that the above-mentioned "wicked woman" was the murderess. That a judicial murder was then and there committed against the Jews in consequence of the accusation is evident from the manner in which the Nuremberg "Memorbuch" and the synagogal poems refer to the incident (Siegmund Salfeld, Das Martyrologium des Nrnberger Memorbuches (1898), pp. 15, 128-130). At Weissenburg, a miracle alone decided the charge against the Jews. According to the accusation, the Jews had suspended a child (whose body was found in the Lauter river) by the feet, and had opened every artery in his body to obtain all the blood. Again, supernatural claims were made: the child's wounds were said to have bled for five days afterward, despite its treatment.

At Oberwesel, "miracles" again constituted the only evidence against the Jews. The corpse of the 11-year-old Werner of Oberwesel was said to have floated up the Rhine (against the current) as far as Bacharach, emitting radiance, and being invested with healing powers. In consequence, the Jews of Oberwesel and many other adjacent localities were severely persecuted during the years 1286-89. Emperor Rudolph I, to whom the Jews had appealed for protection, issued a public proclamation to the effect that great wrong had been done to the Jews, and that the corpse of Werner was to be burned and the ashes scattered to the winds. The statement was made, in the "Chronicle" of Konrad Justinger of 1423, that at Bern in 1294 the Jews tortured and murdered a boy called Rudolph. The historical impossibility of this widely credited story was demonstrated by Jakob Stammler, pastor of Bern, in 1888. "Katholische Schweizer-Bltter," Lucerne, 1888. It has been speculated whether the Kindlifresserbrunnen ("Child Eater Fountain") in Bern might refer to the alleged ritual murder of 1294.

===Renaissance and Baroque===
From an 18th-century etching from Brckenturm. Above: The murdered body of Simon of Trent. Below: The "Judensau."

Simon of Trent, aged two, disappeared, and his father alleged that he had been kidnapped and murdered by the local Jewish community. Fifteen local Jews were sentenced to death and burned. Simon was regarded as a saint, and was canonized by Pope Sixtus V in 1588. His status as a saint was removed in 1965 by Pope Paul VI, though his murder is still promoted as a fact by a handful of extremists.

Christopher of Toledo, also known as Christopher of La Guardia or "the Holy Child of La Guardia," was a four-year-old Christian boy supposedly murdered by two Jews and three Conversos (converts to Christianity). In total, eight men were executed. It is now believed Reston, James: "Dogs of God: Columbus, the Inquisition, and the defeat of the Moors", page 207. Doubleday, 2005. ISBN 0-385-50848-4 that this case was constructed by the Spanish Inquisition to facilitate the expulsion of Jews from Spain. He was canonized by Pope Pius VII in 1805. Christopher has since been removed from the canon, though once again, a handful of individuals still claim the validity of this case.
 The story of Simon of Trent (1475), by Hartmann Schedels (1493)

In a case at Tyrnau (Nagyszombat, today Trnava, Slovakia), the absurdity, even the impossibility, of the statements forced by torture from women and children shows that the accused preferred death as a means of escape from the torture, and admitted everything that was asked of them. They even said that Jewish men menstruated, and that the latter therefore practiced the drinking of Christian blood as a remedy.

At Bsing (Bazin, today Pezinok, Slovakia), it was charged that a nine-year-old boy had been bled to death, suffering cruel torture; thirty Jews confessed to the crime and were publicly burned. The true facts of the case were disclosed later, when the child was found alive in Vienna. He had been stolen by the accuser, Count Wolf of Bazin, as a fiendish means of ridding himself of his Jewish creditors at Bazin.

Fresco in St Paul's Church in Sandomierz, Poland, depicting blood libel

At Rinn, near Innsbruck, a boy named Andreas Oxner (also known as Anderl von Rinn) was said to have been bought by Jewish merchants and cruelly murdered by them in a forest near the city, his blood being carefully collected in vessels. The accusation of drawing off the blood (without murder) was not made until the beginning of the 17th century, when the cult was founded. The older inscription in the church of Rinn, dating from 1575, is distorted by fabulous embellishments&mdash;for example, that the money paid for the boy to his godfather turned into leaves, and that a lily blossomed upon his grave. The cult continued until officially prohibited in 1994 by the Bishop of Innsbruck. Medieval Sourcebook: A Blood Libel Cult: Anderl von Rinn, d. 1462 www.fordham.edu. 

===19th century===
The only child-saint in the Russian Orthodox Church is the six-year-old boy Gavriil Belostoksky from the village Zverki. According to the legend supported by the church, the boy was kidnapped from his home during the holiday of Passover while his parents were away. Shutko, who was a Jew from Biaystok, was accused of bringing the boy to Biaystok, poking him with sharp objects and draining his blood for nine days, then bringing the body back to Zverki and dumping it at a local field. A cult developed, and the boy was canonized in 1820. His relics are still the object of pilgrimage. On All Saints Day, July 27, 1997, the Belorussian state TV showed a film alleging the story is true. Is the New in the Post-Soviet Space Only the Forgotten Old? by Leonid Stonov, International Director of Bureau for the Human Rights and Law-Observance in the Former Soviet Union, the President of the American Association of Jews from the former USSR) The revival of the cult in Belarus was cited as a dangerous expression of antisemitism in international reports on human rights and religious freedoms Belarus. International Religious Freedom Report 2003 Released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Belarus. International Religious Freedom Report 2004 Released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Belarus. International Religious Freedom Report 2005 Released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Belarus. International Religious Freedom Report 2006 Released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor which were passed to the UNHCR. 

* 1823-1835 Velizh blood libel: After a Christian child was found murdered outside of this small Russian town in 1823, accusations by a drunk prostitute led to the imprisonment of many local Jews. Some were not released until 1835.

*1840 Damascus affair: In February, at Damascus, a Catholic monk named Father Thomas and his servant disappeared. The accusation of ritual murder was brought against members of the Jewish community of Damascus.

*1840 Rhodes blood libel: The Jews of Rhodes, under the Ottoman Empire, were accused of murdering a Greek Christian boy. The libel was supported by the local governor and the European consuls posted to Rhodes. Several Jews were arrested and tortured, and the entire Jewish quarter was blockaded for twelve days. An investigation carried out by the central Ottoman government found the Jews to be innocent.

*In March 1879, ten Jewish men from a mountain village were brought to Kutaisi, Georgia to stand trial for the alleged kidnapping and murder of a Christian girl. The case attracted a great deal of attention in Russia (of which Georgia was then a part): "While periodicals as diverse in tendency as Herald of Europe and Saint Petersburg Notices expressed their amazement that medieval prejudice should have found a place in the modern judiciary of a civilized state, New Times hinted darkly of strange Jewish sects with unknown practices." Effie Ambler, Russian Journalism and Politics: The Career of Aleksei S. Suvorin, 1861-1881 (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1972: ISBN 0-8143-1461-9), p. 172. The trial ended in acquittal, and the orientalist Daniel Chwolson published a refutation of the blood libel.

*1882 Tiszaeszlr blood libel: The Jews of the village Tiszaeszlr, Hungary were accused of the ritual murder of a fourteen-year-old Christian girl, Eszter Solymosi. The case was one of the main causes of the rise of antisemitism in the country. The accused persons were eventually acquitted.

*In 1899 Hilsner Affair: Leopold Hilsner, a Jewish vagabond, was accused of murdering a nineteen-year-old Christian woman, Aneka Hrzov, with a slash to the throat. Despite the absurdity of the charge and the relatively progressive nature of society in Austria-Hungary, Hilsner was convicted and sentenced to death. He was later convicted of an additional unsolved murder, also involving a Christian woman. In 1901, the sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. Tom Masaryk, a prominent Austro-Czech philosophy professor and future president of Czechoslovakia, spearheaded Hilsner's defense. He was later blamed by Czech media because of this. In March 1918, Hilsner was pardoned by Austrian emperor Charles I. He was never exonerated, and the true guilty parties were never found.

===20th century and beyond===

*The 1903 Kishinev pogrom, an anti-Jewish revolt, started when an anti-Semitic newspaper wrote that a Christian Russian boy, Mikhail Rybachenko, was found murdered in the town of Dubossary, alleging that the Jews killed him in order to use the blood in preparation of matzo. Around 49 Jews were killed and hundreds were wounded, with over 700 houses being looted and destroyed.

*In the 1910 Shiraz blood libel, the Jews of Shiraz, Iran, were falsely accused of murdering a Muslim girl. The entire Jewish quarter was pillaged; the pogrom left 12 Jews dead and about 50 injured.

Antisemitic flier in Kiev, 1910: "Christians, take care of your children!!! It will be Jewish Passover on March 17."
*In Kiev, a Jewish factory manager, Menahem Mendel Beilis, was accused of murdering a Christian child and using his blood in matzos. He was acquitted by an all-Christian jury after a sensational trial in 1913. 

*In 1928, the Jews of Massena, New York, were falsely accused of kidnapping and killing a Christian girl in the Massena blood libel.

*Jews were frequently accused of ritual murder of Christians for their blood in Der Strmer, an antisemitic newspaper published in Nazi Germany. The infamous May 1934 issue of the paper was later banned by the Nazi authorities, because it went as far as comparing alleged Jewish ritual murder with the Christian communion. German propaganda archive - Caricatures from Der Strmer, Calvin College website. 

*The 1944-1946 Anti-Jewish violence in Poland which killed an estimated 1000-2000 Jews (237 documented cases) involved, among other elements, accusations of blood libel.

*The 1946 Kielce pogrom against Holocaust survivors in Poland was sparked by an accusation of blood libel.

*King Faisal of Saudi Arabia (r. 19641975) made accusations against Parisian Jews that took the nature of a blood libel. 
 

*The Matzah Of Zion was written by the Syrian Defense Minister, Mustafa Tlass in 1986. The book concentrates on two issues: renewed ritual murder accusations against the Jews in the Damascus affair of 1840, and The Protocols of the Elders of Zion. Frankel, Jonathan. The Damascus Affair: "Ritual Murder," Politics, and the Jews in 1840, pp. 418, 421. Cambridge University Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-521-48396-4 The book was cited at a United Nations conference in 1991 by a Syrian delegate. On October 21, 2002, the London-based Arabic paper Al-Hayat reported that the book The Matzah of Zion was undergoing its eighth reprint and was being translated into English, French and Italian. Egyptian filmmaker Munir Radhi has announced plans to adapt the book into a film. Goldberg, Jeffrey. Prisoners: A Story of Friendship and Terror. New York: Vintage, 2006. p. 250 
* In 2003 a private Syrian film company created a 29-part television series Ash-Shatat ("The Diaspora"). This series originally aired in Lebanon in late 2003 and was broadcast by Al-Manar, a satellite television network owned by Hezbollah. This TV series, based on the antisemitic forgery The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, shows the Jewish people as engaging in a conspiracy to rule the world, and presents Jews as people who murder the children of Christians, drain their blood and use this blood to bake matzah.
* In early January 2005, some 20 members of the Russian State Duma publicly made a blood libel against the Jewish people. They approached the Prosecutor Generals Office and demanded that Russia "ban all Jewish organizations. They accused all Jewish groups of being extremists and of being anti-Christian and inhumane, which practices extend even to ritual murders. Alluding to previous antisemitic Russian court decrees that accused the Jews of ritual murder, they wrote that Many facts of such religious extremism were proven in courts. The accusation included traditional antisemitic canards, such as the whole democratic world today is under the financial and political control of international Jewry. And we do not want our Russia to be among such unfree countries. This demand was published as an open letter to the prosecutor general, in Rus Pravoslavnaya (, "Orthodox Russia"), a national-conservative newspaper. This group consisted of members of the ultra-nationalist Liberal Democrats, the Communist faction, and the nationalist Motherland party, with some 500 supporters. he mentioned document is known as "The Letter of Five Hundred" (" "). Their supporters included editors of nationalist newspapers as well as journalists. By the end of the month this group had received stiff criticism, and retracted its demand.
thumb
* At the end of April 2005, five boys, ages 9 to 12, in Krasnoyarsk (Russia) disappeared. In May 2005, their burnt bodies were found in the city sewage. The crime was not disclosed, and in August 2007 the investigation was extended until November 18, 2007. Some Russian nationalist groups claimed that the children were murdered by a Jewish sect with a ritual purpose. Nationalist M. Nazarov, one of the authors of "The Letter of Five Hundred" alleges "the existence of a 'Hasidic sect', whose members kill children before Passover to collect their blood," using the Beilis case mentioned above as evidence. M.Nazarov also alleges that "the ritual murder requires throwing the body away rather than its concealing". "The Union of the Russian People" demanded officials thoroughly investigate the Jews, not stopping at the search in synagogues, Matzah bakeries and their offices. Hasids were accused in Krasnoyarsk children murder, the Beilis Affair was reanimated (Regnum, May 16, 2005) 
* During a speech in 2007, Raed Salah, the leader of the northern branch of the Islamic Movement in Israel, accused Jews of using children's blood to bake bread. "We have never allowed ourselves to knead dough for the bread that breaks the fast in the holy month of Ramadan with children's blood," he said. "Whoever wants a more thorough explanation, let him ask what used to happen to some children in Europe, whose blood was mixed in with the dough of the holy bread." "Islamic Movement head charged with incitement to racism, violence", Haaretz, January 29, 2008. 
* In 2008, a Polish team of anthropologists and sociologists investigated the currency of the blood libel myth in Sandomierz where a painting depicting the blood libel adorns the Cathedral, and discovered that these beliefs persist among Catholic and Orthodox Christians of all social classes. "Interview with two members of a Polish team of anthropologists, sociologists and one theologian researching the persistence of blood libel myths" Joanna Tokarska-Bakir, Sandomierz blood libel legends Tokarska-Bakir, Legendy o krwi, antropologia przesdu (Anthropology of Prejudice: Blood Libel Myths) Warsaw, WAB, 2008, 796 pp, 89 zotys, reviewed here by Jean-Yves Potel 
*In an address that aired on Al-Aqsa TV, a Hamas run TV station in Gaza, on March 31, 2010, Salah Eldeen Sultan (Arabic:   ), founder of the American Center for Islamic Research in Columbus, Ohio, the Islamic American University in Southfield, Michigan, and the Sultan Publishing Co. Egyptian extremists an ill wind in Arab Spring by Harry Sterling, Calgary Herald, September 2, 2011. and described in 2005 as "one of America's most noted Muslim scholars," alleged that Jews kidnap Christians and others in order to slaughter them and use their blood for making matzos. Sultan, who is currently a lecturer of Muslim jurisprudence at the Cairo University stated that: "The Zionists kidnap several non-Muslims  Christians and others... this happened in a Jewish neighborhood in Damascus. They killed the French doctor, Toma, who used to treat the Jews and others for free, in order to spread Christianity. Even though he was their friend and they benefited from him the most, they took him on one of these holidays and slaughtered him, along with the nurse. Then they kneaded the matzos with the blood of Dr. Toma and his nurse. They do this every year. The world must know these facts about the Zionist entity and its terrible corrupt creed. The world should know this." (Translation by the Middle East Media Research Institute) Blood Libel on Hamas' Al-Aqsa TV  American Center for Islamic Research President Dr. Sallah Sultan: Jews Murder Non-Jews and Use Their Blood for Passover Matzos, MEMRI, Special Dispatch No. 2907, April 14, 2010. Blood Libel on Hamas TV - President of the American Center for Islamic Research Dr. Sallah Sultan: Jews Murder Non-Jews and Use Their Blood to Knead Passover Matzos, MEMRITV, Clip No. 2443 - Transcript, March 31, 2010 (video clip available here). Islamic group invited anti-Semitic speaker, The Local (Sweden's News in English), March 25, 2011. Egypt: More Calls to Murder Israelis by Maayana Miskin, Arutz Sheva 7 (Isranelnationalnews.com), August 28, 2011. Why the Muslim Association doesnt expresses reservations towards Antisemitism by Willie Silberstein, Coordination Forum for Countering Antisemitism (CFCA), April 17, 2011. 
*During interview which aired on Rotana Khalijiya TV on August 13, 2012, Saudi Cleric Salman Al-Odeh stated (as translated by MEMRI) that "It is well known that the Jews celebrate several holidays, one of which is the Passover, or the Matzos Holiday. I read once about a doctor who was working in a laboratory. This doctor lived with a Jewish family. One day, they said to him: 'We want blood. Get us some human blood.' He was confused. He didn't know what this was all about. Of course, he couldn't betray his work ethics in such a way, but he began inquiring, and he found that they were making matzos with human blood." Al-Odeh also stated that " eat it, believing that this brings them close to their false god, Yahweh" and that "They would lure a child in order to sacrifice him in the religious rite that they perform during that holiday." Saudi Cleric Salman Al-Odeh: Jews Use Human Blood for Passover Matzos, MEMRITV, Clip No. 3536, (transcript), August 13, 2012. Saudi cleric accuses Jewish people of genocide, drinking human blood by Ilan Ben Zion, The Times of Israel, August 16, 2012. 
*In April 2013, the Palestinian non-profit organization MIFTAH, founded by Hanan Ashrawi apologized for publishing an article which criticized US President Barack Obama for holding a Passover Seder in the White House saying "Does Obama in fact know the relationship, for example, between Passover and Christian blood..?! Or Passover and Jewish blood rituals?! Much of the chatter and gossip about historical Jewish blood rituals in Europe are real and not fake as they claim; the Jews used the blood of Christians in the Jewish Passover." MIFTAH's apology expressed its "sincerest regret." Palestinian non-profit belatedly apologizes for blood libel article 

*In an interview which aired Al-Hafez TV on May 12, 2013, Khaled Al-Zaafrani of the Egyptian Justice and Progress Party, stated (as translated by MEMRI): "It's well known that during the Passover, they Jews make matzos called the "Blood of Zion." They take a Christian child, slit his throat and slaughter him. Then they take his blood and make their . This is a very important rite for the Jews, which they never forgo...They slice it and fight over who gets to eat Christian blood." In the same interview, Al-Zaafrani stated that "The French kings and the Russian czars discovered this in the Jewish quarters. All the massacring of Jews that occurred in those countries were because they discovered that the Jews had kidnapped and slaughtered children, in order to make the Passover matzos." Egyptian Politician Khaled Zaafrani: Jews Use Human Blood for Passover Matzos, MEMRITV, Clip No. 3873 (transcript), May 24, 2013 (see also: Video Clip). Egyptian Politician: Jews Use Human Blood for Passover Matzos by Elad Benari, Arutz Sheva, June 17, 2013. Egyptian politician revives Passover blood libel by Gavriel Fiske, Times of Israel, June 19, 2013. Egyptian Politician Smiles Giddily as He Pushes anti-Semitic Libel that Jews Use Blood of Christian Children for Passover Matzos by Sharona Schwartz, The Blaze, June 17, 2013. 

==Views of the Catholic Church==
The attitude of the Roman Catholic Church towards these accusations and the cults venerating children supposedly killed by Jews has varied over time. The papacy generally opposed them, although it had problems in enforcing its opposition.

In 1911, the Dictionnaire apologtique de la foi catholique, an important French Catholic encyclopedia, published an analysis of the blood libel accusations. English translation here. This may be taken as being broadly representative of educated Catholic opinion in continental Europe at that time. The article noted that the popes had generally refrained from endorsing the blood libel, and it concluded that the accusations were unproven in a general sense, but it left open the possibility that some Jews had committed ritual murders of Christians. Other contemporary Catholic sources (notably the Jesuit periodical Civilt cattolica) promoted the blood libel as truth. As shown by David Kertzer in The Popes Against the Jews (New York, 2001), pp. 161-63. 

Today, the accusations are almost entirely discredited in Catholic circles, and the cults associated with them have fallen into disfavour. For example, Simon of Trent was deleted from the Calendar of Saints in 1965 and does not appear in the current (2000) edition of the Roman Martyrology.

===Papal pronouncements===
*Pope Innocent IV took action against the blood libel: "5 July 1247 "Mandate to the prelates of Germany and France to annul all measures adopted against the Jews on account of the ritual murder libel, and to prevent accusation of Arabs on similar charges" (The Apostolic See and the Jews, Documents: 492-1404; Simonsohn, Shlomo, p. 188-189,193-195,208). In 1247 he wrote also that "Certain of the clergy, and princes, nobles and great lords of your cities and dioceses have falsely devised certain godless plans against the Jews, unjustly depriving them by force of their property, and appropriating it themselves;...they falsely charge them with dividing up among themselves on the Passover the heart of a murdered boy...In their malice, they ascribe every murder, wherever it chance to occur, to the Jews. And on the ground of these and other fabrications, they are filled with rage against them, rob them of their possessions without any formal accusation, without confession, and without legal trial and conviction, contrary to the privileges granted to them by the Apostolic See...Since it is our pleasure that they shall not be disturbed,...we ordain that ye behave towards them in a friendly and kind manner. Whenever any unjust attacks upon them come under your notice, redress their injuries, and do not suffer them to be visited in the future by similar tribulations" (Catholic Encyclopedia (1910), Vol. 8, pp. 393394). 
* Pope Gregory X (12711276) issued a letter which criticized the practice of blood libels and forbade arrests and persecution of Jews based on a blood libel, ...unless which we do not believe they be caught in the commission of the crime. . 
* Pope Paul III, in a bull of 12 May 1540, made clear his displeasure at having learned, through the complaints of the Jews of Hungary, Bohemia and Poland, that their enemies, looking for a pretext to lay their hands on the Jews' property, were falsely attributing terrible crimes to them, in particular that of killing children and drinking their blood.
* St. Pius V in the bull Hebraeorum gens (26 February 1569) did not reference blood libel, but he did make multiple accusations against the Jews, including: usury, theft, receiving stolen goods, pimping, divination and magic. He finishes with this accusation: "Finally, we have sufficiently investigated and explored how unworthily this perverse race attacks the name of Christ; how much hated it is by all those who bear that name; and, finally, with what cunning it plots against their lives."
*Pope Benedict XIV wrote a bull Beatus Andreas (22 February 1755) in which he does not express any doubt concerning the murders of children ascribed to the Jews. He states they are perpetrated "out of hatred of Christ" and "out of hatred for the Christian faith" in his De servorum Dei beatificatione. In the bull he speaks about determining what is to be done "when there arises a case of this sort, which often comes to be put forward, concerning some boy who was slain by the Hebrews in Holy Week out of hostility to Christ, such as Blessed Simon and Anderl and also many of the other murdered boys whom the authors mention".

==Views of Muslim authorities==
In late 1553 or 1554, Suleiman the Magnificent, the reigning Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, issued a firman (royal decree) formally denouncing blood libels against the Jews. 

In 2003, the Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram published a series of articles by Osama Al-Baz, a senior advisor to then Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Among other things, Osam Al-Baz explained the origins of the blood libel against the Jews. He said that Arabs and Muslims have never been antisemitic, as a group, but accepted that a few Arab writers and media figures attack Jews "on the basis of the racist fallacies and myths that originated in Europe". He urged people not to succumb to "myths" such as the blood libel. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Darren O'Brien, The Pinnacle of Hatred the Blood Libel and the Jews, (The Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism, Hebrew University Magnes Press, Jerusalem, 2011).
* David Biale Blood and Belief (2007)
*
*Jewish Encyclopedia article: (Richard Gottheil, Hermann L.Strack, Joseph Jacobs) Blood Accusation
*Leikin, Ezekiel. The Beilis Transcripts. The Anti-Semitic Trial that Shook the World. ISBN 0-87668-179-8
* R. Po-chia Hsia, "The Myth of Ritual Murder: Jews and Magic in Reformation Germany" (New Haven: Yale UP, 1988). ISBN 0-300-04120-9 (cloth), ISBN 0-300-04746-0 (pbk.).
* The Chaucer Review: Emmy Stark Zitter: Antisemitism in Chacer's Prioress's Tale
* Tokarska-Bakir, Legendy o krwi, antropologia przesdu (Anthropology of Prejudice: Blood Libel Myths) Warsaw, WAB, 2008, 796 pp, 89 zotys, reviewed here by Jean-Yves Potel
* Wesker, Arnold, Blood Libel in Wild Spring and Other Plays London, 1994.
*Paul Gensler: "Die Damaskusaffre: Judeophobie in einer anonymen Damszener Chronik." Grin Verlag, 2011

==External links==

*Urban Legends Reference Pages: Religion (Blood Feast)
*Example of anti-Semitic propaganda
*Resources > Medieval Jewish History > Blood Libels Jewish History Resource Center, Project of the Dinur Center for Research in Jewish History Hebrew University of Jerusalem
* The Port Jews of Corfu and the 'Blood Libel' of 1891: A Tale of Many Centuries and of One Event Athanasios (Sakis) Gekas
* The Ritual Murder Libel and the Jew: The Report by Cardinal Lorenzo Ganganelli (Pope Clement XIV.) edited by Cecil Roth (1935)
* Raphael Langham William of Norwich The Jewish Historical Society of England
* The Life and Miracles of St William of Norwich by Thomas of Monmouth (edited by Augustus Jessopp DD)
* Antisemitic painting in Sandomierz Cathedral (17th century) Karol (Charles) de Prvt; an Italian painter of French extraction
*Jewish Virtual Library

 



[[Bagpuss]]

Bagpuss is a UK children's television series, made by Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate. The series of 13 episodes was first broadcast from 12 February 1974 to 7 May 1974 through their company Smallfilms. The title character was "an old, saggy cloth cat, baggy, and a bit loose at the seams". Although only 13 episodes were made, it remains fondly remembered, and was frequently repeated in the UK for 13 years. In 1999 Bagpuss topped a BBC poll for the UK's favourite children's TV programme.

==Format==
Each programme began in the same way: through a series of sepia photographs, the viewer is told of a little girl named Emily (played by Emily Firmin, the daughter of illustrator Firmin), who owned a shop. Emily found lost and broken things and displayed them in the window, so their owners could come and collect them; the shop did not sell anything. She would leave the object in front of her favourite stuffed toy, the large, saggy, pink and white striped cat named Bagpuss, originally intended by Firmin to be a retired Indian Army cat who entertained children in the hospital with his "visible" thoughts appearing in a "thinks bubble" above his head. When Postgate and Firmin were asked to develop this character for a BBC programme Postgate placed him in the shop with other characters and his "thinks bubble" became a way to illustrate the stories and mend or explore the objects that Emily had found. Emily then recited a verse: 

When Emily had left, Bagpuss woke up. The programme shifted from sepia to colour stop motion film, and various toys in the shop came to life: Gabriel the toad (who, unlike most Smallfilms characters, could move by a special device beneath his can without the use of stop motion animation) and a rag doll called Madeleine. The wooden woodpecker bookend became the drily academic Professor Yaffle (based on the philosopher Bertrand Russell, whom Postgate had once met), Channel 4 News, 9 December 2008. while the mice carved on the side of the "mouse organ" (a small mechanical pipe organ that played rolls of music) woke up and scurried around, singing in high-pitched voices. Sandra Kerr and John Faulkner provided the voices of Madeleine and Gabriel respectively, and put together and performed all the folk songs. All the other voices (including the narrator and one out-of-tune mouse) were provided by Postgate, who also wrote the stories.

The toys discussed what the new object was; someone (usually Madeleine) would tell a story related to the object (shown in an animated thought bubble over Bagpuss's head), often with a song, accompanied by Gabriel on the banjo (which often sounded a lot more like a guitar), and then the mice, singing in high-pitched squeaky harmony to the tune of Sumer Is Icumen In as they worked, mended the broken object. The newly mended thing was then be put in the shop window, so that whoever had lost it would see it as they went past, and could come in and claim it. Then Bagpuss would start yawning again, and as he fell asleep the narrator would speak as the colour faded to sepia and they all became toys again.

==Title sequence==
The scene is set at the turn of the 20th century, with Emily Firmin playing the part of the Victorian child Emily. Postgate, Oliver (2000) Seeing Things-A Memoir ISBN 978-1-84767-840-9 The first antique village vignette is a cropped image of Horrabridge taken in 1898, and the shop window was at the Firmin family home in Blean. 

==Episodes==
The titles of the episodes each refer in some way to the object Emily found. 

 Episode Title Original airdate Summary 
 1 Ship in a Bottle 12 February 1974 Some splints of wood are shaken out of a bottle by the mice. Bagpuss tells a story about mermaids and the magic repairs the model ship. The mice put it back into the bottle and raise the sails. 
 2 The Owls of Athens 19 February 1974 A dirty rag reveals a picture of an owl once cleaned. Madeleine recounts a story explaining why owls sound like they do. Gabriel recounts in song the story of a king who needed a cushion to sit on. 
 3 The Frog Princess 26 February 1974 Assorted jewels, which initially are thought to represent a cat and mouse but which Gabriel decides were the crown jewels of a frog princess. 
 4 The Ballet Shoe 5 March 1974 Put to inventive use by the mice, and the subject of a very silly song about its possible use as a rowing boat. 
 5 The Hamish 12 March 1974 A tartan porcupine pincushion, and a legend of a small, soft creature from Scotland. 
 6 The Wise Man 19 March 1974 A broken figurine of a Chinese man (the Wise Man of Ling-Po, Yaffle explains) and a turtle. 
 7 The Elephant 26 March 1974 An elephant missing its ears. 
 8 The Mouse Mill 2 April 1974 A wooden toy mill demonstrated by the mice to make chocolate biscuits out of butterbeans and breadcrumbs. This turns out to be a mischievous fraud. Gabriel and Madeleine sing a song about how ploughmen, farmers, millers and bakers work at difference stages of bread production. Even stern old Professor Yaffle cries. 
 9 The Giant 9 April 1974 A statuette, and a lesson about how sizes are relative. 
 10 The Old Man's Beard 16 April 1974 A tangly plant (Clematis vitalba seeding), and a loom for weaving. 
 11 The Fiddle 23 April 1974 A fiddle that plays itself, and a leprechaun. 
 12 Flying 30 April 1974 A basket that the mice attempt to turn into a flying machine. 
 13 Uncle Feedle 7 May 1974 A piece of cloth, destined to be a house for a rag doll. 

==VHS and DVD releases== 
In May 1999, PolyGram released a video entitled The Complete Bagpuss which included all 13 episodes. It was released in DVD format in April 2005. 

==Production==
The characters of Bagpuss

The programmes were made using stop-frame animation. Bagpuss is an actual cloth cat, but was not intended to be such an electric pink. "It should have been a ginger marmalade cat but the company in Folkestone dyeing the material made a mistake and it turned out pink and cream. It was the best thing that ever happened," said Firmin. 
 

Madeleine the rag doll was made by Firmin's wife, Joan, with an extra long dress to hold their children's nightdresses, but Postgate asked Joan to make a new version as one of the characters.

Gabriel the Toad was the only character in the series who could move freely without the use of stop-frame animation. Scenes featuring him playing the banjo and singing would have taken quite a bit of time if filmed with the stop-frame method, so Peter Firmin created a mechanism that helped him control Gabriel through a hole in his can.The character was based on a real toad that lived in the basement area of the flat that Peter and Joan Firmin rented in Twickenham beside the River Thames. Peter first made Gabriel (named after Walter Gabriel in The Archers, a long-running British radio soap opera) for his live ITV programme "The Musical Box". Oliver chose him as one of the characters in Bagpuss and Peter made a new, slightly larger version.

Professor Yaffle was created as the Bookend who had access to "facts". The BBC did not like Peter's first character, a man in top hat made from Black Irish bogwood called "Professor Bogwood". They thought it was too frightening and asked for a non-human instead.

Bagpuss has now retired to the Rupert Bear Museum in Canterbury, part of the Museum of Canterbury, together with other characters and Emily's shop window. 

Most of the stories and songs used in the series are based on folk songs and fairy tales from around the world.

==Recognition==
In 1987 the University of Kent at Canterbury awarded honorary degrees to Postgate and Firmin. In his speech, Postgate stated that the degree was really intended for Bagpuss, who was subsequently displayed in academic dress. 

In 1999 the series came first in a BBC poll selecting the nation's favourite children's show. It also came fourth in the 2001 Channel 4 poll The 100 Greatest Kids' TV shows. 

In 2002 and 2005 a stage show of Bagpuss songs toured UK folk festivals and theatres with original singers Sandra Kerr and John Faulkner, along with Kerr's daughter Nancy Kerr and her husband, James Fagan.

In June 2002, the charity Hospices of Hope opened the Bagpuss Children's Wing in its hospice in Braov, Romania. The wing was funded entirely by Postgate from royalties received from the BBC. In April 2012, Marc Jenner from Tunbridge Wells in Kent ran in the Virgin London Marathon dressed in a 7 ft Bagpuss costume to raise money for the charity, supported by Emily Firmin and Postgate's family.

Thom Yorke of the band Radiohead has claimed to be a fan of the show, watching it with his son. It was an influence for 2003 album Hail to the Thief. Gabriel's song in Episode 2 was the acknowledged inspiration for the album track (and first single) There There (originally titled "The Bony King of Nowhere"). http://pulk-pull.org/message-124-bagpuss/ 

The character appeared on one of the twelve postage stamps issued by Royal Mail in January 2014 to celebrate classic children's programmes. 

==References==

==External links==
* Bagpuss at bbc.co.uk
*
* The Smallfilms Treasury's Bagpuss site
* British Film Institute Screen Online
* Bagpuss & Co



[[Naive set theory]]

Naive set theory is one of several theories of sets used in the discussion of the foundations of mathematics. Concerning the origin of the term naive set theory, Jeff Miller says, Nave set theory (contrasting with axiomatic set theory) was used occasionally in the 1940s and became an established term in the 1950s. It appears in Hermann Weyl's review of P. A. Schilpp (ed) The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell in the American Mathematical Monthly, 53., No. 4. (1946), p. 210 and Laszlo Kalmar's review of The Paradox of Kleene and Rosser in Journal of Symbolic Logic, 11, No. 4. (1946), p. 136. (JSTOR). The term was later popularized by Paul Halmos' book, Naive Set Theory (1960). Unlike axiomatic set theories, which are defined using a formal logic, naive set theory is defined informally, in natural language. It describes the aspects of mathematical sets familiar in discrete mathematics (for example Venn diagrams and symbolic reasoning about their Boolean algebra), and suffices for the everyday usage of set theory concepts in contemporary mathematics.

Sets are of great importance in mathematics; in fact, in modern formal treatments, most mathematical objects (numbers, relations, functions, etc.) are defined in terms of sets. Naive set theory can be seen as a stepping-stone to more formal treatments, and suffices for many purposes.

==Setting of naive set theory==
Here and below, a naive theory is considered to be a non-formalized theory, that is, a theory that uses a natural language to describe sets and operations on sets. The words and, or, if ... then, not, for some, for every are not here subject to rigorous definition. It is useful to study sets naively at an early stage of mathematics in order to develop facility for working with them. Furthermore, a firm grasp of set theory's concepts from a naive standpoint is a step to understanding the motivation for the formal axioms of set theory. As a matter of convenience, usage of naive set theory and its formalism prevails even in higher mathematics &ndash; including in more formal settings of set theory itself.

Sets are defined informally and a few of their properties are investigated. Links to specific axioms of set theory describe some of the relationships between the informal discussion here and the formal axiomatization of set theory, but no attempt is made to justify every statement on such a basis. The first development of set theory was a naive set theory. It was created at the end of the 19th century by Georg Cantor as part of his study of infinite sets and developed by Gottlob Frege in his Begriffsschrift.

Naive set theory may refer to several very distinct notions. It may refer to
* Informal presentation of an axiomatic set theory, e.g. as in Naive Set Theory (book) by Paul Halmos.
* Early or later versions of Cantors's theory and other informal systems.
* Decidedly inconsistent theories (whether axiomatic or not), like a theory of Gottlob Frege In Volume 2, Jena 1903. pp. 253-261 Frege discusses the antionomy in the afterword. that yielded Russell's paradox, and theories of Giuseppe Peano Axiom 52. chap. IV produces antinomies. and Richard Dedekind.

===Paradoxes===
As it turned out, assuming that one can form sets freely without restriction leads to paradoxes. For example, the assumption that one can collect together, as a set, all (mathematical) objects that has a given property is false. In other words, the statement that
:
(, where P(x) should be read as "x has property P",) is a set will lead to paradoxes, in particular Russell's paradox.

===Cantor's theory===
Some believe that Georg Cantor's set theory was not actually implicated by these paradoxes (see Frpolli 1991); one difficulty in determining this with certainty is that Cantor did not provide an axiomatization of his system. By 1899, Cantor was aware of some of the paradoxes following from unrestricted interpretation of his theory, for instance Cantor's paradox, Letter from Cantor to David Hilbert on September 26, 1897, p. 388. the Burali-Forti paradox, Letter from Cantor to Richard Dedekind on August 3, 1899, p. 408. and did not believe that they discredited his theory. Letters from Cantor to Richard Dedekind on August 3, 1899 and on August 30, 1899, p. 448 (System aller denkbaren Klassen) and p. 407. (There is no set of all sets.) Cantor's paradox can actually be derived from the above (false) assumption using for P(x) \"x is a cardinal number". Frege explicitly axiomatized a theory in which a formalized version of naive set theory can be interpreted, and it is this formal theory which Bertrand Russell actually addressed when he presented his paradox, not necessarily a theory Cantor, who, as mentioned, was aware several paradoxes, presumably had in mind.

===Axiomatic theories===
Axiomatic set theory was developed in response to these early attempts to understand sets, with the goal of determining precisely what operations were allowed and when. Today, when mathematicians talk about "set theory" as a field, they usually mean axiomatic set theory. Informal applications of set theory in other fields are sometimes referred to as applications of "naive set theory", but usually are understood to be justifiable in terms of an axiomatic system (normally ZermeloFraenkel set theory).

===Consistency===
A naive set theory is not necessarily inconsistent, if it correctly specifies the sets allowed to be considered. This can be done by the means of definitions, which are implicit axioms. It is possible to state all the axioms explicitly, as in the case of Halmos' Naive Set Theory, which is actually an informal presentation of the usual axiomatic ZermeloFraenkel set theory. It is "naive" in that the language and notations are those of ordinary informal mathematics, and in that it doesn't deal with consistency or completeness of the axiom system.

Likewise, an axiomatic set theory is not necessarily consistent, i.e. not necessarily free of paradoxes. It follows from Gdel's incompleteness theorems that a sufficiently complicated system, in first order logic, which includes most common axiomatic set theories, cannot be proved consistent from within the theory itself, provided it actually is consistent. However, the common axiomatic systems are generally believed to be consistent, and they do exclude, via the axioms, some paradoxes, like Russell's paradox. It is just not known, and never will be, if there are no paradoxes at all in these theories or in any first-order set theory.

The term naive set theory is still today also used in some literature to refer to the set theories studied by Frege and Cantor, rather than to the informal counterparts of modern axiomatic set theory.

===Utility===
The choice between an axiomatic approach and other approaches is largely a matter of convenience. In everyday mathematics the best choice may be informal use of axiomatic set theory. References to particular axioms typically then occurs only when tradition demands it, e.g. the axiom of choice is often mentioned when used. Likewise, formal proofs occur only when exceptional circumstances warrants it. This informal usage of axiomatic set theory can have (depending on notation) precisely the appearance of the naive set theory outlined below, and is considerably easier, both to read and to write, including in the formulation of most statements and proofs and lines of discussion, and is probably less error-prone for most people than a strictly formal approach.

== Sets, membership and equality ==
In naive set theory, a set is described as a well-defined collection of objects. These objects are called the elements or members of the set. Objects can be anything: numbers, people, other sets, etc. For instance, 4 is a member of the set of all even integers. Clearly, the set of even numbers is infinitely large; there is no requirement that a set be finite.

Passage with the original set definition of Georg Cantor
The definition of sets goes back to Georg Cantor. He wrote 1915 in his article Beitrge zur Begrndung der transfiniten Mengenlehre:

Unter einer Menge verstehen wir jede Zusammenfassung M von bestimmten wohlunterschiedenen Objekten m unserer Anschauung oder unseres Denkens (welche die Elemente von M genannt werden) zu einem Ganzen.  Georg Cantor
A set is a gathering together into a whole of definite, distinct objects of our perception or of our thoughtwhich are called elements of the set.  Georg Cantor

usage of the symbol .png|thumb|right|First usage of the symbol  in the work [https://archive.org/details/arithmeticespri00peangoog Arithmetices principia nova methodo exposita by Giuseppe Peano.]]

=== Note on consistency ===
It does not follow from this definition how sets can be formed, and what operations on sets again will produce a set. The term "well-defined" in "well-defined collection of objects" cannot, by itself, guarantee the consistency and unambiguity of what exactly constitutes and what does not constitute a set. Attempting to achieve this would be the realm of axiomatic set theory or of axiomatic class theory.

The problem, in this context, with informally formulated set theories, not derived from (and implying) any particular axiomatic theory, is that there may be several widely differing formalized versions, that have both different sets and different rules for how new sets may be formed, that all conform to the original informal definition. For example, Cantor's verbatim definition allows for considerable freedom in what constitutes a set. On the other hand, it is unlikely that Cantor was particularly interested in sets containing cats and dogs, but rather only in sets containing purely mathematical objects. An example of such a class of sets could be the Von Neumann universe. But even when fixing the class of sets under consideration, it is not always clear which rules for set formation are allowed without introducing paradoxes.

For the purpose of fixing the discussion below, the term "well-defined" should instead be interpreted as an intention, with either implicit or explicit rules (axioms or definitions), to rule out inconsistencies. The purpose is to keep the often deep and difficult issues of consistency away from the, usually simpler, context at hand. An explicit ruling out of all conceivable inconsistencies (paradoxes) cannot be achieved for an axiomatic set theory anyway, due to Gdel's second incompleteness theorem, so this does not at all hamper the utility of naive set theory as compared to axiomatic set theory in the simple contexts considered below. It merely simplifies the discussion. Consistency is henceforth taken for granted unless explicitly mentioned.

=== Membership ===
If x is a member of a set A, then it is also said that x belongs to A, or that x is in A. This is denoted by x  A. The symbol  is a derivation from the lowercase Greek letter epsilon, "", introduced by Giuseppe Peano in 1889 and shall be the first letter of the word  (means "is"). The symbol  is often used to write x  A, meaning "x is not in A".

=== Equality ===
Two sets A and B are defined to be equal when they have precisely the same elements, that is, if every element of A is an element of B and every element of B is an element of A. (See axiom of extensionality.) Thus a set is completely determined by its elements; the description is immaterial. For example, the set with elements 2, 3, and 5 is equal to the set of all prime numbers less than 6.
If the sets A and B are equal, this is denoted symbolically as A = B (as usual).

=== Empty set ===
The empty set, often denoted  and sometimes , is a set with no members at all. Because a set is determined completely by its elements, there can be only one empty set. (See axiom of empty set.) Although the empty set has no members, it can be a member of other sets. Thus   {}, because the former has no members and the latter has one member. It is interesting to note that, in mathematics, the only sets with which one needs to be concerned can be built up from the empty set alone ().

== Specifying sets ==
The simplest way to describe a set is to list its elements between curly braces (known as defining a set extensionally). Thus {1, 2} denotes the set whose only elements are 1 and 2.
(See axiom of pairing.)
Note the following points:
*The order of elements is immaterial; for example, {1, 2} {2, 1}.
*Repetition (multiplicity) of elements is irrelevant; for example, {1, 2, 2} {1, 1, 1, 2} {1, 2}.
(These are consequences of the definition of equality in the previous section.)

This notation can be informally abused by saying something like {dogs} to indicate the set of all dogs, but this example would usually be read by mathematicians as "the set containing the single element dogs".

An extreme (but correct) example of this notation is {}, which denotes the empty set.

The notation {x : P(x)}, or sometimes {x | P(x)}, is used to denote the set containing all objects for which the condition P holds (known as defining a set intensionally).
For example, {x : x  R} denotes the set of real numbers, {x : x has blonde hair} denotes the set of everything with blonde hair.

This notation is called set-builder notation (or "set comprehension", particularly in the context of Functional programming).
Some variants of set builder notation are:
*{x  A : P(x)} denotes the set of all x that are already members of A such that the condition P holds for x. For example, if Z is the set of integers, then {x  Z : x is even} is the set of all even integers. (See axiom of specification.)
*{F(x) : x  A} denotes the set of all objects obtained by putting members of the set A into the formula F. For example, {2x : x  Z} is again the set of all even integers. (See axiom of replacement.)
*{F(x) : P(x)} is the most general form of set builder notation. For example, {xs owner : x is a dog} is the set of all dog owners.

== Subsets ==
Given two sets A and B, A is a subset of B if every element of A is also an element of B.
In particular, each set B is a subset of itself; a subset of B that is not equal to B is called a proper subset.

If A is a subset of B, then one can also say that B is a superset of A, that A is contained in B, or that B contains A. In symbols, A  B means that A is a subset of B, and B  A means that B is a superset of A.
Some authors use the symbols  and  for subsets, and others use these symbols only for proper subsets. For clarity, one can explicitly use the symbols  and  to indicate non-equality.

As an illustration, let R be the set of real numbers, let Z be the set of integers, let O be the set of odd integers, and let P be the set of current or former U.S. Presidents.
Then O is a subset of Z, Z is a subset of R, and (hence) O is a subset of R, where in all cases subset may even be read as proper subset.
Note that not all sets are comparable in this way. For example, it is not the case either that R is a subset of P nor that P is a subset of R.

It follows immediately from the definition of equality of sets above that, given two sets A and B, A = B if and only if A  B and B  A. In fact this is often given as the definition of equality. Usually when trying to prove that two sets are equal, one aims to show these two inclusions. Note that the empty set is a subset of every set (the statement that all elements of the empty set are also members of any set A is vacuously true).

The set of all subsets of a given set A is called the power set of A and is denoted by or ; the "P" is sometimes in a script font. If the set A has n elements, then will have elements.

== Universal sets and absolute complements ==
In certain contexts, one may consider all sets under consideration as being subsets of some given universal set.
For instance, when investigating properties of the real numbers R (and subsets of R), R may be taken as the universal set. A true universal set is not included in standard set theory (see Paradoxes below), but is included in some non-standard set theories.

Given a universal set U and a subset A of U, the complement of A (in U) is defined as
:AC := {x U : x A}.
In other words, AC ("A-complement"; sometimes simply A, "A-prime" ) is the set of all members of U which are not members of A.
Thus with R, Z and O defined as in the section on subsets, if Z is the universal set, then OC is the set of even integers, while if R is the universal set, then OC is the set of all real numbers that are either even integers or not integers at all.

== Unions, intersections, and relative complements ==
Given two sets A and B, their union is the set consisting of all objects which are elements of A or of B or of both (see axiom of union). It is denoted by A  B.

The intersection of A and B is the set of all objects which are both in A and in B. It is denoted by A  B.

Finally, the relative complement of B relative to A, also known as the set theoretic difference of A and B, is the set of all objects that belong to A but not to B. It is written as A \ B or A  B.

Symbolically, these are respectively
:A  B := {x : (x  A) or (x  B)};
:A  B := {x : (x  A) and (x  B)} = {x  A : x  B} = {x  B : x  A};
:A \ B := {x : (x  A) and not (x  B) } = {x  A : not (x  B)}.

Notice that A doesn't have to be a subset of B for B A to make sense; this is the difference between the relative complement and the absolute complement (AC = U A) from the previous section.

To illustrate these ideas, let A be the set of left-handed people, and let B be the set of people with blond hair. Then A  B is the set of all left-handed blond-haired people, while A  B is the set of all people who are left-handed or blond-haired or both. A B, on the other hand, is the set of all people that are left-handed but not blond-haired, while B A is the set of all people who have blond hair but aren't left-handed.

Now let E be the set of all human beings, and let F be the set of all living things over 1000 years old. What is E  F in this case? No living human being is over 1000 years old, so E  F must be the empty set {}.

For any set A, the power set is a Boolean algebra under the operations of union and intersection.

== Ordered pairs and Cartesian products ==
Intuitively, an ordered pair is simply a collection of two objects such that one can be distinguished as the first element and the other as the second element, and having the fundamental property that, two ordered pairs are equal if and only if their first elements are equal and their second elements are equal.

Formally, an ordered pair with first coordinate a, and second coordinate b, usually denoted by (a, b), can be defined as the set {{a}, {a, b}}.

It follows that, two ordered pairs (a,b) and (c,d) are equal if and only if a = c and b = d.

Alternatively, an ordered pair can be formally thought of as a set {a,b} with a total order.

(The notation (a, b) is also used to denote an open interval on the real number line, but the context should make it clear which meaning is intended. Otherwise, the notation ]a, b[ may be used to denote the open interval whereas (a, b) is used for the ordered pair).

If A and B are sets, then the Cartesian product (or simply product) is defined to be:
:A  B = {(a,b) : a is in A and b is in B}.
That is, A  B is the set of all ordered pairs whose first coordinate is an element of A and whose second coordinate is an element of B.

This definition may be extended to a set A  B  C of ordered triples, and more generally to sets of ordered n-tuples for any positive integer n.
It is even possible to define infinite Cartesian products, but this requires a more recondite definition of the product.

Cartesian products were first developed by Ren Descartes in the context of analytic geometry. If R denotes the set of all real numbers, then R2 := R  R represents the Euclidean plane and R3 := R  R  R represents three-dimensional Euclidean space.

== Some important sets ==
Note: In this section, a, b, and c are natural numbers, and r and s are real numbers.
# Natural numbers are used for counting. A blackboard bold capital N () often represents this set.
# Integers appear as solutions for x in equations like x + a = b. A blackboard bold capital Z () often represents this set (from the German Zahlen, meaning numbers).
# Rational numbers appear as solutions to equations like a + bx = c. A blackboard bold capital Q () often represents this set (for quotient, because R is used for the set of real numbers).
# Algebraic numbers appear as solutions to polynomial equations (with integer coefficients) and may involve radicals and certain other irrational numbers. A blackboard bold capital A () or a Q with an overline () often represents this set. The overline denotes the operation of algebraic closure.
# Real numbers represent the "real line" and include all numbers that can be approximated by rationals. These numbers may be rational or algebraic but may also be transcendental numbers, which cannot appear as solutions to polynomial equations with rational coefficients. A blackboard bold capital R () often represents this set.
# Complex numbers are sums of a real and an imaginary number: r + si. Here both r and s can equal zero; thus, the set of real numbers and the set of imaginary numbers are subsets of the set of complex numbers, which form an algebraic closure for the set of real numbers, meaning that every polynomial with coefficients in has at least one root in this set. A blackboard bold capital C () often represents this set. Note that since a number r + si can be identified with a point (r, s) in the plane, C is basically "the same" as the Cartesian product RR ("the same" meaning that any point in one determines a unique point in the other and for the result of calculations it doesn't matter which one is used for the calculation).

== Paradoxes ==

The unrestricted formation principle of sets referred to as the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension,
:If P is a property, then there exists a set Y {x : P(x)} (false), p. 4. 
is the source of many of the early appearing paradoxes:
*Y {x : x is an ordinal} leads 1897 to the Burali-Forti paradox, the first published antinomy.
*Y {x : x is a cardinal} produced the Cantor's paradox in 1897. 
*Y {x : {} { yielded Cantor's second antinomy in the year 1899. Here the property P is true for all x, whatever x may be, so Y would be a universal set, containing everything.
*Y {x : x  x}, i.e. the set of all sets that do not contain themselves as elements gave Russell's paradox 1902.

If the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension is weakened to the axiom schema of specification or axiom schema of separation,
:If P is a property, then for any set X there exists a set Y {x  X : P(x)}, 
then all the above paradoxes disappear. There is a corollary. With the axiom schema of separation as an axiom of the theory, it follows, as a theorem of the theory:
:The set of all sets does not exist.
Proof: Suppose that it exists and call it U. Now apply the axiom schema of separation with X U and for P(x) use x  x. This leads Russell's paradox again. Hence U can't exist in this theory. 

Related to the above constructions is formation of the set
*Y {x : (x  x)  {}  {, where the statement following the implication certainly is false. It follows, from the definition of Y, using the usual inference rules (and some afterthought when reading the proof in the linked article below) both that Y  Y  {}  {} and Y  Y holds, hence {}  {}. This is Curry's paradox.

It is (perhaps surprisingly) not the possibility of x  x that is problematic here, it is again the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension allowing (x  x)  {}  {} for P(x). With the axiom schema of specification instead of unrestricted comprehension, the conclusion Y  Y doesn't hold and, hence {}  {} is not a logical consequence.

Nonetheless, the possibility of x  x is often removed explicitly See discussion around Russell's paradox. or, e.g. in ZFC, implicitly, Section 1.6. by demanding the axiom of regularity to hold. One consequence of it is:
:There is no set X for which X  X,
in other words, no set is an element of itself. p. 61. 

The axiom schema of separation is simply too weak (while unrestricted comprehension is a very strong axiom&mdash;too strong for set theory) to develop set theory with its usual operations and constructions outlined above. The axiom of regularity is of a restrictive nature as well. Therefore one is led to the formulation of other axioms to guarantee the existence of enough sets to form a set theory. Some of these have been described informally above and many others are possible. Not all conceivable axioms can be combined freely into consistent theories. For example, the axiom of choice of ZFC is incompatible with the conceivable every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable. The former implies the latter is false.

==See also==

* Algebra of sets
* Axiomatic set theory
* Internal set theory
* Set theory
* Set (mathematics)
* Partially ordered set

== Notes ==

==References==
* Bourbaki, N., Elements of the History of Mathematics, John Meldrum (trans.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 1994.
*
* Devlin, K.J., The Joy of Sets: Fundamentals of Contemporary Set Theory, 2nd edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1993.
* Frpolli, Mara J., 1991, "Is Cantorian set theory an iterative conception of set?". Modern Logic, v. 1 n. 4, 1991, 302318.
* 
* Halmos, Paul, Naive Set Theory. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand Company, 1960. Reprinted by Springer-Verlag, New York, 1974. ISBN 0-387-90092-6 (Springer-Verlag edition). Reprinted by Martino Fine Books, 2011. ISBN 978-1-61427-131-4 (Paperback edition).
* 
* Kelley, J.L., General Topology, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY, 1955.
* van Heijenoort, J., From Frege to Gdel, A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1967. Reprinted with corrections, 1977. ISBN 0-674-32449-8.
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Beginnings of set theory page at St. Andrews
* Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (S)



[[Breathy voice]]

Breathy voice (also called murmured voice, soughing, or susurration) is a phonation in which the vocal cords vibrate, as they do in normal (modal) voicing, but are held further apart, so that a larger volume of air escapes between them. This produces an audible noise. A breathy-voiced phonation (not actually a fricative, as a literal reading of the IPA chart would suggest) can sometimes be heard as an allophone of English between vowels, e.g. in the word behind, for some speakers. A stop with breathy-voiced release (symbolized either as etc. or as etc.) is like aspiration in that it delays the onset of full voicing. Breathy-voiced vowels are written etc.

In the context of the Indo-Aryan languages (e.g. Sanskrit and Hindi) and comparative Indo-European studies, breathy-voiced consonants are often called voiced aspirated, as in e.g. the Hindi and Sanskrit stops normally denoted bh, dh, h, jh, and gh and the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European phoneme gh. From an articulatory perspective this terminology is incorrect, as breathy voice is a different type of phonation from aspiration. However, breathy-voiced and aspirated stops are acoustically similar in that in both cases there is an audible period of breathiness following the stop, and in the history of various languages (e.g. Ancient Greek, Chinese languages), breathy-voiced stops have subsequently developed into voiceless aspirated stops.

==Methods of production==
There are several ways to produce breathy-voiced sounds like . One is to hold the vocal cords apart, so that they are lax as they are for , but to increase the volume of airflow so that they vibrate loosely. A second is to bring the vocal cords closer together along their entire length than in voiceless , but not as close as in modally voiced sounds such as vowels. This results in an airflow intermediate between and vowels, and is the case with English intervocalic /h/. A third is to constrict the glottis, but separate the arytenoid cartilages that control one end. This results in the vocal cords being drawn together for voicing in the back, but separated to allow the passage of large volumes of air in the front. This is the situation with Hindi.

The distinction between the latter two of these realizations, vocal cords somewhat separated along their length (breathy voice) and vocal cords together with the arytenoids making an opening (whispery voice), is phonetically relevant in White Hmong. Fulop & Golston (2008), Breathy and whispery voicing in White Hmong, http://zimmer.csufresno.edu/~chrisg/index_files/FulopGolston2009.pdf. Retrieved 17 June 2012. 

==Breathy voice as a phonological property==
A number of languages use breathy voicing in a phonologically contrastive way. Many Indo-Aryan languages, such as Hindi, typically have a four-way contrast among plosives and affricates (voiced, breathy voiced, tenuis, aspirated) and a two-way contrast among nasals (voiced, breathy voiced). The Nguni languages in the southern Bantu languages family, including Phuthi, Xhosa, Zulu, Ndebele and Swati, also have contrastive breathy voice. In the case of Xhosa, there is a four-way contrast analogous to Indic in oral clicks, and similarly a two-way contrast among nasal clicks, but a three-way contrast among plosives and affricates (breathy voiced, aspirated, and ejective), and two-way contrasts among fricatives (voiceless and breathy voiced) and nasals (voiced and breathy voiced).

In some Bantu languages, historically breathy-voiced stops have been phonetically devoiced, Traill, Anthony, James S. M. Khumalo and Paul Fridjhon (1987). Depressing facts about Zulu. African Studies 46: 255-274. but the four-way contrast in the system has been retained. In all five of the southeastern Bantu languages named, the breathy voiced stops (even if they are realised phonetically as devoiced aspirates) have a marked tone-lowering (or tone-depressing) effect on the following tautosyllabic vowels. For this reason, such stop consonants are frequently referred to in the local linguistic literature as 'depressor' stops.

Swati, and even more so Phuthi, display good evidence that breathy voicing can be used as a morphological property independent of any consonant voicing value. For example, in both languages, the standard morphological mechanism for achieving the morphosyntactic copula is to simply execute the noun prefix syllable as breathy voiced (or 'depressed').

In Portuguese, vowels after the stressed syllable can be pronounced with breathy voice. Callou, Dinah. Leite, Yonne. "Iniciao  Fontica e  Fonologia". Jorge Zahar Editor 2001, p. 20 

Gujarati is unusual in contrasting breathy-voiced vowels and consonants: 'twelve', 'outside', 'burden'. 

==See also==
* Aspiration
* Creaky voice
* Grumble (sound)
* List of phonetics topics
* Slack voice
* Whispering

==References==

===Notes===

===General references===
*



[[Bzout's identity]]

Bzout's identity (also called Bzout's lemma) is a theorem in the elementary theory of numbers: let a and b be integers, not both zero, and let d be their greatest common divisor. Then there exist integers x and y such that
: 
In addition, i) d is the smallest positive integer that can be written as 
ax + by,
and ii) every integer of the form 
ax + by 
is a multiple of d. x and y are called Bzout coefficients for (a, b); they are not unique. A pair of Bzout coefficients can be computed by the extended Euclidean algorithm. If both a and b are nonzero, the extended Euclidean algorithm produces one of the two pairs such that and 

Bzout's lemma is true in any principal ideal domain, but there are integral domains in which it is not true.

==Structure of solutions==

When one pair of Bzout coefficients (x, y) has been computed (e.g., using extended Euclidean algorithm), all pairs can be represented in the form
:
where k is an arbitrary integer and the fractions simplify to integers.

Among these pairs of Bzout coefficients, exactly two of them satisfy 
:
This relies on a property of Euclidean division: given two integers c and d, if d does not divide c, there is exactly one pair (q,r) such that 1=c = dq + r and 1=0 < r < d, and another one such that 1=c = dq + r and 1=0 < -r < d.

The Extended Euclidean algorithm always produces one of these two minimal pairs.

===Example===

Let a = 12 and b = 42, gcd (12, 42) = 6. Then we have the following Bzout's identities, with the Bzout coefficients written in red for the minimal pairs and in blue for the other ones.

:

==Proof==
Bzout's lemma is a consequence of the Euclidean division defining property, namely that the division by a nonzero integer b has a remainder strictly less than |b|. The proof that follows may be adapted for any Euclidean domain. For given nonzero integers a and b there is a nonzero integer d as + bt of minimal absolute value among all those of the form ax + by with x and y integers; one can assume d &gt; 0 by changing the signs of both s and t if necessary. Now the remainder of dividing either a or b by d is also of the form ax + by since it is obtained by subtracting a multiple of d as + bt from a or b, and on the other hand it has to be strictly smaller in absolute value than d. This leaves 0 as only possibility for such a remainder, so d divides a and b exactly.
If c is another common divisor of a and b, then c also divides as + bt = d. Since c divides d but is not equal to it, it must be less than d. This means that d is the greatest common divisor of a and b; this completes the proof.

==Generalizations==
===For three or more integers===

Bzout's identity can be extended to more than two integers: if 
: 

then there are integers 

such that

:

has the following properties:
# d is smallest positive integer of this form
# every number of this form is a multiple of d
# d is a greatest common divisor of a1, ..., a'n, meaning that every common divisor of a1, ..., a'n divides d

===For polynomials===

Bzout's identity works for univariate polynomials over a field exactly in the same ways as for integers. In particular the Bzout's coefficients and the greatest common divisor may be computed with the Extended Euclidean algorithm.

As the common roots of two polynomials are the roots of their greatest common divisor, Bzout's identity and fundamental theorem of algebra imply the following result: 
:For univariate polynomials f and g with coefficients in a field, there exist polynomials a and b such that af + bg = 1 if and only if f and g have no common root in any algebraically closed field (commonly the field of complex numbers).

The generalization of this result to any number of polynomials and indeterminates is Hilbert's Nullstellensatz.

===For principal ideal domains===
As noted in the introduction, Bzout's identity works not only in the ring of integers, but also in any other principal ideal domain (PID).
That is, if R is a PID, and a and b are elements of R, and d is a greatest common divisor of a and b,
then there are elements x and y in R such that ax + by = d. The reason: the ideal Ra+Rb is principal and indeed is equal to Rd.

An integral domain in which Bzout's identity holds is called a Bzout domain.

==History==

French mathematician tienne Bzout (17301783) proved this identity for polynomials. However, this statement for integers can be found already in the work of another French mathematician, Claude Gaspard Bachet de Mziriac (15811638). 

 
 On these pages, Bachet proves (without equations) Proposition XVIII. Deux nombres premiers entre eux estant donnez, treuver le moindre multiple de chascun diceux, surpassant de lunit un multiple de lautre. (Given two numbers are relatively prime, find the lowest multiple of each of them that one multiple exceeds the other by unity (1).) This problem (namely, ax - by = 1) is a special case of Bzouts equation and was used by Bachet to solve the problems appearing on pages 199 ff.
 
See also: 

==See also==
* AF+BG theorem, an analogue of Bzout's identity for homogeneous polynomials in three indeterminantes
* Fundamental theorem of arithmetic
* Euclid's lemma

==Notes==

==External links==
* Online calculator for Bzout's identity.
* 



[[Banacek]]

Banacek (pronounced "BAN-a-check") is an American detective TV series starring George Peppard that aired on the NBC network from 1972 to 1974. The series was part of the rotating NBC Wednesday Mystery Movie anthology. It alternated in its time slot with several other shows but was the only one to last beyond its first season.

==Premise==
Peppard played Thomas Banacek, a suave, Polish-American freelance investigator based in Boston, who solved seemingly impossible thefts (see locked room mystery). He then collected from the insurance companies 10% of the insured value of the recovered property. One of Banacek's verbal signatures was the quotation of strangely worded yet curiously cogent "Polish" proverbs such as:
* "If you're not sure that it's potato borscht, there could be orphans working in the mines."
* "Though the hippopotamus has no sting, the wise man would prefer to be sat upon by the bee."
* "A truly wise man never plays leapfrog with a unicorn."
* "If a wolf is after your sleigh throw him a raisin cookiebut don't stop to bake him a cake."
* "Just because the cat has her kittens in the oven doesn't make them biscuits."
* "You can read all the books in the library my son, but the cheese will still stink after four days."
* "No matter how warm the smile on the face of the Sun, the cat still has her kittens under the porch."

Part of the joke was that Ralph Manza as Banacek's chauffeur Jay Drury, would often ask "What does it mean, Boss?" Banacek also had a running agreement with his chauffeur for a 10% share of Banacek's 10% if he solved the crime. Mr. Drury was never at a loss for a potential solution which Banacek would always manage to shoot down with his very next line. Another recurring gag was for other characters to mispronounce his name, often, particularly in the case of rivals, deliberately. The name "Banaczek" (as pronounced in the show) is actually quite rare in Poland.

Also featured were Murray Matheson as rare-bookstore owner and information source Felix Mulholland and Christine Belford as Carlie Kirkland, Banacek's sometime-lover and always-rival.

Banacek's success as an investigator allowed him to live well. He had a mansion at 85 Mt. Vernon Street, (the same house used in The Thomas Crown Affair starring Steve McQueen) on Beacon Hill in Boston. He had a limousine and driver. He owned and drove an antique 1941 Packard convertible. He had a mobile radio telephone in each of his cars at a time when these devices were uncommon and expensive. Banacek was intelligent, well-educated, cultured and suave. He was an unapologetic ladies man who enjoyed the company of beautiful women, but he was street-smart and could engage in violent hand to hand fighting if the moment called for it.

==Production==
In general the series was shot on the Universal Studios backlot, though location scenes were filmed around Los Angeles in areas that could pass for Boston, or rural areas near there. The episode titled "If Max Is So Smart, Why Doesn't He Tell Us Where He Is?" was shot on location at the California Institute of the Arts around the time the school first opened. "Ten Thousand Dollars A Page" was filmed at the Pasadena Art Museum, later known as the Pasadena Museum of Modern Art and now the Norton Simon Museum of Art.

A customized 1969 American Motors AMX was built by George Barris for the second regular season episode. The car became known as the AMX-400 and it is now owned by an automobile collector. Other continuing cars in the series were a 1941 Packard 180 with a Victoria body designed by Howard "Dutch" Darrin (license plate number 178344), a 1973 Corvette (driven by Ms. Kirkland) and a 1973 Cadillac Fleetwood limousine (mobile telephone number KL 17811).

In preparation for both the pilot, first, and then the second seasons the cast went to Boston and filmed a variety of background scenes. These scenes were then used through the series and are especially shown in the opening scenes including Banacek rowing on the Charles River and walking through Government Center. In the pilot, Banacek's car pulls into his Beacon Hill home, the historic Second Harrison Gray Otis House located at 85 Mount Vernon Street. In other episodes, views are shown of the Public Garden, the entry to Felix's bookstore at 50 Beacon Street, and the Esplanade. The Boston filmed pieces were done by a second unit and directed by Peppard himself.

==Reception==
Although the show had a mixture of humor and rather intricate plots, it never generated strong ratings. Despite this, the show was well received by critics. In addition, the Polish American Congress gave the series an award for portraying Polish Americans in a good manner. 

==Banacek renewed for third season, Peppard quits==
Banacek was well received by television critics, and as a result was picked up for a third season. However, before the third season could start, Peppard quit the show in order to prevent his ex-wife Elizabeth Ashley from receiving a larger percentage of his earnings as part of their divorce settlement. The complication ended any chance of reviving Banacek during Peppard's lifetime. A&E (TV channel) continued rebroadcasts of Banacek in syndication. http://www.princeton.edu/~achaney/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Banacek.html 

==Episodes==
===Pilot: 1972===

 N Title Directed by: Written by: Air date 

===Season 1: 197273===

 N Title Directed by: Written by: Air date 

===Season 2: 197374===

 N Title Directed by: Written by: Air date 

==DVD releases==
Arts Alliance America has released the entire series on DVD in Region 1. Season 1 was released on May 15, 2007, without the series pilot. Season 2 was released on January 22, 2008 and included the pilot episode. On September 30, 2008, Arts Alliance released Banacek: The Complete Series, a 5-disc boxset featuring all 16 episodes. As of 2012, these releases have been discontinued and are out of print.

In Region 4, Madman Entertainment has released both seasons on DVD in Australia. http://www.madman.com.au/actions/catalogue.do?releaseId=13227&method=view http://www.madman.com.au/catalogue/view/13229/banacek-the-complete-second-season-4-dvd-set&webChannelId=18 

==References==
Notes

==External links==
* 
* 
* 



[[Blue Angels]]

The Blue Angels is the United States Navy's flight demonstration squadron. The Blue Angels team was formed in 1946, "History of the Blue Angels". Blue Angels official site. making it the second oldest formal flying aerobatic team (under the same name) in the world, after the French Patrouille de France formed in 1931. The Blue Angels' six demonstration pilots fly the F/A-18 Hornet, typically in more than 70 shows at 34 locations throughout the United States each year, where they still employ many of the same practices and techniques used in their aerial displays in 1946. An estimated 11 million spectators view the squadron during air shows each full year. The Blue Angels also visit more than 50,000 people in a standard show season (March through November) in schools and hospitals. Since 1946, the Blue Angels have flown for more than 260 million spectators. 

On 1 March 2013 the U.S. Navy announced that due to sequestration actions aerial demonstration team performances including that of the Blue Angels would cease from 1 April 2013. Military spending cuts ground Blue Angels, Thunderbirds 1 March 2013 NBC News; U.S. Navy Cancels Blue Angels 2013 Performances 10 April 2013, U.S. Navy In October 2013, Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, stating that "community and public outreach is a crucial Departmental activity", announced that the Blue Angels (along with the U.S. Air Force's Thunderbirds) would resume appearing at air shows starting in 2014, although the number of flyovers will continue to be severely reduced. http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2013/10/thunderbirds-and-blue-angels-to-resume-air-shows-but-no-more-flyovers/ 

==Mission==
The mission of the United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron is to showcase the pride and professionalism of the United States Navy and Marine Corps by inspiring a culture of excellence and service to country through flight demonstrations and community outreach. 

==Air show==

The Blue Angels' show season runs each year from March until November. They perform at both military and civilian airfields, and often perform directly over major cities such as San Francisco's "Fleet Week" maritime festival, Cleveland's annual Labor Day Air Show, the Chicago Air and Water Show, and Seattle's annual Seafair festival.

The Blue Angels flying in a Delta Formation at Miramar, San Diego in 2011

During their aerobatic demonstration, the Blues fly six F/A-18 Hornet aircraft, split into the Diamond Formation (Blue Angels 1 through 4) and the Lead and Opposing Solos (Blue Angels 5 and 6). Most of the show alternates between maneuvers performed by the Diamond Formation and those performed by the Solos. The Diamond, in tight formation and usually at lower speeds (400 mph), performs maneuvers such as formation loops, barrel rolls, and transitions from one formation to another. The Solos showcase the high performance capabilities of their individual aircraft through the execution of high-speed passes, slow passes, fast rolls, slow rolls, and very tight turns. The highest speed flown during an air show is 700 mph (just under Mach 1) and the lowest speed is 120 mph. Some of the maneuvers include both solo aircraft performing at once, such as opposing passes (toward each other in what appears to be a collision course) and mirror formations (back-to-back. belly-to-belly, or wingtip-to-wingtip, with one jet flying inverted). The Solos join the Diamond Formation near the end of the show for a number of maneuvers in the Delta Formation.

The parameters of each show must be tailored in accordance with local weather conditions at showtime: in clear weather the high show is performed; in overcast conditions a low show is performed, and in limited visibility (weather permitting) the flat show is presented.The high show requires at least an 8000 ft ceiling and visibility of at least 3 nmi from the show's centerpoint. The maximum ceilings allowed for low and flat shows are 3,500 feet (~1 km) and 1500 ft, respectively. 

==Origin of squadron name, insignia and paint scheme==

When initially formed, the unit was called the Navy Flight Exhibition Team. The squadron was officially redesignated as the United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron in December 1974. http://a4skyhawk.org/3e/blues/blues.htm The original team was christened the Blue Angels in 1946, when one of the pilots came across the name of New York City's Blue Angel Nightclub in The New Yorker magazine; the team introduced themselves as the "Blue Angels" to the public for the first time on 21 July 1946, in Omaha, Nebraska.

The official Blue Angels insignia was designed by then team leader Lt. Cmdr. R. E. "Dusty" Rhodes and approved by Chief of Naval Operations in 1949. It is nearly identical to the current design. In the cloud in the upper right quadrant, the aircraft were originally shown heading down and to the right. Over the years, the plane silhouettes have changed along with the squadron's aircraft. Additionally, the lower left quadrant, which contains the Chief of Naval Air Training insignia, has occasionally contained only Naval Aviator wings.

Originally, demonstration aircraft were navy blue (nearly black) with gold lettering. The current shades of blue and yellow were adopted when the team transitioned to the Bearcat in 1946. For a single year in 1949, the team performed in an all-yellow scheme with blue markings. Campbell, War Paint, p. 171. 

==Current aircraft==
Water condensation in the strake vortices of a Hornet during a tight maneuver.

The Blues' F/A-18 Hornets are former fleet aircraft that are nearly combat-ready. Modifications to each aircraft include removal of the aircraft gun and replacement with the tank that contains smoke-oil used in demonstrations, and outfitting with the control stick spring system for more precise aircraft control input. The standard demonstration configuration has a spring tensioned with 40 lb of force installed on the control stick as to allow the pilot minimal room for uncommanded movement. The Blues do not wear G-suits, because the air bladders inside them would repeatedly deflate and inflate, interfering with the control stick between the pilot's legs. Instead, Blue Angel pilots tense their muscles to prevent blood from rushing from their heads and rendering them unconscious. 

"Fat Albert" conducting a Rocket Assisted Take Off.

The show's narrator flies Blue Angel 7, a two-seat F/A-18B Hornet, to show sites. The Blues use this jet for backup, and to give demonstration rides to VIP civilians. Three backseats at each show are available; one of them goes to members of the press, the other two to "Key Influencers". The No.4 slot pilot often flies the No. 7 aircraft in Friday's "practice" shows.

The Blue Angels use a United States Marine Corps C-130T Hercules, nicknamed "Fat Albert", for their logistics, carrying spare parts, equipment, and to carry support personnel between shows. Beginning in 1975, "Bert" was used for Rocket Assisted Take Off (RATO) and short aerial demonstrations just prior to the main event at selected venues, but the RATO demonstration ended in 2009 due to dwindling supplies of rockets. "Fat Albert Airlines" flies with an all-Marine crew of three officers and five enlisted personnel.

==Team members==
The first Blue Angel Flight Demonstration Squadron (19461947), assembled in front of one of their F6F Hellcats (l to r): Lt. Al Taddeo, Solo; Lt. (J.G.) Gale Stouse, Spare; Lt. Cdr. R.M. "Butch" Voris, Flight Leader; Lt. Maurice "Wick" Wickendoll, Right Wing; Lt. Mel Cassidy, Left Wing.
The "Blues" support crew watches the team perform in the Grumman F9F-2 Panther jet fighter.
A Blue Angels Flight Demonstration Squadron pilot sits in the cockpit of an F/A-18 Hornet aircraft

All team members, both officer and enlisted, pilots and staff officers, come from the ranks of regular Navy and United States Marine Corps units. The demonstration pilots and narrator are made up of Navy and USMC Naval Aviators. Pilots serve two to three years, and position assignments are made according to team needs, pilot experience levels, and career considerations for members.

The officer selection process requires pilots and support officers (flight surgeon, events coordinator, maintenance officer, supply officer, and public affairs officer) wishing to become Blue Angels to apply formally via their chain-of-command, with a personal statement, letters of recommendation and flight records. Navy and Marine Corps F/A-18 demonstration pilots and naval flight officers are required to have a minimum of 1,250 tactical jet hours and be carrier-qualified. Marine Corps C-130 demonstration pilots are required to have 1,200 flight hours and be an aircraft commander. 

Applicants "rush" the team at one or more airshows, paid out of their own finances, and sit in on team briefs and post-show activities and social events. Rushes are asked to tell a joke prior to the brief, and graded by the team as part of the rigorous selection process. Team members vote in secret on the next year's members, with no accountability to the higher Navy authority why an applicant was or was not selected. Selections must be unanimous. There have been female and racial minority staff officers as official Blue Angel members, in support of the Blue Angels recruiting for the Navy and Marine Corps. The most recent minority Blue Angel pilot was LCDR Keith Hoskins on the 2000 team. Flight surgeons serve a two-year term, and act as the team recorder during air shows, and help oversee emergency response planning with the various air show planners. The first female Blue Angel flight surgeon was LT Tamara Schnurr, as a member of the 2001 team. 

The team leader (#1) is the Commanding Officer and is always a Navy Commander, who may be promoted to Captain mid-tour if approved for Captain by the selection board. Pilots of numbers 27 are Navy Lieutenants or Lieutenant Commanders, or Marine Corps Captains or Majors. The number 7 pilot narrates for a year, and then typically flies Opposing and then Lead Solo the following two years, respectively. The number 3 pilot moves to the number 4 (slot) position for his second year. Blue Angel No.4 serves as the demonstration safety officer, due largely to the perspective he is afforded from the slot position within the formation, as well as his status as a second-year demonstration pilot. There are a number of other officers in the squadron, including a Naval Flight Officer, the USMC C-130 pilots, a Maintenance Officer, an Administrative Officer, and a Flight Surgeon. Enlisted members range from E-4 to E-9, and perform all maintenance, administrative, and support functions. They serve three to four years in the squadron. After serving with the Blues, members return to fleet assignments.

 U.S. Navy Blue Angels are:
*Flying Blue Angel No.1, Commander Thomas Frosch, USN (Commanding Officer/Flight Leader)
*Flying Blue Angel No.2, Lieutenant Commander John Hiltz, USN (Right Wing)
*Flying Blue Angel No.3, Lieutenant Commander Nate Barton, USN (Left Wing)
*Flying Blue Angel No.4, Captain Brandon Cordill, USMC (Slot)
*Flying Blue Angel No.5, Lieutenant Commander David Tickle, USN (Lead Solo)
*Flying Blue Angel No.6, Lieutenant Mark Tedrow, USN (Opposing Solo)
*Flying Blue Angel No.7, Lieutenant Ryan Chamberlain, USN (Advance Pilot/Narrator)
*Events Coordinator, Blue Angel No.8, Lieutenant Commander Michael Cheng, USN
*Flying Fat Albert, M1, Captain John Hecker, USMC
*Flying Fat Albert, M2, Captain A. J. Harrell, USMC
*Flying Fat Albert, M3, Captain Mike Van Wyk, USMC
*Maintenance Officer, Lieutenant Commander Richard Mercado, USN
*Flight Surgeon, Lieutenant Commander Mark DeBuse, MC USN
*Administrative Officer, Lieutenant Holly Taylor, USN
*Supply Officer, Lieutenant Scott Adams, USN
*Public Affairs Officer, Lieutenant Katie Kelly, USN

===Commanding officer===
Commander Tom Frosch

Cmdr. Tom Frosch relieved Capt. Greg McWherter as Blue Angel commanding officer/flight leader on 4 November 2012.

Frosch has more than 3,000 flight hours, 830 carrier arrested landings, and is a graduate of U.S. Naval Test Pilot School aboard NAS Patuxent River, where he subsequently was an F/A-18 E/F Super Hornet test pilot with VX-23 (Air Test and Evaluation Squadron TWO THREE) STRIKE TEST. His decorations include the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, two Meritorious Service Medals, two Individual Air Medals with Combat "V" (Six Strike Flight), three Navy Commendation Medals, one with Combat "V," and numerous unit, campaign and service awards.

==Training and weekly routine==

Annual winter training takes place at NAF El Centro, California, where new and returning pilots hone skills learned in the fleet. During winter training, the pilots fly two practice sessions per day, six days a week, in order to fly the 120 training missions needed to perform the demonstration safely. Separation between the formation of aircraft and their maneuver altitude is gradually reduced over the course of about two months in January and February. The team then returns to their home base in Pensacola, Florida, in March, and continues to practice throughout the show season. A typical week during the season has practices at NAS Pensacola on Tuesday and Wednesday mornings. The team then flies to its show venue for the upcoming weekend on Thursday, conducting "circle and arrival" orientation maneuvers upon arrival. The team flies a "practice" airshow at the show site on Friday. This show is attended by invited guests but is often open to the general public. The main airshows are conducted on Saturdays and Sundays, with the team returning home to NAS Pensacola on Sunday evenings after the show. Monday is the Blues' day off.

==History==

===1940s===
The original team insignia

On 24 April 1946 Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Chester Nimitz issued a directive ordering the formation of a flight exhibition team to boost Navy morale, demonstrate naval air power, and maintain public interest in naval aviation. However, an underlying mission was to help the Navy generate public and political support for a larger allocation of the shrinking defense budget. In April of that year, Rear Admiral Ralph Davison personally selected Lieutenant Commander Roy Marlin "Butch" Voris, a World War II fighter ace, to assemble and train a flight demonstration team, naming him Officer-in-Charge and Flight Leader. Voris selected three fellow instructors to join him (Lt. Maurice "Wick" Wickendoll, Lt. Mel Cassidy, and Lt. Cmdr. Lloyd Barnard, veterans of the War in the Pacific), and they spent countless hours developing the show. The group perfected its initial maneuvers in secret over the Florida Everglades so that, in Voris' words, "if anything happened, just the alligators would know". The team's first demonstration before Navy officials took place on 10 May 1946 and was met with enthusiastic approval.

Grumman F6F-5 Hellcats in 1946

On 15 June Voris led a trio of Grumman F6F-5 Hellcats, specially modified to reduce weight and painted sea blue with gold leaf trim, through their inaugural 15-minute-long performance at their Florida home base, Naval Air Station Jacksonville. The team employed an SNJ Texan, painted and configured to simulate a Japanese Zero, to simulate aerial combat. This aircraft was later painted yellow and dubbed the "Beetle Bomb".

The team thrilled spectators with low-flying maneuvers performed in tight formations, and (according to Voris) by "keeping something in front of the crowds at all times. My objective was to beat the Army Air Corps. If we did that, we'd get all the other side issues. I felt that if we weren't the best, it would be my naval career." The Blue Angels' first public demonstration also netted the team its first trophy, which sits on display at the team's current home at NAS Pensacola.

In 1947 the Blue Angels introduced the famous "diamond" formation.

The team soon became known worldwide for its spectacular aerobatic maneuvers. On 25 August 1946 the squadron upgraded their aircraft to the F8F-1 Bearcat. In May 1947, flight leader Lt. Cmdr. Bob Clarke, replaced Butch Voris as the leader of the team, he introduced the famous Diamond Formation, now considered the Blue Angels' trademark.

In 1949, the team acquired a Douglas R4D Sky Train for logistics to and from show sites. The team's SNJ was also replaced by a F8F-1 "Bearcat", painted yellow for the air combat routine. The Blues transitioned to the straight-wing Grumman F9F-2 Panther on 13 July 1949, wherein the F8F-1 "Beetle Bomb" was relegated to solo aerobatics before the main show, until it crashed on takeoff at a training show in Pensacola in 1950.

Team headquarters shifted from NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, to NAAS Whiting Field, Florida, in the fall of 1949, announced 14 July 1949. Fort Walton, Florida, "Blue Angels' To Pensacola  Navy Flight Exhibition Team Is Transferred", Playground News, Thursday 14 July 1949, Volume 4, Number 24, page 2. 

===1950s===
The "Blues" continued to perform nationwide until the start of the Korean War in 1950, when (due to a shortage of pilots, and no planes were available) the team was disbanded and its members were ordered to combat duty. Once aboard the aircraft carrier the group formed the core of VF-191, Satan's Kittens.

F9F-8 Cougar formation in 1956

The Blue Angels were officially recommissioned on 25 October 1951, and reported to NAS Corpus Christi, Texas. Lt. Cdr. Voris was again tasked with assembling the team (he was the first of only two commanding officers to lead them twice). In 1953 the team traded its Sky Train for a Curtiss R5C Commando.

The first Marine Corps pilot, Capt Chuck Hiett, joined the team and they relocated to their current home of NAS Pensacola in the winter of 1954. It was here they progressed to the swept-wing Grumman F9F-8 Cougar. In August 1954, "Blues" leader LCDR Ray Hawkins became the first naval aviator to survive an ejection at supersonic speeds when his F9F-6 became uncontrollable on a cross-country flight.

Grumman F11F-1 Tiger, 195769

In Sept 1956, the team added a sixth aircraft to the flight demonstration in the Opposing Solo position, and gave its first performance outside the United States at the International Air Exposition in Toronto, Canada. It also upgraded its logistics aircraft to the Douglas R5D Skymaster.

In January 1957, the team left its winter training facility at Naval Air Facility El Centro, California for a ten-year period. For the next ten years, the team would winter at NAS Key West, Florida. For the 1957 show season, the Blue Angels transitioned to the supersonic Grumman F11F-1 Tiger, first flying the short-nosed, and then the long-nosed versions. The first Six-Plane Delta Maneuvers were added in the 1958 season.

===1960s===
In July 1964, the Blue Angels participated in the Aeronaves de Mexico Anniversary Air Show over Mexico City, Mexico, before an estimated crowd of 1.5 million people.

In 1965, the Blue Angels conducted a Caribbean island tour, flying at five sites. Later that year, they embarked on a European tour to a dozen sites, including the Paris Air Show, where they were the only team to receive a standing ovation.

McDonnell F-4J Phantom II

The Blues toured Europe again in 1967 touring six sites. In 1968 Skymaster transport aircraft was replaced with a C-121J Constellation. The Blues transitioned to the two-seat McDonnell Douglas F-4J Phantom II in 1969, nearly always keeping the back seat empty for flight demonstrations. The Phantom was the only plane to be flown by both the "Blues" and the United States Air Force Thunderbirds. That year they also upgraded to the Lockheed C-121 Super Constellation for logistics.

===1970s===

The Blues received their first U.S Marine Corps Lockheed KC-130F Hercules in 1970. An all-Marine crew manned it. That year, they went on their first South American tour. In 1971, the team conducted its first Far East Tour, performing at a dozen locations in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Guam, and the Philippines. In 1972, the Blue Angels were awarded the Navy's Meritorious Unit Commendation for the two-year period from 1 March 1970  31 December 1971. Another European tour followed in 1973, including air shows in Tehran, Iran, England, France, Spain, Turkey, Greece, and Italy.

All six Blue Angel A-4F Skyhawks executing a "fleur de lis" maneuver.

In December 1974 the Navy Flight Demonstration Team downsized to the subsonic Douglas A-4F Skyhawk II and was reorganized into the Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron. This reorganization permitted the establishment of a commanding officer (the flight leader), added support officers, and further redefined the squadron's mission emphasizing the support of recruiting efforts. Commander Tony Less was the squadron's first official commanding officer. History of the Blue Angels. blueangels.navy.mil. 

===1980s===

On 8 November 1986 the Blue Angels completed their 40th anniversary year during ceremonies unveiling their present aircraft, the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet, the first multi-role fighter/attack aircraft. The power and aerodynamics of the Hornet allows them to perform a slow, high angle of attack "tail sitting" maneuver, and to fly a "dirty" (landing gear down) formation loop, the last of which is not duplicated by the USAF Thunderbirds.

Also in 1986, LCDR Donnie Cochran, joined the Blue Angels as the first African-American Naval Aviator to be selected. He would return to lead the team in 1993.

F/A-18s Performing in San Francisco

===1990s===
In 1992 the Blue Angels deployed for a month-long European tour, their first in 19 years, conducting shows in Sweden, Finland, Russia (the first foreign flight demonstration team to perform there), Romania, Bulgaria, Italy, the United Kingdom and Spain.
In 1998, CDR Patrick Driscoll made the first "Blue Jet" landing on a "haze gray and underway" aircraft carrier, USS Harry S. Truman (CVN-75).

===2000s===

In 2006, the Blue Angels marked their 60th year of performing. On 30 October 2008 a spokesman for the team announced that the team would complete its last three performances of the year with five jets instead of six. The change was because one pilot and another officer in the organization had been removed from duty for engaging in an "inappropriate relationship". The Navy stated that one of the individuals was a man and the other a woman, one a Marine and the other from the Navy, and that Rear Admiral Mark Guadagnini, chief of Naval air training, was reviewing the situation. At the next performance at Lackland Air Force Base following the announcement the No.4 or slot pilot, was absent from the formation. A spokesman for the team would not confirm the identity of the pilot removed from the team. On 6 November 2008 both officers were found guilty at an admiral's mast on unspecified charges but the resulting punishment was not disclosed. Scutro, Andrew, "2 Blue Angels found guilty, await punishment", Military Times, 8 November 2008. The names of the two members involved were later released on the Pensacola News Journal website/forum as pilot No. 4 USMC Maj. Clint Harris and the administrative officer, Navy Lt. Gretchen Doane. "A (Potentially) Disgraced Angel (updated)", Defensetech.org 

Fat Albert performed its final JATO demonstration at the 2009 Pensacola Homecoming show, spending their 8 remaining JATO bottles. This demonstration not only was the last JATO performance of the squadron, but also the final JATO profile of the entire U.S. Marine Corps. "End of JATO for Blue Angels!", blueangels.navy.mil, November 2009 

===2010s===
On 22 May 2011, The Blue Angels were performing at the Lynchburg Regional Airshow in Lynchburg, Virginia, when the Diamond formation flew the Barrel Roll Break maneuver at an altitude that was lower than the required minimum altitude. Barrel Roll Break as performed on 21 May 2011 and 22 May 2011, Youtube.com The maneuver was aborted, the remainder of the demonstration canceled and all aircraft landed safely. The next day, the Blue Angels announced that they were initiating a safety stand-down, canceling their upcoming Naval Academy Airshow and returning to their home base in Pensacola, Florida, for additional training and airshow practice. Blue Angels Cancel Naval Academy Airshow. blueangels.navy.mil. On 26 May, the Blue Angels announced they would not be flying their traditional fly-over of the Naval Academy Graduation Ceremony and that they were canceling their 2829 May 2011 performances at the Millville Wings and Wheels Airshow in Millville, New Jersey.

On 27 May 2011, the Blue Angels announced that Commander Dave Koss, the squadron's Commanding Officer, would be stepping down. He was replaced by Captain Greg McWherter, the team's previous Commanding Officer. The squadron canceled performances at the Rockford, Illinois Airfest 45 June and the Evansville, Indiana Freedom Festival Air Show 1112 June to allow additional practice and demonstration training under McWherter's leadership. 

Between 2 and 4 September 2011 on Labor Day weekend, the Blue Angels flew for the first time with a 5050 blend of conventional JP-5 jet fuel and a camelina-based biofuel at Naval Air Station Patuxent River airshow at Patuxent River, Maryland. McWherter flew an F/A-18 test flight on 17 August and stated there were no noticeable differences in performance from inside the cockpit. 

On 9 April 2013, the U.S. Navy released a statement that it was cancelling all remaining 2013 performances due to budget constraints, which ends the 2013 Blue Angels season after 2 of 35 scheduled shows were performed. The Navy also stated it continues to believe the value of inspiring future generations, and that the 2014 Blue Angels Schedule has not been subject to any cancellations, the schedule itself was released in September 2013. 

In June 2014, Captain Greg McWherter, flight leader of the Blue Angels for 2008-2010 and 2011-2012, received letter of reprimand from Adm. Harry Harris after an admiral's mast for failing to stop obvious and repeated instances of sexual harassment, condoning widespread lewd practices within the squadron and engaging in inappropriate and unprofessional discussions with his junior officers" during his second tour with the team. 

==Aircraft timeline==

The "Blues" have flown nine different demonstration aircraft and five support aircraft models: http://www.blueangels.navy.mil/aircraft/historical.aspx 

;Demonstration aircraft
#Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat: JuneAugust 1946
#Grumman F8F-1 Bearcat: August 1946  1949
#Grumman F9F-2 Panther: 1949  June 1950 (first jet); F9F-5 Panther: 1951 - Winter 1954/55
#Grumman F9F-8 Cougar: Winter 1954/55 - mid-season 1957 (swept-wing)
#Grumman F11F-1 (F-11) Tiger: mid-season 1957  1969 (first supersonic jet)
#McDonnell Douglas F-4J Phantom II: 1969  December 1974
#Douglas A-4F Skyhawk: December 1974  November 1986
#McDonnell Douglas F/A-18A/B Hornet (F/A-18B was #7 aircraft): November 1986  1992
#McDonnell Douglas F/A-18C/D Hornet (F/A-18D is #7 aircraft): 1992present
;Support aircraft
#Douglas R4D Skytrain: 19491955
#Curtiss R5C Commando: 1953
#Douglas R5D Skymaster: 19561968
#Lockheed C-121 Super Constellation: 19691973
#Lockheed C-130 Hercules "Fat Albert": 1970present

;Miscellaneous aircraft
#North American SNJ Texan (used to simulate a Japanese A6M Zero aircraft in demonstrations during the late 1940s)
#Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star (Used during the 1950s as a VIP transport aircraft for the team) 
#Vought F7U Cutlass (two of the unusual F7Us were received in late 1952 and flown as a side demonstration during the 1953 season but they were not a part of their regular formations which at the time used the F9F Panther. Pilots and ground crew found it unsatisfactory and plans to use it as the team's primary aircraft were cancelled).

==Show routine==
The following is the show routine used on 17 May 2008: 

The solos make a "knife-edge" pass. The far aircraft is actually slightly higher than the near aircraft to make them appear in-line to the audience.
Blue Angels in the double farvel formation.
Blue Angels aircraft perform the "Section High Alpha", the slowest maneuver of their show. During the maneuver the two jets slow down to 125 kn as they pitch the nose of the F/A-18 up to 45 degrees.

Blue Angel number seven roars past during the Fleet Week 2007 air show over the San Francisco Bay.
Blue Angels on Delta Formation.

* Fat Albert (C-130)  high performance takeoff (Low Transition)
* Fat Albert  Parade Pass (Photo Pass. The plane banks around the front of the crowd)
* Fat Albert  Flat Pass
* Fat Albert  Head on Pass
* Fat Albert  Short-Field Assault Landing
* FA-18 Engine Start-Up and Taxi Out
* Diamond Take-off (Either a low transition with turn, loop on takeoff, a half-Cuban 8 takeoff, or a Half Squirrel Cage)
* Solos Take-off (Blue Angel #5: Dirty Roll on Take-Off; Blue Angel #6: Low Transition to High Performance Climb)
* Diamond 360: Aircraft 1, 2, 3 and 4 are in their signature 18" wingtip-to-canopy diamond formation.
* Opposing Knife-Edge Pass
* Diamond Roll: The whole diamond formation rolls as a single entity.
* Opposing Inverted to Inverted Rolls
* Diamond Aileron Roll: All 4 diamond jets perform simultaneous aileron rolls.
* Fortus: Solos flying in carrier landing configuration with No.5 inverted, establishing a "mirror image" effect.
* Diamond Dirty Loop: The diamond flies a loop with all 4 jets in the carrier landing configuration.
* Minimum Radius Turn (Highest G maneuver. No.5 flies a "horizontal loop" pulling 7 Gs to maintain a tight radius)
* Double Farvel: Diamond formation flat pass with aircraft 1 and 4 inverted.
* Opposing Minimum Radius Turn
* Echelon Parade
* Opposing Horizontal Rolls
* Left Echelon Roll: The roll is made into the Echelon, which is somewhat difficult for the outside aircraft.
* Sneak Pass: the fastest speed of the show is about 700 mph (just under Mach 1 at sea level) Video
* Line-Abreast Loop  the most difficult formation maneuver to do well. No.5 joins the diamond as the 5 jets fly a loop in a straight line
* Opposing Four-Point Hesitation Roll
* Vertical Break
* Opposing Vertical Pitch
* Barrel Roll Break
* Section High-Alpha Pass: (tail sitting), the show's slowest maneuver Blue Angels FAQ 
* Low Break Cross
* Inverted Tuck Over Roll
* Tuck Under Break
* Delta Roll
* Fleur de Lis
* Solos Pass to Rejoin, Diamond flies a loop
* Loop Break Cross (Delta Break): After the break the aircraft separate in six different directions, perform half Cuban Eights then cross in the center of the performance area.
* Delta Breakout
* Delta Pitch Up Carrier Break to Land

==Accidents==
During its history, 26 Blue Angels pilots have been killed in air show or training accidents. Investigators probe Blue Angels crash, MSNBC, 22 April 2007 Through the 2006 season there have been 262 pilots in the squadron's history, Blue Angels Alumni FAQ, last updated 17 March 2007. giving the job a 10% fatality rate.

* 1946  September: Lt. "Robby" Robinson was killed during a performance when a wingtip broke off his Bearcat, sending him into an unrecoverable spin.
* 1952  Two Panthers collided during a demonstration in Corpus Christi, Texas and one pilot was killed. The team resumed performances two weeks later.
* 14 October 1958  Cmdr. Robert Nicholls Glasgow died during an orientation flight just days after reporting for duty as the new Blue Angels leader. Blue Angels crash artifacts found 50 years later, Associated Press, 3 March 2009 
*15 March 1964  Lt. George L. Neale, 29, was killed during an attempted emergency landing at Apalach Airport near Apalachicola, Florida. Lt. Neale's F-11A Tiger had experienced mechanical difficulties during a flight from West Palm Beach, Florida to NAS Pensacola, causing him to attempt the emergency landing. Failing to reach the airport, he ejected from the aircraft on final approach, but his parachute did not have sufficient time to fully deploy. Basham, Dusty, "Blue Angel Pilot Killed  Jet Fighter Falls Near Apalachicola", Playground Daily News, Fort Walton Beach, Florida, Monday Morning, 16 March 1964, Volume 18, Number 27, pages 1, 2. 
* 2 September 1966  Lt. Cmdr. Dick Oliver crashed his Tiger and was killed at the Canadian International Air Show in Toronto.
* 1 February 1967  Lt Frank Gallagher was killed when his Tiger stalled during a practice Half Cuban 8 maneuver and spun into the ground.
* 18 February 1967  Capt. Ronald Thompson was killed when his Tiger struck the ground during a practice formation loop.
* 14 January 1968  Opposing solo Lt. Bill Worley was killed when his Tiger crashed during a practice double immelman.
* 30 August 1970  Lt. Ernie Christensen belly-landed his F-4J Phantom at the Eastern Iowa Airport in Cedar Rapids with one engine stuck in afterburner. He ejected safely, while the aircraft ran off the runway.
* 4 June 1971  CDR Harley Hall safely ejected after his Phantom caught fire and crashed during practice over Narragansett Bay near the ex-NAS Quonset Point in Rhode Island.
* 14 February 1972  Lt. Larry Watters was killed when his F-4J Phantom II struck the ground, upright, while practicing inverted flight, during winter training at NAF El Centro.
* 8 March 1973  Capt. John Fogg, Lt. Marlin Wiita and LCDR Don Bentley survived a multi-aircraft mid-air collision during practice over the Superstition Mountains in California.
* 26 July 1973  2 pilots and a crew chief were killed in a mid-air collision between 2 Phantoms over Lakehurst, NJ during an arrival practice. Team Leader LCDR Skip Umstead, Capt. Mike Murphy and ADJ1 Ron Thomas perished. The rest of the season was cancelled after this incident.
* 22 February 1977  Opposing solo Lt. Nile Kraft was killed when his Skyhawk struck the ground during practice.
* 8 November 1978  One of the solo Skyhawks struck the ground after low roll during arrival maneuvers at NAS Miramar. Navy Lieutenant Michael Curtin was killed.
* April 1980  Lead Solo Lt. Jim Ross was unhurt when his Skyhawk suffered a fuel line fire during a show at NS Roosevelt Roads, Puerto Rico. LT Ross stayed with and landed the plane which left the end of the runway and taxied into the woods after a total hydraulic failure upon landing.
* 22 February 1982  Lt. Cmdr Stu Powrie, Lead Solo was killed when his Skyhawk struck the ground during winter training at Naval Air Facility El Centro, California just after a dirty loop.
*13 July 1985  Lead and Opposing Solo Skyhawks collided during a show at Niagara Falls, killing opposing solo Lt. Cmdr. Mike Gershon. Lt. Andy Caputi ejected and parachuted to safety. 
* 12 February 1987  Lead solo Lt. Dave Anderson ejected from his Hornet after a dual engine flameout during practice near El Centro, CA.
* 23 January 1990  Two Blue Angel Hornets suffered a mid-air collision during a practice at El Centro. Marine Corps Maj. Charles Moseley ejected safely. Cmdr. Pat Moneymaker was able to land his airplane, which then required a complete right wing replacement. 
* 28 October 1999  Lt. Cmdr. Kieron O'Connor, flying in the front seat of a two-seat Hornet, and recently selected demonstration pilot Lt. Kevin Colling (in the back seat) struck the ground during circle and arrival maneuvers in Valdosta, Georgia. Neither pilot survived. 
* 1 December 2004  Lt. Ted Steelman ejected from his F/A-18 approximately one mile off Perdido Key after his aircraft struck the water, suffering catastrophic engine and structural damage. He suffered minor injuries. 
*21 April 2007  Lt. Cmdr. Kevin J. Davis crashed his Hornet near the end of the Marine Corps Air Station Beaufort airshow in Beaufort, South Carolina, and was killed. U.S. Navy "Blue Angels" jet crashes. Reuters 

===Other incidents involving former Blue Angels===
* 8 March 1951  LCDR Johnny Magda, while flying in Korea, was the first former Blue Angel killed in combat.
* 27 January 1973  CDR Harley Hall (1970 team leader) was shot down flying an F-4J over Vietnam, and was officially listed as missing in action.

==In the media==
John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John with Blue Angels, 1982

* The Blue Angels was a dramatic television series, starring Dennis Cross and Don Gordon, inspired by the team's exploits and filmed with the cooperation of the Navy. It aired in syndication from 26 September 1960 to 3 July 1961. Blue Angels TV series, 1960 
* The Blue Angels were the subject of "Flying Blue Angels," a pop song recorded by George, Johnny and the Pilots (Coed Co 555), that debuted on Billboard Magazines "Bubbling Under the Hot 100" chart on 11 September 1961.
* is a 1975 documentary film, written by Dune author Frank Herbert, featuring the team in practice and performance during their F-4J Phantom era; many of the aerial photography techniques pioneered in Threshold were later used in the film Top Gun. IMDb.com 
* In 2005, the Discovery Channel aired a documentary miniseries, Blue Angels: A Year in the Life, focusing on the intricate day-to-day details of that year's training and performance schedule. Blue Angels: A Year in the Life 
* The video for the American rock band Van Halen's 1986 release "Dreams" consists of Blue Angels performance footage. The video was originally shot featuring the Blues in the A-4 Skyhawk. A later video features the F/A-18 Hornet.
* The Blue Angels appeared in the episodes "Death Begins at Forty" and "Insult to Injury" of Tim Allen's television sitcom Home Improvement as themselves.
* The Blue Angels made a brief appearance on I Love Toy Trains part 3.
* The Blue Angels were featured in the IMAX film Magic of Flight.
* In 2009, the MythBusters enlisted the aid of Blue Angels to help test the myth that a sonic boom could shatter glass. http://www.aero-news.net/index.cfm?do=main.textpost&id=d3efb603-f4f2-4120-bafb-3db867c52d90 
* The Blue Angels are a major part of the novel Shadows of Power by James W. Huston. 
* Blue Angels and the Thunderbirds is a 4 disc SkyTrax DVD set  2012 TOPICS Entertainment, Inc. ISBN 976-1-61894-180-0. It features highlights from airshows performed in the U.S.A. shot from inside and outside the cockpit including interviews of squadron aviators, plus aerial combat footage taken during Desert Storm, histories of the two flying squadrons from 1947 through 2008 including on-screen notes on changes in Congressional budgeting and research program funding, photo gallery slide shows, and two "forward-looking" sequences Into the 21st Century detailing developments of the F/A 18 Hornet's C and E and F models (10 min.) and footage of the F-22 with commentary (20 min.).
* In the television micro-series Star Wars: Clone Wars, Anakin Skywalker's starfighter is named Azure Angel, after the Blue Angels team. http://web.archive.org/web/http://blogs.starwars.com/holocron/16 

==Notable alumni==
* Captain Chuck Brady  Astronaut
* Captain Donnie Cochran  first African-American Blue Angels aviator and commander
* Rear Admiral Edward L. Feightner  World War II fighter ace and Lead Solo
* Captain Robert L. Rasmussen  Aviation Artist
* Commander Raleigh Rhodes World War II veteran and third leader of the Blue Angels 
* Captain Roy Marlin Voris  First Blue Angel leader
* Admiral Patrick M. Walsh  Left Wingman and Slot Pilot, 19851987; Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, Former Vice Chief of Naval Operations and White House Fellow

==Budget==
As of November 2011: the Pentagon spends $37 million annually on the Blue Angels, out of the Pentagon's $645 billion annual budget. 

All 2013 shows after the Naval Air Station Key West, Fla. Southernmost Air Spectacular on 2324 March 2013 were canceled due to the sequestration.

==See also==

* List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons
* United States Air Force Thunderbirds
* United States Marine Corps Aviation
* Red Arrows

==References==

==Further reading==
* (2012). "My incredible flight aboard the Blue Angels" By Charles Atkeison
* (2005). "The First Blue Angel." Miramar 50th Air Show Special Commemorative Program 18.
* (2005). "The Blue Angels History." Miramar 50th Air Show Special Commemorative Program 22.
* Blue Angels Timeline (19461980) accessed 10 November 2005.
* "Grumman and the Blue Angels" article by William C. Barto at the Grumman Memorial Park official website  accessed 15 October 2005.
* "First Blue: The story of World War II Ace Butch Voris and the Creation of the Blue Angels" by Robert K. Wilcox, Thomas Dunne Books/St.Martins Press, 2004, robertkwilcox.com
* Moneymaker.rootsweb.com

==External links==

* Blue Angels, official U.S. Navy web site



[[Born again (Christianity)]]

In Christianity, to be born again is to undergo a "spiritual rebirth" (regeneration) of the human soul or spirit from the Holy Spirit, contrasted with the physical birth everyone experiences. The origin of the term "born again" is the New Testament: "Jesus replied, 'Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God without being born again. Or "born from above" according to some other translations It is a term associated with salvation in Christianity. Individuals who profess to be born again often state that they have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ. 

==History and usage==

Many historic church denominations understood being "born again" as spiritual regeneration via the sacrament of baptism by the power of water and word. This understanding persists in Roman Catholicism, in some parts of Anglicanism, 
See the section on Anglicanism in Baptismal regeneration
 
in Lutheranism and in Eastern Orthodoxy. However, beginning sometime after the Reformation, Evangelical Protestants have predominantly understood being born again 
"born-again." Good Word Guide. London: A&C Black, 2007. Credo Reference. 30 July 2009
 
as an experience of conversion, and then symbolized by deep-water baptism, and rooted in a commitment to one's own personal faith in Jesus Christ for salvation. This same belief is also an integral part of Methodist doctrine, 

 

 
and is connected with the doctrine of Justification. 
 

Such " 'Rebirth' has often been identified with a definite, temporally datable form of 'conversion'." Its effects vary with the type of person involved:

With the voluntaristic type, rebirth is expressed in a new alignment of the will, in the liberation of new capabilities and powers that were hitherto undeveloped in the person concerned. With the intellectual type, it leads to an activation of the capabilities for understanding, to the breakthrough of a "vision". With others it leads to the discovery of an unexpected beauty in the order of nature or to the discovery of the mysterious meaning of history. With still others it leads to a new vision of the moral life and its orders, to a selfless realization of love of neighbour. ... each person affected perceives his life in Christ at any given time as newness of life.
 Encyclopdia Britannica, entry for The Doctrine of Man (from Christianity), 2004.
 

According to Melton:

Born again is a phrase used by many Protestants to describe the phenomenon of gaining faith in Jesus Christ. It is an experience when everything they have been taught as Christians becomes real, and they develop a direct and personal relationship with God. Melton, JG., Encyclopedia Of Protestantism (Encyclopedia of World Religions)
 

According to Purves and Partee, Purves, A. and Partee, C., Encountering God: Christian Faith in Turbulent Times, Westminster John Knox Press, 2000, p. 96
 "Sometimes the phrase seems to be judgemental, making a distinction between genuine and nominal Christians. Sometimes ... descriptive, like the distinction between liberal and conservative Christians. Occasionally, the phrase seems historic, like the division between Catholic and Protestant Christians."
Furthermore, the term "usually includes the notion of human choice in salvation and excludes a view of divine election by grace alone".

The Oxford English Dictionary, finding examples going back to 1961, defines the adjective born-again as:

:Of, pertaining to, or characterized by (an experience of) new birth in Christ or spiritual renewal; of a Christian: placing special emphasis on this experience as a basis for all one's actions, evangelical. Oxford English Dictionary.
 

===Origin===

====Biblical foundation====
The King James' Version uses the phrase born again three times. Two appear in chapter 3 of the Gospel of John. Jesus is speaking to Nicodemus, a Pharisee described as "a ruler of the Jews", who says that, because of his miracles, Jesus is known "to be a teacher come from God". Jesus immediately replies: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." 
A few verses later the Gospel quotes Jesus as saying:

:::Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. / The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.

John's Gospel was written in Greek, and the Greek word translated as again is  (anothen), which could mean again, or from above. The New Revised Standard Version prefers this latter translation, and both the King James Version and the Revised Version give it as an alternative in the margins. Hoskyns argues that it is to be preferred as the fundamental meaning and drew attention to phrases such as "birth of the Spirit ()", "birth from God (cf. ; , , , )" but continues that this necessarily carries with it an emphasis upon the newness of the life as given by God himself. Hoskyns, Sir Edwyn C. and Davy, F.N.(ed), The Fourth Gospel, Faber & Faber 2nd ed. 1947, pp. 211,212 

The third and last mention of the phrase occurs in the First Letter of Peter. The King James Bible translates this as:

:::Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently: / Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.

Here, the Greek word translated as born again is  (anagegennemenoy). Fisichella, SJ., Taking Away the Veil: To See Beyond the Curtain of Illusion, iUniverse, 2003, pp. 55-56. 

====Interpretations====
The traditional Jewish understanding of the promise of salvation is interpreted as being rooted in "the seed of Abraham"; that is in the physical lineage from Abraham. Jesus explained to Nicodemus that this doctrine was in errorthat every person must have two birthsthe natural birth of the physical body, the other of the water and the spirit. 
Emmons, Samuel B. A Bible Dictionary. BiblioLife, 2008. ISBN 978-0-554-89108-8.
 This discourse with Nicodemus established the Christian belief that all human beingswhether Jew or Gentilemust be "born again" of the spiritual seed of Christ. The Apostle Peter further reinforced this understanding in . The Catholic Encyclopedia states that " controversy existed in the primitive church over the interpretation of the expression the seed of Abraham. It is [the Apostle Paul's] teaching in one instance that all who are Christ's by faith are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. He is concerned, however, with the fact that the promise is not being fulfilled to the seed of Abraham (referring to the Jews)." 
Driscoll, James F. "Divine Promise (in Scripture)." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 15 Nov 2009 . 

Charles Hodge writes that "The subjective change wrought in the soul by the grace of God, is variously designated in Scripture" with terms such as new birth, resurrection, new life, new creation, renewing of the mind, dying to sin and living to righteousness, and translation from darkness to light. Hodge, Charles. "Regeneration." Systematic Theology-Volume III. Web: http://www.ccel.org/ccel/hodge/theology3.iii.i.i.html 

Jesus Christ used the "birth" analogy in tracing spiritual newness of life to a divine beginning. Contemporary Christian theologians have provided explanations for "born from above" being a more accurate translation of the original Greek word transliterated anthen. 
The New Testament Greek Lexicon. 30 July 2009. Online.
 Theologian Frank Stagg cites two reasons why the newer translation is significant:
# The emphasis "from above" (implying "from Heaven") calls attention to the source of the "newness of life." Stagg writes that the word "again" does not include the source of the new kind of beginning
# More than personal improvement is needed. "...a new destiny requires a new origin, and the new origin must be from God." Stagg, Evelyn and Frank. Woman in the World of Jesus. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1978. ISBN 0-664-24195-6 

An early example of the term in its more modern use appears in the sermons of John Wesley. In the sermon printed under the title of A New Birth he writes "none can be holy unless he be born again", and "except he be born again, none can be happy even in this world. For ... a man should not be happy who is not holy." Also, "I say, man may be born again and so become an heir of salvation." Wesley also states infants who are baptized are born again, but for adults it is different:

... our church supposes, that all who are baptized in their infancy, are at the same time born again. ... But ... it is sure all of riper years, who are baptized, are not at the same time born again. Wesley, J., The works of the Reverend John Wesley, Methodist Episcopal Church, 1831, pp. 405406.
 

==Denominational positions==
For American Christians, The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics notes: "The GSS ... has asked a born-again question on three occasions ... 'Would you say you have been 'born again' or have had a 'born-again' experience?" The Handbook says that "Evangelical, black, and Latino Protestants tend to respond similarly, with about two-thirds of each group answering in the affirmative. In contrast, only about one third of mainline Protestants and one sixth of Catholics (Anglo and Latino) claim a born-again experience." However, the handbook suggests that "born-again questions are poor measures even for capturing evangelical respondents. ... it is likely that people who report a born-again experience also claim it as an identity." The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, OUP, p16. 

===Anglicanism===
The phrase is mentioned in the 39 Articles of the Anglican Church in article XV, which is headed "Of Christ alone without Sin". In part, it reads: "sin, as S. John saith, was not in Him. But all we the rest, although baptized and born again in Christ, yet offend in many things: and if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." Accessed 8 April 2012. 

===Catholicism===
The Catholic Church identifies regeneration (being "born again") with the sacrament of baptism. http://www.catholic.com/tracts/are-catholics-born-again 
The catholic.com site has:Regeneration (being "born again") is the transformation from death to life that occurs in our souls when we first come to God and are justified. 
The site catholic education.org http://www.catholiceducation.org/articles/apologetics/ap0022.html adds:How, then, should a Catholic answer the question, Have you been born again? An accurate answer would be, Yes, I was born again in baptism. Yet leaving it at that may generate even more confusion. ... The Catholic, then, should do more than simply point to his baptism; he should discuss his living faith, trust and love of Christ; his desire to grow in sanctity and conformity to Christ; and his total dependence on Christ for salvation. These are integral to the new life of the Holy Spirit that baptism bestows. When the Fundamentalist sees the link between baptism and the Holy Spirit in the life of his Catholic neighbor, he may begin to see that St. Paul was more than figurative when he wrote, You were buried with Christ in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the power of God, who raised him from the dead (Col 2:12).

However, at the Council of Trent, on 15 November 1551, the necessity for a second conversion after baptism was delineated: 

===Lutheranism===
The Lutheran Church holds that it "thoroughly teaches that we are cleansed of our sins and born again and renewed in Holy Baptism by the Holy Ghost. But she also teaches that whoever is baptized must, though daily contrition and repentance, drown The Old Adam so that daily a new man come forth and arise who walks before God in righteousness and purity forever. She teaches that whoever lives in sins after his baptism has again lost the grace of baptism." 

===Methodism and other Evangelicals===
In Methodism, the "new birth is necessary for salvation because it marks the move toward holiness. That comes with faith." John Wesley, the founder of the Methodist Church, held that the New Birth "is that great change which God works in the soul when he brings it into life, when he raises it from the death of sin to the life of righteousness" (Works, vol. 2, pp. 193194). The Articles of Religion, in Article XVIIOf Baptism, state that baptism is a "sign of regeneration or the new birth." The Methodist Visitor in describing this doctrine, admonishes individuals: "'Ye must be born again.' Yield to God that He may perform this work in and for you. Admit Him to your heart. 'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.'" 

The belief in the New Birth is something that Methodists share with other evangelicals. In The Encyclopedia of Protestantism, JG Melton states that "In churches that emphasize evangelism, the 'born-again' experience tends to become the norm, and everyone is expected to recount such an experience." Melton, JG, The Encyclopedia of Protestantism, Infobase publishing, 2009, p. 100. 

Evangelical Protestants employ the KJV translation of as "born again" rather than "born from above". 
"Although many evangelicals allow that conversion can be a process, generally they see it as a specific, identifiable moment of time when a person simply and sincerely trusts in Jesus Christ as savior." Mullen, MS., in Kurian, GT., The Encyclopedia of Christian Civilization, J. Wiley & Sons, 2012, p. 302. They understand to indicate a requirement of salvation: "That if you confess with your mouth, 'Jesus is Lord', and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved." So, "to be born again" means "to be saved" because to be saved, one must confess Jesus is Lord with one's mouth and believe it in one's heart. Also, to be born again means to follow that "with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved". Graham, RC. I healed you with my word, Xulan, 2007, p. 414. 

===Reformed===
The Reformed churches reject both the Catholic/Lutheran and Methodist/Evangelical concepts of being born again. Here, "regeneration, the equivalent to being 'born again,' is the inward working of the Spirit which induces the sinner to respond to the effectual call". This is "the work of Gods Spirit, whereby, convincing us of our sin and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing our wills, he doth persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us in the gospel.": 

In Reformed theology, "regeneration precedes faith." Samuel Storms writes that "Calvinists insist that the sole cause of regeneration or being born again is the will of God. God first sovereignly and efficaciously regenerates, and only in consequence of that do we act. Therefore, the individual is passive in regeneration, neither preparing himself nor making himself receptive to what God will do. Regeneration is a change wrought in us by God, not an autonomous act performed by us for ourselves." 

===Jehovahs Witnesses===
Jehovahs Witnesses believe that individuals do not have the power to be born again, because it is God who calls and selects his followers. This follows from the verse in John 6:44, "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him." (King James Version) They consider that when Jesus said in John 3:5 that one has to be born from "water and the spirit" to enter the kingdom of God, it was not a command but a necessity, because the text states "Ye must be born again". On this point, their publishing organisation, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, prefers the translation: "should be born from above". They write: "Thus, according to that alternate rendering, the new birth originates 'from above'that is, 'from heaven,' or 'from the Father.' ... Yes it is caused by God." Watchtower, BORN AGAIN What Does It Mean?: THE NEW BIRTH A Personal Decision?, www.watchtower.org, Accessed 8 April 2012. 

For further evidence, Jehovah's Witnesses note that in Mark 1:9-10, after Jesus was baptised in water by John the Baptist, he was baptised by the spirit symbolised by a dove. Also, in Acts 1:5, Jesus assured his disciples that they too would soon be baptised in holy spirit: "For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (KJV) The Watchtower states: "Note that Jesus first got baptized with water. Then he received the holy spirit. Similarly, the early disciples had first been baptized in water ... and then they received the holy spirit." This occurred "On the day of Pentecost in the year 33 C.E." Watchtower, BORN AGAIN What Does It Mean?: THE NEW BIRTH How Does It Take Place?, www.watchtower.org, Accessed 8 April 2012. 

==Disagreements between denominations==
The term "born again" is used by several Christian denominations, but there are disagreements on what the term means, and whether members of other denominations are justified in claiming to be born again Christians.

A Catholic website says:Catholics should ask Protestants, "Are you born againthe way the Bible understands that concept?" If the Evangelical has not been properly water baptized, he has not been born again "the Bible way," regardless of what he may think. 
On the other hand, an Evangelical site argues:Another of many examples is the Catholic who claims he also is "born again." ... However, what the committed Catholic means is that he received his spiritual birth when he was baptizedeither as an infant or when as an adult he converted to Catholicism. That's not what Jesus meant when He told Nicodemus he "must be born again" (Jn 3:3-8). The deliberate adoption of biblical terms which have different meanings for Catholics has become an effective tool in Rome's ecumenical agenda. McMahon, TA, The "Evangelical" Seduction, , Accessed 10 Feb 2013. 

The Reformed view of regeneration may be set apart from other outlooks in at least two ways. 

==Public stances==
In recent history, born again is a term that has been widely associated with the evangelical Christian renewal since the late 1960s, first in the United States and then later around the world. Associated perhaps initially with Jesus People and the Christian counterculture, born again came to refer to a conversion experience, accepting Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior in order to be saved from Hell and given eternal life with God in Heaven, and was increasingly used as a term to identify devout believers. By the mid-1970s, born again Christians were increasingly referred to in the mainstream media as part of the born again movement.

In 1976, Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson's book Born Again gained international notice. Time magazine named him "One of the 25 most influential Evangelicals in America." The 25 Most Influential Evangelicals in America. The term was sufficiently prevalent that during the year's presidential campaign, most notably with Democratic party nominee Jimmy Carter describing himself as "born again" in the first Playboy magazine interview of an American presidential candidate. Modern musicians such as Little Richard, White, Charles (2003), p. 83 (see text under photo on opposite page). The Life and Times of Little Richard: The Authorised Biography. Omnibus Press. Mark Farner, Dan Peek, Donna Summer, Bob Dylan, Cott (ed.), Dylan on Dylan: The Essential Interviews, 279285 Kerry Livgren, Dave Hope, Dave Mustaine, Nicko McBrain, Roger McGuinn, Ted Nugent, Kanye West, Carrie Underwood, Johnny Cash, Brian Welch, Keith Farley, Cliff Richard, Charlie Daniels, Randy Travis, Alice Cooper, Steven Tyler, Mariah Carey, Nick Cannon, and Lou Gramm were artists whose born again conversions had an impact on modern culture. Others such as department store magnate James Cash Penney, Chick-fil-A founder Truett Cathy, actor/martial artist Chuck Norris, wrestlers Shawn Michaels, Chris Jericho, AJ Styles, Ted DiBiase and Sting, and actors Jesse McCartney, Kirk Cameron, and Mr. T are also mentioned as being born again. Born-again athletes like former New York Jets quarterback Tim Tebow, St. Louis Rams quarterback Sam Bradford and former Rams Super Bowl XXXIV winning quarterback Kurt Warner, Olympic hurdler Lolo Jones, boxer Katie Taylor and Houston Rockets player Jeremy Lin. Former Alabama governor and American presidential candidate George Wallace became born again in the late 1970s, which led him to apologize for his earlier segregationist views.

===Chuck Colson===
In his book Born Again (1976 and 2008), Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson describes his path to faith in conjunction with his criminal imprisonment and played a significant role in solidifying the "born again" identity as a cultural construct in the US. He writes that his spiritual experience followed considerable struggle and hesitancy to have a "personal encounter with God." He recalls:... while I sat alone staring at the sea I love, words I had not been certain I could understand or say fell from my lips: "Lord Jesus, I believe in You. I accept You. Please come into my life. I commit it to You." With these few words...came a sureness of mind that matched the depth of feeling in my heart. There came something more: strength and serenity, a wonderful new assurance about life, a fresh perception of myself in the world around me. Colson, Charles W. Born Again. Chosen Books (Baker Publishing), 2008. 

==Born-again and US politics==
The first President of the United States to publicly declare that he was born-again was Jimmy Carter in 1976. Hough, JF., Changing party coalitions, Algora Publishing, 2006, p. 203. "In the 1980 campaign, all three of the major candidates ... stated that they had been born-again" Utter, GH. and Tru, JL.,Conservative Christians and political participation: a reference handbook, ABC-CLIO, 2004, p. 137. 

Sider and Knippers Sider, J. and Knippers, D. (eds), Toward an Evangelical Public Policy: Political Strategies for the Health of the Nation, Baker Books, 2005, p.51.
 state that "Ronald Reagan's election that fall aided by the votes of 61% of 'born-again' white Protestants."

The Gallup Organization reported that "In 2003, 42% of U.S. adults said they were born-again or evangelical; the 2004 percentage is 41%." Also, "Black Americans are far more likely to identify themselves as born-again or evangelical, with 63% of blacks saying they are born-again, compared with 39% of white Americans. Republicans are far more likely to say they are born-again (52%) than Democrats (36%) or independents (32%)." 

Haiven, in speaking of "born-agains", Haiven, J., Faith, hope, no charity: an inside look at the born again movement in Canada and the United States, New Star Books, 1984, p.218.
 refers to them having "a type of intolerance". She says, "The instant and thoughtless panaceas of born-again Christianity will be seen as a vast sanctuary by millions of North Americans." She asks, "Is this sanctuary really a recruitment camp for right-wing movements? It would be naive to think otherwise."

The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, Smidt, C., Kellstedt, L., and Guth, J., The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, Oxford Handbooks Online, 2009, pp.195-196.
 referring to several studies, reports "that 'born-again' identification is associated with lower support for government anti-poverty programs." It also notes that "self-reported born-again" Christianity, "strongly shapes attitudes towards economic policy."

==Criticism==

===Biblical arguments===
The quotation from the Gospel of John has raised some questions about the meaning and authenticity of the phrase "born again". In the chapter, Nicodemus is puzzled and asks Jesus what he means by saying that "Ye must be born again". He questions: "How can a man re-enter his mother's womb?" Scholar Bart D. Ehrman says that this confusion is because in Greek (the language of the gospel) the word again is ambiguous. It might mean again or a second time or from above, which would explain Nicodemus' confusion. However, the Jews at Jesus' time were actually speaking Aramaic, in which language there would not have been a double meaning. Ehrman says that this raises questions about the authenticity of the dialogue, the meaning of the words, and, therefore, the use of the phrase. Ehrman, B.D., Referred to in Edward T. Babinski The "Born Again" Dialogue In the Gospel of John (Another Reason To Doubt Its Authenticity) from http://etb-biblical-errancy.blogspot.com/2012/04/born-again-dialogue-in-gospel-of-john.html Accessed 25 Feb 2011. 

A 19th-century source notes that the phrase was not mentioned by the other Evangelists, nor by the Apostles except Peter. "It was not regarded by any of the Evangelists but John of sufficient importance to record." And, without John, "we should hardly have known that it was necessary for one to be born again." This suggests that "the text and context was meant to apply to Nicodemus particularly, and not to the world." Otherwise, it would have been mentioned more often.
 LeFevre, CF. and Williamson, ID., The Gospel anchor. Troy, NY, 183132, p. 66. 

==Names inspired by the term==

The idea of "rebirth in Christ" has inspired Oxford Dictionary of First Names some common European forenames: French Ren/Rene. lso used in Belgium the Netherlands and Great Britain, Dutch Renaat/Renate, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese Renato/Renata, Latin Renatus/Renata, which all mean "reborn", "born again". Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary, W. & R. Chambers (1954) p.1355 

==See also==

* Altar call  invitation to become a Christian; given at a church service or event.
* Baptism  referred to in Jesus' born-again discourse with Nicodemus ("born of water and spirit")
* Baptismal regeneration  overview of doctrinal debate about the effect of the baptism rite.
* Born-again virgin  a person who, though not still a virgin, chooses to live as one.
* Dvija, or twice-born  in Hinduism, a person who has formally taken on the roles of one of the first three castes.
* Evangelism  the preaching of the Christian Gospel to others with the object of conversion.
* Holy Spirit  referred to in Jesus' born-again discourse with Nicodemus ("born of water and spirit")
* Monergism  belief that being born again is entirely God's work (and not the believer's work)
* Sinner's prayer  the prayer of a person seeking forgiveness and wanting to become a Christian.
* Velsius#London: more religious turmoil|Justus Velsius]  16th-century Dutch dissident who promoted the view that through new birth man could become like Christ

==References==

==External links==
* The New Birth, John Wesley, sermon #45. Wesley's teaching on being born again, and argument that it is fundamental to Christianity.
* Monergistic Regeneration? (Calvinist/Reformed) - discusses monergism, the view that the new birth is entirely the work of God (as opposed to synergism which teaches that the believer is also active to some extent.)
* New Birth, a 16th-century work by anabaptist preacher Menno Simons, c. 1537, revised c. 1550



[[Rockwell B-1 Lancer]]

The Rockwell (now part of Boeing) B-1 Lancer The name "Lancer" is only applied to the B-1B version, after the program was revived. is a four-engine supersonic variable-sweep wing, jet-powered strategic bomber used by the United States Air Force (USAF). It was first envisioned in the 1960s as a supersonic bomber with Mach 2 speed, and sufficient range and payload to replace the Boeing B-52 Stratofortress. It was developed into the B-1B, primarily a low-level penetrator with long-range and Mach 1.25 speed capability at high altitude.

Designed by Rockwell International, the bomber's development was delayed multiple times over its history, as the theory of strategic balance changed from flexible response to massive retaliation and back again. Each change in stance changed the perceived need for manned bombers. The initial B-1A version was developed in the early 1970s, but its production was canceled, and only four prototypes were built. The need for a new platform once again surfaced in the early 1980s, and the aircraft resurfaced as the B-1B version with the focus on low-level penetration bombing. However, by this point development of stealth technology was promising an aircraft of dramatically improved capability. Production went ahead as the B version would be operational before the "Advanced Technology Bomber" (which became the B-2 Spirit), during a period when the B-52 would be increasingly vulnerable. The B-1B entered service in 1986 with the USAF Strategic Air Command (SAC) as a nuclear bomber.

In the early 1990s, following the Gulf War and concurrent with the disestablishment of SAC and its reassignment to the newly formed Air Combat Command (ACC), the B-1B was converted to conventional bombing use. It first served in combat during Operation Desert Fox in 1998 and again during the NATO action in Kosovo the following year. The B-1B has supported U.S. and NATO military forces in Afghanistan and Iraq. The Lancer is the supersonic component of the USAF's long-range bomber force, along with the subsonic B-52 and Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit. The bomber is commonly called the "Bone" (originally from "B-One"). With the retirement of the General Dynamics/Grumman EF-111A Raven in 1998 and the Grumman F-14 Tomcat in 2006, the B-1B is the U.S. military's only active variable-sweep wing aircraft. The B-1B is expected to continue to serve into the 2030s, with the Next-Generation Bomber to start supplementing the B-1B in the 2020s.

==Development==

===Background===

The U.S. Air Force in 1955 issued requirements for a new bomber with the payload and range of the Boeing B-52 Stratofortress and the Mach 2 maximum speed of the Convair B-58 Hustler. Jenkins 1999, p. 10. In December 1957, the U.S. Air Force selected North American Aviation's proposal to replace the B-52 with the B-70 Valkyrie. The Valkyrie was a six-engine bomber that could reach Mach 3 speeds at high altitude (70000 ft) to avoid interceptor aircraft, the only effective anti-bomber weapon in the 1950s. Soviet aircraft were already unable to intercept the high-flying Lockheed U-2; Rich, Ben and Leo Janos. Skunk Works. Boston: Little, Brown & Company, 1994. ISBN 0-316-74300-3. the Valkyrie would fly at similar altitudes but much higher speeds. In combat, the B-70 was expected to simply fly right by the defenders.

By the late 1950s, however, anti-aircraft surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) could threaten high-altitude aircraft, as demonstrated by the 1960 downing of Gary Powers's U-2. "May 1960  The U-2 Incident.  Soviet and American Statements." Keesing's Record of World Events, Volume 6, 1960. The USAF Strategic Air Command (SAC) began moving its bombers to low-level penetration before the U-2 downing. This tactic greatly reduces radar detection distances by use of terrain masking; using features of the terrain like hills and valleys, the line-of-sight from the radar to the bomber can be broken, rendering the radar (and human observers) incapable of seeing the target. Even at somewhat higher altitudes, radar systems of the era were subject to "clutter" from stray returns from the ground and other objects, requiring a minimum angle above the ground to be effective. Bombers flying at low altitudes could remain under these angles simply by flying around the radar sites. This combination of effects made SAMs of the era ineffective against low-flying aircraft. The same effects also meant that low flying aircraft were difficult to detect by higher flying interceptors, since their radar systems could not readily pick out opposing aircraft against the clutter from ground reflections.

Planners outlined a series of low-level profiles for the B-70, but higher drag at low level limited the B-70 to subsonic speed while dramatically decreasing its range. The result would be an aircraft with somewhat higher subsonic speed, but less range than the B-52 it was meant to replace. Unsuited for the new low-altitude role, and because of a growing shift to the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) force, the B-70 bomber program was canceled in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy, "NASA-CR-115702, B-70 Aircraft Study Final Report, Vol. I, p. I-38." NASA, 1972. and the two XB-70 prototypes were used in a supersonic research program. 

Although never intended for the low-level role, the B-52's flexibility allowed it to outlast its intended successor as the nature of the air war environment changed. The B-52's huge fuel load allowed it to operate at lower altitudes for longer times, and the large airframe allowed the addition of improved electronic countermeasures suites to deal with radars. During the Vietnam War the concept that all future wars would be nuclear was turned on its head, and the "big belly" modifications increased the B-52's total bomb load to 60000 lb, turning it into a powerful tactical aircraft which could be used against ground troops along with strategic targets from high altitudes. The much smaller bomb bay of the B-70 would have made it much less useful in this role.

===Design studies and delays===
Although effective, the B-52 was not ideal for the low-level role. This led to a number of aircraft designs known as "penetrators", which were tuned specifically for long-range low-altitude flight. The first of these designs to see operation was the supersonic F-111 fighter-bomber, which used variable-sweep wings for tactical missions. Gunston 1978, pp. 1213. Similar aircraft also emerged for other users as well, notably the TSR-2, and later, Panavia Tornado and Sukhoi Su-24. A number of studies on a strategic-range counterpart followed.

The first post-B-70 strategic penetrator study was known as the Subsonic Low Altitude Bomber (SLAB), which was completed in 1961. This produced a design that looked more like an airliner than a bomber, with a large swept wing, T-tail and large high-bypass engines. Gordon Taylor, "Subsonic Low Altitude Bomber", Wright-Patterson Air Force Base ASD-TDR-62-426, June 1962 This was followed by the similar Extended Range Strike Aircraft (ERSA), which added a variable-sweep wing planform, then in vogue in the aviation industry. ERSA envisioned a relatively small aircraft with a 10000 lb payload and a range of 8750 nmi, with 2500 nmi being flown at low altitudes. In August 1963 the similar Low-Altitude Manned Penetrator (LAMP) design was completed, which called for an aircraft with a 20000 lb bomb load and somewhat shorter range of 7150 nmi. 

These all culminated in the October 1963 Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (AMPSS), which led to industry studies at Boeing, General Dynamics, and North American. In mid-1964, the USAF had revised its requirements and retitled the project as Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (AMSA), which differed from AMPSS primarily in that it also demanded a high-speed high-altitude capability, similar to that of the existing Mach 2 class B-58 Hustler. Given the lengthy series of design studies, Rockwell engineers joked that the new name actually stood for "America's Most Studied Aircraft". Wykes, J. H. "The Evolution of a Strategic Bomber." AIAA, 1214 May 1981. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

The arguments that led to the cancellation of the B-70 program had led some to question the need for a new strategic bomber of any sort. The air force was adamant about retaining bombers as part of the nuclear triad concept that included bombers, ICBMs, and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) in a combined package that complicated any potential defense. They argued that the bomber was needed to attack hardened military targets and to provide a safe counterforce option because the bombers could be quickly launched into safe loitering areas where they could not be attacked. However, the introduction of the SLBM mooted the mobility and survivability argument, and a newer generation of ICBMs had the accuracy and speed needed to attack point targets. During this time, ICBMs were seen as a less costly option based on their lower unit cost, but development costs were much higher. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara preferred ICBMs over bombers for the Air Force portion of the deterrent force and felt a new expensive bomber was not needed. "B-1A page." fas.org. Retrieved: 20 March 2008. McNamara limited the AMSA program to studies and component development beginning in 1964. 

Program studies continued; IBM and Autonetics were awarded AMSA advanced avionics study contracts in 1968. McNamara remained opposed to the program in favor of upgrading the existing B-52 fleet and adding nearly 300 FB-111s for shorter range roles then being filled by the B-58. Schwartz 1998, p. 119. He again vetoed funding for AMSA aircraft development in 1968. 

===B-1A program===
President Richard Nixon reestablished the AMSA program after taking office, keeping with his administration's flexible response strategy that required a broad range of options short of general nuclear war. Nixon's Secretary of Defense, Melvin Laird, reviewed the programs and decided to lower the numbers of FB-111s, since they lacked the desired range, and recommended that the AMSA design studies be accelerated. In April 1969, the program officially became the B-1A. This was the first entry in the new bomber designation series, first created in 1962. The Air Force issued a request for proposals in November 1969. 

alt= A B-1A flying with its wings swept back, showing its underside
alt= The nose section of a B-1A on display with outline of the ejection capsule denoted

Proposals were submitted by Boeing, General Dynamics and North American Rockwell in January 1970. Kocivar, Ben. "Our New B-1 Bomber  High, Low, Fast, and Slow." Popular Science, Volume 197, Issue 5, November 1970, p. 86. In June 1970, North American Rockwell's design was selected and was awarded a development contract. The original program called for two test airframes, five flyable aircraft, and 40 engines. This was cut in 1971 to one ground and three flight test aircraft. The company changed its name to Rockwell International and named its aircraft division North American Aircraft Operations in 1973. "Rockwell International history 19701986." Boeing. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. A fourth prototype, built to production standards, was ordered in the fiscal year 1976 budget. Plans called for 240 B-1As to be built, with initial operational capability set for 1979. 

Rockwell's design featured a number of features common to 1960s U.S. designs. Among these was the use of a "crew capsule" that ejected as a unit during emergencies, which was introduced to improve survivability in the case of an ejection at high speed. Additionally, the design featured large variable-sweep wings in order to provide both high lift during takeoff and landing, and low drag during a high-speed dash phase. With the wings set to their widest position the aircraft had considerably better lift and power than the B-52, allowing it to operate from a much wider variety of bases. Penetration of the USSR's defences would take place at supersonic speed, crossing them as quickly as possible before entering into the less defended "heartland" where speeds could be reduced again. The large size and fuel capacity of the design would allow the "dash" portion of the flight to be relatively long.

In order to achieve the required Mach 2 performance at high altitudes, the exhaust nozzles and air intake inlets were variable. Initially, it had been expected that a Mach 1.2 performance could be achieved at low altitude, which required that titanium be used in critical areas in the fuselage and wing structure. The low altitude performance requirement was later lowered to Mach 0.85, reducing the amount of titanium and therefore cost. A pair of small vanes mounted near the nose are part of an active vibration damping system that smooths out the otherwise bumpy low-altitude ride. Schefter, Jim. "The Other Story About The Controversial B-1." Popular Science, Volume 210. Issue 5, May 1977, p. 112. The first three B-1As featured an escape capsule that ejected the cockpit with all four crew members inside. The fourth B-1A was equipped with a conventional ejection seat for each crew member. 

The B-1A mockup review occurred in late October 1971. The first B-1A prototype (serial no. 74-0158) flew on 23 December 1974. Three more B-1A prototypes followed. "B-1B Background Information." Boeing. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. As the program continued the per-unit cost continued to rise in part because of high inflation during that period. In 1970, the estimated unit cost was $40 million, and by 1975, this figure had climbed to $70 million. 

===New problems and cancellation===
In 1976, Soviet pilot Viktor Belenko defected to Japan with his MiG-25 "Foxbat". Willis, David K. "Japan's scrutiny of Soviet jet jars detente." Christian Science Monitor, 16 September 1976. Retrieved: 23 May 2010. During debriefing he described a new "super-Foxbat" (almost certainly referring to the MiG-31) that had look-down/shoot-down radar systems in order to attack cruise missiles. This would also make any low-level penetration aircraft "visible" and easy to attack. Donald 2004, p. 120. Given that the B-1's armament suite was similar to the B-52, and it now appeared no more likely to survive Soviet airspace than the B-52, the program was increasingly questioned. In particular, Senator William Proxmire continually derided it in public, arguing it was an outlandishly expensive dinosaur. During the 1976 federal election campaign, Jimmy Carter made it one of the Democratic Party's platforms, saying "The B-1 bomber is an example of a proposed system which should not be funded and would be wasteful of taxpayers' dollars." "Carter's Big Decision: Down Goes the B-1, Here Comes the Cruise." Time, 11 July 1977. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

When Carter took office in 1977 he ordered a review of the entire program. By this point the projected cost of the program had risen to over $100 million per aircraft, although this was lifetime cost over 20 years. He was informed of the relatively new work on stealth aircraft that had started in 1975, and he decided that this was a better avenue of approach than the B-1. Pentagon officials also stated that the AGM-86 Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM) launched from the existing B-52 fleet would give the USAF equal capability of penetrating Soviet airspace. With a range of 1500 mi, the ALCM could be launched well outside the range of any Soviet defenses and penetrate at low altitude just like a bomber, but in much greater numbers at a lower cost. A small number of B-52s could launch hundreds of ALCMs, saturating the defense. A program to improve the B-52 and develop and deploy the ALCM would cost perhaps 20% of the price to deploy the planned 244 B-1As. 

On 30 June 1977, Carter announced that the B-1A would be canceled in favor of ICBMs, SLBMs, and a fleet of modernized B-52s armed with ALCMs. Carter called it "one of the most difficult decisions that I've made since I've been in office." No mention of the stealth work was made public with the program being top secret, but today it is known that in early 1978 he authorized the Advanced Technology Bomber (ATB) project, which eventually led to the B-2 Spirit. 

Domestically, the reaction to the cancellation was split along partisan lines. The Department of Defense was surprised by the announcement; internal expectations were that the number of B-1s ordered would be reduced to around 150. Congressman Robert Dornan (R-CA) claimed, "They're breaking out the vodka and caviar in Moscow." Belcher, Jerry. "Dropping B-1 Would Bring World War III, Dornan Says." Los Angeles Times, 11 June 1977. In contrast, it appears the Soviets were more concerned by large numbers of ALCMs representing a much greater threat than a smaller number of B-1s. Soviet news agency TASS commented that "the implementation of these militaristic plans has seriously complicated efforts for the limitation of the strategic arms race." Western military leaders were generally happy with the decision. NATO commander Alexander Haig described the ALCM as an "attractive alternative" to the B-1. French General Georges Buis stated "The B-1 is a formidable weapon, but not terribly useful. For the price of one bomber, you can have 200 cruise missiles." 

Flight tests of the four B-1A prototypes for the B-1A program continued through April 1981. The program included 70 flights totaling 378 hours. A top speed of Mach 2.22 was reached by the second B-1A. Engine testing also continued during this time with the YF101 engines totaling almost 7,600 hours. 

===Shifting priorities===
alt= A right side view of a B-1A on the ground in 1984

It was during this period that the Soviets started to assert themselves in several new theaters of action, in particular through Cuba during the Angolan Civil War starting in 1975 and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. U.S. strategy to this point had been focused on containing Communism and preparation for war in Europe. The new Soviet actions revealed that the military lacked capability outside these narrow confines. Liggett, Lieutenant Colonel William R. "Long-Range Combat Aircraft and Rapid Deployment Forces." Maxwell Air Force Base, Air University Review, JulyAugust 1982. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

The U.S. Army responded by accelerating its Rapid Deployment Forces concept but suffered from major problems with airlift and sealift capability. Moore, John Leo. "U.S. defense policy: weapons, strategy, and commitments." Congressional Quarterly, 1980, pp. 65, 79. In order to slow an enemy invasion of other countries, air power was critical; however the key Iran-Afghanistan border was outside the range of the U.S. Navy's carrier-based attack aircraft, leaving this role to the air force. Although the B-52 had the range to support on-demand global missions, its long runway requirements limited the forward basing possibilities. Herbet, Adam J. "The Search for Asian Bases." AIR FORCE Magazine, January 2002, pp. 5153. 

During the 1980 presidential campaign, Ronald Reagan campaigned heavily on the platform that Carter was weak on defense, citing the cancellation of the B-1 program as an example, a theme he continued using into the 1980s. Reagan, President Ronald. "Reagan's Radio Address to the Nation on Foreign Policy." presidentreagan.info. 20 October 1984. During this time Carter's defense secretary, Harold Brown, announced the stealth bomber project, apparently implying that this was the reason for the B-1 cancellation. 

===B-1B program===
On taking office, Reagan was faced with the same decision as Carter before: whether to continue with the B-1 for the short term, or to wait for the development of the ATB, a much more advanced aircraft. Studies suggested that the existing B-52 fleet with ALCM would remain a credible threat until 1985, as it was predicted that 75% of the B-52 force would survive to attack its targets. Mitchell, Douglas D. "IB81107, "Bomber Options for Replacing B-52s." Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, via Digital Library, UNT, 3 May 1982. Retrieved: 16 July 2011. After this, the introduction of the SA-10 missile, the MiG-31 interceptor and the first Soviet Airborne Early Warning and Control (AWACS) systems would make the B-52 increasingly vulnerable. Jumper, John P. "Global Strike Task Force: A Transforming Concept, Forged by Experience." Aerospace Power Journal 15, no. 1, Spring 2001, pp. 3031. Originally published by Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, 2001. During 1981, funds were allocated to a new study for a bomber for the 1990s time-frame, this led to the Long-Range Combat Aircraft (LRCA) project. The LRCA evaluated the B-1, F-111 and ATB as possible solutions; an emphasis was placed on multi-role capabilities, as opposed to purely strategic operations. 

alt= The first B-1B at its roll-out ceremony outside a hangar in Palmdale, California in 1984

In 1981, it was believed the B-1 could be in operation before the ATB, covering the transitionary period between the B-52's increasing vulnerability and the ATB's introduction. Reagan decided the best solution was to procure both the B-1 and ATB, and on 2 October 1981 Reagan announced that 100 B-1s were to be ordered to fill the LRCA role. Coates, James. "Reagan approves B-1, alters basing for MX." Chicago Tribune, 3 October 1981. Retrieved: 28 July 2010. 

In January 1982 the U.S. Air Force awarded two contracts to Rockwell worth a combined $2.2 billion for the development and production of 100 new B-1 bombers. Numerous changes were made to the design to make it better suited to the now expected missions, resulting in the new B-1B. These changes included a reduction in maximum speed, which allowed the variable-aspect intake ramps to be replaced by simpler fixed geometry intake ramps in the newer design. This reduced the B version's radar signature; the reduction in radar cross-section was seen as a good trade off for the speed decrease. High subsonic speeds at low altitude became a focus area for the revised design, and low-level speeds were increased from about Mach 0.85 to 0.92. The B-1B has a maximum speed of Mach 1.25 at higher altitudes. 

The B-1B's maximum takeoff weight was increased to 477000 lb from the B-1A's 395000 lb. The weight increase was to allow for takeoff with a full internal fuel load and for external weapons to be carried. Rockwell engineers were able to reinforce critical areas and lighten non-critical areas of the airframe, so the increase in empty weight was minimal. In order to deal with the introduction of the MiG-31 and other aircraft with look-down capability, the B-1B's electronic warfare suite was significantly upgraded. 

alt= B-1B with its wings swept back doing a banked turn during a demonstration

Opposition to the plan was widespread within Congress. Critics pointed out that many of the original problems remained in both areas of performance and expense. In particular it seemed the B-52 fitted with electronics similar to the B-1B would be equally able to avoid interception, as the speed advantage of the B-1 was now minimal. It also appeared that the "interim" time frame served by the B-1B would be less than a decade, being rendered obsolete shortly after the introduction of a much more capable ATB design. Germani, Clara, ed. "Former defense chief raps B-1 bomber plan." Christian Science Monitor, 21 September 1981. Retrieved: 28 July 2010. The primary argument in favor of the B-1 was its large conventional payload, and that its takeoff performance allowed it to operate with a credible bombload from a much wider variety of airfields. The air force spread production subcontracts across many congressional districts, making the aircraft more popular on Capitol Hill. 

B-1A #1 was disassembled and used for radar testing at the Rome Air Development Center at the former Griffiss Air Force Base, New York. B-1As #2 and #4 were modified to include B-1B systems. The first B-1B was completed and began flight testing in March 1983. The first production B-1B was rolled out on 4 September 1984 and first flew on 18 October 1984. The 100th and final B-1B was delivered on 2 May 1988; before the last B-1B was delivered, the air force had determined that the aircraft was vulnerable to Soviet air defenses. Dao 2001, p. 1. 

==Design==

===Overview===
The B-1 has a blended wing body configuration, with variable-sweep wing, four turbofan engines, and triangular fin control surfaces. The wings can sweep from 15 degrees to 67.5 degrees (full forward to full sweep). Forward-swept wing settings are used for takeoff, landings and high-altitude maximum cruise. Aft-swept wing settings are used in high subsonic and supersonic flight. The B-1's variable-sweep wings and thrust-to-weight ratio provide it with better takeoff performance, allowing it to use more runways than previous bombers. The length of the aircraft presented a flexing problem due to air turbulence at low altitude. To alleviate this, Rockwell included small triangular fin control surfaces or vanes near the nose on the B-1. The B-1's Structural Mode Control System rotates the vanes automatically to counteract turbulence and smooth out the ride. Wykes, J. H. "AIAA-1972-772, B-1 Structural Mode Control System." American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 9 August 1972. Retrieved: 3 August 2011. 

alt= A rear view of a B-1B at Royal International Air Tattoo air show in 2004

Unlike the B-1A, the B-1B cannot reach Mach 2+ speeds; its maximum speed is Mach 1.25 (about 950 mph or 1,530 km/h at altitude), but its low-level speed increased to Mach 0.92 (700 mph, 1,130 km/h). The speed of the current version of the aircraft is limited by the need to avoid damage to its structure and air intakes. To help lower its radar cross section (RCS), the B-1B uses serpentine air intake ducts and fixed intake ramps, which limit its speed compared to the B-1A. Vanes in the intake ducts serve to deflect and shield radar emissions from the highly reflective engine compressor blades. 

The B-1A's engine was modified slightly to produce the GE F101-102 for the B-1B, with an emphasis on durability, and increased efficiency. The core of this engine has since been re-used in several other engine designs, including the GE F110 which has seen use in the F-14 Tomcat, F-15K/SG variants and most recent versions of the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon. "F110 Family." GE Aviation. Retrieved: 25 January 2010 It is also the basis for the non-afterburning GE F118 used in the B-2 Spirit and the U-2S. The F101 engine was the basis for the core of the extremely popular CFM56 civil engine, which can be found on some versions of practically every small-to-medium sized airliner. "CFM delivers 20,000th engine". CFM International. Retrieved: 25 January 2010. The nose gear cover door has controls for the auxiliary power units (APUs), which allow for quick starts of the APUs upon order to scramble. 

===Avionics===
alt=The interior of a B-1B cockpit at night
The B-1's main computer is the IBM AP-101, which is also used on the Space Shuttle orbiter and the B-52 bomber. Ch4-3 The computer is programmed with the JOVIAL programming language. Jovial to smooth U.S. Air Force shift to Ada. (processing language) |HighBeam Business: Arrive Prepared The Lancer's offensive avionics include the Westinghouse (now Northrop Grumman) AN/APQ-164 forward-looking offensive passive electronically scanned array radar set with electronic beam steering (and a fixed antenna pointed downward for reduced radar observability), synthetic aperture radar, ground moving target indicator (GMTI), and terrain-following radar modes, Doppler navigation, radar altimeter, and an inertial navigation suite. "AN/APQ-164 B-1B Radar". Northrop Grumman. Retrieved: 25 January 2010. The B-1B Block D upgrade added a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver beginning in 1995. 

The B-1's defensive electronics include the Eaton AN/ALQ-161A radar warning and defensive jamming equipment, which has three sets of antennas; one at the front base of each wing and the third rear-facing in the tail radome. The ALQ-161 is linked to a total of eight AN/ALE-49 flare dispensers located on top behind the canopy, which are handled by the AN/ASQ-184 avionics management system. Each AN/ALE-49 dispenser has a capacity of 12 MJU-23A/B flares. The MJU-23A/B flare is one of the world's largest infrared countermeasure flares at a weight of over 3.3 lb. Humphries, J. A. and D. E. Miller. "AIAA-1997-2963: B-1B/MJU-23 flare strike test program." American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, 33rd, Seattle, Washington, 69 July 1997. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. The B-1 has also been equipped to carry the ALE-50 Towed Decoy System. "B-1B USAF fact sheet." U.S. Air Force. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

Also aiding the B-1's survivability is its relatively low radar cross-section (RCS). Although not technically a stealth aircraft in a comprehensive sense, thanks to the aircraft's structure, serpentine intake paths and use of radar-absorbent material its RCS is about 1/50th that of the B-52 (probably about 26 ft or 2.4 m), although the Lancer is not substantially smaller in mass than the Stratofortress. Cunningham, Jim. "The New Old Threat: Fighter Upgrades and What They Mean for the USAF", p. 7. Illinois State University, 3 December 1997. 

===Upgrades===
alt=Sideview of a B-1B's nose section, which features a Sniper XR pod mounted on its chin

The B-1 has been upgraded since production, beginning with the "Conventional Mission Upgrade Program" (CMUP) This program added a new MIL-STD-1760 smart-weapons interface to enable the use of precision-guided conventional weapons. CMUP began with Block A, which was the standard B-1B with the capability to deliver non-precision gravity bombs. Block B brought an improved Synthetic Aperture Radar, and some upgrades to the Defensive Countermeasures System and was fielded in 1995. Block C provided an "enhanced capability" for delivery of up to 30 cluster bomb units (CBUs) per sortie with modifications made to 50 bomb racks. 

Block D added a "Near Precision Capability" for B-1 aircrews to accurately put bombs on target with improved weapons and targeting systems, and added advanced secure communications capabilities. The first part of the electronic countermeasures upgrade added Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM), ALE-50 Towed Decoy System, and anti-jam radios. "Boeing Completes Block E Avionics Upgrade of B-1 Bomber Fleet." Boeing, 4 December 1998. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. Adams, Charlotte. "Building Blocks to Upgrade to B-1B." Avionics Magazine, 1 August 2002. Retrieved: 24 June 2010. Block E upgraded the avionics computers and incorporated the Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser (WCMD), the AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapon (JSOW) and the AGM-158 JASSM (Joint Air to Surface Standoff Munition), substantially improving the bomber's capability. Upgrades were completed in September 2006. "Boeing 2006 Block E Upgrades." Boeing, 27 September 2006. Retrieved: 14 August 2010. Block F was the Defensive Systems Upgrade Program (DSUP) to improve the aircraft's electronic countermeasures and jamming capabilities, but it was canceled in December 2002 due to cost overruns and schedule slips. "Block F Upgrades." US Air Force, 21 January 2003. Retrieved: 24 June 2010. 

In 2007 the Sniper XR targeting pod was integrated on the B-1 fleet. The pod is mounted on an external hardpoint at the aircraft's chin near the forward bomb bay. Hernandez, Jason. "419th FLTS demonstrates Sniper pod capability." US Air Force, 23 February 2007. Following accelerated testing, the Sniper pod was fielded in summer 2008. La Rue, Nori. "B-1 Sniper pod aims to hit summer target." US Air Force, 4 June 2008. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. Future precision munitions include the GBU-39 Small Diameter Bomb. Wicke, Russell. "ACC declares small diameter bomb initially operational." US Air Force, 5 October 2006. In 2011, the Air Force was considering upgrading the B-1s with multiple ejector racks so that they can carry three times as many smaller JDAMs than they currently can. Rivezzo, Charles. "B-1B Lancer upgrade will triple payload." USAF, 11 April 2011. Retrieved: 31 August 2011. 

In 2005, a program began to upgrade crew stations and integrate data linking. Young, Susan H. "Gallery of USAF Weapons." Air Force Magazine, May 2009. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. A B-1 equipped with the Fully Integrated Data Link (FIDL) first flew on 29 July 2009; the FIDL enables electronic data sharing, eliminating the need to enter information between systems by hand. Maull, Lisa and Forrest Gossett. "Boeing B-1 Upgraded With Fully Integrated Data Link Completes 1st Flight." Boeing, 13 August 2009. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. In January 2013, Boeing delivered the first Integrated Battle Station (IBS) equipped B-1. This replaced several displays with new multi-function color display units, introduced a Central Integrated Test System and a newer model of Aircraft Performance Monitoring Computer. "US Air Force Receives 1st B-1 Equipped with Boeing Integrated Battle Station." "Boeing Awarded B-1B Upgrade Contract". September 2011. AirForces Monthly. Issue 282. p. 14. In June 2012, the B-1Bs are receiving Sustainment-Block 16 upgrades to add Link 16 networking and digital flight instrumentation. Rivezzo, Charles V. "New upgrades revitalize B-1B Lancers." USAF, 2 June 2012. 

In February 2014, work began on a multi-year upgrade of 62 B-1Bs, scheduled to be completed by 2019. The vertical situation display upgrade (VDSU) shall replace existing flight instruments with multifunction color displays, a second display shall aid threat evasion and targeting, and act as a back-up display. Additional memory capacity is to be installed for the diagnostics database. Procurement and installation of the IBS upgrades is expected to cost $918 million, research and engineering costs are estimated at $391 million. Other additions are to replace the two spinning mass gyroscopic inertial navigation system with ring laser gyroscopic systems and a GPS antenna, replacement of the APQ-164 radar, and a new attitude indicator. Air Force Begins Massive B-1B Overhaul - Defensetech.org, 21 February 2014 

==Operational history==

===Strategic Air Command===
The second B-1B, "The Star of Abilene", was the first B-1B delivered to the USAF Strategic Air Command (SAC) in June 1985. Initial operational capability was reached on 1 October 1986 and the B-1B was placed on nuclear alert status. The B-1 received the official name "Lancer" on 15 March 1990. However, the bomber has been commonly called the "Bone"; a nickname that appears to stem from an early newspaper article on the aircraft wherein its name was phonetically spelled out as "B-ONE" with the hyphen inadvertently omitted. 

A dismantled decommissioned B-1 being transported by flatbed truck
In late 1990 engine fires in two Lancers caused the grounding of the fleet. The cause was traced back to problems in the first-stage fan, the aircraft were placed on "limited alert"; in other words, they were grounded unless a nuclear war broke out. Following inspections and repairs they were returned to duty beginning on 6 February 1991. B-1 aircrew logbook entry. Due to the engine problems, the B-1B was effectively sidelined in the First Gulf War. Dao 2001, p. 1. 

Originally designed strictly for nuclear war, the B-1's development as an effective conventional bomber was delayed until the 1990s. The collapse of the Soviet Union had brought the B-1's nuclear role into question, leading to President George H. W. Bush ordering a $3 billion conventional refit. Dao 2001, p. 4. By 1991, the B-1 had a fledgling conventional capability, forty of them able to drop the 500 lb Mk-82 General Purpose (GP) bomb, although mostly from low altitude. Despite being cleared for this role, the problems with the engines precluded their use in Operation Desert Storm. B-1s were primarily reserved for strategic nuclear strike missions at this time, providing the role of airborne nuclear deterrent against the Soviet Union. The B-52 was more suited to the role of conventional warfare and it was used by coalition forces instead. 

After the inactivation of Strategic Air Command (SAC) and the establishment of the Air Combat Command (ACC) in 1992, the B-1 developed a greater conventional weapons capability. Part of this development was the start-up of the U.S. Air Force Weapons School B-1 Division. Scott, Ed. "JDAM Course Ushers B-1 Students Into New Era". Program Manager, 1 November 1999. Retrieved: 14 August 2010. In 1994, two additional B-1 bomb wings were also created in the Air National Guard, with former fighter wings in the Kansas Air National Guard and the Georgia Air National Guard converting to the aircraft. By the mid-1990s, the B-1 could employ GP weapons as well as various CBUs. By the end of the 1990s, with the advent of the "Block D" upgrade, the B-1 boasted a full array of guided and unguided munitions. The B-1B no longer carries nuclear weapons; its nuclear capability was disabled by 1995 with the removal of nuclear arming and fuzing hardware. 

===Conventional role===
alt=Top forward view of gray aircraft with wings swept forward banking right. Underneath are strips of white clouds and uninhabited terrain.

The B-1 was first used in combat in support of operations against Iraq, during Operation Desert Fox in December 1998, employing unguided GP weapons. B-1s have been subsequently used in Operation Allied Force (Kosovo) and, most notably, in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The B-1's role in Operation Allied Force has been criticized as the aircraft was not used until after enemy defenses had been suppressed by aircraft like the older B-52 it was intended to replace. The B-1 has deployed an array of conventional weapons in war zones, most notably the GBU-31, 2000 lb Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM). In the first six months of Operation Enduring Freedom, eight B-1s dropped almost 40 percent of aerial ordnance, including some 3,900 JDAMs. JDAM munitions were heavily used by the B-1 over Iraq, notably on 7 April 2003 in an unsuccessful attempt to kill Saddam Hussein and his two sons. At the height of the Iraq War, a B-1 was permanently airborne to provide rapid precision bombardment upon important targets as intelligence identified them. During Operation Enduring Freedom, the B-1 was able to raise its mission capable rate to 79%. 

The B-1 has higher survivability and speed when compared to the older B-52, which it was intended to replace. It also holds 61 FAI world records for speed, payload, distance, and time-to-climb in different aircraft weight classes. "History  B-1 Lancer Bomber." Boeing. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. In November 1983, three B-1Bs set a long distance record for the aircraft, which demonstrated its ability to conduct extended mission lengths to strike anywhere in the world and return to base without any stops. The National Aeronautic Association recognized the B-1B for completing one of the 10 most memorable record flights for 1994. 

Of the 100 B-1Bs built, 93 remained in 2000 after losses in accidents. In June 2001, the Pentagon sought to place a third of its then fleet of 93 into storage; this proposal resulted in several U.S. Air National Guard officers and members of Congress lobbying against the proposal, including the drafting of an amendment to prevent such cuts. The 2001 proposal was intended to allow money to be diverted to further upgrades to the remaining B-1Bs, such as computer modernization. In 2003, accompanied by the removal of B-1Bs from the two bomb wings in the Air National Guard, the USAF decided to retire 33 aircraft to concentrate its budget on maintaining availability of remaining B-1Bs. "B-1 bomber's final flight." Arizona Star, 21 August 2002. Retrieved: 14 August 2010. In 2004 a new appropriation bill called for some of the retired aircraft to return to service, Klamper, Amy. "Lawmakers look after home military installations." govexec.com, 25 June 2004. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. and the USAF returned seven mothballed bombers to service to increase the fleet to 67 aircraft. Mehuron, Tamar A. "USAF Almanac: Facts and Figures" (data as of 30 September 2004). Air Force Magazine, May 2005. Retrieved: 3 July 2011. 

alt=Ammunition and yellow bombs lay as two crew member, using lift truck, transfer them to a gray B-1 parked nearby in the background

On 14 July 2007, the Associated Press reported on the growing USAF presence in Iraq as a result of "surge" in forces. Also mentioned is the reintroduction of B-1Bs to be a close-at-hand "platform" to support Coalition ground forces. Hanley, Charles J. "Air Force Quietly Building Iraq Presence." commondreams.org, 14 July 2007. Retrieved: 30 June 2011. B-1s have been used in Iraq and Afghanistan. Since 2008 B-1s have been used there in an "armed overwatch" role. They loiter over the region maintaining surveillance, ready to deliver guided bombs in support of ground troops if contacted. Wicke, Tech. Sgt. Russell, "B-1 performs as never envisioned after 20 years." US Air Force, 17 April 2008. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. Door 2010, pp. 4045. 

The B-1B underwent a series of flight tests using a 50/50 mix of synthetic and petroleum fuel; on 19 March 2008, a B-1B from Dyess Air Force Base, Texas, became the first US Air Force aircraft to fly at supersonic speed using a synthetic fuel during a flight over Texas and New Mexico. This was conducted as part of an ongoing Air Force testing and certification program to reduce reliance on traditional oil sources. Bates, Matthew. "B-1B achieves first supersonic flight using synthetic fuel." Air Force News, 20 March 2008. On 4 August 2008, a B-1B flew the first Sniper Advanced Targeting Pod equipped combat sortie where the crew successfully targeted enemy ground forces and dropped a GBU-38 guided bomb in Afghanistan. Pate, Capt. Kristen. "Sniper ATP-equipped B-1B has combat first." US Air Force, 11 August 2008. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

In March 2011, B-1Bs from Ellsworth Air Force Base attacked undisclosed targets in Libya as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn. "Ellsworth Airmen join Operation Odyssey Dawn." Rapid City Journal, 29 March 2011. The USAF had 66 B-1Bs in service in September 2012, split between four squadrons organized into two Bomb Wings: the 7th Bomb Wing at Dyess AFB, Texas, and the 28th Bomb Wing at Ellsworth AFB, South Dakota. "The Air Force in Facts and Figures  2013 USAF Almanac." Air Force Magazine, Journal of the Air Force Association, Vol. 96, Issue 5, May 2013. 

With upgrades to keep the B-1 viable, the air force may keep the bomber in service until approximately 2038. Hebert, Adam J. "The 2018 Bomber and Its Friends." Air Force magazine, October 2006. Retrieved: 14 August 2010. Despite upgrades, the B-1 has repair and cost issues resulting from its age. For every flight hour it needs 48.4 hours of repair. The fuel, repairs and other needs for a 12-hour mission costs $720,000 as of 2010. Shachtman, Noah. "The Air Force Needs a Serious Upgrade," Brookings Institution, 15 July 2010. Retrieved: 31 August 2011. The $63,000 cost per flight hour is, however, less than the $72,000 for the B-52 and the $135,000 of the B-2. Axe, David. "Why Can't the Air Force Build an Affordable Plane?" The Atlantic, 26 March 2012. Retrieved: 30 June 2012. In June 2010, senior US Air Force officials met to consider retiring the entire fleet to meet budget cuts. "Budget cutting axe may fall on the U.S. bomber force." Reporter News. Retrieved: 25 July 2010. It is expected to be supplemented by the Next-Generation Bombers beginning in the 2020s. Gosan, Angelo. "Neugebauer fighting to preserve B1 program." Gosanangelo.com, 5 May 2011. Retrieved: 31 August 2011. In the meantime, its "capabilities are particularly well-suited to the vast distances and unique challenges of the Pacific region, and we'll continue to invest in, and rely on, the B-1 in support of the focus on the Pacific" as part of President Obama's "Pivot to East Asia". Brook,Tom Vanden. "B-1 bomber mission shifts from Afghanistan to China, Pacific." USA Today, 11 May 2012. 

In August 2012, the 9th Expeditionary Bomb Squadron returned from a six-month tour in Afghanistan. Their nine B-1Bs flew 770 sorties, the most of any B-1B squadron on a single deployment. The squadron spent 9,500 hours airborne, while having one of its bombers in the air at all times. They accounted for a quarter of the combat aircraft sorties over the country while there and averaged 23 requests for air support per day. "The 24/7 Bone Over Afghanistan." Strategypage.com, 15 August 2012. On 4 September 2013, a B-1B participated in a maritime evaluation exercise, deploying munitions such as laser-guided 500 lb GBU-54 bombs, 500 lb and 2,000 lb Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM), and Long Range Anti-Ship Missiles (LRASM). The aim was to detect and engage several small craft using existing weapons and tactics developed from conventional warfare against ground targets; the B-1 is seen as a useful asset for maritime duties such as patrolling shipping lanes. U.S. Air Force tests B-1B Lancer bomber for maritime environment & anti-ship missions - Navyrecognition.com, 19 September 2013 

==Variants==
alt=

;B-1A
The B-1A was the original B-1 design with variable engine intakes and Mach 2.2 top speed. Four prototypes were built; no production units were manufactured. Donald 1997, p. 723. 
;B-1B
The B-1B is a revised B-1 design with reduced radar signature and a top speed of Mach 1.25. It was otherwise optimized for low-level penetration. A total of 100 B-1Bs were produced. 

;B-1R
The B-1R is a proposed upgrade of existing B-1B aircraft. Lewis, Paul and Erik Simonsen. "Offering Unique Solutions for Global Strike Force." All Systems Go, (Boeing) Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2004. (copy on Archive.org) Retrieved: 8 October 2009. The B-1R (R for "regional") would be fitted with advanced radars, air-to-air missiles, and new Pratt & Whitney F119 engines. This variant would have a top speed of Mach 2.2, but with 20% less range. Hebert, Adam J. "Long-Range Strike in a Hurry." Air Force Magazine, November 2004. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 

Existing external hardpoints would be modified to allow multiple conventional weapons to be carried, increasing overall loadout. For air-to-air defense, an Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) radar would be added and some existing hardpoints modified to carry air-to-air missiles. If needed the B-1R could escape from unfavorable air-to-air encounters with its Mach 2+ speed. Few aircraft are currently capable of sustained speeds over Mach 2. 

==Operators==
alt=Front view of B-1 parked on ramp at night. Nearby yellow flood lights illuminate the area. In the background are buildings
alt=
alt=Gray aircraft before landing, flying left, with gears extended. Green grass make up the foreground. Buildings and communication towers are in the background

;
United States Air Force
:Strategic Air Command 1985-92
:Air Combat Command 1992-present
*7th Bomb Wing - Dyess AFB, Texas
::9th Bomb Squadron 1993-present
::13th Bomb Squadron 2000-05
::28th Bomb Squadron 1994-present
::337th Bomb Squadron 1993-94
*28th Bomb Wing - Ellsworth AFB, South Dakota
::34th Bomb Squadron 1994-97, 2002-present
::37th Bomb Squadron 1986-present
::77th Bomb Squadron 1985-95, 1997-2002
*53d Test and Evaluation Group - Nellis AFB, Nevada
::337th Test and Evaluation Squadron (Dyess AFB, Texas) 2004-present
*57th Wing - Nellis AFB, Nevada 
::77th Weapons Squadron (Dyess) 2003-present
*96th Bomb Wing - Dyess AFB, Texas
::337th Bomb Squadron 1985-93
::338th Combat Crew Training Squadron 1986-93
::4018th Combat Crew Training Squadron 1985-86
*319th Bomb Wing - Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota 1987-94
::46th Bomb Squadron 
*366th Wing - Mountain Home AFB, Idaho 1997-2002
::34th Bomb Squadron 
*384th Bomb Wing - McConnell AFB, Kansas 1987-94
::28th Bomb Squadron
:Air National Guard
*116th Bomb Wing - Robins AFB. Georgia 1996-2002
::128th Bomb Squadron
*184th Bomb Wing - McConnell AFB, Kansas 1994-2002
::127th Bomb Squadron
:Air Force Flight Test Center - Edwards AFB, California
*412th Operations Group 1989-92
::410th Flight Test Squadron
*412th Test Wing 1992-present
::419th Flight Test Squadron
*6510th Test Wing 1974-89
::6519th Flight Test Squadron

==Aircraft on display==
;B-1A
*74-0160 - Wings Over the Rockies Museum at the former Lowry Air Force Base in Denver, Colorado. "B-1A Lancer/74-160." Wings Over The Rockies Air & Space Museum. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. 
*74-0174 - Strategic Air and Space Museum in Ashland, Nebraska. This aircraft has conventional ejection seats and other features used on the B-1B variant. "B-1A Lancer/76-174." Strategic Air Command Museum. Retrieved: 28 January 2013. 
;B-1B
*83-0065 Star of Abilene - Dyess Linear Air Park at Dyess Air Force Base in Texas. This was the first aircraft delivered to the U.S. Air Force. Dyess AFB is home to one of two active Air Force B-1B wings. "B-1B Lancer/83-0065." joebaugher.com. Retrieved: 20 May 2013. 
*83-0066 Ole Puss - Heritage Park at Mountain Home AFB in Idaho with wheels in the wells. "B-1B Lancer/83-0066." joebaugher.com. Retrieved: 20 May 2013. 
*83-0067 Texas Raider - South Dakota Air and Space Museum at Ellsworth Air Force Base in South Dakota. Ellsworth AFB is home to one of two active Air Force B-1B wings. "B-1B Lancer/83-0067." sdairandspacemuseum.com. Retrieved: 10 October 2010. 
*83-0068 Spuds - Reflections of Freedom Air Park at McConnell Air Force Base in Wichita, Kansas, a former Air Force and Air National Guard B-1B base. "B-1B Lancer/83-0068." joebaugher.com. Retrieved: 20 May 2013. 
*83-0069 Silent Penetrator - Museum of Aviation at Robins Air Force Base in Warner Robins, Georgia, a former Air National Guard B-1B base. This aircraft was the sixth B-1 produced, and was delivered to the 96th Bomb Wing at Dyess AFB, Texas on 13 March 1986. This aircraft arrived at Robins AFB in September 2002. Robins AFB was previously home to one of two Air National Guard B-1B wings. "B-1B Lancer/83-0069." Museum of Aviation. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. 
*83-0070 7 Wishes - Hill Aerospace Museum at Hill Air Force Base in Ogden, Utah. "B-1B Lancer/83-0070." Hill Aerospace Museum. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. 
*83-0071 Spit Fire - near the main gate at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma. This aircraft was one of two that suffered an in-flight engine failure in 1990 that led to grounding of the fleet. "B-1B Lancer/83-0071." joebaugher.com. Retrieved: 20 May 2013. 
*84-0051 - National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB near Dayton, Ohio. It is displayed in the Museum's Cold War Gallery, and replaces the B-1A (74-0174) formerly on display. "B-1B Lancer/84-0051." National Museum of the United States Air Force. Retrieved: 31 July 2010. 

==Accidents and incidents==
Ten B-1s have been lost due to accidents. Between 1984 and 2001, 17 crew members and people on board have been killed in B-1 accidents. 

===Crashes===
* On 29 August 1984, B-1A (AF Ser. No. 74-0159) stalled and crashed while performing minimum control speed tests at low altitude. The crew used the escape capsule to leave the bomber, but the parachutes deployed improperly, causing the capsule to hit nose down. The impact killed the B-1's pilot, Rockwell test pilot Doug Benefield, and seriously injured two other crew members. 
* In September 1987, B-1B (s/n 84-0052) from the 96th Bomb Wing, 338th Bomb Squadron, Dyess AFB crashed near La Junta, Colorado while flying on a low-level training route. This was the only B-1B crash to occur with six crew members aboard. The two crew members in jump seats, and one of the four crew members in ejection seats perished. The root cause of the accident was thought to be a bird strike on a wing's leading edge during the low-level flight. The impact was severe enough to sever fuel and hydraulic lines on one side of the aircraft, the other side's engines functioned long enough to allow for ejection. The B-1B fleet was later modified to protect these supply lines. 
* In November 1988, B-1B (s/n 85-0063) from the 96th Bomb Wing, 337th Bomb Squadron, Dyess AFB crashed near Tye, Texas after a fire broke out above the left engines. All four crew members successfully ejected from the aircraft. 
* In November 1988, B-1B (s/n 85-0076) from the 28th Bomb Wing, 37th Bomb Squadron, Ellsworth AFB crashed short of the runway at Ellsworth AFB during adverse weather. All four crew members ejected successfully. 
* In November 1992, B-1B (s/n 86-0106) from the 7th Bomb Wing, 337th Bomb Squadron, Dyess AFB, Texas, flying on a low-level training flight crashed into a mountain near Van Horn, Texas. All four members of the crew were killed, and the cause was attributed to pilot error. 
* In September 1997, B-1B (s/n 85-0078) from the 28th Bomb Wing, 37th Bomb Squadron, Ellsworth AFB, South Dakota, flying in the Powder River Military Operating Area crashed 25 mi north of Alzada, Montana. All four members of the crew were killed. "Air Force suspends Monday's combat training flights." CNN, 20 September 1997. Retrieved: 16 July 2011. The review board found that the bomber struck the ground while performing a defensive maneuver. "B-1 bomber crash blamed on crew." CNN, 9 September 1997. Retrieved: 16 July 2011. 
* On 18 February 1998, B-1B (s/n 84-0057) from the 7th Bomb Wing, Dyess AFB, Texas crashed near Marion, Kentucky when a fire detected by a cockpit instrument panel shut down the aircraft's power. "4 survive B-1B bomber crash in Kentucky." CNN, 18 February 1998. Retrieved: 30 June 2011. All four crew members were able to eject and were rescued safely. "Crew parachutes from B-1B bomber just before crash." CNN, February 1998. Retrieved: 16 July 2011. 
* In December 2001, B-1B (s/n 86-0114) from the 28th Bomb Wing, 37th Bomb Squadron, Ellsworth AFB, South Dakota, was lost over the Indian Ocean. All four crew members successfully ejected and were rescued. Morris, Ted. "Call Sign "ICECUBE 44"." zianet.com, 24 August 2010. Retrieved: 30 June 2011. The bomber was flying en route to a long-range combat mission over Afghanistan when the crew declared an in-flight emergency. The pilot, Captain William Steele, attributed the crash to "multiple malfunctions" causing the bomber to go "out of control". "Bomber Crew Rescued from Sea." USA Today, 12 December 2001. Retrieved: 18 July 2006. Because of the water's depth, the structural data collector (SDC) or "Black Box" was not recovered and the cause was not positively determined. The aircraft had recently returned from a routine Phase Inspection, and was on its first combat mission after returning to the island of Diego Garcia in the British Indian Ocean Territory. This was the first B-1B to be lost during combat operations. "Aircraft Accident Investigation: B-1 (S/N 86-0114)." Air Force Legal Operations Agency, 12 December 2001. 
* On 4 April 2008, B-1B (s/n 86-0116) lost hydraulic power while taxiing, then crashed into a concrete barrier and caught fire at Al Udeid AB, Qatar. The crew safely evacuated the aircraft. The B-1B was carrying multiple bombs at the time, all but two of which detonated during the fire. The aircraft was destroyed. Rolfsen, Bruce. "Brake failure caused B-1B crash in Qatar." Air Force Times, 6 October 2008; includes photographs and video. Retrieved: 8 October 2009. 
* On 19 August 2013, B-1B out of Ellsworth Air Force Base, South Dakota crashed in a remote area near Broadus, Montana. All four crew members survived by ejecting before the aircraft crashed. B-1 bomber crashes in Montana - Stripes.com, 19 August 2013 A report found that the crash was due to a mechanical failure leading to a fuel leak and explosions. 

===Other accidents and notable incidents===
alt=Black aircraft trailed by column of black smoke and fire on runway as fire trucks close in on the flame from behind

* In October 1990, while flying a training route in eastern Colorado, B-1B (s/n 86-0128) from the 384th Bomb Wing, 28th Bomb Squadron, McConnell AFB, experienced an explosion as the engines reached full power without afterburners. Fire on the aircraft's left was spotted. The #1 engine was shut down and its fire extinguisher was activated. The accident investigation determined that the engine had suffered catastrophic failure, engine blades had cut through the engine mounts and the engine became detached from the aircraft. 
* In December 1990, B-1B (s/n 83-0071) from the 96th Bomb Wing, 337th Bomb Squadron, Dyess AFB, Texas, experienced a jolt that caused the #3 engine to shut down with its fire extinguisher activating. This event, coupled with the October 1990 engine incident, led to a 50+ day grounding of the B-1Bs not on nuclear alert status. The problem was eventually traced back to problems in the first-stage fan, and all B-1Bs were equipped with modified engines. 
* In June 1994, B-1B (s/n 84-0057) from the 7th Bomb Wing, 9th Bomb Squadron, made an emergency divert to Rhein-Main Air Base, Germany due to a wing sweep malfunction. The crew made a high speed landing at Rhein-Main and stopped 100 feet short of the end of the runway. Afterward the overheated brakes led to a fire of the right main landing gear, but was quickly extinguished. Dorr, Robert F. 7th Bombardment Group/Wing, 1918-1995, pp. 2245. Paducah, Kentucky. : Turner Publishing Company, 1996. ISBN 1563112787. 
* On 15 September 2005, B-1B (s/n 85-0066) was extensively damaged by fire while landing at Andersen Air Force Base, Guam. The investigation into the incident concluded that leaking hydraulic fluid and sparks from a wheel being gouged caused a fire to start in the aircraft's right main landing gear as it touched down. The resulting fire damaged the B-1's right wing, engine nacelle, airframe and landing gear, leading to an estimated repair cost of more than $32 million. Stemple, Master Sgt. John. "Andersen, Tinker rebuild B-1." andersen.af.mil, 12 March 2007. Retrieved: 25 July 2010. 
* On 8 May 2006, B-1B (s/n 86-0132) from the 7th Bomb Wing, 9th Bomb Squadron, Dyess AFB, Texas, landed "gear-up" during recovery from an 11-hour ferry flight to the island of Diego Garcia. A resulting fire was quickly extinguished and the crew escaped through the top hatch with only a minor back injury to the co-pilot. The air force investigation concluded that the crew "forgot to lower the landing gear" based on the following reasons: 1) co-pilot task oversaturation, 2) co-pilot's wanting to complete a long mission, 3) neither pilot completed the landing checklist, 4) co-pilot's belief that the pilot had lowered the landing gear when he had not, 5) pilot had turned over control to the co-pilot on the final approach and the pilot had reported to base that the landing gear was down when it was not - indicator lights showing the landing gear was still up were working and apparently ignored. As a result the B-1B impacted and slid on the runway, which caused approximately $8 million of damage to the aircraft and runway. "Report: pilot error caused B-1B crash." Air Combat Command Public Affairs, USAF, 18 September 2006. Retrieved: 1 December 2006. After repairs, the B-1B returned to service in 2007.

==Specifications (B-1B)==
alt=Three sketched diagrams showing the front, top and side views of the B-1. The top view, in particular, shows the maximum sweep angles of the wings
alt=A flightdeck, dominated by a mix of new and analogue instruments. On both sides are control yokes. Light enters through the forward windows
B-1B forward bomb bay fitted with a rotary launcher

 B-1B Lancer internal weapons load options 
 Bomb rack & Stores \"The Weapons File \" Air Armament Center Bay 1 Bay 2 Bay 3 Total 
 conventional 
 CBM2816 to 3513 lb 1 1 1 
 *Mk-82 *Mk-82 AIR *Mk-36 *Mk-62 28 28 28 84 
 conventional 
 SECBM(CBM w/ TMD upgrade)2816 lb empty 1 1 1 
 *CBU-87 *CBU-89 *CBU-97 *CBU-103 *CBU-104 *CBU-105 10 10 10 30 
 GBU-38 6 6 3 15 
 multi-purpose 
 MPRL1300 to 2055 lb 1 1 1 
 *Mk-84 *GBU-31 *AGM-154 *AGM-158 8 8 8 24 
 Mk-65 naval mines 4 4 4 12 
 *4-pack GBU-39 *6-pack GBU-39 8 8 8 96 or 144 
 multi-purpose (mixed) 
 MPRL(MER upgrade) \"B-1B Lancer upgrade will triple payload\" US Air Force News, April 11, 2011 1 1 1 
 *GBU-38, GBU-32, GBU-31 4 4 4 36 
 GBU-38 16 16 16 48 
 ferry/range extension 
 fuel tank2975 gal \"Uncovering the Rockwell B-1B Lancer\" Willy Peeters, Daco Publications, ISBN 978-9080674776, 2006 1 1 1 39157 gal Technical Order 00-105E-9 Revision 11, February 1st, 2006. 
 nuclear (uniform)(out of use) 
 *MPRL1300 to 2055 lb 1 1 1 
 B28 \"Encyclopedia of Modern U.S. Military Weapons\", Berkley Hardcover; 1st edition, August 1, 1995,ISBN 978-0425147818 4 4 4 12 
 *AGM-69 *B61 *B83 8 8 8 24 
 nuclear (mixed)(out of use) \"The B-1B Bomber and Options for hancements\" Congressional Budget Office, August, 1988 
 *CSRL 1 
 AGM-86B small fuel tank8 8 

 external weapons load options(mostly not in use due to RCS concerns) 
 Bomb rack & Stores FWD Stations 1 & 2 INT Stations 3-6 AFT Stations 7 & 8 Total 
 nuclear (out of use) 
 dual-pylon 2 2 2 
 single-pylon 2 
 *AGM-86B *B-61 2x2 2x2 + 2 2x2 14(restricted to 12 under SALT II) 
 conventional (uniform) 
 Mk-82 2x6 2x6 + 2x6 2x6 44 
 targeting \"Sniper ATP-equipped B-1B has combat first\" US Air Force News, August 11, 2008 
 Pylon884 lb 1 (right station) 
 Sniper XR targeting pod 1 (right station) 1440 lb 
 ferry/range extension \"NA 95-1210 B-1B FACT BOOK\" North American Aircraft Rockwell International, July 20th, 1995 
 fuel tank923 gal 2 2 2 65538 gal 

==Notable appearances in media==

==See also==

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

===Bibliography===

* Casil, Amy Sterling. The B-1 Lancer. New York: Rosen, 2003. ISBN 0-8239-3871-9.
* Dao, James. "Much-Maligned B-1 Bomber Proves Hard to Kill." The New York Times, 1 August 2001.
* Donald, David, ed. "Rockwell B-1B". The Complete Encyclopedia of World Aircraft. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1997. ISBN 0-7607-0592-5.
* .
* 
* .
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Sorrels, Charles A. U.S. Cruise Missile Programs: Development, Deployment, and Implications for Arms Control. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983. ISBN 0-08-030527-X.
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* B-1B Fact Sheet and B-1 System Program Office on USAF web site
* B-1B product page and B-1B history page on Boeing.com
* B-1 history page on NASA/Langley Research Center site
* B-1 page on GlobalSecurity.org, Detailed History, Development and Data
* B-1B Lancer USAF 20-year history article
* Boeing Wins $45 Million U.S. Air Force B-1B Upgrade Contract
* B-1B Lancer Long-Range Strategic Bomber USA Images

B-001



[[Book of Common Prayer]]

The Book of Common Prayer is the short title of a number of related prayer books used in the Anglican Communion, as well as by the Continuing Anglican, "Anglican realignment" and other Anglican churches. The original book, published in 1549 , in the reign of Edward VI, was a product of the English Reformation following the break with Rome. Prayer books, unlike books of prayers, contain the words of structured (or liturgical) services of worship. The work of 1549 was the first prayer book to include the complete forms of service for daily and Sunday worship in English. It contained Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer, the Litany, and Holy Communion and also the occasional services in full: the orders for Baptism, Confirmation, Marriage, 'prayers to be said with the sick' and a Funeral service. It also set out in full the "propers" (that is the parts of the service which varied week by week or, at times, daily throughout the Church's Year): the collects and the epistle and gospel readings for the Sunday Communion Service. Old Testament and New Testament readings for daily prayer were specified in tabular format as were the Psalms; and canticles, mostly biblical, that were provided to be said or sung between the readings .

The 1549 book was soon succeeded by a more reformed revision in 1552 under the same editorial hand, that of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. It was used only for a few months, as after Edward VI's death in 1553, his half-sister Mary I restored Roman Catholic worship. She herself died in 1558, and in 1559 Elizabeth I reintroduced the 1552 book with a few modifications to make it acceptable to more traditionally minded worshippers, notably the inclusion of the words of administration from the 1549 Communion Service alongside those of 1552.

In 1604, James I ordered some further changes, the most significant of these being the addition to the Catechism of a section on the Sacraments. Following the tumultuous events leading to and including the English Civil War, another major revision was published in 1662 . That edition has remained the official prayer book of the Church of England, although in the 21st century, an alternative book called Common Worship has largely displaced the Book of Common Prayer at the main Sunday worship service of most English parish churches.

A Book of Common Prayer with local variations is used in churches inside and outside the Anglican Communion in over 50 different countries and in over 150 different languages . In many parts of the world, other books have replaced it in regular weekly worship.

Traditional English Lutheran, Methodist and Presbyterian prayer books have borrowed from the Book of Common Prayer and the marriage and burial rites have found their way into those of other denominations and into the English language. Like the Authorized King James Bible and the works of Shakespeare, many words and phrases from the Book of Common Prayer have entered common parlance.

== Full name ==

The full name of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer is The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church according to the use of the Church of England together with the Psalter or Psalms of David pointed as they are to be sung or said in churches and the form and manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of bishops, priests, and deacons.

== History ==

===Background===
The forms of parish worship in the late medieval church in England, which followed the Latin Roman Rite, varied according to local practice. By far the most common form, or "use", found in Southern England was that of Sarum (Salisbury). There was no single book; the services that would be provided by the Book of Common Prayer were to be found in the Missal (the Eucharist), the Breviary (daily offices), Manual (the occasional services of Baptism, Marriage, Burial etc.), and Pontifical (services appropriate to a bishopConfirmation, Ordination). The chant (plainsong, plainchant) for worship was contained in the Roman Gradual for the Mass and in the Antiphoner for the offices. The Book of Common Prayer has never contained prescribed music or chant, however John Merbecke produced his Book of Common Praier noted in 1550 which set what would have been the proper of the Mass (Kyrie, Gloria, Creed, etc.) in the new BCP to simple plainchant inspired by Sarum Use. The work of producing a liturgy in the English language books was largely done by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, starting cautiously in the reign of Henry VIII, and then more radically under his son Edward VI. In his early days Cranmer was somewhat conservative: an admirer, if a critical one, of John Fisher. It may have been his visit to Germany in 1532 (where he secretly married) which began the change in his outlook. Then in 1538, as Henry began diplomatic negotiations with Lutheran princes, Cranmer came face to face with a Lutheran embassy . The Exhortation and Litany, the earliest English-language service of the Church of England, was the first overt manifestation of his changing views. It was no mere translation from the Latin: its Protestant character is made clear by the drastic reduction of the place of saints, compressing what had been the major part into three petitions . Published in 1544, it borrowed greatly from Martin Luther's Litany and Myles Coverdale's New Testament and was the only service that might be considered to be "Protestant" to be finished within the lifetime of King Henry VIII.

===Prayer Books of Edward VI===
====1549====
Cranmer's 1549 Book of Common Prayer
It was not until Henry's death in 1547 and the accession of Edward VI that revision could proceed faster. Cranmer finished his work on an English Communion rite in 1548, obeying an order of Convocation of the previous year that communion was to be given to the people as both bread and wine. The ordinary Roman Rite of the Mass had made no provision for any congregation present to receive communion. So, Cranmer composed in English an additional rite of congregational preparation and communion (based on the form of the Sarum rite for Communion of the Sick), to be undertaken immediately following the communion, in both kinds, of the priest.

Further developed, and fully translated into English, this Communion service was included, one year later, in 1549, in a full prayer book, set out with daily offices, readings for Sundays and Holy Days, the Communion Service, Public Baptism, of Confirmation, of Matrimony, The Visitation of the Sick, At a Burial and the Ordinal (added in 1550) . The Preface to this edition, which contained Cranmer's explanation as to why a new prayer book was necessary, began: "There was never any thing by the wit of man so well devised, or so sure established, which in continuance of time hath not been corrupted." Although the work is commonly attributed to Cranmer, its detailed origins are obscure . A group of bishops and divines met first at Chertsey and then at Windsor in 1548, drawn from both conservatives and reformers, agreed only "the service of the church ought to be in the mother tongue" . Cranmer collected the material from many sources; even the opening of Preface (above) was borrowed . He borrowed much from German sources, particularly from work commissioned by Hermann von Wied, Archbishop of Cologne; and also from Osiander (to whom he was related by marriage) . The Church Order of Brandenberg and Nuremberg was partly the work of the latter. Many phrases are characteristic of the German reformer Martin Bucer, or of the Italian Peter Martyr, (who was staying with Cranmer at the time of the finalising of drafts), or of his chaplain, Thomas Becon. However, to Cranmer is "credited the overall job of editorship and the overarching structure of the book" including the systematic amendment of his materials to remove any idea that human merit contributed to their salvation .

The Communion service of 1549 maintained the format of distinct rites of consecration and communion, that had been introduced the previous year; but with the Latin rite of the Mass (chiefly following the familiar structure in the Use of Sarum), translated into English. By outwardly maintaining familiar forms, Cranmer hoped to establish the practice of weekly congregational communion, and included exhortations to encourage this; and instructions that communion should never be received by the priest alone. This represented a radical change from late medieval practicewhereby the primary focus of congregational worship was taken to be attendance at the consecration, and adoration of the elevated consecrated host. In late medieval England, congregations regularly received communion only at Easter; and otherwise individual lay people might expect to receive communion only when gravely ill, or in the form of a Nuptial Mass on being married.

Cranmer's work of simplification and revision was also applied to the Daily Offices, which were to become Morning, and Evening Prayer; and which he hoped would also serve as a daily form of prayer to be used by the Laity, thus replacing both the late medieval lay observation of the Latin Hours of the Virgin, and its English equivalent, the Primer. This simplification was anticipated by the work of Cardinal Francis Quiones, a Spanish Franciscan, in his abortive revision of the Roman Breviary published in 1537 . Cranmer took up Quiones's principle that everything should be sacrificed to secure continuity in singing the Psalter and reading the Bible. His first draft, produced during Henry's reign, retained the traditional seven distinct Canonical hours of Office prayer; but in his second draft, while he retained the Latin, he consolidated these into two . The 1549 book then dispensed with the Latin, and with all non-biblical readings; and established a rigorously biblical cycle of readings for Morning and Evening Prayer (set according to the calendar year, rather than the ecclesiastical year) and a Psalter to be read consecutively throughout each month. He provided that the New Testament (other than the Book of Revelation) be read through three times in a year, while the Old Testament, including the Apocrypha would be read through once. Of the set canticles, only the Te Deum was retained of the non-biblical material.

Introduced on Whitsunday 1549, after considerable debate and revision in Parliamentbut there is no evidence that it was ever submitted to either Convocationit was said to have pleased neither reformers nor their opponents, indeed the Catholic Bishop Gardiner could say of it was that it "was patient of a catholic interpretation". It was clearly unpopular in the parishes of Devon and Cornwall where, along with severe social problems, its introduction was one of the causes of the "commotions", or rebellions in the summer of that year, partly because many Cornish people lacked sufficient English to understand it ,. appears that it was far less significant in the other "commotions" in the Home Counties and the "Eastern Rebellion". Particularly unpopular was the banning of processions and the sending out of commissioners to enforce the new requirements. There was widespread opposition to the introduction of regular congregational Communion, partly because the extra costs of bread and wine that would fall on the parish; but mainly out of an intense resistance to undertaking in regular worship, a religious practice previously associated with marriage or illness.

====1552====
Cranmer's Prayer book of 1552
The 1549 book was, from the outset, intended only as a temporary expedient, as Bucer was assured having met Cranmer for the first time in April 1549: 'concessions...made both as a respect for antiquity and to the infirmity of the present age' as he wrote . Both Bucer and Peter Martyr wrote detailed proposals for modification; Bucer's Censura ran to 28 chapters which influenced Cranmer significantly though he did not follow them slavishly and the new book was duly produced in 1552, making "fully perfect" what was already implicit . The policy of incremental reform was now unveiled: more Roman Catholic practices were now excised, as doctrines had in 1549 been subtly changed. Thus, in the Eucharist, gone were the words Mass and altar; the 'Lord have mercy' was interleaved into a recitation of the Ten Commandments and the Gloria was removed to the end of the service. The Eucharistic prayer was split in two so that Eucharistic bread and wine were shared immediately after the words of institution (This is my Body..This is my blood...in remembrance of me.); while its final element, the Prayer of Oblation, (with its reference to an offering of a 'Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving'), was transferred, much changed, to a position after the priest and congregation had received Communion, and was made optional with an alternative prayer of thanksgiving provided. The Elevation of the Host had been forbidden in 1549; all manual acts were now omitted. The words at the administration of Communion which, in the prayer book of 1549 described the Eucharistic species as 'The body of our Lorde Jesus Christe...', 'The blood of our Lorde Jesus Christe...' were replaced with the words 'Take, eat, in remembrance that Christ died for thee..' etc. The Peace, at which in the early Church the congregation had exchanged a greeting, was removed altogether. Vestments such as the stole, chasuble and cope were no longer to be worn, but only a surplice. It was the final stage of the reformers' work of removing all elements of sacrificial offering from the Latin Mass; so that it should cease to be seen as a ritual at which the priest, on behalf of the faithful offered Christ's body and blood to God; and might rather be seen as a ritual whereby Christ shared his body and blood, according to a different sacramental theology, with the faithful.

Cranmer recognized that the 1549 rite of Communion had been capable of conservative misinterpretation and misuse in that the consecration rite might still be undertaken even when no congregational Communion followed. Consequently, in 1552 he thoroughly integrated Consecration and Communion into a single rite, with congregational preparation preceding the words of institutionsuch that it would not be possible to mimic the Mass with the priest communicating alone. He appears nevertheless, to have been resigned to being unable for the present to establish in parishes the weekly practice of receiving Communion; so he restructured the service so as to allow ante-Communion as a distinct rite of worshipfollowing the Communion rite through the readings and offertory, as far as the intercessory "Prayer for the Church Militant".

Diarmaid MacCulloch suggests that Cranmer's own Eucharistic theology in these years approximated most closely to that of Heinrich Bullinger; but that he intended the Prayer Book to be acceptable to the widest range of Reformed Eucharistic belief, including the high sacramental theology of Bucer and John Calvin . At the same time, however, Cranmer intended that constituent parts of the rites gathered into the Prayer Book should still, so far as possible, be recognizably derived from traditional forms and elements.

In the baptism service, the signing with the cross was moved until after the baptism and the exorcism, the anointing, the putting on of the chrysom robe and the triple immersion were omitted. Most drastic of all was the removal of the Burial service from church: it was to take place at the graveside. In 1549, there had been provision for a Requiem (not so called) and prayers of commendation and committal, the first addressed to the deceased. All that remained was a single reference to the deceased, giving thanks for their delivery from 'the myseryes of this sinneful world'. This new Order for the Burial of the Dead was a drastically stripped-down memorial service designed to undermine definitively the whole complex of traditional beliefs about Purgatory and intercessory prayer .

In other respects, however, both the Baptism and Burial services imply a theology of salvation that accords notably less with Reformed teachings than do the counterpart passages in the Articles of Religion. In the Burial service, the possibility that a deceased person who has died in the faith may nevertheless not be counted amongst God's elect, is not entertained. In the Baptism service the priest explicitly pronounces the baptised infant as being now regenerate. In both cases, conformity with strict Reformed Protestant principles would have resulted in a conditional formulation. The continued inconsistency between the Articles of Religion and the Prayer Book remained a point of contention for Puritans; and would in the 19th century come close to tearing the Church of England apart, through the course of the Gorham judgement.

The Orders of Morning and Evening Prayer were extended by the inclusion of a penitential section at the beginning including a corporate confession of sin and a general absolution, although the text was printed only in Morning Prayer with rubrical directions to use it in the evening as well. The general pattern of Bible reading in 1549 was retained (as it was in 1559) except that distinct Old and New Testament readings were now specified for Morning and Evening Prayer on certain feast days. Following the publication of the 1552 Prayer Book, a revised English Primer was published in 1553; adapting the Offices and Morning and Evening Prayer, and other prayers, for lay domestic piety .

===English Prayer Book during the reign of Mary I===
The 1552 book, however, was used only for a short period, as Edward VI had died in the summer of 1553 and, as soon as she could do so, Mary I, restored union with Rome. The Latin Mass was re-established, altars, roods and statues were reinstated; an attempt was made to restore the English Church to its Roman affiliation. Cranmer was punished for his work in the English Reformation by being burned at the stake on 21 March 1556. Nevertheless, the 1552 book was to survive. After Mary's death in 1558, it became the primary source for the Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer, with subtle if significant changes only.

Hundreds of Protestants fled into exileestablishing an English church in Frankfurt am Main. A bitter and very public dispute ensued between those, such as Edmund Grindal and Richard Cox, who wished to preserve in exile the exact form of worship of the 1552 Prayer Book; and those, such as John Knox the minister of the congregation, who regarded that book as still partially tainted with compromise. Eventually, in 1555, the civil authorities expelled Knox and his supporters to Geneva, where they adopted a new prayer book, The Form of Prayers, which derived principally from Calvin's French La Forme des Prires . Consequently, when the accession of Elizabeth I re-asserted the dominance of the reformed Church of England, there remained a significant body of more Protestant believers who were nevertheless hostile to the Book of Common Prayer. John Knox took The Form of Prayers with him to Scotland, where it formed the basis of the Scottish Book of Common Order.

===1559 Prayer Book===
Prayer book of 1559.
Under Elizabeth I, a more permanent enforcement of the reformed Church of England was undertaken and the 1552 book was republished, scarcely altered, in 1559 .

The alterations, though minor, were however to cast a long shadow. One, the "Ornaments Rubric", related to what was worn. Instead of the banning of all vestments except the rochet for bishops and the surplice for parish clergy, it permitted "such ornaments...as were in use...in the second year of K. Edward VI". This allowed substantial leeway for more traditionalist clergy to retain some of the vestments which they felt were appropriate to liturgical celebration (at least until the Queen gave further instructions under the Act of Uniformity of 1559). It was to be the basis of claims in the 19th century that vestments such as chasubles, albs and stoles were legal. At Holy Communion, the words from the 1549 book, "the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ" etc. were combined with the words of Edward's second book, "Take eat in remembrance" etc. The instruction to the congregation to kneel when receiving communion was retained; but the accompanying Black Rubric denying any "real and essential presence" of Christ's flesh and blood, was removed . The conservative nature of these changes underlines the fact that reformed principles were by no means universally popular  a fact that the Queen herself recognised: her revived Act of Supremacy, giving her the ambiguous title of Supreme Governor, passed without difficulty but the Act of Uniformity 1559, giving statutory force to the Prayer Book, passed through the House of Lords by only three votes. It made constitutional history in being imposed by the laity alone, as all the bishops, except those imprisoned by the Queen and unable to attend, voted against it . Convocation had made its position clear by affirming the traditional doctrine of the Eucharist, the authority of the Pope, and the reservation by divine law to clergy "of handling and defining concerning the things belonging to faith, sacraments, and discipline ecclesiastical" .

After the several innovations and reversals, the new forms of worship took time to settle in. Among Cranmer's innovations, retained in the new book was the requirement of weekly Holy Communion services. In practice, as before the English Reformation, many received communion rarely, as little as once a year in some cases; George Herbert estimated it as no more than six times. . Practice, however, varied from place to place: very high attendance at festivals was the order of the day in many parishes and in some regular communion was very popular, in other places families stayed away or sent "a servant to be the liturgical representative of their household." . Few parish clergy were initially licensed to preach by the bishops; in the absence of a licensed preacher, Sunday services were required to be accompanied by reading one of the homilies written by Cranmer . George Herbert was, however, not alone in his enthusiasm for preaching, which he regarded as one of the prime functions of a parish priest . Music was much simplified and a radical distinction developed between, on the one hand, parish worship where only the metrical psalms of Sternhold and Hopkins might be sung and, on the other hand, worship in churches with organs and surviving choral foundations, where the music of John Marbeck and others was developed into a rich choral tradition . The whole act of parish worship might take well over two hours; and accordingly, churches were equipped with pews in which households could sit together (whereas in the medieval church, men and women had worshipped separately). Diarmaid MacCulloch describes the new act of worship as, "a morning marathon of prayer, scripture reading, and praise, consisting of mattins, litany, and ante-communion, preferably as the matrix for a sermon to proclaim the message of scripture anew week by week." .

Many ordinary churchgoersthat is those who could afford a copy as it was expensivewould own a copy of the prayer book. Judith Maltby cites a story of parishioners at Flixton in Suffolk who brought their own prayer books to church in order to shame their vicar into conforming with it: they eventually ousted him . Between 1549 and 1642, roughly 290 editions of the prayer book were produced . Before the end of the Civil War and the introduction of the 1662 prayer book, something like a half a million prayer books are estimated to have been in circulation .

A (re)translation into Latin of the 1559 Book of Common Prayer was made in the form of Walter Haddon's Liber Precum Publicarum of 1560. Its use was destined for the universities.

===Changes in 1604===
On Elizabeth's death in 1603, the 1559 book, substantially that of 1552 which had been regarded as offensive by some, such as Bishop Stephen Gardiner, as being a break with the tradition of the Western Church, had come to be regarded in some quarters as unduly Catholic. On his accession and following the so-called "Millenary Petition", James I called the Hampton Court Conference in 1604the same meeting of bishops and Puritan divines that initiated the Authorized version of the Bible. This was in effect a series of two conferences: (i) between James and the bishops; (ii) between James and the Puritans on the following day. The Puritans raised four areas of concern: purity of doctrine; the means of maintaining it; church government; and the Book of Common Prayer. Here Confirmation, the cross in baptism, private baptism, the use of the surplice, kneeling for communion, reading the Apocrypha; and subscription to the BCP and Articles were all touched on. On the third day, after James had received a report back from the bishops and made final modifications, he announced his decisions to the Puritans and bishops.

The business of making the changes was then entrusted to a small committee of bishops and the Privy Council and, apart from tidying up details, this committee introduced into Morning and Evening Prayer a prayer for the Royal Family; added several thanksgivings to the Occasional Prayers at the end of the Litany; altered the rubrics of Private Baptism limiting it to the minister of the parish, or some other lawful minister, but still allowing it in private houses (the Puritans had wanted it only in the church); and added to the Catechism the section on the sacraments. The changes were put into effect by means of an explanation issued by James in the exercise of his prerogative under the terms of the 1559 Act of Uniformity and Act of Supremacy. 

The accession of Charles I (16251649) brought about a complete change in the religious scene in that the new king used his supremacy over the established church "to promote his own idiosyncratic style of sacramental Kingship" which was "a very weird aberration from the first hundred years of the early reformed Church of England". He questioned "the populist and parliamentary basis of the Reformation Church" and unsettled to a great extent "the consensual accommodation of Anglicanism" and this led to the Civil War and republican Commonwealth.

With the defeat of Charles I (16251649) in the Civil War, the Puritan pressure, exercised through a much-changed Parliament, had increased. Puritan-inspired petitions for the removal of the prayer book and episcopacy "root and branch" resulted in local disquiet in many places and, eventually, the production of locally organized counter petitions. The parliamentary government had its way but it became clear that the division was not between Catholics and Protestants, but between Puritans and those who valued the Elizabethan settlement. . The 1604 book was finally outlawed by Parliament in 1645 to be replaced by the Directory of Public Worship, which was more a set of instructions than a prayer book. How widely the Directory was used is not certain; there is some evidence of its having been purchased, in churchwardens' accounts, but not widely. The Prayer Book certainly was used clandestinely in some places, not least because the Directory made no provision at all for burial services. Following the execution of Charles I in 1649 and the establishment of the Commonwealth under Lord Protector Cromwell, it would not be reinstated until shortly after the restoration of the monarchy to England.

John Evelyn records, in Diary, receiving communion according to the 1604 Prayer Book rite:
:Christmas Day 1657. I went to London with my wife to celebrate Christmas Day... Sermon ended, as minister was giving us the holy sacrament, the chapel was surrounded with soldiers, and all the communicants and assembly surprised and kept prisoners by them, some in the house, others carried away... These wretched miscreants held their muskets against us as we came up to receive the sacred elements, as if they would have shot us at the altar.

===Changes made in Scotland===
Laud's abortive 1637 Prayer book.
In 1557, the Scots Protestant lords had adopted the English Prayer Book of 1552, for reformed worship in Scotland. However, when John Knox returned to Scotland in 1559, he continued to use the Form of Prayer he had created for the English exiles in Geneva and, in 1564, this supplanted the Book of Common Prayer under the title of the Book of Common Order.

Following the accession of King James VI of Scotland to the throne of England his son, King Charles I, with the assistance of Archbishop Laud, sought to impose the prayer book on Scotland . The book concerned was not, however, the 1559 book but very much that of 1549, the first book of Edward VI. First used in 1637, it was never accepted, having been violently rejected by the Scots. Following the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (including the English Civil War), the Church of Scotland was re-established on a presbyterian basis but by the Act of Comprehension 1690, the rump of Episcopalians were allowed to hold onto their benefices. For liturgy they looked to Laud's book and in 1724 the first of the "wee bookies" was published, containing, for the sake of economy, the central part of the Communion liturgy beginning with the offertory .

Between then and 1764, when a more formal revised version was published, a number of things happened which were to separate the Scottish Episcopal liturgy more firmly from either the English books of 1549 or 1559. First, informal changes were made to the order of the various parts of the service and inserting words indicating a sacrificial intent to the Eucharist; secondly, as a result of Bishop Rattray's researches into the liturgies of St James and St Clement, published in 1744, the form of the invocation was changed. These changes were incorporated into the 1764 book which was to be the liturgy of the Scottish Episcopal Church (until 1911 when it was revised) but it was to influence the liturgy of the Episcopal Church in the United States. A completely new revision was finished in 1929 and several alternative orders of the Communion service and other services have been prepared since then.

===1662===
Title page of the 1662 Prayer Book, printed by John Baskerville in 1762.
The 1662 Prayer Book was printed only two years after the restoration of the monarchy, following the Savoy Conference between representative Presbyterians and twelve bishops which was convened by Royal Warrant to "advise upon and review the Book of Common Prayer" . Attempts by the Presbyterians, led by Richard Baxter, to gain approval for an alternative service book failed. Their major objections (exceptions) were: firstly, that it was improper for lay people to take any vocal part in prayer (as in the Litany or Lord's Prayer), other than to say "amen"; secondly, that no set prayer should exclude the option of an extempore alternative from the minister; thirdly, that the minister should have the option to omit part of the set liturgy at his discretion; fourthly, that short collects should be replaced by longer prayers and exhortations; and fifthly, that all surviving "Catholic" ceremonial should be removed.

The Savoy Conference ended in disagreement late in July 1661, but the initiative in prayer book revision had already passed to the Convocations and from there to Parliament. The Convocations made some 600 changes, mostly of details, which were "far from partisan or extreme". However, Edwards states that more of the changes suggested by high Anglicans were implemented (though by no means all ) and Spurr comments that (except in the case of the Ordinal) the suggestions of the "Laudians" (Cosin and Matthew Wren) were not taken up possibly due to the influence of moderates such as Sanderson and Reynolds. For example, the inclusion in the intercessions of the Communion rite of prayer for the dead was proposed and rejected. The introduction of "Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in earth" remained unaltered and only a thanksgiving for those "departed this life in thy faith and fear" was inserted to introduce the petition that the congregation might be "given grace so to follow their good examples that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom". Griffith Thomas commented that the retention of the words "militant here in earth" defines the scope of this petition: we pray for ourselves, we thank God for them, and adduces collateral evidence to this end. Secondly, an attempt was made to restore the Offertory. This was achieved by the insertion of the words "and oblations" into the prayer for the Church and the revision of the rubric so as to require the monetary offerings to be brought to the table (instead of being put in the poor box) and the bread and wine placed upon the table. Previously it had not been clear when and how bread and wine got onto the altar. The so-called "manual acts", whereby the priest took the bread and the cup during the prayer of consecration, which had been deleted in 1552, were restored; and an "amen" was inserted after the words of institution and before communion, hence separating the connections between of consecration and communion which Cranmer had tried to make. After communion, the unused but consecrated bread and wine were to be reverently consumed in church rather than being taken away for the priest's own use. By such subtle means were Cranmer's purposes further confused, leaving it for generations to argue over the precise theology of the rite. One change made that constituted a concession to the Presbyterian Exceptions, was the updating and re-insertion of the so-called "Black Rubric", which had been removed in 1559. This now declared that kneeling in order to receive communion did not imply adoration of the species of the Eucharist nor "to any Corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood"which, according to the rubric, were in heaven, not here.

Unable to accept the new book, 936 ministers were deprived. (: see Widely varying figures are quoted. Procter and Frere (1902) gave 2000; ,1760. Spurr gives the following breakdown for the period 166063: Total ministers forced out of English parishes about 1760. This includes 695 parish ministers ejected under the 1660 act for settling clergy; 936 more forced out under the 1662 Act of Uniformity. In addition 200 non-parochial ministers from lectureships, universities and schools, and 120 in Wales were excluded. He adds that 171 of the 1760 are "known to have conformed later". In a footnote he cites . ) In effect, the 1662 Prayer Book marked the end of a period of just over 100 years, when a common form of liturgy served for almost all reformed public worship in England and the start of the continuing division between Anglicans and Nonconformists. The actual language of the 1662 revision was little changed from that of Cranmer. With two exceptions, some words and phrases which had become archaic were modernised; secondly, the readings for the epistle and gospel at Holy Communion, which had been set out in full since 1549, were now set to the text of the 1611 Authorized Version of the Bible. The Psalter, which had not been printed in the 1549, 1552 or 1559 bookswas in 1662 provided in Miles Coverdale's translation from the Great Bible of 1538.

It was this edition which was to be the official Book of Common Prayer during the growth of the British Empire and, as a result, has been a great influence on the prayer books of Anglican churches worldwide, liturgies of other denominations in English and of the English as a whole.

===Further attempts at revision===
====16621832====
A Collect for 5th November in the Book of Common Prayer published in London in 1689, referring to the Gunpowder Plot and the arrival of William III.
Between 1662 and the 19th century, further attempts to revise the Book in England stalled . On the death of Charles II, his brother James, a Roman Catholic, became James II. James wished to achieve toleration for those of his own Roman Catholic faith, whose practices were still banned. This, however, drew the Presbyterians closer to the Church of England in their common desire to resist 'popery'; talk of reconciliation and liturgical compromise was thus in the air. But with the flight of James in 1688 and the arrival of the Calvinist William of Orange the position of the parties changed. The Presbyterians could achieve toleration of their practices without such a right being given to Roman Catholics and without, therefore, their having to submit to the Church of England, even with a liturgy more acceptable to them. They were now in a much stronger position to demand changes that were ever more radical. John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury pressed the king to set up a commission to produce such a revision . The so-called Liturgy of Comprehension of 1689, which was the result, conceded two thirds of the Presbyterian demands of 1661; but, when it came to convocation the members, now more fearful of William's perceived agenda, did not even discuss it and its contents were, for a long time, not even accessible . This work, however, did go on to influence the prayer books of many British colonies.

====18331906====
Edward Bouverie Pusey, a leader of the Oxford Movement.
By the 19th century, pressures to revise the 1662 book were increasing. Adherents of the Oxford Movement, begun in 1833, raised questions about the relationship of the Church of England to the apostolic church and thus about its forms of worship. Known as Tractarians after their production of Tracts for the Times on theological issues, they advanced the case for the Church of England being essentially a part of the "Western Church", of which the Roman Catholic Church was the chief representative. The illegal use of elements of the Roman rite, the use of candles, vestments and incensepractices collectively known as Ritualismhad become widespread and led to the establishment of a new system of discipline, intending to bring the "Romanisers" into conformity, through the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 . The Act had no effect on illegal practices: five clergy were imprisoned for contempt of court and after the trial of the much loved Bishop Edward King of Lincoln, it became clear that some revision of the liturgy had to be embarked upon .

One branch of the Ritualism movement argued that both "Romanisers" and their Evangelical opponents, by imitating, respectively, the Church of Rome and Reformed churches, transgressed the Ornaments Rubric of 1559 ("...that such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, at all Times of their Ministration, shall be retained, and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the Authority of Parliament, in the Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth"). These adherents of ritualism, among whom were Percy Dearmer and others, claimed that the Ornaments Rubric prescribed the ritual usages of the Sarum Rite with the exception of a few minor things already abolished by the early reformation.

Following a Royal Commission report in 1906, work began on a new prayer book. It took twenty years to complete, prolonged partly due to the demands of the First World War and partly in the light of the 1920 constitution of the Church Assembly, which "perhaps not unnaturally wished to do the work all over again for itself" .

====19062000====
In 1927, the work on a new version of the prayer book reached its final form. In order to reduce conflict with traditionalists, it was decided that the form of service to be used would be determined by each congregation. With these open guidelines, the book was granted approval by the Church of England Convocations and Church Assembly in July 1927. Since the Church of England Assembly (Powers) Act 1919 required measures affecting the Book of Common Prayer to be approved by Parliament before receiving royal assent, the measure authorising its use, together with an annexed copy (a "Deposited Book"), was submitted to Parliament. The House of Lords approved the Book by a large majority, but the corresponding resolution in the House of Commons was defeated by thirty-three votes on 15 December 1927 when the MPs William Joynson-Hicks and Rosslyn Mitchell "reached and inflamed all the latent Protestant prejudices in the House" and argued strongly against it on the grounds that the proposed book was "papistical", restored the Roman Mass and implied the doctrine of transubstantiation.

Early in 1928, a second measure, the Prayer Book Measure 1928, was introduced in the Church Assembly proposing to authorise the use of the "Deposited Book" with certain amendments which were set out in a schedule to the Measure. This Measure again was approved by large majorities in both the Convocations and the Church Assembly; but again failed to pass the House of Commons, being defeated by forty-six votes on 14 June 1928. Writing in 1947, Cyril Garbett comments:"The House of Commons was within its constitutional rights in rejecting in a few hours the work of many anxious years. Nonconformist members and members from constituencies which would not have been affected by the Revised Book were only exercising their full legal rights in throwing out a Measure which was approved by the majority of English Members of Parliament. But whatever were the reasons behind the votes of the majority, the rejection of the Measures made it plain that the Church does not possess full spiritual freedom to determine its worship ..." Stephen Neill points out that the Roman Catholic members of parliament abstained from voting.

In response to this rejection, the bishops issued a unanimous statement, asserting the Church of England's right to order its forms of worship and, in 1929, the Upper House of the Convocation of Canterbury resolved that bishops might approve the use of the 1928 book, notwithstanding the lack of parliamentary authority. It became common for prayer books to be printed with the 1662 and 1928 forms of service in parallel columns, although the legal basis of the revision remained unclear. The 1928 revised forms of Matrimony and Baptism were quite widely adopted, but those of other rites tended not to be; the consequence, in practice, being very wide variation in liturgical practice from parish to parish, with very few clergy adhering consistently to the strict observation of either the 1662 or the 1928 forms of worship.

The effect of the failure of the 1928 book was salutary: no further attempts were made to revise the Book of Common Prayer. Instead a different process, that of producing an alternative book, led to the publication of Series 1, 2 and 3 in the 1960s, the 1980 Alternative Service Book and subsequently to the 2000 Common Worship series of books. Both differ substantially from the Book of Common Prayer, though the latter includes in the Order Two form of the Holy Communion a very slight revision of the prayer book service, largely along the lines proposed for the 1928 Prayer Book. Order One follows the pattern of modern liturgical scholarship.

== In the Anglican Communion ==

With British colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards, Anglicanism was planted across the globe. These new Anglican churches at first used and then revised the use of the Book of Common Prayer, until they, like the English church, produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries which come under the general heading of the Liturgical Movement.

===Africa===
The Book of Common Prayer in Africa is the same as elsewhere. Each province or national church has its own signature which is put on the cover pages of the book as there are some words that differ from one province to another. In Yoruba, the Book is known as Iwe Adura ti gbogbo Ijo Anglikan.

===Asia===
====China and Hong Kong====
The Book of Common Prayer is called  in Chinese (pinyin:Gong Dao Shu, Jyutping: Gung Tou Sy). The former dioceses in the now defunct Chung Hua Sheng Kung Hui had their own Book of Common Prayer. The General Synod and the College of Bishops of Chung Hwa Sheng Kung Hui planned to publish a unified version for the use of all Anglican churches in China in 1949, which was the 400th anniversary of the first publishing of the Book of Common Prayer. After the communists took over mainland China, the Diocese of Hong Kong and Macao became independent of the Chung Hua Sheng Kung Hui, and continued to use the edition issued in Shanghai in 1938 with a revision in 1959. This edition, also called the "Black-Cover Book of Common Prayer"  because of its black cover, still remains in use after the establishment of the Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui (Anglican province in Hong Kong). The language style of "Black-Cover Book of Common Prayer" is closer to Classical Chinese than contemporary Chinese.

====Korea====
In 1965, the Anglican Church of Korea produced a translation of the BCP into Korean and called it gong-do-gi-do-mun meaning "common prayers". In 1994, the prayers announced "allowed" by the 1982 Bishops Council of the Anglican Church of Korea was published in a second version of the Book of Common Prayers In 2004, the National Anglican Council published the third and the current Book of Common Prayers known as "seoung-gong-hwe gi-do-seo" or the "Anglican Prayers", including the Daily Masses, Special Masses, Baptism, Confirmation, Funeral Mass, Wedding Mass, Rite of Ordination Mass, and all of the other events the Anglican Church of Korea celebrates.
The Diction of the books have changed from the 1965 version to the 2004 version. For example, the word "God" which used to be "Cheon-joo" was altered to "ha-nu-nim" according to the Public Christian translation. The Bible that the Anglican Church of Korea uses is the 1994 edition called the "gong-dong beon-yuk-seong-seo" or the Common Translation Bible.

====India====
The Church of South India was the first modern Episcopal uniting church, consisting as it did, from its foundation in 1947, at the time of Indian independence, of Anglicans, Methodists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians and Reformed Christians. Its liturgy, from the first, combined the free use of Cranmer's language with an adherence to the principles of congregational participation and the centrality of the Eucharist, much in line with the Liturgical Movement. Because it was a minority church of widely differing traditions in a non-Christian culture (except in Kerala, where Christianity has a long history), practice varied wildly.

====Philippines====
Philippine Book of Common Prayer in the Church of Saint Mary, Sagada, Mountain Province, Philippines.
The diglotic EnglishChinese Book of Common Prayer used by the FilipinoChinese community of St Stephen's Pro-Cathedral in Manila, Philippines.
As the Philippines is connected to the worldwide Anglican Communion through the Episcopal Church in the Philippines, the main edition of the Book of Common Prayer in use throughout the islands is the same as that of the United States.

Aside from the American version and the newly published Philippine Book of Common Prayer, Filipino-Chinese congregants of Saint Stephen's Pro-Cathedral in the Diocese of the Central Philippines uses the English-Chinese Diglot Book of Common Prayer, published by the Episcopal Church of Southeast Asia.

The ECP has since published its own Book of Common Prayer upon gaining full autonomy on 1 May 1990. This version is notable for the inclusion of the Misa de Gallo, a popular Christmastide devotion amongst Filipinos that is a mostly Catholic custom.

===Europe===
====Ireland====
William Bedell had undertaken an Irish translation of the Book of Common Prayer in 1606. An Irish translation of the revised prayer book of 1662 was effected by John Richardson (16641747) and published in 1712. It has been revised several times, and the present edition has been used since 2004.

====Wales====
An Act of Parliament passed in the year 1563, entitled An Act for the Translating of the Bible and the Divine Service into the Welsh Tongue, ordered that the Old and New Testament, together with the Book of Common Prayer, were to be translated into Welsh. A translation by Richard Davies, bishop of St David's and the scholar William Salesbury was published in 1567 by Humphrey Toy as Y Llyfr Gweddi Gyffredin. A new revision  based on the 1662 English revision and probably by George Griffith, Bishop of St Asaph - was published in 1664. http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bcp/Muss-Arnolt/ch7&8.htm 

Until 1966, trials of new services began, the 1662 book and its Welsh equivalent continued to be used, even after the Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920. The present version was published in 1984 and is currently under revision.

====Isle of Man====
The first Manx translation of the Book of Common Prayer was made by Bishop John Phillips of Sodor and Man in 1610. A more successful "New Version" by Bishop Mark Hildesley (16981772) was in use until 1824 when English liturgy became universal on the island. 

===Oceania===
====Australia====
The Anglican Church of Australia, known officially, until 1981, as the Church of England in Australia and Tasmania, became self-governing in 1961. Its General Synod agreed that the Book of Common Prayer was to "be regarded as the authorised standard of worship and doctrine in this Church". In 1978, An Australian Prayer Book was produced, seeking to adhere to this principle, such that where the Liturgical Committee could not agree on a formulation, the words or expressions of the Book of Common Prayer were to be used . The result was conservative revision.

A Prayer Book for Australia, produced in 1995, departed from both the structure and wording of the Book of Common Prayer, prompting conservative reaction. Numerous objections were made and the notably conservative evangelical Diocese of Sydney drew attention to the loss of BCP wording and of an explicit "biblical doctrine of substitutionary atonement". The Diocese of Sydney has developed its own small prayer book, called Sunday Services, to supplement the existing prayer book and preserve the original theology which the Sydney diocese asserts has been changed.

===North and Central America===
====Canada====
The Anglican Church of Canada developed its first Book of Common Prayer separately from the English version in 1918, which received final authorization from General Synod on April 16, 1922. The revision of 1959 was much more substantial, bearing a family relationship to that of the abortive 1928 book in England. The language was conservatively modernized, and additional seasonal material was added. As in England, while many prayers were retained the structure of the Communion service was altered: a Prayer of Oblation was added to the Eucharistic prayer after the 'words of institution', thus reflecting the rejection of Cranmer's theology in liturgical developments across the Anglican Communion. More controversially, the Psalter included in the book omitted certain sections, including the entirety of Psalm 58. According to the Tables of Proper Psalms, "The following passages in the Psalter as hitherto used are omitted: Psalm 14. 5-7; 55. 16; 58 (all); 68. 21-23; 69. 23-29; 104. 35 (in part); 109. 5-19; 136. 27; 137. 7-9; 140. 9-10; 141. 7-8. The verses are renumbered." See also the Psalter from 1962 Canadian Book of Common Prayer. General Synod gave final authorization to the revision in 1962, to coincide with the 300th anniversary of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. A French translation, Le Recueil des Prires de la Communaut Chrtienne, was published in 1967.

After a period of experimentation with the publication of various supplements, the Book of Alternative Services was published in 1985. This book (which owes much to Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and other sources) has widely supplanted the 1959 book, though the latter remains authorized. As in other places, there has been a reaction and the Canadian version of the Book of Common Prayer has found supporters.

====Indigenous languages====
The Book of Common Prayer has also been translated into these North American indigenous languages: Cowitchan, Cree, Haida, Ntlakyapamuk, Slavey, Eskimo-Aleut, Dakota, Delaware, Mohawk, Ojibwe. 

=====Ojibwa=====
Joseph Gilfillan was the chief editor of the 1911 Ojibwa edition of the Book of Common Prayer entitled Iu Wejibuewisi Mamawi Anamiawini Mazinaigun (Iw Wejibwewizi Maamawi-anami'aawini Mazina'igan) .

====United States====

The Episcopal Church separated itself from the Church of England in 1789, having been established in the United States in 1607. Its prayer book, published in 1790, had as its sources, the 1662 English book and the 1764 Scottish Liturgy (see above) which Bishop Seabury of Connecticut had brought over following his consecration in Aberdeen in 1784, containing elements of each . The preface to the 1789 Book of Common Prayer says "this Church is far from intending to depart from the Church of England in any essential point of doctrine, discipline, or worship...further than local circumstances require." There were some notable differences. For example, in the Communion service after the words of institution there follows a Prayer of Oblation from 1549, but into which were inserted the words 'which we now offer unto thee' (in small caps) with reference to the 'holy gifts'. An epiclesis was included, as in the Scottish book, though modified to meet reformist objections. Overall the book was modelled in the English Prayer Book, the Convention having resisted attempts at deletion and revision .

Further revisions occurred in 1892 and 1928, in which minor changes were made, removing, for instance, some of Cranmer's Exhortations and introducing such innovations as prayers for the dead.

In 1979, a more substantial revision was made. There were now two rites for the most common services, the first that kept most of the language of 1928, and the second using only contemporary language (some of it newly composed, and some adapted from the older language). Many changes were made in the rubrics and the shapes of the services, which were generally made for both the traditional and contemporary language versions. However, there was arguably a greater degree of continuity than was the case in England, which may account for the fact that all the books of the series, from 1790 to 1979 retain the same title. The 1979 book owes a good deal to the Liturgical Movement and to the 19th-century Catholic revival. Many traditionalists, both Anglo-Catholics and Evangelicals, felt alienated by the theological changes made in the 1979 BCP, and in 1991 The Church of the Good Shepherd in Rosemont, PA published a book entitled, the Anglican Service Book which is "a traditional language adaptation of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer together with the Psalter or Psalms of David and Additional Devotions." Books like this are allowed in the Episcopal Church because of a rubric in the 1979 Prayer Book which allows for the translation of the contemporary language into the traditional language of the 1928 Book of Common Prayer.

Even so, the revision caused some controversy and in 2000, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church issued an apology to those "offended or alienated during the time of liturgical transition to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer." Use of the 1928 Book of Common Prayer is currently discouraged. Article X of the Canons of the Episcopal Church provides that "he Book of Common Prayer, as now established or hereafter amended by the authority of this Church, shall be in use in all the Dioceses of this Church," which, of course, is a reference to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer, but many parishes http://pbsusa.org/PBLinks.htm still use it either regularly or occasionally, for pastoral sensitivity, for doctrinal reasons and for the beauty of its language.

The Prayer Book Cross was erected in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park in 1894 as a gift from the Church of England. Prayer Book Cross Created by Ernest Coxhead, it stands on one of the higher points in Golden Gate Park. It is located between John F. Kennedy Drive and Park Presidio Drive, near Cross Over Drive. This 57 ft sandstone cross commemorates the first use of the Book of Common Prayer in California by Sir Francis Drake's chaplain on June 24, 1579.

== Roman Catholic adaptations ==

In 2003, a Roman Catholic liturgical book, the Book of Divine Worship, was published in the United States. The book's development began in the early 1980s for former Anglicans within the Anglican Use parishes. It was published in a single volume, primarily for their own use, in 2003. The book is composed of material drawn from the proposed 1928 BCP, the 1979 Book of Common Prayer of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America and the Roman Missal. Since 2011, the Book of Divine Worship has undergone additional revision to bring it more coherently in line with the language of the BCP, while also incorporating elements of the English Missal and the Anglican Missal. The updated edition was mandated for use in all personal ordinariates for former Anglicans from Advent 2013, although further revision is expected to incorporate most of the BCP propers as well.

== Religious influence ==

The Book of Common Prayer has had a great influence on a number of other denominations. While theologically different, the language and flow of the service of many other churches owe a great debt to the prayer book. In particular, many Christian prayer books have drawn on the Collects for the Sundays of the Church Yearmostly freely translated or even "rethought" by Cranmer from a wide range of Christian traditions, but including a number of original compositionswhich are widely recognized as masterpieces of compressed liturgical construction.

John Wesley, an Anglican priest whose revivalist preaching led to the creation of Methodism wrote, "I believe there is no Liturgy in the world, either in ancient or modern language, which breathes more of a solid, scriptural, rational piety than the Common Prayer of the Church of England." Many Methodist churches in England and the United States continued to use a slightly revised version of the book for communion services well into the 20th century. In the United Methodist Church, the liturgy for Eucharistic celebrations is almost identical to what is found in the Book of Common Prayer, as are some of the other liturgies and services.

A unique variant was developed in 1785 in Boston, Massachusetts when the historic King's Chapel (founded 1686) left the Episcopal Church and became an independent Unitarian church. To this day, King's Chapel uniquely uses The Book of Common Prayer According to the Use in King's Chapel in its worship.

== Literary influence ==

Together with the Authorized version and the works of Shakespeare, the Book of Common Prayer has been one of the three fundamental underpinnings of modern English. As it has been in regular use for centuries, many phrases from its services have passed into the English, either as deliberate quotations or as unconscious borrowings. They are used in non-liturgical ways. For example, many authors have used quotes from the prayer book as titles for their books.

Some examples of well-known phrases from the Book of Common Prayer are:
*"Speak now or forever hold your peace" from the marriage liturgy.
*"Till death us do part", from the marriage liturgy.
*"Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust" from the funeral service.
*"From all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil" from the litany.
*"Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest" from the collect for the second Sunday of Advent.
*"Evil liver" from the rubrics for Holy Communion.
*"All sorts and conditions of men" from the Order for Morning Prayer.
*"Peace in our time" from Morning Prayer, Versicles.

The phrase "till death us do part" ("till death us depart" before 1662 James E. Clapp, "till death us do part," The Mavens' Word of the Day (October 13, 2000). ) has been changed to "till death do us part" in some more recent prayer books, such as the 1962 Canadian Book of Common Prayer.

References and allusions to Prayer Book services in the works of Shakespeare were tracked down and identified by Richmond Noble . Derision of the Prayer Book or its contents "in any interludes, plays, songs, rhymes, or by other open words" was a criminal offence under the 1559 Act of Uniformity, Act of Uniformity, 1559 and consequently Shakespeare avoids too direct reference; but Noble particularly identifies the reading of the Psalter according to the Great Bible version specified in the Prayer Book, as the biblical book generating the largest number of Biblical references in Shakespeare's plays. Noble found a total of 157 allusions to the Psalms in the plays of the First Folio, relating to 62 separate Psalmsall, save one, of which he linked to the version in the Psalter, rather than those in the Geneva Bible or Bishops' Bible. In addition, there are a small number of direct allusions to liturgical texts in the Prayer Book; e.g. Henry VIII 3:2 where Wolsey states "Vain Pomp and Glory of this World, I hate ye!", a clear reference to the rite of Public Baptism; where the Godparents are asked "Doest thou forsake the vaine pompe and glory of the worlde..?"

More recently, P.D. James used phrases from the Book of Common Prayer and made them into bestselling titlesDevices and Desires and The Children of Men, while Alfonso Cuarn's 2006 film Children of Men placed the phrase onto cinema marquees worldwide.

== Copyright status ==

As the Book of Common Prayer is long out of copyright, it can be freely reproduced in most of the world. However, in the United Kingdom, the Crown holds the rights as part of the royal prerogative and as such, they are perpetual. Publishers are licensed to reproduce the Book of Common Prayer under letters patent which prohibit anyone other than the holders (and those authorized by them) from printing, publishing or importing the Book of Common Prayer into the United Kingdom.

Letters patent for England, Wales and Northern Ireland are held by the Queen's Printer, and for Scotland by the Scottish Bible Board. The office of Queen's Printer has been associated with the right to reproduce the Bible for many years, with the earliest known reference coming in 1577. Other letters patent of similar antiquity grant Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press the right to produce the Book of Common Prayer independently of the Queen's Printer. The Queen's Printer is currently the Cambridge University Press as from their takover of Eyre & Spottiswoode (which had been Queen's Printer since 1901) in the late 20th century. The protection that the Book of Common Prayer and the Authorized Version enjoy is the last remnant of the time when the Crown held a monopoly over all printing and publishing in the United Kingdom. This prerogative should not be confused with Crown copyright, or copyright in works of the United Kingdom's government.

The Episcopal Church's book is always released into the public domain. Canon II.3.6(b)(2) Trial use and supplemental liturgies are however copyrighted by Church Publishing, the official publishing arm of the church.

== See also ==

* Anglican devotions
* Book of Common Order
* Prayer Book Rebellion
* Prayer Book Society of Canada
* The Homilies
* Thirty-Nine Articles

== Editions ==

*
* Anglican Church of Canada (1964). The Canadian Book of Occasional Offices: Services for Certain Occasions not Provided in the Book of Common Prayer, compiled by the Most Rev. Harold E. Sexton, Abp. of British Columbia, published at the request of the House of Bishops of the Anglican Church of Canada. Toronto: Anglican Church of Canada, Dept. of Religious Education. x, 162 p.
* Anglican Catholic Church of Canada (198-?). When Ye Pray: Praying with the Church, Roland F. Palmer editor of the 1959/1962 Canadian B.C.P.. Ottawa: Anglican Catholic Convent Society. N.B.: "This book is a companion to the Prayer Book to help ... to use the Prayer Book better."Pg. 1. Without ISBN
* Reformed Episcopal Church in Canada and Newfoundland (1892). The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and Other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, According to the Use of the Reformed Episcopal Church in the Dominion of Canada, Otherwise Known as the Protestant Church of England.... Toronto, Ont.: Printed ... by the Ryerson Press ... for the Synod of Canada, 1951, t.p. verso 1892. N.B.: This is the liturgy as it had been authorized in 1891.
*
*
* Church in Wales (1984). The Book of Common Prayer, for the Use in the Church in Wales. Penarth, Wales: Church in Wales Publications. 2 vol. N.B.: Title also in Welsh on vol. 2: Y Llfr Gweddi Giffredin i'w arfer yn Yr Eglwys yng Nghymru; vol. 1 is entirely in English; vol. 2 is in Welsh and English on facing pages. Without ISBN 
* 
* The Episcopal Church (2003). The Book of Common Prayer: Selected Liturgies ... According to the Use of the Episcopal Church = Le Livre de la prire commune: Liturgies slectionnes ... selon l'usage de l'Eglise piscopale. Paris: Convocation of American Churches in Europe. 373, p. N.B.: Texts in English and as translated into French, from the 1979 B.C.P. of the Episcopal Church (U.S.A.), on facing pages. ISBN 0-89869-448-5
* Reformed Episcopal Church (U.S.A.)(1932). The Book of Common Prayer, According to the Use of the Reformed Episcopal Church in the United States of America. Rev. fifth ed. Philadelphia, Penn.: Reformed Episcopal Publication Society, 1963, t.p. 1932. xxx, 578 p. N.B.: On p. iii: "he revisions made ... in the Fifth Edition 1932 are those authorized by the Episcopal General Councils from 1943 through 1963."
* 

== Notes ==

== Footnotes ==

== References ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Lewis, C.S. (196-). "Miserable Offenders": an Interpretation of and Prayer Book Language it, in series, The Advent Papers. Cincinnati, Ohio: Forward Movement Publications.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

== Further reading ==
Chronological order of publication (oldest first):
*
* Forbes, Dennis (1992). Did the Almighty intend His book to be copyrighted?, European Christian Bookstore Journal, April 1992
*
* 

== External links ==
*
*
*Books of Common Prayer, from various Provinces of the Anglican Communion, curated by Charles Wohlers at Society of Archbishop Justus.
*The Prayer Book Society (UK)

 



[[Bokken]]

A daisho set of bokuto

A bokken (, bok(u), "wood", and ken, "sword") (or commonly as bokut in Japan) is a Japanese wooden sword used for training. It is usually the size and shape of a katana, but is sometimes shaped like other swords, such as the wakizashi and tant. Some ornamental bokken are decorated with mother-of-pearl work and elaborate carvings.

Bokken should not be confused with shinai, practice swords made of flexible bamboo.

==History==
Bokken were designed to lessen the damage caused by fighting with real swords and were used for the training of samurai warriors in feudal Japan. Bokken eventually became lethal weapons themselves in the hands of trained experts. Secrets of the samurai: a survey of the martial arts of feudal Japan, Authors Oscar Ratti, Adele Westbrook, Contributor Adele, Westbrook Edition reprint, illustrated, Publisher Tuttle Publishing, 1991, ISBN 0-8048-1684-0, ISBN 978-0-8048-1684-7 P.272 

Miyamoto Musashi, a kenjutsu master, was renowned for fighting fully armed foes with only one or two bokken. In a famous legend, he defeated Sasaki Kojiro with a bokken he had carved from an oar while traveling on a boat to the predetermined island for the duel. 
 The Lone Samurai: The Life Of Miyamoto Musashi, Publisher Kodansha International, 2004, ISBN 4-7700-2942-X, 9784770029423 P.19 

==Usage==
Various styles of bokken
The bokken is used as an inexpensive and relatively safe substitute for a real sword in several martial arts such as kendo, aikido and kenjutsu. Its simple wooden construction demands less care and maintenance than a katana. In addition, training with a bokken does not carry the same mortal risk associated with that of a sharp metal sword, both for the user and other practitioners near by. While its use has several advantages over use of a live edged weapon, it can still be deadly, and any training with a bokken should be done with due care. Injuries occurring from bokken are very similar to those caused by clubs and similar battering weapons and include compound fractures, ruptured organs, and other such blunt force injuries. In some ways, a bokken can be more dangerous as the injuries caused are often unseen and inexperienced practitioners may underestimate the risk of harm. It is not a sparring weapon, but is intended to be used in kata and to acclimate the student to the feel of a real sword. For sparring, a bamboo shinai is typically used instead for obvious safety reasons.

In 2003, the All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF) introduced a set of basic exercises using a bokuto called Bokuto Ni Yoru Kendo Kihon-waza Keiko-ho. This form of practice is intended primarily for kendoka up to Nidan, but can be beneficial for all kendo students. Bokuto Ni Yoru Kendo Kihon-waza Keiko-ho, 1 June 2003, All Japan Kendo Federation, Tokyo, Japan (no ISBN). 

Suburito are bokken designed for use in suburi. Suburi, literally "bare swinging," are solo cutting exercises. Suburito are thicker and heavier than normal bokken and users of suburito must therefore develop both strength and technique. Their weight makes them unsuitable for paired practice and kata. One famous user of the suburi-sized bokken is Miyamoto Musashi who used one in his duel against Sasaki Kojiro.

Bokken are currently (as of 2011) issued to the Los Angeles Police Mounted Unit for use as batons. 

==Types of bokken==
Bokken can be made to represent any style of weapon required such as nagamaki, no-dachi, yari, naginata, kama, etc. The most widely used styles are:

* dait or tachi (katana-sized), long sword
* shoto or kodachi or wakizashi bo, short sword, (wakizashi-sized)
* tant bo (tant-sized)
* suburito can be made in dait and shoto sizes

Additionally, various koryu (traditional Japanese martial arts) have their own distinct styles of bokken which can vary slightly in length, tip shape, or in whether or not a tsuba (hilt guard) is added.

The All Japan Kendo Federation specify the dimensions of bokken for use in the modern kendo kata, called Nippon kendo kata. Japanese-English Dictionary of Kendo, All Japan Kendo Federation, Tokyo, Japan (no ISBN). 
*Tachi: Total length, approx. 102 cm; tsuka (handle) approx. 24 cm.
*Kodachi: Total length, approx. 55 cm; tsuka (handle) approx. 14 cm.

==Bokken in fiction==

*In manga, Hiroyuki Takei's Shaman King, Ryu possesses a wooden sword and uses it as his main weapon, and for that reason he is also known as Bokuto no Ryu (Wooden Sword Ryu).

*In anime Bleach is an example, Ikkaku Madarame carries a bokken when in his Gigai as he wasn't allowed to carry a real sword in public.

*In the manga/anime Gintama, the main character, Gintoki Sakata, wields a bokken as opposed to a katana, as the story takes place in an Edo period of an alternate timeline where a weapons ban has been imposed by imperialistic aliens.

*Date Masamune is often portrayed as using a bokken as his main weapon in several media he has appeared in, such as Samurai Deeper Kyo and the original Samurai Warriors.

*In the Wolverine limited series (1982) by Chris Claremont and Frank Miller, Wolverine is beaten nearly to death by Shingen Yashida, using a bokken.

*Kamiya Kaoru from Rurouni Kenshin is normally seen wielding a bokken.

*Tatewaki Kuno from Ranma 1/2 as a Kendo practitioner and Captain of Kendo Club in Furinkan High, he always wield a bokken in his fight against Ranma and other opponents, excluding the final chapter of the series when he appears at Ranma and Akane's wedding wielding a real katana.

* Aoi Kunieda from Beelzebub, use bokken as her main weapon.

* Mina Hazuki from uses a bokken as her main weapon, combining it with her powers.

* Benny Imura, Nix Riley, and Chong use this weapon in the book Dust and Decay
==See also==
*Aiki-Ken
*Iaido
*Kenjutsu
*Kinomichi
*Waster

== References ==

 

==External links==

* A discussion of different woods with regard to bokken design, focusing particularly on durability
* Information about making or selecting a bokken



[[BMI]]

BMI may refer to:
* Body mass index, a numerical computation regarding height and weight

== Companies and organizations ==
* BMI, the IATA code for the Central Illinois Regional Airport
* BMI Healthcare, a British healthcare company
* Baltimore Museum of Industry
* Bank Melli Iran, the first national Iranian bank
* Birmingham and Midland Institute, not to be confused with the Birmingham Medical Institute, England
* British Midland International, a defunct airline of the United Kingdom
** bmibaby.com, a defunct low-cost airline, subsidiary of British Midland International
** bmi regional, a regional airline, former subsidiary of British Midland International
* Bundesministerium des Innern, the German Federal Ministry of the Interior
* Bureau of Military Information, a historic Union Army agency during the American Civil War

== Media and entertainment ==
* BMI Gaming, also known as BMI Worldwide, an amusement products firm
* Best Motoring International, a Japanese magazine and video series for automobiles and racing
* Broadcast Music, Inc., a collecting society for composers' copyrights
** BMI Foundation, a non-profit organization founded by Broadcast Music Incorporated

== Other uses ==
* Biculculline methiodide, a GABA-A antagonist used in neuroscience research
* Big Mac Index, a measurement of purchasing power parity across different countries, popularized by The Economist
* Bit Manipulation Instruction Sets for x86 microprocessors.
* Brain Machine Interface, a technological interface between a brain and an artificial device
* Bruno Martins Indi, a Portuguese-born Dutch footballer who currently plays as a defender for Dutch Eredivisie club Feyenoord and the Netherlands



[[BSA]]

BSA may refer to:
== Organizations ==

* Baltimore School for the Arts
* Bank Secrecy Act
* Bearing Specialists Association
* Belarusian Socialist Assembly
* Bhutan Scouts Association
* Bibliographical Society of America
* Birmingham School of Acting
* Birmingham Small Arms Company, a British manufacturer of military and civilian firearms and vehicles including motorcycles
* Bosnian Serb Army  Army of the Republika Srpska
* Boston Society of Architects, Boston Chapter of the American Institute of Architects (AIA)
* Botanical Society of America
* The Botswana Scouts Association
* Boy Scouts of America
* Brazilian Space Agency
* British Sandwich Association
* British School at Athens
* British School of Amsterdam
* British Schools of America
* British Science Association, a trading name for the British Association for the Advancement of Science
* British Sociological Association
* British South Africa Company
* British Speleological Association
* British Stammering Association
* Broadcasting Standards Authority
* Bronx Success Academy, former name of schools (now Success Academy Bronx 1 etc.), part of Success Academy Charter Schools
* BSA The Software Alliance
* Building Societies Association
* Business Services Association, the body representing UK outsourced service providers

== Science and medicine ==

* Benzenesulfonic acid
* Body surface area
* Bovine serum albumin, used as a standard for protein assay curves
* Broad-spectrum antibiotic

== Other uses ==

* Bachelor of Science in Agriculture
* Bank Secrecy Act
* Behavioral systems analysis
* Bethesda Softworks Archive, a common extension used by this company for the data needed by its games
* Bismuth (Bi), Tin (Sn), Silver (Ag) solder, a lead-free solder
* Bisphenol A
* Bis(trimethylsilyl)acetamide
* The British Soap Awards
* Birmingham Small Arms Company
* Bronze service arrowhead, properly known as the arrowhead device, an insignia of the United States Army
* BSA Company, motorcycle manufacturer
* Business system analyst or business analyst
* Base Station Almanac - A cellular providers list of base station locations used in Location Based Services

== See also ==

* BSA Bantam



[[Birmingham Small Arms Company]]

This article is not about Gamo subsidiary BSA Guns (UK) Limited or BSA Company or its successors.

The Birmingham Small Arms Company Limited (BSA) was a major industrial combine, a group of businesses manufacturing military and sporting firearms; bicycles; motorcycles; cars; buses and bodies; steel; iron castings; hand, power, and machine tools; coal cleaning and handling plants; sintered metals; and hard chrome process.

At its peak, BSA was the largest motorcycle producer in the world. Loss of sales and poor investments in new products in the motorcycle division, which included Triumph Motorcycles, led to problems for the whole group.

A government-organised rescue operation in 1973 led to the takeover of remaining operations by what is now Manganese Bronze Holdings, then owners of Norton-Villiers, and over the following decade further closures and dispersals. The original company, The Birmingham Small Arms Company Limited, remains a subsidiary of Manganese Bronze but its name was changed in 1987.

Manganese Bronze continues to operate former BSA subsidiary Carbodies, now known as LTI Limited, manufacturers of London Taxicabs and formerly the largest wholly British-owned car manufacturer. (Manganese Bronze is now owned by the Chinese company Geely)

==History of the BSA industrial group==
BSA began in June 1861 in the Gun Quarter, Birmingham, England founded specifically to manufacture guns by machinery. It was formed by a group of fourteen gunsmith members of the Birmingham Small Arms Trade Association. The market had moved against British gunsmiths following the outbreak of the Crimean War in 1854 because the Board of Ordnance's Royal Small Arms Factory at Enfield had introduced machinery made in the USA and Enfield's greatly increased output had been achieved with reduced reliance on skilled craftsmen. Taylerson, A. W. F. (1983). pages 469472. in Pollard, Hugh B. C. and Blair, Claude (eds.). Pollard's History of Firearms. Feltham, Middlesex: Country Life Books. ISBN 0-600-33154-7 The War Office provided this new grouping of gunsmiths free access to technical drawings and their facilities at their Enfield factory.

The newly formed company purchased 25 acre of land at Small Heath, Birmingham, built a factory there and made a road on the site calling it Armoury Road.

This machinery brought to Birmingham manifested the principle of the inter-changeability of parts. W.B. Stephens (Editor), A History of the County of Warwick: Volume 7: The City of Birmingham. Victoria County History, 1964 

===Firearms===
BSA's resort to the use of machinery was rewarded in 1863 with an order for 20,000 Turkish infantry rifles. The management of the BSA Company was changed at an Extraordinary Meeting called on 30 September 1863 when the Company was changed from being run by a committee to that of an elected Board of Directors, Joseph Wilson, Samuel Buckley, Isaac Hollis, Charles Playfair, Charles Pryse, Sir John Ratcliffe, Edward Gem, and J.F. Swinburn under the chairmanship of John Dent Goodman. Ryerson, Barry (1980). The Giants of Small Heath: The History of BSA. Haynes. ISBN 0-85429-255-1 

The first War Office contract was not agreed until 1868. In 1879 the factory, without work, was shut for a year. The military arms trade was precarious. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 48. ISBN 0-521-89400-X 

===New ventures===

====Bicycles====
The next year BSA branched out into bicycle manufacture. The gun factory proved remarkably adaptable to the manufacture of cycle parts. What cycles needed was large quantities of standard parts accurately machined at low prices. In 1880 BSA manufactured the Otto Dicycle, In the 1880s the company began to manufacture safety bicycles on their own account and not until 1905 was the company's first experimental motorcycle constructed. Bicycle production ceased in 1887 as the company concentrated on producing the Lee-Metford magazine loading rifle for the War Office which was re-equipping the British Army with it. The order was for 1,200 rifles per week. BSA recommenced manufacturing bicycles on their own behalf from 1908. BSA Cycles Ltd was set up in 1919 for the manufacture of both bicycles and motorcycles. BSA sold the bicycle business to Raleigh in 1957 after separating the bicycle and motorcycle business in 1953.

====Bicycle components====
In 1893 BSA commenced making bicycle hubs and continued to supply the cycle trade with bicycle parts up to 1936. BSA bought The Eadie Manufacturing Company of Redditch in 1907 and so began to manufacture the Eadie two speed hub gear and the Eadie coaster brake hub. BSA also signed an agreement with the Three Speed Gear Syndicate in 1907 to manufacture a 3 speed hub under licence. This was later classified as the Sturmey Archer Type X. BSA introduced a 'Duo' hub in the late 1930s which was capable of one fixed gear and one gear with a freewheel. All BSA hub gear production temporarily ceased in 1939, until they recommenced making their 3 speed hub around 1945. The Eadie coaster hub made a brief return in 1953 on two BSA bicycle models. BSA forever ceased production of their hub gears in 1955.

====Ammunition====
BSA sold its ammunition business in 1897 to Birmingham Metal and Munitions Company Limited part of the Nobel-Dynamite Trust, through Kynoch a forerunner of ICI. Ryerson, Barry (1980). The Giants of Small Heath: The History of BSA. Haynes. p. 16. ISBN 0-85429-255-1 

====Sparkbrook====
In 1906 Frank Dudley Docker was appointed a director of the company. By the autumn of that year BSA was in some difficulty. They had purchased the Sparkbrook Royal Small Arms Factory from the War Office, and in return, the War Office undertook to give BSA a quarter of all orders for Lee-Enfield rifles. But, the War Office did not honour their undertaking. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 0-521-89400-X The ensuing financial crisis did not prevent BSA from signing an agreement to amalgamate with another bicycle component manufacturer, the Eadie Manufacturing Company of Redditch, on 11 February 1907. That decision was ratified by the shareholders of both companies at separate Extraordinary General Meetings held in the Grand Hotel, Birmingham on 27 February 1907. Albert Eadie became a BSA director, a post he held until his death in 1931. 

====Motorcycles====
Motor bicycles were added to bicycle products in 1910. The BSA 3 hp was exhibited at the 1910 Olympia Show, London for the 1911 season. The entire BSA production sold out in 1911, 1912 and 1913. 

====Motor cars====

=====BSA cars=====

In an effort to make use of the Sparkbrook factory BSA established a motorcar department there. An independent part of it was occupied by Lanchester Motor Company. The first prototype automobile was produced in 1907. The following year, marketed under BSA Cycles Ltd, the company sold 150 automobiles and again began producing complete bicycles on its own account. By 1909 it was clear the new motorcar department was unsuccessful; an investigation committee reported to the BSA Board on the many failures of its management and their poor organisation of production.

=====Daimler vehicles=====

Dudley Docker had joined the board in 1906 and was appointed deputy chairman of BSA in 1909. He had made a spectacular financial success of a merger of five large rolling-stock companies in 1902 and become the leader of the period's merger movement. Believing he could buy the missing management skills that could not be found within BSA he started merger talks with The Daimler Company Limited of Coventry. Daimler and Rover were then the largest British car producers. Daimler was immensely profitable. After its capital reconstruction in 1904 Daimler's profits were 57 per cent and 150 per cent returns on invested capital in 1905 and 1906. The attraction for Daimler shareholders was the apparent stability of BSA. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 49-50. ISBN 0-521-89400-X 

So in 1910 BSA purchased Daimler with BSA shares but Docker who negotiated the arrangements either ignored or failed in his assessment of their consequences for the new combine. The combine was never adequately balanced or co-ordinated. One of the financial provisions obliged Daimler to pay BSA an annual dividend of 100,000 representing approximately 40 per cent of the actual cash BSA had put into Daimler. This financial burden deprived Daimler of badly needed cash to fund development, forcing the Daimler company to borrow money from the Midland Bank. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-521-89400-X 

BSA had still not recovered financially from the earlier purchase of Royal Small Arms factory at Sparkbrook and BSA were not in a position to finance Daimler, nor had either company ample liquid resources. BSA went ahead with motorcycle production in 1910, their first model available for the 1911 season. In 1913 the BSA group were compelled through pressure from the Midland Bank to make a capital issue of 300,000 preference shares. In the short term this was to solve the liquidity issue but further diluted the groups capitalisation. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 50-52. ISBN 0-521-89400-X 

Dudley Docker retired as a BSA director in 1912 and installed Lincoln Chandler on the BSA board as his replacement. Dudley Docker liked to draw a comparison between the BSA~Daimler merger he engineered and that of his 1902 merger of Metropolitan Carriage Wagon & Finance Company and Patent Shaft. However there was not the integration of facilities in the BSA~Daimler case, nor was there a reorganisation of either BSA or Daimler and in view of the earlier criticism contained in the 1909 report of the investigation committee, BSA continued to produce cars of their own using Daimler engines. In 1913 Daimler employed 5,000 workers to manufacture 1,000 vehicles, an indication that things were not well. Davenport-Hines, R. P. T. (2002). Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 52. ISBN 0-521-89400-X 

=====Steel bodies=====
In 1912, BSA would be one of two automobile manufacturers pioneering the use of all-steel bodies, joining Hupmobile in the US. , p. 63. 

===First World War===
During the First World War, the company returned to arms manufacture and greatly expanded its operations. BSA produced rifles, Lewis guns, shells, motorcycles and other vehicles for the war effort.

===Inter-war years===
1935 magazine advert for the BSA range of motorcycles and 3-wheeler cars

====Motorcycles====

In November 1919 BSA launched their first 50 degree vee-twin, Model E, 770cc side valve (6-7 hp) motorcycle for the 1920 season. BSA Cycles Ltd 1920 Advertisement Suggestions for BSA Bicycles and Motor Bicycles, The Birmingham Small Arms Company, no ISBN The machine had interchangeable valves, total loss oil system with mechanical pump and an emergency hand one. Retail price was 130. Other features were Amac carburettor, chain drive, choice of magneto or Magdyno, 7-plate clutch, 3 speed gear box with kickstarter and new type of cantilever fork Ryerson, Barry 1980 The Giants of Small Heath - The History of BSA, Sparkford, ISBN 0-85429-255-1 

====Aviation====

During the war Daimler had built enormous numbers of aero engines and aircraft and by the end was building 80 Airco de Havilland bombers a month. In February 1920 BSA amalgamated Air Transport Combine. Aircraft And B.S.A. Firms Unite The Times, Monday, 1 Mar 1920; pg. 14; Issue 42347 with what was the world's largest aircraft manufacturer, Aircraft Manufacturing Company (Airco), Airco's main plant at Hendon had employed between 7,000 and 8,000 people. Mr. G. Holt Thomas. The Times, Friday, 4 Jan 1929; pg. 14; Issue 45092 The Airco group of companies had turned out a new aircraft every 45 minutes. Mr. G. Holt Thomas. Colonel G. W. Dawes. The Times, Saturday, 5 Jan 1929; pg. 14; Issue 45093 

Within days BSA discovered Airco was in a far more serious financial state than George Holt Thomas had revealed. Holt Thomas was immediately dropped from his new seat on the BSA board and all BSA's new acquisitions were placed in the hands of a liquidator. Some of the businesses were allowed to continue for some years, Aircraft Transport and Travel's assets being eventually rolled into Daimler Air Hire to make Daimler Airway Limited. BSA failed to pay a dividend for the following four years while it tried to recover from its losses. Dudley Docker: The Life and Times of a Trade Warrior R. P. T. Davenport-Hines 1984 Cambridge University Press Some relief was achieved when in March 1924 Daimler Airway and its management became the major constituent of Imperial Airways.

As well as the Daimler car range, BSA Cycles Ltd re-entered the car market under the BSA name in 1921 with a V-twin engined light car followed by four-cylinder models up to 1926, when the name was temporarily dropped. In 1929 a new range of 3- and 4-wheel cars appeared and production of these continued until 1936.

By 1930 the BSA Group's primary activities were BSA motorcycles and Daimler vehicles. The Birmingham Small Arms Company The Times, Saturday, 1 November 1930; pg. 20; Issue 45659 

Car production under the BSA name ceased in the 1930s.

====Lanchester====

In 1931 the Lanchester Motor Company at Sparkbrook was acquired The Lanchester Company FROM OUR MOTORING CORRESPONDENT The Times, Tuesday, 6 Jan 1931; pg. 10; Issue 45713 The Birmingham Small Arms Company A Difficult Trading Year, Important Transactions Effected The Times, Saturday, 28 Nov 1931; pg. 17; Issue 45992 from Hamilton Barnsley, the principal shareholder, chairman and managing director. Negotiated shortly before his death during Christmas time 1930. The Lanchester Motor Company held adjoining factory premises at Sparkbrook. The purchase of the whole of the shares was completed in January 1931 for 26,000. and production of their cars transferred to Daimler's Coventry works. The first new product was a version of the Daimler Light Twenty or 16/20 and called Lanchester 15/18.

Lanchester Type 1518 - 1932 5905514590.jpg|Lanchester 15/18October 19312504 cc6
Lanchester Ten 6-light saloon 1936 5917710821 3a71f2bf4b o.jpg|Lanchester TenSeptember 19321203 cc4
Daimler 15 HP 1934 4860323967 .jpg|Daimler FifteenSeptember 19321805 cc6
BSA 10 1185cc October 1933.JPG|BSA TenOctober 19321185 cc4

====Armaments====
In the 1930s, the board of directors authorised expenditure on bringing their arms-making equipment back to use  it had been stored at company expense since the end of the Great War in the belief that BSA might again be called upon to perform its patriotic duty.

===Second World War===
By the outbreak of the Second World War, BSA Guns Ltd at Small Heath, was the only factory producing rifles in the UK. The Royal Ordnance Factories would not begin production until 1941. BSA Guns Ltd was also producing .303 Browning machine guns for the Air Ministry at the rate of 600 guns per week in March 1939 and Browning production was to peak at 16,390 per month by March 1942. The armed forces had chosen the 500 cc side-valve BSA M20 motorcycle as their preferred machine. On the outbreak of war the Government requisitioned the 690 machines BSA had in stock as well as placing an order for another 8,000 machines. South Africa, ire, India, Sweden and Holland also wanted machines.

The Government passed the Emergency Powers (Defence) Act 1939 on 24 August allowing the drafting of defence regulations affecting food, travel, requisitioning of land and supplies, manpower and agricultural production. A second Emergency Powers (Defence) Act was passed on 22 May 1940 allowing the conscription of labour. The fall of France had not been anticipated in Government planning and the encirclement of a large part of the British Expeditionary Force into the Dunkirk pocket resulted in a hasty evacuation of that part of the B.E.F following the abandonment of their equipment. The parlous state of affairs "no arms, no transport, no equipment" in the face of the threat of imminent invasion of Britain by Nazi forces was recorded by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke in his diary entries of the 1/2 July 1940. War Diaries 1939 -1945 Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke, London 2001, ISBN 0-297-60731-6 

The creation of the Home Guard (initially as the Local Defence Volunteers) following Anthony Eden's broadcast appeal to the Nation on Tuesday 14 May 1940 also created further demand for arms production to equip this new force. BSA, as the only rifle producer in Britain, had to step up to the mark and the workforce voluntarily went onto a seven-day week. BSA Centenary 1861 - 1961, BSA Group News, No.17 June 1961, The Birmingham Small Arms Company, no ISBN Motorcycle production was also stepped up from 500 to 1,000 machines per week which meant a finished machine coming off the production line every 5 minutes. The motorcycle department had been left intact in 1939 due to demand which was doubled following Dunkirk. At the same time BSA staff were providing lectures and demonstrations on motorcycle riding and maintenance to 250,000 officers and men in all parts of the UK.

The BSA factory at Small Heath was bombed by the Luftwaffe on 26 August 1940 resulting in one H.E.bomb and a shower of incendiaries hitting the main barrel mill which was the only one operating on service rifles in the country, causing the unaffordable loss of 750 machine tools but fortunately no loss of life. BSA Centenary 1861 - 1961, BSA Group News, No. 17 June 1961, The Birmingham Small Arms Company, no ISBN Two further air raids took place on 19 and 22 November 1940. Godwin, Tommy It wasn't that easy - The Tommy Godwin story, John Pinkerton Memorial Publishing Fund, 2007, ISBN 978-0-9552115-5-3 The air raid of 19 November did the most damage, causing loss of production and trapping hundreds of workers. Two BSA night-shift electricians, Alf Stevens and Alf Goodwin, helped rescue their fellow workers. Alf Stevens was awarded the George Medal for his selfless acts of bravery in the rescue and Alf Goodwin was awarded the British Empire Medal. Workers involved in the works Civil Defence were brought in to help search for and clear bodies to get the plant back into production. The net effect of the November raids was to destroy machine shops in the four-storey 1915 building, the original 1863 gunsmiths' building and nearby buildings, 1,600 machine tools, kill 53 employees, injure 89, 30 of them seriously and halt rifle production for three months.

The Government Ministry of Supply and BSA immediately began a process of production dispersal throughout Britain, through the shadow factory scheme. Factories were set up at Tipton, Dudley, Smethwick, Blackheath, Lye, Kidderminster, Stourport, Tyseley, and Bromsgrove to manufacture Browning machine guns, Stoke, Corsham, and Newcastle-under-Lyme produced the Hispano cannon, Leicester and Studley Road produced the Besa machine gun, Ruislip produced the Oerlikon 20mm cannon, Stafford produced rocket projectiles, Tamworth produced two-pounder gun carriages, Mansfield produced the Boys Anti-tank gun and Shirley produced rifles. These were dispersal factories which were in addition to Small Heath and the other BSA factories opened in the two years following the 1940 blitz. At its peak Small Heath was running 67 factories engaged in war production. BSA operations were also dispersed to other companies under licence.

In 1941 BSA was approached to produce a new pedal cycle with a maximum weight allowance of only 22 lb especially for airborne use. This required a new concept in frame design which BSA found, producing a machine which weighed 21 lb, one pound less than the design specification and which also exceeded the design requirement for an effective life of 50 miles many times over. Over 60,000 folding bicycles were produced, a figure equal to half the total production of military bicycles during World War II. BSA also produced folding motorcycles for the Airborne Division. In late 1942 BSA examined the Special Operations Executive designed Welgun with a view to manufacture. BSA were willing to manufacture the gun in the quantities required starting April 1943 but the cheaper and less accurate Sten Mk IV was adopted for production by the Ministry of Supply. Boyce, Frederick and Everett, Douglas, S.O.E.- The Scientific Secrets Stroud, Gloucester, 2003, ISBN 0-7509-3165-5 BSA bought the Sunbeam motorcycles and bicycle business from Associated Motor Cycles Ltd in 1943 and then Ariel Motors Ltd in 1944. During the course of the conflict BSA produced 1,250,000 Lee Enfield .303 service rifles, 404,383 Sten sub-machine guns, 468,098 Browning machine guns plus spares equivalent to another 100,000, 42,532 Hispano cannon, 32,971 Oerlikon cannon, 59,322 7.9 mm Besa machine guns, 3,218 15 mm Besa machine guns, 68,882 Boys Anti-tank guns, 126,334 motorcycles, 128,000 military bicycles (over 60,000 of which were folding paratrooper bicycles), 10,000,000 shell fuse cases, 3,485,335 magazines and 750,000 anti-aircraft rockets were supplied to the armed forces. 

At the same time other parts of the Group were having similar problems. Before World War II Daimler had been linked with other Coventry motor manufacturers in a government-backed scheme for aero engine manufacture and had been allocated two shadow factories. Apart from this, BSA-owned Daimler was producing Scout Cars and Daimler Mk I Armoured Cars which had been designed by BSA at Small Heath not Coventry as well as gun turrets, gun parts, tank transmissions, rocket projectiles and other munitions. This activity had not gone unnoticed by the enemy, which made Radford Works a target in the Coventry air raids. Radford Works received direct hits in four separate air raids during 1940. None of these attacks were to seriously disrupt production, however two more serious air raids were carried out in April 1941 which destroyed half the factory. In all it is estimated that 170 bombs containing 52,000 lbs of explosive were dropped on Radford Works as well as the thousands of incendiaries. Like BSA, Daimler had to find dispersal units. A back-handed compliment was paid by Field Marshal Rommel to the workers at Radford Works when he used a captured Daimler Scout to escape following his defeat at El Alamein.

===Post-war===
As the result of increased post war demand the Small Heath, Birmingham factory was turned over entirely to motorcycle production.

BSA produced the first Sunbeam bicycle catalogue in 1949 and produced its own '4 Star' derailleur gear with an associated splined cassette hub and 4 sprocket cassette. BSA Cycles Ltd, 1951 Bicycle Replacement Parts, BSA, Sunbeam, New Hudson Birmingham Small Arms Company Ltd, no ISBN This design was different from the 1930s Bayliss Wiley cassette hub which had a threaded sprocket carrier. BSA bought New Hudson motorcycle and bicycle business in 1950 and followed this up in 1951 with the purchase of Triumph Motorcycles which brought Jack Sangster onto the BSA board. The effect of this acquisition was to make BSA into the largest producer of motorcycles in the world at that time.

1952 saw BSA establish a Professional Cycling Team. Bob Maitland a successful amateur cyclist and the highest placed British finisher in the 1948 Olympic Games road race and now an independent rider in the BSA team was a BSA employee working in the design office as a draughtsman. It was Bob Maitland who was responsible for the design of post war BSA range of lightweight sports bicycles based on his knowledge of cycling. Godwin, Tommy It wasn't that easy  the Tommy Godwin story, John Pinkerton Memorial Publishing Fund, 2007, ISBN 978-0-9552115-5-3 Bob Maitland also made some of the components used on the bicycles of the professional team which were not standard production machines. In the 1952 Tour of Britain Road Race run between Friday 22 August and Saturday 6 September, involving 14 individual stages and covering a total race distance of 1,470 miles, the BSA team of Bob Maitland, Tiny Thomas, Pete Proctor, Alf Newman and Stan Jones won the overall team race and Pete Proctor King of the Mountains classification. The riders also enjoyed success on the individual stages of the race. The team competed in four further events, 14 September Tour of the Chilterns, 1st Tiny Thomas and Team Prize, 21 September Weston-Super-Mare Grand Prix, Team Prize, 28 September Staffordshire Grand Prix, 1st Bob Maitland and Team Prize, 5 October Tour Revenge Race, Dublin, 1st Tiny Thomas and Team prize. BSA Cycles Ltd, The Story of How BSA Won The Daily Express TOUR OF BRITAIN TEAM PRIZE and The King of the Mountains, Birmingham Small Arms (1952), no ISBN 

In 1953 BSA withdrew motorcycle production from BSA Cycles Ltd, the company it has established in 1919, by creating BSA Motorcycles Ltd. BSA also produced its 100,000th BSA Bantam motorcycle, a fact celebrated at the 1953 motorcycle show with a visit by Sir Anthony Eden to the BSA stand. In 1953 the BSA Professional Cycling Team was managed by Syd Cozens. Successes were 5/6 April Bournmouth 2 Day Road Race, 1st Bob Maitland, 12 April Dover to London 63 Miles Road Race, 1st Stan Jones, 31 May Langsett 90 Miles Road Race, 1st Bob Maitland and King of the Mountains, 7 June Tour of the Wrekin, 1st Bob Maitland, 12 July Severn Valley 100 Miles Road Race, 1st Tiny Thomas, 19 July Jackson Trophy, Newcastle, Team Prize, 9 August Les Adams Memorial 80 Miles Road Race, 1st Alf Newman, Team Prize, King of the Mountains Arthur Ilsley, 30 August Weston-Super-Mare 100 Miles Grand Prix, 1st Bob Maitland, Team Prize. The team also competed in the 1,624 mile, 12 stage, 1953 Tour of Britain Road Race. The 1953 line up had changed as Arthur Ilsley replaced Pete Proctor in the team. Tiny Thomas won the overall individual classification, the Team were runners-up in the team competition and Arthur Ilsley was 3rd in the King of the Mountains competition. Bob Maitland also had notable success by winning the Independent National Championship. BSA Cycles Ltd, 1st BSA Wins Daily Express Tour of Britain, Birmingham Small Arms, (November 1953), no ISBN 

1954 saw the introduction of the BSA Quick Release 3 Speed hub gear. It was a split axle three speed gear intended for use with bicycles equipped with oil bath chainguards. The original BSA 3 speed hub gear had been made under licence from the Three-Speed Gear Syndicate since 1907. The design was later to be classified as the Sturmey-Archer 'Type X', but all BSA hub gear production ceased in 1955 Hadland, Tony The Sturmey-Archer Story, privately published, (1987), ISBN 0-9507431-2-7 

Sir Bernard Docker remained chairman of BSA until 1956 when the BSA removed him. In an acrimonious dispute conducted in the media the matter was brought to the BSA shareholders at the Annual General Meeting where the decision of the Board was upheld. Another significant departure for the fortune of the BSA Group but less controversial was the retirement on ill health grounds of James Leek CBE, Managing Director from 1939 until his retirement. Sir Bernard Docker was replaced as Chairman of the BSA Board by Jack Sangster. 

The BSA bicycle division, BSA Cycles Ltd., including the BSA cycle dealer network was sold to Raleigh in 1957. Bowden, Gregory Houston (1975). The Story of the Raleigh Cycle. London: Allen. ISBN 0-491-01675-1 Raleigh initially continued bicycle production in Birmingham at Coventry Road, Sheldon, Birmingham 26 into the early 1960s using up BSA parts but as time went on more stock Raleigh parts and fittings were used, some continuing to bear the 'piled arms' stamp. TI Group owners of the British Cycle Corporation bought Raleigh in 1960 thus gaining access to the BSA brand. Bicycles bearing the BSA name are currently manufactured and distributed within India by TI Cycles of India but have no direct connection to the original Birmingham BSA company.

In 1960, Daimler was sold off to Jaguar.

1961 was the centenary year of the BSA Group and in recognition of this milestone the company magazine produced an anniversary issue of BSA Group News in June BSA Centenary 18611961 in which many of the achievements of the Group were celebrated. This year also saw the end of military rifle production, however BSA still continued to make sporting guns. In 1986 BSA Guns was liquidated, the assets bought and renamed BSA Guns (UK) Ltd. The company continues to make air rifles and shotguns, and is still based in Small Heath in Birmingham.

====Norton-Villiers-Triumph====

The Group continued to expand and acquire throughout the 1950s, but by 1965 competition from Japan (in the shape of companies like Honda, Yamaha and Suzuki) and Europe from Jawa / CZ, Bultaco and Husqvarna was eroding BSA's market share. The BSA (and Triumph range) were no longer aligned with the markets; mopeds were displacing scooter sales and the trials and scrambles areas were now the preserve of European two-strokes. Some poor marketing decisions and expensive projects contributed to substantial losses. For example, the development and production investment of the Ariel 3, an ultra stable 3-wheel moped, was not recouped by sales; the loss has been estimated at 2 million. Furthermore, BSA failed to take seriously the threat that key-start Japanese motor cycles might completely destroy the market for kick-started BSA motor cycles.

In 1968, BSA announced many changes to its product line of singles, twins and the new three-cylinder machine named the "Rocket three" for the 1969 model year. It now concentrated on the more promising USA, and to a lesser extent, Canadian, markets. However, despite the adding of modern accessories, for example, turn signals and even differing versions of the A65 twins for home and export sale, the damage had been done and the end was near.

Reorganisation in 1971 concentrated motorcycle production at Meriden, Triumph's site, with production of components and engines at BSA's Small Heath. At the same time there were redundancies and the selling of assets. Barclays Bank arranged financial backing to the tune of 10 million.

Upgrades and service bulletins continued until 1972, but the less service-intensive Japanese bikes had by then flooded the market on both sides of the Atlantic. The merger with Norton Villers was started in late 1972, and for a brief time a Norton 500 single was built with the B50-based unit-single engine, but few if any were sold publicly. The BSA unit single B50's 500 cc enjoyed much improvement in the hands of the CCM motorcycle company allowing the basic BSA design to continue until the mid to late 1970s in a competitive form all over Europe.

By 1972, BSA was so moribund that, with bankruptcy imminent, its motorcycle businesses were merged (as part of a government-initiated rescue plan) with the Manganese Bronze company, Norton-Villiers, to become Norton-Villiers-Triumph with the intention of producing and marketing Norton and Triumph motorcycles at home and abroad. In exchange for its motorcycle businesses, Manganese Bronze received BSA Group's non-motorcycle-related divisionsnamely, Carbodies. Although the BSA name was left out of the new company's name, a few products continued to be made carrying it until 1973. The final range was just four models: Gold Star 500, 650 Thunderbolt/Lightning and the 750 cc Rocket Three.

However, the plan involved the axing of some brands, large redundancies and consolidation of production at two sites. This scheme to rescue and combine Norton, BSA and Triumph failed in the face of worker resistance. Norton's and BSA's factories were eventually shut down, while Triumph staggered on to fail four years later.
BSA logo

==Trademarks==

===Motorcycles===
Rights went to Norton Villiers Triumph and on its liquidation were purchased by a new company formed by management and named BSA Company Limited.

===Guns===
Rights were acquired by Gamo for its new subsidiary BSA Guns (UK) Limited

==Products==

===Bicycles===
According to Charles Spencer, BSA was manufacturing the "Delta" bicycle circa 1869. In 1880 the company was approached to manufacture the "Otto Dicycle". An initial contract was signed to produce 210 and a further contract followed for a further 200. In all it is believed that a total of 953 Otto machines were made. BSA then went into bicycle production on their own account, the first machines to their own specification being exhibited at the 1881 Stanley Show. BSA went on to design and manufacture a "safety" bicycle (patent:15,342 of 1884). BSA was also producing tricycles and a licence was obtained in 1885 to manufacture ball bearings. BSA ceased bicycle manufacture in 1887 because of the demand for arms. Bicycle component manufacture commenced in 1894 and BSA continued to supply the bicycle trade up to 1936. The company recommenced bicycle manufacture on their own account again in 1908 and these were exhibited at the Stanley Show in 1909. Millar, Ray (2009). An Encyclopaedia of Cycle Manufacturers: The Early Years up to 1918. (2nd ed.) Britain: John Pinkerton Memorial Publishing Fund. ISBN 978-0-9560430-5-4 Bicycle manufacture was what led BSA into motorcycles. BSA produced bicycles for both the police and military and notably a folding bicycle for the British Army during World War I Birmingham Small Arms, 1918, BSA History from the days of the Crimea , Birmingham, no ISBN B.S.A. History booklet 1914 and the more well known folding Paratroopers bicycle during World War II. BSA supplied the Irish Army with bicycles after 1922.

BSA manufactured a range of bicycles from utility roadsters through to racing bicycles. The BSA range of Sports bicycles expanded in the 1930s following the granting of a patent for a new lighter design of seat lug in 1929 Intellectual Property Office, (patent application date 4 July 1929), GB332384(A) Improvements in or relating to the construction of cycle frames BSA Birmingham, no ISBN and tandems were introduced into the BSA bicycle range as well. BSA had a reputation for quality and durability and their components were more expensive that either Chater-Lea or Brampton. BSA launched a high end club cyclists machine in the early 1930s initially branded as the "Super-eeze". Never slow to avail of publicity BSA sponsored the great Australian cyclist Hubert Opperman and re-branded the top of the range machine the "Opperman" model. A less expensive range of clubman lightweight machines was introduced from 1936 with the "Cyclo" 3 speed derailleur equipped "Clubman". Subtle changes were made to the range, most models being equipped with "Russ" patent forks and some models were made for only two seasons. This all stopped around September 1939 with the outbreak of war. A revised catalogue with a much reduced range was issued in March 1940 which also saw the launch of the BSA "Streamlight" model. A novel all white bicycle was produced for the blackout but had disappeared from a severely reduced bicycle range the details of which were circulated to dealers from December 1941. BSA had ceased production of their 3 speed hub gear in 1939 and production appears to have started again by 1945 although with a black finish instead of chromium plating. BSA bought Sunbeam in 1943 and produced Sunbeam bicycles using up existing frames and parts and using BSA components for the missing bits. The first BSA produced Sunbeam catalogue was published in 1949 Pinkerton, John; Roberts, Derek; Hadland, Tony; and Lawrence, Scotford (2002). Sunbeam Cycles: The Story from the Catalogues, 18871957 . Birmingham: Pinkerton Press. ISBN 0-9536174-3-2 

Post war BSA expanded their bicycle range but faced problems of shortages of raw materials such as steel and was required to export a lot of their manufactured output in order to get a Government licence to purchase the necessary raw materials. The company moved bicycle production to the new Waverley Works after World War II. BSA continued to innovate introducing the 4 Star derailleur gear in 1949 Berto, Frank J. et al. (2005). The Dancing Chain: History and Development of the Derailleur Bicycle. (2nd ed.) San Francisco, CA: Van der Plas Publications/Cycle Publishing. p. 168. ISBN 1-89249-541-4 along with an associated 4-speed 'unit' or cassette hub. The derailleur design was altered from 1950 BSA Cycles Ltd, June 1950 Bicycle Catalogue It's Time You Had a BSA Birmingham Small Arms Company Ltd, no ISBN and was certainly available up to 1953 but was not a great success. BSA bought New Hudson in 1950 BSA Cycles Ltd, April 1950 Letter to Dealers reference newspaper advertising campaign for New Hudson bicycles to be run in local newspapers from March to August 1950, Birmingham, no ISBN and started to manufacture and sell New Hudson branded machines as well as Sunbeam. It appears that the top of the range BSA lightweight club cyclist machine was the "Gold Column" and this appears to have been changed into the BSA "Tour of Britain" model following the success of the BSA Professional Cycling Team in the 1952 Tour of Britain race. The "Tour of Britain" model was heavily promoted in the BSA 1953 sales literature. The factory made "Tour of Britain" model was not the same as those ridden by the professional team. Only eight machines were crafted for the professional team and none of the components appear to have been standard BSA parts. 1953 saw BSA separate the bicycle / motorcar and motorcycle business into different holdings.

The good times were coming to an end and demand for bicycles fell with the end of rationing in 1954. BBC ON THIS DAY | 4 | 1954: Housewives celebrate end of rationing James Leek, managing director of BSA Cycles Ltd was suffering ill health and he retired in 1956, the same year the BSA Chairman, Sir Bernard Docker, Time magazine 11 June 1956 was removed from the BSA Board. Jack Sangster who had joined the BSA Board in 1951 following the purchase of his company Triumph Motorcycles became Chairman. The bicycle manufacturing business BSA Cycles Ltd was sold to Raleigh Industries in 1957.

===Motorcycles from 1910===

BSA Motorcycles were made by BSA Cycles Ltd, under the BSA parent, up until 1953 when the motorcycle business was moved into holding BSA Motorcycles Ltd. The first instance of intention to produce motorcycles was reported in The Motor Cycle, a British motorcycling journal, in July 1906. Motor Cycle, 7 July 1966. p.26 Flashbacks to 1906. 16 July 1906. "We hear that the Birmingham Small Arms Co Ltd, the makers of well known and renowned BSA fittings, who recently purchased the Government Small Arms factory at Sparkbrook, Birmingham, for motor work, have decided to take up the manufacture of a light motor bicycle". Accessed and added 2014-05-29 The first wholly BSA motorcycle, the 3 H.P. VJMC Northern Counties Classic Bike Show 2009 | Flickr  Condivisione di foto! was built in 1910 and displayed at the first Olympia Show, London on 21 November in that year. Sir Hallewell Rogers, BSA Chairman, had informed the shareholders at the Company's 1910 AGM in Birmingham "We have decided to put a motor-bicycle on the market for the coming season .... These machines will be on exhibit at the Cycle and Motor Show on November 21st, after which date we look forward to commencing delivery". The machines were available for the 1911 season and entire production sold out. BSA had previously acquired a commercially available engine in 1905 and fitted it to one of their bicycle frames and discovered at first hand the problems that needed to be overcome. BSA Cycles Ltd was set up as a subsidiary company in 1919 under Managing Director Charles Hyde to manufacture both bicycles and motorcycles. 

BSA produced their only two stroke motorcycle design for the 1928 season, the 1.74 H.P. Model A28 with two speed gearbox. It was produced as the A29 and A30 the following two years and became the A31 with a three-speed gearbox in 1931, the last year of production. The post-war 'Bantam' was a German DKW design, part of war reparation, and not a true BSA design.

BSA motorcycles were sold as affordable motorcycles with reasonable performance for the average user. BSA stressed the reliability of their machines, the availability of spares and dealer support. The motorcycles were a mixture of sidevalve and OHV engines offering different performance for different roles, e.g. hauling a sidecar. The bulk of use would be for commuting. BSA motorcycles were also popular with "fleet buyers" in Britain, who (for example) used the Bantams for telegram delivery for the Post Office or motorcycle/sidecar combinations for AA patrols The Automobile Association (AA) breakdown help services. This mass market appeal meant they could claim "one in four is a BSA" on advertising.

Machines with better specifications were available for those who wanted more performance or for competition work.

Initially, after the Second World War, BSA motorcycles were not generally seen as racing machines, compared to the likes of Norton. In the immediate post-war period few were entered in races such as the TT races, though this changed dramatically in the Junior Clubman event (smaller engine motorcycles racing over some 3 or 4 laps around one of the Isle of Man courses). In 1947 there were but a couple of BSA mounted riders, but by 1952 BSA were in the majority and in 1956 the makeup was 53 BSA, 1 Norton and 1 Velocette.

To improve US sales, in 1954, for example, BSA entered a team of riders in the 200 mile Daytona beach race with a mixture of single cylinder Gold Stars and twin cylinder Shooting Stars assembled by Roland Pike. The BSA team riders took first, second, third, fourth, and fifth places with two more riders finishing at 8th and 16th. This was the first case of a one brand sweep. BSA: 50 years later 

The BSA factory experienced success in the sport of motocross with Jeff Smith riding a B40 to capture the 1964 and 1965 FIM 500 cc Motocross World Championships. It would be the last year the title would be won by a four-stroke machine until the mid-1990s. A BSA motocross machine was often colloquially known as a "Beezer."

Birmingham rocker Steve Gibbons released a song "BSA" on his 1980 album "Saints & Sinners" as a tribute to the Gold Star. He still plays this song with his band and often performs on the Isle of Man at the TT races.

===Motorcycle models===

====Pre World War II====
1935 BSA Blue Star
*3 hp
*Model E
*Model A28
*C10 sidevalve 250 cc 1938 on design by Val Page
*G14 1000 cc V-twin
*Blue Star
*Empire Star
*Silver Star
*Gold Star
*Sloper
*M20 (500cc):as the WD (War Department) M20 the motorcycle of the British Army in World War II
*M21 (600cc): the big brother of the M20, also used by the British Army in World War II

====Post World War II====
1957 BSA Golden Flash 650
1969 BSA Royal Star
*A series Twins (four-stroke, pushrod parallel twins)
**A7
***A7 Shooting Star - 500cc pre-unit construction
**A10 - 650cc pre-unit construction
***A10 Golden Flash
***A10 Super Flash
***A10 Road Rocket
***A10 Super Rocket
***A10 Rocket Gold Star
**A50 - 500cc unit construction
***A50R Royal Star
***A50C Cyclone
***A50W Wasp
**A65 - 650cc unit construction
***A65 Star Twin
***A65R Rocket
***A65T Thunderbolt
***A65L Lightning
***A65S Spitfire
***A65H Hornet
***A65F Firebird Scrambler
**A70L Lightning 750

*Triples (four-stroke, pushrod, three-cylinder engines) - The BSA Rocket 3/Triumph Trident were developed together. The Rocket 3 shares a majority of engine components and cycle parts with the Trident T150, but has forward-inclined cylinder barrels, BSA frame and cycle parts.
**A75R Rocket3 750
**A75RV Rocket3 750 - 5 speed
**A75V Rocket3 750 - 5 speed

*Singles (Four-stroke single cylinder)
**C25 Barracuda
**B25 Starfire - 250cc unit construction
**B25FS Fleetstar
**B25 SS Gold Star
**BSA B31 single
**B32 Gold Star
**B33
**B34 Gold Star
**B40 350 Star - 350cc unit construction
**B40 SS90
**B44 Victor
**B44
***B44SS Shooting Star
***B44VS Victor Special
**B50
***B50SS Gold Star 500
***B50T Victor Trials
***B50MX Motocross

*C series (Four-stroke 250 cc single-cylinder).

**C10

**C11/C11G: - 70 mi/h - 85mpg - weight 250 lb.
The C11 used a C10 motor fitted with an overhead valve cylinder head. The C11 frame was almost unchanged until 1951 when BSA added plunger rear suspension. Early gearboxes were weak and unreliable. The C11G was available with a three ratio gearbox and rigid frame or a four ratio gearbox and a plunger frame. Both models had better front brakes than earlier models. This model was a common commuter motorcycle, and many survive today.

**C12
: (19561958). 249 cc OHV
Used the C11G engine, fitted with an alternator and swinging fork (known as swinging arm) rear suspension.

**C15 Star - 250cc unit construction
**C15T Trials
**C15S Scrambler
**C15SS80 Sports Star 80
**C15 Sportsman

*D series (Two-stroke single cylinder. See BSA Bantam for details)
**D1 Bantam - 125cc unit-construction
**D3 Bantam Major
**D5 Bantam Super
**D7 Bantam Super
**D10 Silver Bantam, Bantam Supreme, Bantam Sports, Bushman
**D13
**D14/4 Bantam Supreme, Bantam Sports, Bushman - 175cc
**B175 Bantam Sports, Bushman

*Others (may include some export versions of models listed above)
**B31 Twin (350 cc). B31 frame fitted with a Triumph 3T motor to produce this BSA B31 Twin. Very few units were produced, probably prototypes.
**BSA Barracuda
**BSA Beagle
**BSA Boxer - 1979 - c.1981 the sports version of the boxer-GT50, beaver, brigand (or 50cc) range
**BSA GT50 (renamed from the boxer)
**BSA beaver the standard road version
**BSA Tracker 125/175 - late 70s moto-cross style product by NVT with Yamaha two stroke engine.
**BSA Dandy 70
**BSA Sunbeam (Scooters, also produced as Triumph TS1, TW2 Tigress)
***175B1
***250B2
**BSA Starfire
**BSA Rocket Scrambler
**BSA Rocket Gold Star
**BSA Fury
**BSA Hornet
**Winged Wheel (auxiliary power unit for bicycles)
**T65 Thunderbolt (essentially a Triumph TR6P with BSA Badges)

===Military vehicles===
* BSA Scout armoured car.
* "Type G Apparatus", Folding paratrooper bicycle, 32+1/2 lb with parachute.

===Military firearms===
* Snider-Enfield rifle
* Martini-Henry rifle
* Lee-Metford rifle
* Lewis gun
* Lee-Enfield rifle
* .303 RAF Browning
* Hispano-Suiza cannon
* Oerlikon 20mm cannon
* Sten submachine gun
* Boys anti-tank rifle
* Besa machine gun
* BSA experimental model 1949 pump-action machine carbine
* ADEN cannon
* L1A1 SLR

===Civilian firearms===
* The 1906 war office pattern rifle The War Office Pattern Miniature Rifle 
* The Sportsman series of .22 Long Rifle bolt action rifles
* Various Martini action target .22lr rifles BSA Small-bore Target Rifles and Equipment 
* The Ralock and Armatic semi automatic .22lr rifles The BSA Ralock and Armatic semi-auto rifles 
* Various bolt action hunting rifles mostly in .243 and .270 calibre

== See also ==
* Clews Competition Motorcycles (CCM) - the remnants of BSA's off road arm
* List of BSA motorcycles
* List of modern armament manufacturers
* Tribsa custom built caf racer or off road using a Triumph engine in a BSA frame

== Notes ==
 

== References ==

== External links ==
* BSA History from the Days of the Crimea (1918)
* 
* Catalogue of the BSA archives, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick



